BACKGROUND
diseases represent the main constraint for the success of an expanding aquaculture industry. atlantic salmon  farmers can experience severe fish losses due to both infectious and non-infectious diseases, usually during the seawater growth stage. infectious pancreatic necrosis , pancreas disease , infectious salmon anemia , as well as the sea lice parasite  represent some of the most hazardous diseases  <cit> , but losses have also been associated with non-infectious diseases such as cardiac failures  <cit> . biosecurity countermeasures to control the disease situation include vaccines and pharmaceuticals, as well as improvements of the genetic material, feeds and husbandry practices. the aim of current and future countermeasures is to strengthen the fish robustness, which is the capability to combine fast growth and normal organ development with improved resistance to both disease and physiological challenges.

sustained exercise training has been documented to confer higher robustness to cultured fish, including increased somatic and cardiac growth, cardiac performance, aerobic capacity of the muscle, oxygen carrying and extraction capacity and improved bone quality  <cit> . khovanskiy et al.  <cit>  found that exercised chum salmon  displayed lower mortality associated with an improved osmoregulatory capacity after seawater transfer when compared to untrained fish. going further, we have recently demonstrated direct effects of sustained exercise on disease resistance, showing that survival of atlantic salmon challenged with infectious pancreatic necrosis virus  was 13% higher for fish subjected to a moderate interval-training regime for six weeks prior to smoltification when compared with fish held at a low, constant swimming speed  <cit> . thus, sustained exercise in fish can induce a similar robustness effect as in humans, where a moderate aerobic training is also known to decrease the risk of infections and chronic life-style diseases  <cit> .

it has been observed that exercised salmonids  <cit>  and non-salmonids,  exhibit improved growth due to improved feed efficiency, higher feed intake or a mix of both. several studies have reported on the relationship between improved growth performance and disease resistance in fish . for example, gjedrem  <cit>  suggested that a breeding program selecting for growth also induced a positive genetic response for disease resistance, although conflicting results exist  <cit> . recently, an association between exercise-induced growth and improved disease resistance was shown in atlantic salmon  <cit> . the possibility of a linkage between these two factors, growth and disease resistance, is of obvious importance for the fish farming sector.

migratory fish such as salmonids have a great inherent capacity for sustained aerobic swimming. benefits from exercise seem to be maximized at speeds close to the optimal swimming speed , where energy use is more efficient and the cost of transport is minimized  <cit> . exercising fish at speeds other than uopt results in additional energy usage for locomotion, even at low speeds due to behavioral changes . further, the highest speeds may prove stressful and unsustainable compared with uopt <cit> . because of their natural swimming behavior and high aerobic capacity, salmonids are naturally amenable to long-term continuous exercise training, provided sustainable water velocities are used. this is in contrast to terrestrial animals that more typically require resting periods between bouts of exercise training. in humans, where most exercise training research has been performed, the intensity seems to be a fundamental factor affecting the individual’s systemic immunity. while engaging in regular moderate exercise activity seems to enhance immune functions  <cit> , high intensity aerobic training results in acute and chronic states of impaired immunity  <cit> .

on top of training effects, there seems to be an equally large inherent variation in exercise capacity among fish and humans. for example, juvenile rainbow trout  can be classified according to their inherent swimming performance as either poor or good swimmers. interestingly, such classification was associated with several cardiac and metabolic capacities after  <dig> months of common rearing  <cit> .

this study aimed to evaluate if inherent swimming performance in juvenile fish affect disease resistance. juvenile fish were identified according to their inherent swimming performance by pre-screening them in a swim challenge test. fish classified as either poor or good swimmers were then trained at four different regimes to investigate if training differentially affected them. after smoltification, a controlled disease challenge with ipnv allowed us to assess differences in disease resistance among and within the two performance groups and four training regimes. this was further examined by analyzing expression levels of sensitive virus responsive genes  in head kidney and cardiac tissues. in addition, exercise-induced effects on robustness were evaluated by growth performance and feed efficiency.

RESULTS
disease resistance is related to inherent swimming performance
mortality following the ipn challenge started  <dig> days after the introduction of virus-shedding fish and reached a plateau around day  <dig> post-challenge. inherent swimming performance showed a strong association with survival after the ipn challenge test. fish initially categorized as good swimmers had significantly better survival than poor swimmers  when analyzed across all groups . when survival was examined independent of the inherent swimming performance, differences among training regimes showed no significant difference . the continuous-velocity training regimes tended to improve survival compared to the control trained group , whereas interval-velocity training regimes tended to negatively impact survival .

when survival was examined in light of swimming performance, exercise training did not significantly affect disease resistance of poor and good swimmers. nevertheless, exercise may have had a larger impact on disease resistance of poor swimmers since larger changes in mortality were observed in exercised groups of poor swimmers compared to good swimmers .

virus responsive gene expression reflects and supports mortality data
to verify mortality data from ipnv, infection level was analyzed in challenged fish at termination of the disease trial. quantification of ipnv  in surviving fish showed low prevalence of virus-positive fish  and low level of viral transcripts in positive fish. heart tissue was also tested and found negative for all fish. thus, sampled fish were in a late stage of infection with either low levels or no virus replication.

gene expression analysis was performed to investigate among-groups differences in host immune correlates of disease response. for initial screening of correlates, transcriptome analysis by microarray of poor and good swimmers was assessed, since the strongest contrast in mortality was associated with swimming performance. this resulted in  <dig> genes with significantly higher transcript abundance in poor compared to good swimmers  . by function, all genes were previously identified as virus-responsive genes ; a group of genes displaying a common activation/transcription to most of the known viruses infecting atlantic salmon. vrgs are sensitive antiviral markers reflecting the infection status and the level of viral transcripts in cells  <cit> . thus, poor swimmers seemed to have higher activation of antiviral immune genes compared to good swimmers at the end of the infection trial.

to further substantiate these results and to evaluate effects of the different training regimes with sufficient biological replication, expression of six vrgs was analyzed in heart ventricle tissue of poor and good swimmers from the c, m and lint exercise-trained groups using qpcr. results showed that induced levels of vrgs in poor swimmers were mainly explained by a strong expression in lint exercised fish . control trained  and m trained poor swimmers had equal expression level of vrgs. within the good swimmers, vrg expression levels were higher in m and lint trained compared to control trained fish.

we further analyzed expression of eight vrgs in head kidney, where ipnv replication was observed. expression levels within exercised good swimmers showed a similar trend as observed for heart tissue . within poor swimmers, vrg expression levels were significantly lower in m compared to both control and lint trained fish . in contrast to heart tissue, vrg expression levels in head-kidney of control trained good swimmers were significantly lower compared to control trained poor swimmers . thus, the increased overall mortality observed for poor swimmers was reflected by stronger expression levels of antiviral immune genes in lint trained  and control trained  fish as compared to good swimmers. while no evidence for any positive effects of exercise training on mortality and infection status was observed for good swimmers, results implied beneficial effects in terms of reduced infection status  from m trained poor swimmers.

results produced for  <dig> genes by microarray and qpcr were in close concordance .

exercise training effects on growth
after six weeks of exercise training, no significant differences in thermal growth coefficient  were found among training regimes and control trained fish. at the end of the freshwater phase of the experiment , tgc was significantly higher  in the high intensity  training regime  compared with the control  trained group  . the other training regimes only showed a trend towards higher tgc compared to the control trained group . at the end of exercise training, medium intensity  trained fish showed a significantly higher condition factor  than c. feed intake showed significant differences among training regimes, with the higher values belonging to the h and short interval  regimes at the end the first six training weeks, while h and long interval  had the highest feed intake in the second part of the training experiment. after six weeks of training, the only significant differences for feed efficiency ratio  among training groups were h and sint groups being lower than both c and m .

c control, m medium intensity, h high intensity, sint short interval, lint long interval, cf condition factor, tgc thermal growth coefficient, week  6: end of first six weeks of training under a short day light photoperiod. w 11: end of  <dig> weeks of training and one week of detraining. means in the same row with different superscripts letters are significantly different based on one-way anova . differences between the groups were assessed by the least-squares means procedure. data are means ± sem.

discussion
in this study we found that the inherent swimming performance of juvenile atlantic salmon is associated with differences in survival to an infectious disease challenge after seawater transfer, with good swimmers displaying a significantly higher disease resistance than poor swimmers. exercise training had no significant effect on disease resistance, though a trend towards improved performance was seen for fish being trained at constant compared to interval regimes. though not significant, results further argue for exercise training affecting poor swimmers more strongly than good swimmers. mortalities were supported by mrna expression levels of a subset of vrgs reflecting the antiviral response status. growth was promoted by exercise training, though only significant for the highest intensity regime , while swimming performance did not show an association with growth performance.

the impact of inherent swimming performance on disease resistance
the inherent swimming performance of individual juvenile salmon was positively associated with disease resistance. fish classified as good swimmers showed  <dig> % better survival against ipn virus than poor swimmers when challenged  <dig> months after the swimming performance classification. claireaux et al.  <cit>  demonstrated that good swimmers of a cohort of rainbow trout, classified by a similar methodological approach as used in this work, retained this advantage nearly nine months later, despite a common rearing environment and similar growth performance, and displayed a significantly better cardiac capacity and morphology compared to poor swimmers. this and the present study collectively suggest that a simple screening test for swimming performance can efficiently distinguish between fish with low and high robustness, with the latter possessing better cardiac capacity and disease resistance. it must be noted that none of these studies could find differences in growth performance between poor and good swimmers.

in addition to the effects of the inherent swimming performance of fish on robustness, exercise training appeared to have a stronger, though not significant, modulatory effect on the poor swimmer’s disease resistance. while the m training regime showed a tendency to improve the survival rate of the poor swimmers, the lint regime tended to decrease the survival of the poor swimmers. the possible interaction effect between inherent poor swimming performance and training regime on survival was supported by expression analysis of vrgs in surviving fish from the different training regimes and performance groups at the end of the ipn challenge. results showed that improved survival of good swimmers was associated with lower expression levels of virus responsive genes, probably reflecting an overall lower level of infection pressure, a more rapid or efficient viral clearance and/or a reduced antiviral status to recover and regain homeostasis. thus, the ability to rapidly clear or reduce virus replication and antiviral immunity at the end of a viral infection might be important for survival. in a previous study, we demonstrated that the improved survival induced by sustained training of juvenile atlantic salmon, was related to a specific cardiac transcriptome signature, suggesting lower levels of inflammation and higher levels of immune effector molecules, antioxidant enzymes and xenobiotics clearance capacity prior to an ipn challenge  <cit> .

the impact of training regimes on disease resistance
overall, the three continuous training regimes  displayed a trend, though not significant, towards higher survival compared to the interval training regimes. the continuous  <dig>  body lengths s- <dig> m regime gave the best results, which is in agreement with our previous finding where atlantic salmon pre-smolts trained at a similar intensity for six weeks  showed 13% higher survival following an ipn challenge test when compared to control trained fish  <cit> . such improvements are very important in an industry context. in contrast to the improvement in disease resistance from utilizing an interval training regime with mild speed changes as in the previously mentioned study, the ~3-fold daily changes in swimming speed applied for the sint and lint regimes tended to reduce disease resistance against ipn compared to controls kept continuously at  <dig>  bls- <dig>  since sint and lint trained fish had theoretically swum the same distance as the m trained fish, it could be argued that the relatively strong daily changes in water speed for both interval regimes may be the cause of the apparent negative impact on disease resistance of these fish.

we may speculate that the non-significant trend towards reduced disease resistance of the inherently poor swimmers trained with the lint regime is due to a lower acclimation capacity of these fish to the relatively strong changes in swimming velocity compared to the good swimmers. it is then plausible to suggest that poor swimmers suffered from higher stress levels when following the lint compared to the continuous speed regimes, which could potentially cause an impairment of their disease resistance capacities. inherently good swimmers, however, seem to have sufficient behavioral and/or physiological plasticity as to avoid disease resistance impairment.

the moderate intensity of the m training regime may have promoted an acclimative response in the poor swimmers, boosting their disease resistance to the level of the good swimmers. thus, if confirmed with new studies, the overall profit of conducting m regime training would be the achievement of a more homogenous population when it comes to disease resistance. this would imply an indisputable benefit for salmon producers.

the impact of training regimes on growth and feed utilization
by definition, a robust fish must possess a good combination of both high growth performance and disease resistance. jobling et al.  <cit>  and davison  <cit>  stated that higher growth may be achieved for fish when training intensity lies between  <dig>  and  <dig>  bls- <dig>  our results are in agreement with this; the h training regime  had significantly higher tgc than the control trained group. interestingly, the other three regimes , which had an average water speed of  <dig>  bls- <dig>  showed a tendency towards improved growth compared to control trained fish, suggesting the existence of a correlation between growth and total work load of the swimming-induced exercise. higher growth given by the h training regime was mainly due to increased feed intake associated with a lower feed efficiency and protein retention. this suggests that fish subjected to that regime required more energy to satisfy the increased demand. despite a lowered feed efficiency, increases in feed intake were sufficient to overcompensate the needs of simultaneous swimming and growth. it could be argued that training at this intensity stimulated the regulation of neuroendocrine factors involved in controlling feeding, resulting in an anabolic dominant state. it is logical to think though, that growth will be compromised at higher water speeds than those tested here, as has been found in salmonids  <cit>  and other species, such as striped bass morone saxatilis <cit> . indeed, routine gut blood flow, which is a basic requirement for effective digestion, is reduced in salmon as they swim progressively faster and can stop with abrupt stresses  <cit> .

another effect that may contribute to exercise-induced growth is the possibility of salmon juveniles changing from active to passive  ventilation. ram ventilation is the capacity of some fish species to ventilate passively by opening their mouths when swimming or facing high water currents, allowing water to pass through the gills with enough pressure for gas exchange to occur without the need for active branchial pumping  <cit> . the energy sparing effect of ram ventilation ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig> % in adult rainbow trout, which shifted ventilation mode when swimming above  <dig> - <dig> bls- <dig> <cit> . nevertheless, we cannot know for certain if this is also the case in this study.

CONCLUSIONS
this study provides the first evidence demonstrating that inherent swimming performance in juvenile fish may predetermine disease resistance later in life. fish classified as good swimmers showed a significantly lower mortality when challenged with ipn than fish classified as poor swimmers. our results further suggest that the inherently poor swimmers are more sensitive to the intensity and design of the training regimes than good swimmers. finally, the results confirmed that sustained exercise at high intensity stimulates growth performance of atlantic salmon, while exercise at lower intensities has less effect.

the great variability in swimming performance within populations of fish opens up novel possibilities for phenotype or marker-assisted selection in breeding programs and as a discrimination tool to sort out poor juvenile fish when it is still cost-effective.

