BACKGROUND
the cctc-binding factor  protein  <cit>  is involved in eukaryotic genome organization, including mediating chromatin interactions  <cit> . it has functions affecting gene regulation such as enhancer blocking  <cit>  and chromatin domain boundary demarcation  <cit>  where the spread of repressive chromatin is blocked, although the distinction between these two roles has been called into question  <cit> . it is additionally involved in several more specialized genomic processes including imprinting  <cit> , immune-related genomic recombination and gene expression regulation  <cit> , mammalian x-chromosome inactivation  <cit> , alternative splicing  <cit>  and alternative promoter choice  <cit> . interestingly, while it has been described primarily as an insulator protein, it has also been implicated in enhancing gene expression  <cit> , an apparent contradiction. to resolve this contradiction, it has been proposed that ctcf may simply serve to tether distant chromatin sites together, with its different roles depending on the nature of the sites that are brought together and the other dna-binding proteins involved in the interaction  <cit> .

genome-wide ctcf-mediated chromatin organization was investigated by handoko and colleagues in mouse embryonic stem cells  <cit>  with the “chromatin interaction assay using paired-end tags”  technique  <cit> . that study showed that most ctcf interactions link sites on the same chromosome forming loops, which are generally less than 1mb in length. they also identified an enrichment of the enhancer-associated  <cit>  h3k4me <dig>  chromatin mark within ctcf loops that are <200kb long, constituting the majority of the loops. these within-loop h3k4me <dig> levels decreased upon knock-down of ctcf. the h3k4me <dig> chromatin mark is associated with both active enhancers and those poised for future activation, depending on the additional presence or absence respectively of the h3k27ac chromatin mark at the same enhancer  <cit> . therefore, this pattern is suggestive of a model in which the <200kb ctcf loops enclose regulatory domains of enhancer-regulated genes. indeed, a later study using the 5c technique  <cit>  lends support to this model, and proposes a more detailed three-dimensional model in which ctcf interactions demarcate overall regulatory domains within which smaller-scale enhancer-promoter interactions occur.

recently, three unrelated human patients were identified with disruptive mutations in a single copy of their ctcf gene  <cit> . these patients showed surprisingly mild phenotypes consisting primarily of mild intellectual disability, reduced head size  and growth retardation. rna-sequencing data generated from whole blood lymphocytes taken from these patients showed reduced expression levels of enhancer-associated stimulus responsive genes when compared to lymphocytes from healthy controls  <cit> . this suggests that such genes are incapable of being up-regulated to adequate levels upon induction by stimuli. patient down-regulated genes were also enriched for enhancer-promoter interactions in rna polymerase ii chia-pet data from k <dig> leukemia cells  <cit> .

we therefore hypothesized that ctcf interactions may stabilize enhancer-promoter chromatin interactions, facilitating increased transcription levels in response to stimuli. this hypothesis is supported by the recent findings that genome-wide tnf-alpha responsive genes have enhancers and promoters that are already pre-looped prior to their induction  <cit> , and that the tnf-alpha responsive samd4a gene is pre-looped head-to-tail by a ctcf-dependent tie before its induction, a configuration that is required for its prompt response to tnf-alpha  <cit> . additionally, genes in mouse embryonic stem cells set to be activated later during differentiation are already pre-looped and are associated with chromatin marks for poised enhancers  <cit> . this enhancer-promoter pre-looping of poised genes has also been observed during drosophila embryogenesis  <cit>  and appears to be a general phenomenon in animal gene regulation.

here we investigate this hypothesis computationally, seeking to identify whether there is a genome-wide tendency for ctcf loops to enclose stimulus responsive enhancer-regulated genes. we used ctcf chia-pet data from human k <dig> and mcf- <dig> cells provided by the encode project  <cit> , which are more comprehensive than the mouse ctcf chia-pet data analyzed in the previous study. we additionally predicted ctcf loops from genome-wide ctcf binding site data for a hundred cell line datasets provided by the encode project, using an algorithm we developed that exploits the motif directionality in ctcf loop anchors  <cit> . we find a general tendency for ctcf loops to enclose stimulus responsive genes that are associated with enhancer-based regulation. we also find global differences in loop-enclosed genes between primary and immortal cells, with the former containing more predicted ctcf loop-enclosed genes that are enriched for transcription regulation, cell motility regulation and stem cell differentiation. finally, we discuss the implications of the motif directionality in ctcf loop anchors, which point to a model of ctcf loop formation involving the reeling of the chromatin template through stationary rna polymerases, consistent with the transcription factory model of transcription  <cit> .

RESULTS
ctcf loops insulate enhancer-regulated stimulus response genes from housekeeping genes
to investigate whether ctcf loops are enriched for enhancers relative to surrounding regions, we investigated the enhancer-associated h3k4me <dig>  as well as other chromatin marks within and around experimentally determined ctcf loops determined using the chia-pet technique in k <dig> myeloid leukemia and mcf- <dig> breast cancer cell lines. these chromatin mark and chia-pet data were all obtained from the encode project  <cit> . the chia-pet ctcf interaction data have been corroborated by the independent hi-c technique, which does not focus on specific proteins  <cit> . we focused on ctcf loops less than 200kb in length as these have previously been shown to be associated with active chromatin marks in mouse embryonic stem cells  <cit> . to ensure we were using reliable chia-pet interactions, we filtered them for those containing ctcf binding sites at both anchors, using chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by sequencing  datasets also obtained from the encode project  <cit> , and additionally filtered them for those that were supported by at least three ligation products in the chia-pet data. most marks were assessed in the k <dig> cell line as, being one of the main encode cell lines, it had the largest collection of chromatin mark chip-seq datasets.

to investigate the loop-flanking regions as well as the loop bodies, each loop was extended on either side to include flanking regions equal in size to the loop itself, after which the extended region was divided into a fixed number of bins each spanning a distance equal to  <dig> % of the loop length. average feature density across all loops was calculated per bin, and plotted across the region . consistent with mouse embryonic stem cells  <cit> , we identified an enrichment of the h3k4me <dig> enhancer mark within ctcf loop bodies relative to flanking regions . we did not find enrichment of other histone marks within ctcf loops, except for a slight increase in the h2a.z histone variant which is also associated with active promoters and enhancers  <cit>  . however, most histone marks are enriched at ctcf loop anchors . the enrichment of active enhancer marks within ctcf loops is also detectable using the enhancer states determined by the encode project using the chromhmm algorithm  <cit>  . this algorithm combines different histone marks and other genomic features into a set of states, each defined by a specific combination of features  <cit> . chromatin states associated with enhancers, weak enhancers and weak transcription  were strongly enriched within k <dig> loops relative to flanking regions, while the state associated with normal transcription remained relatively constant across loops and their flanking regions . this indicates that while transcription occurs both within and outside the loops, the nature of this transcription differs between the two regions, with enhancer-associated transcription being more prominent within the loops. unsurprisingly, the insulator state is enriched specifically at the ctcf loop anchors.fig.  <dig> genomic properties of ctcf loops and flanking regions. a profiles of h3k4me <dig> histone mark and gene and exon density across genomic regions within and around ctcf chia-pet loops in both mcf- <dig> and k <dig> cells. the loops and their flanking regions are split into bins each spanning  <dig> % of the loop length. for each bin, the median feature coverage for all loops is plotted. profiles were normalized by subtracting the mean of all bins, displaying only the variation pattern across the profile. this was done because mean genomic bin coverage can vary substantially between chromatin marks and other genomic features, separating the profiles along the y-axis and making pattern comparison more difficult. b profiles of enhancer- and transcription-related chromatin states as defined by the chromhmm algorithm, within and around ctcf chia-pet loops in k <dig> cells. processed as above, but without normalizing the means as all the profiles have similar means. weak transcription differs from the normal transcription state in that it is associated with transcript production but not with any further chromatin marks. c expression level distribution for genes within and flanking ctcf chia-pet loops in k <dig> and mcf- <dig> cells. flanking regions are equal in size to the loops they flank. flanking genes located within neighboring loops are excluded from the set of flanking genes; there is no overlap between loop-enclosed and loop-flanking genes. expression data are from the same cell lines as the corresponding loop sets. d tissue specificity index  distribution for genes within and flanking ctcf chia-pet loops. flanking genes are chosen as described above. e coefficient of variation  distribution for genes within and flanking ctcf chia-pet loops. cv  indicates the degree of variability in expression level of a gene across tissues. flanking genes are chosen as described above



we reasoned that enhancer-regulated genes should be located in gene poor regions, as more non-coding dna within and around the genes would be required for the placement of enhancers  <cit> . we therefore expected a lower ratio of coding to non-coding dna within the loops relative to their flanking regions. indeed, there is a marked reduction in exon density within ctcf loops relative to flanking regions . this corresponds to a less pronounced reduction in within-loop gene density, although the centers of the loops are enriched for genes. these results imply that ctcf loops enclose gene poor regions, with a tendency for genes to be centered within the loops. alternatively, it may reflect a high gene density just outside ctcf loops. the low exon density compared to gene density within the loops relative to the flanking regions indicates a proportionally larger amount of non-coding dna within the intergenic regions around the loop-enclosed genes, as loop genes are shorter  and their intron density is also lower .

gene ontology  <cit>  analysis showed that genes located within ctcf loops are enriched for response to stimuli . several stimulus responsive function categories are enriched  and, to a lesser extent, developmental and cell differentiation categories . these are biological function categories that are associated with dynamic transcription regulation. consistent with their biological functions, these loop genes are also enriched for extracellular, plasma membrane and vesicle cellular localizations.

in contrast to genes within the ctcf loops, those in the flanking regions just outside the loops show an expression pattern more similar to housekeeping genes: they are on average more highly expressed than the loop-enclosed genes , less cell line-specific in their expression pattern , and have less variation in their expression levels across cell lines . this is confirmed by the enrichment of genes from a list of human housekeeping genes determined from  <dig> diverse human tissue types  <cit>  in these loop-flanking regions . gene ontology analysis also shows enrichment for housekeeping biological functions such as rna processing, primary metabolism, cytoskeletal and cell cycle proteins, with genes localized primarily to the cytoplasm, mitochondria and nucleus . these findings were recently corroborated by another comprehensive study of ctcf chia-pet data  <cit> .table  <dig> gene expression pattern differences between chia-pet ctcf loop-enclosed, loop-flanking and loop-distal genes

fca
p-valueb
median expression c
median tsid
median cve

afc: fold change of the medians


b
p-value based on wilcoxon rank sum test with continuity correction


cfpkm: fragments per kilobase per million mapped reads


dtsi: tissue specificity index


ecv: coefficient of variation



loop-distal genes, which are located neither within loops nor within their flanking regions, generally resemble within-loop genes more than they do loop-flanking genes in their expression patterns in these two cell types, in that they have lower expression levels, higher tissue specificity and greater expression variability across cell types than the loop flanking genes . they further resemble within-loop genes in that they are enriched for cell surface-associated gene ontology terms; however these are primarily nervous system-related . it is unknown whether they might be enclosed within ctcf loops in other cell types like neuronal cells.

we have previously reported that genes that were down-regulated in lymphocytes of ctcf mutant human patients are enriched among the within-loop genes for the k <dig> cell line, after these k <dig> ctcf loops were filtered for those whose anchors overlap ctcf binding sites in lymphocytes  <cit> . here, we additionally detect an enrichment of genes whose expression did not differ between patients and controls, within the ctcf loop-flanking regions of both k <dig> and mcf <dig> cells . this is consistent with the housekeeping functions identified for these patient-unaffected genes  <cit> .

ctcf interactions can be predicted from ctcf chip-seq data
in order to investigate ctcf loop-enclosed genes in a broad array of cell lines, we developed an algorithm to predict ctcf loops from ctcf chip-seq datasets. these datasets contain genome-wide ctcf dna binding sites and are available for many cell lines from the encode project  <cit> . our algorithm exploits the recently reported finding that ctcf binding site motifs are oriented towards the loop body  <cit> . using encode ctcf chia-pet data from the k <dig> and mcf- <dig> cell lines, we first confirmed that the 3′ end of the ctcf motif  is oriented towards the loop body  in over  <dig> % of all anchors , mcf-7: 48653/ <dig> anchor motifs , p < 10− <dig> for both k <dig> and mcf- <dig> cell lines, chi-square test). we further observed that the concordance between motif orientation and interaction direction correlates with motif score; it increases with the similarity of the motif to the canonical ctcf motif, reaching almost  <dig> % concordance for the highest-scoring motifs . concordant ctcf motif scores follow a bimodal distribution with an enrichment of high-scoring motifs as well as a subset of lower-scoring motifs, while discordant motifs follow a unimodal distribution with primarily low-scoring motifs .fig.  <dig> predicting ctcf loops from chip-seq datasets. a model of ctcf loops implied by ctcf motif orientation in loop anchors. rad21: cohesin subunit. b percentage of motifs for which motif orientation is concordant with loop anchor orientation , for motifs in different score categories in mcf- <dig> and k <dig> cells. c schematic illustration of ctcf loop prediction algorithm. triangles represent ctcf chip-seq peaks, with color and size reflecting binding strength . black arrows represent ctcf motifs, with orientation indicated by arrow. predicted loops are represented by double-headed arrows, with color reflecting predicted loop strength. briefly, the loop prediction algorithm scans the genome from left to right connecting start anchors to end anchors based on motif orientation . new loop sets are begun when new start anchors are encountered beyond end anchors . subsequently, weaker peaks  are filtered out and the genome is rescanned, identifying stronger, longer loops . this process is repeated with progressively higher peak thresholds up to a maximum threshold. d example of ctcf chip-seq peak-based predicted ctcf loops  compared to experimentally determined ctcf chia-pet loops  in mcf- <dig> cells. darker lines indicate stronger  loops. e comparison of percentage of correctly predicted chia-pet loops with  <dig> random control datasets in which motif orientation within chip-seq peaks is randomly permuted, for k <dig> and mcf- <dig> cell lines. grey density plots depict the distributions of the random control percentages. black diamonds indicate the actual percentages. f comparison of percentage of correctly predicted hi-c loops with  <dig> random control datasets in which motif orientation within chip-seq peaks is randomly permuted, for  <dig> cell lines



based on this motif orientation preference, we developed a computational algorithm for predicting ctcf interactions from chip-seq data . for a given chip-seq dataset, we scan the ctcf motifs located in the ctcf binding sites , opening ctcf loops each time a parallel motif is encountered and closing all currently open loops for each anti-parallel motif that is encountered. as this simple scanning approach cannot identify nested ctcf loops which occur extensively in the ctcf chia-pet data, we iteratively rescan the genome after removing the lowest-scoring chip-seq peaks from the dataset, using successively more stringent cut-offs. given that stronger peaks are more likely to be involved in experimentally determined interactions  <cit> , removing weaker peaks should allow us to skip over ctcf binding sites that do not interact robustly in the cell. this allows us to identify larger outer loops that enclose smaller inner loops, provided the outer loops are anchored by stronger ctcf binding sites than the inner loops . when predicted loops at different peak thresholds are combined, this approach effectively recovers nested chia-pet loop structures . we find the highest recovery rate of chia-pet loops occurs when excluding the weakest 30– <dig> % of ctcf chip-seq peaks, although the success rate varies between different ctcf chip-seq data sets even for the same cell type . nevertheless, prediction performance is much better than random expectation for both k <dig> and mcf- <dig> cell types  . independent validation using experimentally determined ctcf-associated loops based on the hi-c technique  <cit>  gave consistent results with the chia-pet loop validation  . it should be noted that these overlap estimates are probably lower bounds, as the chia-pet technique is likely to miss interactions as evidenced by the moderate reproducibility of loops between replicates , while the hi-c loops are biased toward longer loops due to the sequencing depth-limited genomic resolution of the technique  <cit>  . in addition, the overall domain architecture can be detected from the predicted loops even when many of the individual chia-pet loops within the region are undetected . furthermore, predicted loops involving stronger ctcf peaks are more likely to reflect experimentally determined loops than those linking weaker peaks , consistent with the observation that stronger ctcf peaks are more likely to be involved in chia-pet interactions in mouse embryonic stem cells than weaker ctcf peaks  <cit> . when all peaks are used for loop predictions, the majority of the genome falls within predicted ctcf loops in most cell lines . predicted loops involving weak ctcf peaks are therefore less likely to be biologically relevant than those linking stronger binding sites.

in order to obtain subsets of high-confidence predicted loops, we filtered the top-scoring  <dig> % of predicted loops for each dataset. as these high-scoring predicted loops also tend to be the longer loops , they reflect the larger ctcf-demarcated domains and generally enclose 25– <dig> % of all genes predicted to lie within ctcf loops per cell line . these stringent loop subsets were used for further comparison of the genome-wide ctcf loop-enclosed gene architecture across the encode cell lines.

enrichment of stimulus response genes within ctcf loops is universal across cell lines
we applied our ctcf loop prediction algorithm to  <dig> ctcf chip-seq datasets generated by the encode consortium  <cit> , in order to investigate the generality of the enrichment of stimulus response genes within ctcf-enclosed chromatin domains . due to the variability in chip-seq datasets and correspondingly in loop prediction between different labs even for the same cell line , we restricted our analysis to the  <dig> cell line datasets generated by the university of washington   <cit> . using k-means clustering, we clustered the genes into six clusters based on their pattern of loop membership across cell lines . similar results are obtained with different choices of cluster number . while the largest cluster  contains genes absent from strong predicted ctcf loops in virtually all cell lines, the next largest  contains genes predicted to lie within strong ctcf loops in the majority of cell lines. consistent with the genes located within chia-pet loops in k <dig> and mcf- <dig> cells, this latter cluster is enriched for genes involved in the regulation of cellular responses to external signals .fig.  <dig> gene content similarities and differences between encode cell lines for predicted ctcf loops. a heatmap showing similarity of predicted ctcf loop-enclosed gene content across the university of washington encode cell lines. genes are clustered into six clusters using k-means clustering. cell lines are clustered hierarchically based on the k-means cluster patterns, using the average linkage algorithm and euclidean distances. heatmap colors indicate the proportion of genes from that cluster falling within ctcf loops in that cell line. b predicted ctcf loop gene count distributions for primary and immortal cells, for all encode datasets and for the subset from the university of washington . notches extend  <dig> *iqr/sqrt from the medians and roughly correspond to their 95% confidence intervals . c ctcf chip-seq peak count distributions for primary and immortal cells . d principal components analysis  of cell lines based on their predicted ctcf loop-enclosed gene content 



strikingly, hierarchical clustering of the cell lines based on their cluster similarity profiles reveals a general segregation of primary and immortal cells . cluster  <dig>  contains genes that are loop-enclosed predominantly within immortal cells, while cluster  <dig>  contains genes that generally loop-enclosed in primary cells but not in immortal cells. primary cells also generally contain more predicted loop-enclosed genes than the immortal cells , an effect that is still observable even when datasets from multiple encode labs are pooled . this is despite the fact that the overall number of ctcf binding sites does not differ significantly between these two classes  , and that ctcf gene expression is actually higher in immortal than in primary cells  <cit> . this segregation of primary and immortal cells is also observable using principal components analysis  where it corresponds to the main axis of variation. it is consistent with the previously reported dna methylation-dependent differences in ctcf binding patterns between these two classes of cell types  <cit> , in which a small subset of ctcf binding sites is silenced by dna methylation in immortal cells  <cit> . interestingly, and consistent with their more differentiated nature, gene ontology  <cit>  analysis shows that genes within primary cell-specific predicted ctcf loops are enriched for transcription regulation, stem cell differentiation and the regulation of cell motility and migration . in contrast, genes located within putative ctcf loops in immortal cells but not in primary cells show a slight enrichment for regulation of  gtpase activity, lipid and glucan metabolic processes, and mitotic cell cycle – consistent with their proliferation phenotype . apart from this separation into primary and immortal cell types, no clear clustering by cell type is observable . somewhat surprisingly, three primary cell types  cluster with the immortal cell lines .

a common theme to the functions associated with gene clusters enriched for ctcf loop-enclosed genes in multiple cell types  is the preponderance of regulatory processes. in contrast, genes that are rarely or never located within putative ctcf loops  are enriched for housekeeping processes and for genes that are involved in specialized and highly cell type-specific biological processes, such as olfactory receptors . this is consistent with the observation that genes with complex regulatory requirements have intermediate levels of tissue-specificity in their expression patterns  <cit> , and with ctcf playing a role in the genomic organization of genes requiring dynamic regulation and rapid changes in expression levels.

discussion
based on the pattern of affected genes in lymphocytes of human patients with mutations in a single copy of their ctcf gene  <cit> , we hypothesized that a major role of ctcf-mediated chromatin interactions may be to stabilize the three-dimensional enhancer-promoter chromatin conformations of inducible genes. here our data show that stimulus response genes are enriched within the ctcf loops across a wide variety of cell types, providing evidence to support this model.

interestingly, ctcf-enclosed chromatin domains are enriched for h3k4me <dig> chromatin mark which marks both active and poised enhancers  <cit> , but they are not as enriched for the h3k27ac mark which is specific to active enhancers and promoters  <cit>  . given ctcf’s previously described role in poising inactive inducible genes for activation  <cit> , this suggests that they are associated with the poising of inducible genes for transcription whether or not they are currently active. in support of this, the loop-enclosed genes tend to have a greater expression variation within cell types and increased expression variability between cell types relative to loop-flanking genes . in contrast, these flanking genes are generally widely and highly expressed across cell types , but are not associated with enhancer marks . the gene functions enriched within loops are those associated with inducible genes, while those enriched among flanking genes are associated with constitutive housekeeping processes. this leads to a model in which ctcf loops enclose regulatory domains of dynamically expressed inducible enhancer-regulated genes, insulating them from nearby domains of constitutively expressed housekeeping genes . this model is consistent with hi-c data that show that flanking regions of topologically associating domains are enriched for housekeeping genes  <cit> , and that domain boundaries are demarcated by ctcf loops  <cit> , and has been corroborated in another recent study  <cit> .fig.  <dig> models of ctcf loop formation and genomic organization. a model of ctcf loop-enclosed genomic domain. ctcf loops enclose domains of enhancer-regulated stimulus-responsive genes, separating them from domains of constitutively expressed housekeeping genes. b the strong preference shown by ctcf binding sites for interacting with partner sites on their 3′ side that have an opposite orientation cannot be explained by a spatial diffusion model in which partner sites encounter each other through diffusion in three-dimensional nuclear space. such a mechanism would not be able to distinguish between the three depicted scenarios . the strong observed preference for scenario  implies chromatin template-mediated contact between the partner sites. c mechanistic model for the formation of interactions between ctcf-bound genomic sites. relatively stationary rnap <dig> molecules in transcription factories reel in the chromatin template, bringing distal ctcf binding sites towards the factory. bound ctcf molecules presenting their c-terminus to the rnap <dig> polymerase interact with and are efficiently dislodged by the polymerase. those presenting their n-terminus stall the polymerase, giving them time to interact with other factory-tethered ctcf molecules



these findings are also consistent with the genes affected in ctcf patient lymphocytes, where highly expressed genes involved in response to stimuli were expressed at lower levels in patients than in controls  <cit> ; a pattern which suggests that those patient genes were not able to be sufficiently induced in response to stimuli. in contrast to these patient lymphocyte findings, a recent study in which ctcf was knocked down in hek293t cells found very little effect on global gene expression  <cit> . however, if ctcf loss primarily affects gene induction, such an effect would only be detected if the cells were additionally provided with transcription-inducing stimuli. notably, in the ctcf patient lymphocytes, the affected genes were primarily involved in response to wounding, inflammation and bacterial defense  <cit> , all processes that can be expected to be activated in lymphocytes in blood drawn from human individuals.

the enclosure of the regulatory domains of stimulus response genes is consistent with ctcf’s bilaterian multicellular animal phylogenetic distribution  <cit> , as organisms in this clade have complex developmental processes that make extensive use of local environmental signaling cues within the embryo, such as morphogen gradients and cell surface molecular markers, to direct cell differentiation, migration, adhesion, proliferation and apoptosis during development  <cit> . diversification of cell surface proteins and nuclear transcription factors, which expand a cell’s repertoire of responses to environmental signals, is characteristic for the evolution of multicellular animal development  <cit> . our findings therefore support ctcf’s proposed role as a key facilitator of the evolution of complex multicellular animals  <cit> .

mechanistically, the poising of inducible genes by ctcf may involve the stabilization of the chromatin interaction hubs that maintain the spatial co-localization of enhancers and promoters  <cit> . indeed, a ctcf interaction has been described to stabilize a head-to-tail looping interaction of the inducible samd <dig> gene, an interaction that is required for prompt response of the gene to an inducing stimulus  <cit> . interestingly, the convergent linear orientation of interacting dna-bound ctcf molecules  <cit>   implies that such enhancer-promoter chromatin interaction hubs are not only required for transcription, but are also formed by transcription. this is because such an orientation preference is best explained by a transcription model in which static fixed motor molecules reel a mobile chromatin template through themselves . within the nucleus, motif orientation along the chromatin strand cannot be reliably determined if ctcf binding sites encountered each other through spatial diffusion, as interacting sites would not be able to distinguish between parallel and anti-parallel orientations of their chromatin strands . similarly, oppositely oriented binding sites would not be able to determine whether they are located 5′ or 3′ to each other without information on their linear chromatin positions relative to each other . given that ctcf binding sites primarily interact with partner sites that are oppositely oriented, and given that these sites generally lie on their 3′ side, there must be linear communication between them along the chromatin strand . additionally, as linearly distant partner sites need to be brought together in close spatial proximity in the nucleus in order to interact with each other, this linear communication can be explained by chromatin template reeling by a motor protein that pulls the partner sites towards each other . the most obvious candidate for such a reeling motor is rna polymerase ii . it has been proposed that during rnapii transcription relatively static polymerases reel the mobile chromatin template through them as they transcribe dna  <cit> ; a central tenet in the “transcription factory” model of transcription  <cit> . ctcf interacts with rnapii via its c-terminal domain  <cit> , although the loop body is located on the 3′ side of the motif and therefore on the n-terminal side of the bound protein  <cit>  . dna-bound ctcf molecules have also been reported to stall transcribing rnapii polymerases  <cit> .

these observations allow us to propose a mechanistic model for ctcf binding site interaction formation, in which reeling polymerases in transcription factories stall when they encounter bound ctcf molecules that they cannot interact with . the more strongly the ctcf molecule is bound the longer the polymerase is stalled, increasing the opportunity for interaction with spatially proximal ctcf binding sites also localized to the transcription factory – explaining the quantitative relationship between binding strength and orientation preference . should the reeling polymerase encounter a bound ctcf molecule presenting its c-terminal domain however, it would be able to interact with and efficiently dislodge the bound ctcf molecule . in this model, transcription would only be required for loop formation and not loop maintenance. this loop formation-associated transcription through entire gene regulatory domains may be related to the “weak transcription” chromatin state which is specifically enriched within ctcf loops . it is important to note that such domain-wide transcription is unlikely to produce functional mrnas and therefore does not conflict with the observation that enhancer-promoter chromatin interactions can be formed and maintained in the absence of active mrna production  <cit> . once formed, the ctcf interactions can then be fortified through the recruitment of cohesin ties  <cit> . this is supported by the obsevations that the majority of ctcf binding sites are co-bound by cohesin and that ctcf binding is required for cohesin recruitment to these sites  <cit> . our model is similar to the extrusion model recently proposed by nichols and corces  <cit>  as well as lieberman‐aidez and colleagues  <cit> , but proposes a central role for transcription as the motor behind ctcf loop formation. nevertheless the two models are not mutually exclusive.

it is reasonable to assume that not all interacting ctcf binding sites are brought together by chromatin template reeling as inter-chromosomal and very long range cis-interactions also occur  <cit> . while some of these long-range interactions might be artifacts of the chia-pet technique, inter-chromosomal interactions identified using chia-pet have been experimentally validated  <cit> , so many are likely to be genuine. therefore, chromatin template reeling is unlikely to be an absolute requirement for the establishment of all ctcf interactions. actively transcribed sites may also co-localize in the nucleus through spatial clustering of active genes in transcription factories  <cit> , even without rnapii reeling as a mechanism to bring them together. still, the preponderance of specifically located and oriented cis-linked interaction partners, especially for the binding sites with stronger motifs , suggests that chromatin template reeling is the main mechanism by which ctcf binding sites are brought into proximity with their interaction partners. importantly, this model suggests that transcription shapes the formation of the ctcf interactome.

it should be noted that the gene functional category enrichments for the ctcf loop-enclosed and loop-flanking genes are relatively modest, generally below two-fold , and therefore probably only reflect the role of a subset of ctcf loops. the majority of ctcf loops may simply be involved in the structural organization of the chromatin fiber. nevertheless, the h3k4me <dig> poised/active enhancer mark is the only one that is clearly enriched within ctcf loops when they are viewed at a global scale , and the enrichment of genes involved in regulatory and stimulus responsive processes within ctcf loops is similarly clear and consistent across cell types . where they do differ between cell types , the putative loop-enclosed genes reflect regulatory and environmental interaction-related cellular processes that are relevant to the cell types in which these genes are loop-enclosed . additionally, in lymphocytes of patients with reduced levels of functional ctcf molecules, actively transcribed stimulus inducible genes are clearly reduced  <cit> . these patients also have mild phenotypes, suggesting that most functions of ctcf are not very dosage-sensitive. taken together, these observations indicate that its role in poising inducible genes for transcriptional up-regulation, whether in response to environmental signals  <cit>  or in the course of normal development and cell differentiation  <cit> , is one of the most important general roles of ctcf in the nucleus – at least from a quantitative perspective.

CONCLUSIONS
a major role of ctcf-mediated chromatin loops, particularly those that are less than 200kb long, appears to be to enclose enhancer-regulated gene domains, particularly those involved in responding to stimuli. this looping may facilitate rapid changes in transcription rate by stabilizing pre-formed enhancer-promoter chromatin hubs that can readily be converted into, or recruited to, active transcription factories. it may also permit such genes to be controlled independently from neighboring constitutively expressed housekeeping genes. ctcf-mediated chromatin loops can be predicted from chip-seq data due to the ctcf binding orientation preference at interacting loop anchors. this orientation preference suggests that these loops may be formed by relatively stationary rnapii molecules reeling in the chromatin template, thereby bringing together distant ctcf genomic binding sites into close spatial proximity in the nucleus.

