BACKGROUND
invasive weeds are regarded as major threats to biodiversity because they can spread through communities, displacing or even eradicating native species. over  <dig>  invasive plant species have been documented in the united states, invading nearly  <dig>  hectares per year, with a cost exceeding  <dig>  billion dollars per year  <cit> . multiple non-exclusive ecological hypotheses exist to explain plant invasion in new habitats  <cit> . the niche hypothesis suggests invaders are able to take advantage of unutilized resources in new environments  <cit> . the natural enemy release hypothesis suggests invaders escape their natural enemies when moving to new environments, allowing them to obtain high population densities  <cit> . the novel weapons hypothesis suggests that invaders come equipped with an arsenal of chemical weapons that are detrimental to the resident community of the invaded habitat  <cit> . the plant community in the invader's native habitat has had time to co-evolve defenses against these chemical weapons, whereas the invaded community has not, allowing invaders to obtain a competitive advantage in their new environment  <cit> . the evolution of increased competitive ability  hypothesis expands on the idea of natural enemy release, suggesting that invaders have rapidly evolved in their new environment to direct more resources to competitive ability over defense  <cit> . similarly, the allelopathic advantages against resident species  hypothesis expands on the idea of novel weapons, suggesting that novel weapons which increase plant competitive ability are selected for in the invasive range  <cit> . all these hypotheses are supported at least in part by data from field experiments which are often coupled with physiological and biochemical studies; however, it remains unclear why some plants become problematic invaders and others do not. one aspect that is rarely investigated in relation to invasive weeds and their native counterparts is the potential for modified gene regulation in the introduced range. as limited genetic resources are available for most invaders and other weedy species  <cit> , defense and growth response genes cannot be effectively monitored at the molecular level to test hypotheses of plant invasion.

centaurea maculosa lam.  is a eurasian native that has become a particularly problematic invasive weed in the northwestern united states, infesting over  <dig>  million acres in montana alone  <cit> . spotted knapweed often colonizes disturbed areas in north america, but also invades rangelands, pastures and prairies, where it displaces native species and establishes dense monocultures. diploid and tetraploid forms of the weed exist in the native range, but only tetraploid plants have been identified in north america  <cit> . the diploid form contains  <dig> chromosomes  <cit> , with a dna content  near  <dig>  picograms based on measures from closely related species of the same chromosome number  <cit> . this translates to an estimated genome size of approximately  <dig>  mbp. molecular markers and karyotyping have been used to identify the two forms, as it is impossible to distinguish between them based on morphological characters  <cit> . both forms are short-lived outcrossing perennials of the aster family; however, the diploid is monocarpic while the tetraploid is polycarpic. also, the tetraploid can tolerate dense vegetation and thus may be a better competitor than the diploid. this is presumed to be the main reason why only the tetraploid form is invasive in north america, while it is not considered invasive or even predominant in its native eurasian habitat  <cit> . ecological and greenhouse investigations suggest that invasive c. maculosa is a strong competitor against north american natives, even in the presence of biocontrol agents that have been introduced to limit the spread of the weed  <cit> . also, common garden studies suggest that north american c. maculosa seeds germinate more readily than their eurasian counterparts and the resulting individuals are larger, more robust, and better able to fend off and compensate for herbivore attack, under both greenhouse and field conditions . these studies give partial support to the eica hypotheses. there is also evidence that centaurea species  produce allelopathic compounds that inhibit growth and germination of north american plant species more severely than their native congneners, lending support to the novel weapons hypothesis  <cit> , although the production of allelochemicals seems to be variable  <cit> . it is not clear what combination of effects cause c. maculosa to become invasive in north america.

as an initial step towards understanding the molecular mechanisms by which plants become invasive, we have generated a normalized expressed sequence tag  library representing seven invasive populations of c. maculosa. here we describe candidate genes that could be utilized in future experiments to correlate plant gene expression and ecological hypotheses proposed for invasive success. to the best of our knowledge, this is the first published set of ests derived from an invasive weed that will be targeted to study invasive behavior.

RESULTS
library creation and sequence annotation
seeds from seven invasive populations of centaurea maculosa lam were grown for one to two months, at which time two to three entire plants per population were harvested. tissue was frozen in liquid nitrogen and shipped to agencourt biosciences for normalized cdna library construction. single pass directional sequencing was performed on  <dig> randomly selected clones from the c. maculosa normalized cdna library . these sequences were assembled into  <dig> unique contigs  or "unigenes" using noble foundation's in-house pipeline based on tigr assembler  <cit> .

the library consisted of  <dig> contig-forming ests which created  <dig> unigenes and  <dig> singlet ests, each representing a unique sequence. of the  <dig> unigene contigs, the majority contained only two est sequences . the largest unigene contig, which had high similarity to a chlorophyll a-b binding protein, contained  <dig> ests. interestingly, the second largest unigene contig, a compilation of ten sequences, had extremely low similarity to known sequences and was not able to be annotated. other large unigene contigs were annotated as polyphenol  oxidase, chloroplast atp synthase, photosystem i subunits ii and xi, polygalacturonase , and the small subunit of rubisco. normalization should remove most redundant transcripts and enrich for low abundant regulatory genes in the library. however, it is interesting that one of the most abundant transcripts found, polyphenol oxidase, is a potential defense-related protein  <cit> . overall redundancy of the library was 18%  which suggests that the normalization process was effective, and that continued sequencing of the library has the potential to uncover many more unique transcripts. sequence quality was high; over 80% of the unigenes were between 800– <dig> bp in length , with an average size of  <dig> bp.

to annotate the c. maculosa ests, the  <dig> unigenes were translated in all frames and searched for similarity against the ncbi non-redundant protein database using blastx . of the entire unigene set, 77%  had significant similarity to genes in the ncbi database, while the remaining  <dig> sequences had low similarity and were not able to be annotated. in the group of annotated sequences, 35%  had top blast hits to transcripts from arabidopsis thaliana, whereas only 10%  had top hits to orzya cultivars. taxonomically, 64%  of the annotated unigene top hits grouped into the rosids clade ,  <dig> % grouped into the asterids clade , and  <dig> % grouped into the commelinids clade  . thirty four unigenes had top hits to non-plant sequences. most of these non-plant sequences were annotated as hypothetical or unknown proteins.

functional categorization of centaurea unigenes
gene ontology  assignment programs were used to functionally categorize unigenes in the library. unigene go terms were counted and grouped in a hierarchical fashion into the major go functional categories of cellular component, biological process and molecular function. the go categories of cellular component and biological process contained over  <dig> centaurea unigene annotations, whereas the molecular function category contained only  <dig> annotations. each category contained approximately 16% unigenes that were annotated as "unknown," but this number does not account for the unigenes that were unable to be annotated in go format .

approximately 38% of the unigene annotations were grouped into the 'physiological process' category of the biological process go , which includes subcategories such as metabolism, transport, photosynthesis, apoptosis, and homeostasis. the next largest category of unigene annotations , 'cellular process,' has some overlap of subcategories with physiological processes , but includes unique subcategories such as cell communication, recognition, and differentiation. five percent of unigene annotations fell in the 'stimulus response' category which includes subcategories that relate to plant response to abiotic and biotic stresses, such as pathogen attack. thirty unigenes were subcategorized as responding to hormone stimulus, and most of these fell into the ethylene and jasmonic acid signaling pathways. ethylene- and jasmonic acid-mediated pathways have been implicated in the defense of plants against pathogens and insects  <cit> , and these transcripts may be up-regulated in c. maculosa under biotic stress conditions. only a small percentage of unigene annotations fell into the reproduction category of biological processes , but this is not entirely surprising, as reproductive structures such as flowers were not used in the starting material for the library.

over 38%  of the unigene annotations fell into the 'catalytic activity' category of the molecular function go . specific catalytic activities associated with these unigenes covered a range of gos, with the largest amount of unigenes falling into the transferase and hydrolase categories . these types of enzymes are involved in many intracellular processes including primary and secondary metabolism, signal transduction, and post translational modification of proteins. the next largest category under molecular function was 'binding'  with the majority of unigenes being associated with nucleotide/nucleic acid binding .

transporters accounted for nearly 8% of all unigene annotations, the majority being ion transporters and transporters with carrier activity . eighteen unigenes fell into the 'atp-ase coupled transporter' category, which includes transporters of xenobiotics, steroids, sugars, peptides and other small molecules. however, most unigenes could not be subcategorized with a specific transport role. uptake and translocation of nutrients in plants differ, and regulated expression of specific transporters may allow increased competitive ability in different situations   <cit> . depending on the specific transporter, these genes could be interesting targets for understanding root exudation or other release strategies for centaurea secondary metabolites and uptake of nutrients, and may aid in understanding the role of transport in competitive ability of centaurea.

one hundred twenty-seven unigene annotations were designated as transcriptional regulators, with the majority  being subcategorized as having 'transcription factor activity.' transcription factors are responsible for modulating cellular responses to biotic and abiotic stimuli  <cit> , and they may play important roles in plant invasion by up- or down-regulating the expression of genes involved in defense and growth responses. transcription factors identified in the centaurea library made up ~6% of the go annotations for molecular function, whereas ~4% of the arabidopsis genome sequences are annotated as transcription factors .

over two-thirds of the unigenes were localized by cellular component to either cell or organelle, as shown in figure  <dig>  of these,  <dig> unigenes were assigned to the nucleus,  <dig> to the mitochondrion,  <dig> to the chloroplast, and  <dig> to the cytosol. thirty-five unigenes were assigned to the cell wall category and  <dig> unigenes were assigned to the membrane category, although only  <dig> could be further categorized to the plasma membrane. these membrane proteins may be interesting targets to investigate transport and/or signal transduction.

a wide variety of functional categories were represented in the centaurea library. many of these unigenes could be used as candidates for production of a microarray to visualize changes in global gene expression, or to look at more specific changes in regulation related to plant defense or stress.

unigene candidates for testing ecological hypotheses
evolution and plasticity
the eica hypothesis suggests that when plants are introduced into a new range, they escape their enemies and rapidly evolve to put more resources into growth/reproduction and less into defense  <cit> . evolution through random mutation, movement of transposable elements, and genetic recombination may facilitate changes in plant genes or gene expression which give them a competitive and evolutionary advantage  <cit> . in addition, novel environments can reveal genetic variants in a population that possess advantageous phenotypes due to adaptive or developmental plasticity  <cit> . candidate unigenes from the centaurea cdna library potentially involved in genome evolution and plasticity are described below.

mobile elements
mobile, or transposable elements  have the ability to modify dna sequences by 'jumping' in and out of places in the genome, and certain mobile elements carry gene fragments that, when transposed, lead to repetition or creation of new genetic material  <cit> . mobile elements can modify genome size, gene regulation, and gene function, all of which contribute to genome evolution  <cit> . in the invasive centaurea cdna library, six transposable element-related unigenes were identified . normally transposable elements are found in non-coding regions of their host genomes and are considered 'silent;' however, expressed transposable elements, such as those found in the centaurea cdna library, have been detected in plants at specific growth stages and under biotic stress conditions such as pathogen attack and wounding  <cit> . evidence from such experiments support barbara mcclintock's idea that transposable elements may play a role in genome evolution through organismal adaptation to stress  <cit> , and it would be interesting to test this idea in relation to plant invasion.

heat-shock proteins
heat shock protein  <dig> , a stress-induced protein, has been shown to buffer genetic variation in morphogenic pathways in the fruit fly drosophila melanogaster and the cruciferous plant arabiodpsis  <cit> . as a chaperone of proteins that regulate growth and development, hsp <dig> may allow for the storage and release of genetic variation, as well as allowing phenotypic plasticity in an organism's response to their environment  <cit> . eight heat shock-related unigenes were identified in the centaruea cdna library . one unigene is closely related to hsp <dig>  one to hsp <dig>  one to hsp <dig>  and the others are annotated as 'putative heat-shock proteins' or 'heat shock factors.' only two of these unigenes have top blast hits to sequences from a. thaliana, suggesting there may be a wide diversity of hsp <dig> related sequences in centaurea. understanding the mechanism of these proteins in relation to plant genotype, environment and defense response throughout the native and invasive range of c. maculosa may give some clues to the plasticity of the species.

secondary metabolism
as explained above the aars hypothesis proposes that novel weapons, often in the form of secondary metabolites, are selected for in invasive plants in the introduced ranges. members of the aster family are capable of synthesis of a broad spectrum of secondary metabolites that may aid in basal and induced defense response, as well as in competition against other plants  <cit> . included in the list of secondary metabolites synthesized by centaurea spp. are polyacetylenes and related thiophenes, flavonoids  and their glycosides, phenolics and lignans, coumarins, anthocyanins, cyanogenic glycosides , mono-, sesqui-, di- and tri-terpenoids , and steroidal compounds  <cit> . described below are several centaurea unigenes which share sequence similarity with characterized genes involved in plant secondary metabolite biosynthesis. further study of these candidate genes may aid in understanding the relative influence of aars in centaurea invasion.

sesquiterpene lactones
c. maculosa is known to accumulate the sesquiterpene lactone, cnicin, at concentrations approaching 2% of dry weight on the leaves of the inflorescence stem  <cit> . this compound is thought to act as a protectant against herbivory of generalist herbivores and acts as an oviposition stimulant for specialist herbivores  <cit>  including agapeta zoegana, a biological control agent introduced for the control of c. maculosa in the north america. additionally, cnicin is phytotoxic to several plant species  <cit> , appears to inhibit the rumen microbial activity of sheep , possesses broad spectrum anti-fungal activity  <cit> , and is being examined as a potential pesticide for control of formosan termite  <cit> . sesquiterpenes are synthesized through cyclization of farnesyl pyrophosphate  followed by further modification steps including oxidation, reduction, and glycosylation reactions. the genes responsible for the committed step that catalyzes the conversion of fpp to sesquiterpene hydrocarbons are well-characterized, including sesquiterpene synthases from aster family members such as artemisia annua, solidago canadensis, helianthus annuus, ixeris dentata, chicorium intybus, and lactuca sativa. in the centaurea cdna library, no unigenes were annotated as a sesquiterpene synthase. however, several unigenes revealed high sequence simlarity to genes involved in the synthesis of the iosprenoid pyrophosphates, metabolic precursors to the terpenoids. blast similarity searches revealed two unigenes which closely matched the antirrhinum majus geranyl diphosphate synthase, which catalyzes the condensation of two isopenyl pyrophosphate units to form a ten-carbon precursor  of monoterpenoids. gpp can then be extended further to fpp, geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate , and ultimately to dolichol phosphate, a polyprenoid involved in the formation of glycoproteins via the endomembrane system. two unigenes were annotated as dehydrodolichol phosphate synthases by go annotation.

following formation of the ring structure, sesquiterpene skeletons can be modified through oxidation, reduction, and glycosylation reactions to form an enormous diversity of secondary products including cnicin, a sesquiterpene lactone found in c. maculosa. sesquiterpene lactones commonly occur in the asteraceae, but the biosynthetic routes for individual metabolites are relatively poorly characterized. one of the most well-characterized of the biosynthetic pathways leading to sesquiterpene lactones is that for artemisinin, a compound of value as an anti-malarial drug  <cit>  isolated from the aster artemisia annua. recently the oxidation steps which generate artemisinic acid, a precursor of artemisinin, were characterized and the entire pathway to artemisinic acid reconstructed in yeast  <cit> . the reaction proceeds from fpp to the sesquiterpene, amorphadiene , and then to artemisinic acid, a reaction catalyzed by a single p <dig> enzyme which performs a three-step oxidation reaction to form a carboxylic acid. a unigene from the centaurea library  demonstrates 93% amino acid sequence identity to this three-step oxidase and a nearly identical gene from the related a. obtusifolia , highly suggestive of a role in the biosynthesis of the cnicin or other sesquiterpene lactones of c. maculosa.

acetylenes
the polyacetylelenes are secondary metabolites derived from fatty acids, and are characteristic of many aster genera. acetylenes contain highly reduced carbon-carbon triple bonds. the biosynthetic route has been only recently characterized for a small group of acetylenes  <cit> . alignment of established acetylenases, Δ <dig> oleic acid desaturates, and c. maculosa unigenes annotated as desaturases reveals three c. maculosa ests which cluster closely to h. annuus acetylenase, but are distinct from h. annuusΔ <dig> oleic acid desaturates , suggesting that these genes may be involved in acetylene production in c. maculosa.

flavonoids
the basic flavonoid pathway is the best-characterized metabolic pathway of plant secondary metabolism  <cit> . more than  <dig> flavonoid structures have been characterized from the asteraceae, in the cardueae tribe, which contains centaurea spp., that are particularly rich in hydroxy-methylated flavonols and flavones  <cit> . the early steps of the pathway involve the generation of phenylpropanoid monomers which are condensed with three malonyl coa units to form the chalcones, followed by isomerization, hydroxylation, methylation, glycosylation, and polymerizations steps  <cit> . many steps of the general flavonoid pathway are represented in the centaurea cdna library, with clones present that show similarity to most characterized enzymatic functions . however, no unigenes showed significant sequence similarity to flavonol synthase , the gene responsible for generation of the flavonols, or flavone synthase , the gene product of which converts flavanones to flavones. each of these genes are oxoglutarate-dependent dioxygenases, and several unigenes suggest this function, as revealed by go annotation. further, only two fs clones from asteraceae members  are reported in genbank, and only one asteraceae sequence is annotated as an fls gene , suggesting that one or more of the unannotated 2-oxoglutarate-dependent dioxygenases may be fls or fs genes.

as c. maculosa has been reported to exude catechin, a phytotoxic secondary metabolite, from its root  <cit> , the study of genes involved in secondary metabolism in c. maculosa may help reveal how this compound and other potential 'novel weapons' are synthesized. the aars hypothesis suggests that plants may evolve to produce more of the effective 'weapon' compounds when in the invaded environment  <cit> , so it would also be interesting to test the activity of some of these proteins in native and invasive populations.

defense-response genes
one of the main predictions of eica is that plants in their new environment rapidly evolve to put more resources into growth/reproduction and less into defense, as they have escaped their co-evolved pathogens and predators  <cit> . thus, native plants should show higher levels of basal defense compounds and should out-perform invasives when both are exposed to pathogens from the native environment. the centaurea cdna library contains a variety of unigenes annotated as defense response genes , as well as components of signaling pathways that may be involved in defense mechanisms. these include centaurea sequences similar to three lipoxygenase  proteins, two phenylalanine ammonia lyase  proteins, and three calmodulin binding proteins. also identified was a centaurea sequence similar to the arabidopsis activated disease resistance-like  gene, which contains nucleotide binding site – leucine rich repeat  motifs characteristic of defense-response proteins  <cit> . four centaurea unigenes show high similarity to another lrr containing arabidopsis transcript  that is suspected to be involved in the defense response signal transduction pathway. the centaurea library contains seven other unigenes, not annotated as "defense related," that contain lrr motifs or leucine zippers . one centaurea unigene shows similarity to the r gene-mediated disease resistance gene  from arabidopsis, which is required for sa accumulation and production of pathogenesis related  proteins  <cit> . two unigenes show similarity to a pr- <dig> type protein from sambucus nigra, similar to arabidopsis pr-1-related transcript at4g <dig>  in addition, twelve of the unigenes annotated as having 'transcription factor activity' in the go molecular function categorization are similar to wrky transcription factors  which may be involved in initial steps of the defense-response signaling pathway  <cit> . with this c. maculosa sequence information it will be possible to test levels of basal defense responses at the level of gene expression in populations of native and invasive plants. genes involved only in induced defense response may be under represented in the library, as the plants that were used in library creation did not undergo interspecific competition, pathogen stress, or herbivory and were not grown under field conditions. however, many of the unigenes identified have been implicated in induced defenses in other systems , and these may be good candidates for studying induced as well as basal defense response. future experiments can be coupled with more traditional tests of morphology and biochemistry in order to supplement data concerning hypotheses of plant invasion.

CONCLUSIONS
this is the first report of a cdna library from an invasive weed. the centaurea cdna library, consisting of  <dig> unique transcripts , represents an initial step towards looking at gene-specific expression in this species, and will pave the way for creation of other resources such as microarray chips that can help provide a view of global gene expression in invasive c. maculosa and its native counterparts. these technologies can likely be extrapolated to look at other invasive knapweeds  also problematic in north america. by comparing native and invasive c. maculosa plants under different stresses, including herbivory and pathogen infection, it will be possible to test hypotheses such as eica using molecular resources coupled with classical  techniques.

this technology will also be useful to help understand differences in gene expression between diploid and tetraploid c. maculosa populations, and give insight into the effects of chromosome doubling and polyploidization events in the plant world. additionally, by looking at secondary metabolite accumulation and the genes responsible for their production in c. maculosa, it may be possible to knock out those genes, create mutants defective in the production of allelochemicals, and to finally determine unequivocally whether allelopathy  is involved in the invasive success of some weeds.

understanding the genetic basis of evolution for increased invasiveness in exotic plants is critical to understanding the mechanisms through which exotic invasions occur. the centaurea cdna library provides a unique resource that will be valuable to geneticists, molecular biologists, and ecologists alike.

