BACKGROUND
the lack of a robust phylogeny for the specialized predators within the dorylomorph ants has been recognized as a major gap in our current knowledge of higher-level ant diversification  <cit> . this group comprises six subfamilies and approximately  <dig> described species, distributed collectively across most major biogeographic realms, with highest diversity in tropical latitudes  <cit> . monophyly of the dorylomorphs as a whole was established several decades ago based on a suite of morphological characters  <cit>  and has subsequently been verified through phylogenetic analyses of several molecular data sets  <cit> . however, relationships among the major dorylomorph lineages remain almost completely unresolved.

the dorylomorphs include the notorious army ants, well-known for their large colony sizes, nomadic behavior, mass foraging, and strong ecological impacts on communities  <cit> . army ants do not use individual scouts to locate food, as do most other ant species; rather, they send out swarms of up to several hundred thousand workers en masse to kill prey items and transport them back to their colonies. some army ant species show synchronized reproductive cycles in which all brood in a colony are at the same stage in development. another feature that separates army ants from many other ant species is the nomadic nesting behavior observed in many aboveground species, in which colonies periodically move their habitation sites  to new locations. as a result of these foraging characteristics, army ants considerably impact their prey populations both ecologically  and evolutionarily   <cit> .

in contrast to the relatively well-studied army ants, most other dorylomorph species are less conspicuous ants whose biology remains far less well known. available information suggests that all dorylomorph ants are specialized predators of social insects, particularly other ant species and termites. however, many epigaeic  and some hypogaeic  army ant species have secondarily expanded their diet breadth to include other invertebrates and even small vertebrates  <cit> . another characteristic of many dorylomorph ants is the presence of permanently wingless queens. such species, found in many dorylomorph groups including all army ants, do not have winged queens that engage in mating flights as in most other ant species, but rather possess large wingless queens that mate within the nest and then disperse on the ground via colony fission.

the dorylomorphs occupy a key position in the overall phylogeny of ants, forming the sister group to all other formicoids  <cit> , a clade first revealed by molecular phylogenetic data, which contains several major lineages  and the bulk of ant species diversity . in contrast to the secure placement of dorylomorphs within the ant phylogeny, the relationships of many taxa within the dorylomorphs have resisted robust phylogenetic resolution. previous work within the dorylomorphs has focused almost exclusively on the phylogeny of army ants  <cit> . these ants – comprising the subfamilies aenictinae, dorylinae, and ecitoninae – are by far the largest and most widespread group to possess the army ant syndrome of traits described above   <cit> . previous phylogenies of army ants have suggested that the three army ant subfamilies  form a monophyletic group, with the new world ecitoninae forming the sister group to the exclusively old world lineages  <cit> . however, some of these conclusions were not strongly corroborated by subsequent larger-scale ant phylogenies that included fewer dorylomorph taxa but more molecular data  <cit> . the relationships among the non-army ant lineages remain even more obscure, such that the phylogenetic positions of virtually all non-army ant genera and higher-level groups cannot be established from the previous studies. more troubling is the lack of support for the monophyly of several key genera, including the genus cerapachys, which constitutes the majority of species diversity within the non-army ant dorylomorphs.

here we present the first comprehensive phylogenetic analysis of major dorylomorph lineages. we update hypotheses regarding the evolution of major army ant lineages, and for the first time identify a series of well-supported, distinct lineages among the non-army ant dorylomorphs. our divergence dating estimates suggest a rapid radiation of major lineages soon after the origin of this group.

RESULTS
summary of phylogenetic analyses and reclassification of the dorylomorphs
we generated a molecular data set consisting of dna sequences from  <dig> genes obtained from  <dig> dorylomorph taxa and  <dig> outgroup taxa. we inferred the phylogeny of dorylomorph lineages under several different analytical treatments of the data. our fundamental analyses included all generated data, analyzed under partitioned bayesian inference  and maximum likelihood  frameworks. we found evidence of base composition heterogeneity in the third codon positions of all protein-coding genes , a condition long known to potentially compromise phylogenetic inference using standard model implementations  <cit> . to address this, we conducted analyses  in which all or some third positions were ry-coded, a technique that recodes nucleotides into purines  or pyrimidines  to reduce the influence of base compositional bias  <cit> ;  in which third positions were excluded; and  in which codon models were applied to the nine protein-coding genes. we also found evidence that four species  acted as “wildcard” taxa, the inferred phylogenetic positions of which varied markedly depending on analytical treatment. unlike the most commonly encountered wildcard taxa, these four do not contain any missing nucleotide data. nonetheless, they are able to occupy multiple, often very different positions in the phylogeny with little or no penalty in likelihood or posterior probability, apparently due to high levels of autapomorphic, symplesiomorphic, and/or homoplastic character states and correspondingly low levels of synapomorphies reliably linking them to other, more stable taxa and clades. this property can lead to erosion in support in extended regions of the phylogeny  <cit> . thus, we also conducted alternative analyses in which these potential wildcard taxa were excluded.

“variable non-pi” indicates the number of non-parsimony-informative  and “variable pi” indicates the number of parsimony-informative variable characters. p-values in bold signify significant levels of base frequency heterogeneity.

under all analytical treatments of the data, the dorylomorphs were inferred to be a robustly supported, monophyletic group . this was an expected result in light of the overwhelming support for this clade found in previous morphological and molecular studies  <cit> . the dorylomorphs, as currently defined, encompass six different subfamilies. we find strong support for the monophyly of five of these subfamilies . however, the sixth subfamily, cerapachyinae, is heterogeneous and non-monophyletic, comprising all remaining dorylomorphs that cannot be placed in the five more derived groups. the five monophyletic subfamilies are all nested within cerapachyinae, and no redefinition or subdivision of cerapachyinae can salvage its monophyly. for this reason, we propose to reclassify all dorylomorph ants as members of a single subfamily to ensure monophyly—a criterion that already applies to all other ant subfamilies except possibly amblyoponinae  <cit> . because dorylinae represents the oldest available name, it takes priority as the name for all dorylomorphs. hence, we refer to the dorylomorphs as dorylinae throughout the remainder of this paper. this establishes the following new synonymy: dorylinae = acanthostichini n. syn., = aenictinae n. syn., = aenictogitoninae n. syn., = cerapachyinae  n. syn., = cheliomyrmecini n. syn.,= cylindromyrmecini n. syn., = ecitoninae n. syn., = leptanilloidinae n. syn.

army ant evolution
the army ants were reconstructed as monophyletic under most analytical treatments, with support varying considerably depending on treatment conditions. our bi analysis of the entire data set supports army ant monophyly with a posterior probability  of  <dig>   or  <dig>  , but ml analyses of this data set only weakly support army ant monophyly under both nucleotide  and codon  models . the application of ry-coding showed similar trends in support, but with even weaker ml support, while the exclusion of third codon positions yielded essentially no support for this clade. the exclusion of the four wildcard taxa had no appreciable influence on these trends .

army ant monophyly would imply a single origin of the army ant syndrome, while non-monophyly would indicate either convergent evolution or an evolutionary reversal of the syndrome. only the bi analyses yielded strong support for monophyly of this group, and this occurs only when fast evolving third positions are included. furthermore, the four major army ant clades are all composed of relatively long subtending branches  and it is possible that the strong bi support for army ant monophyly, depending largely on third positions, is an analytical artifact. thus, evidence for army ant monophyly cannot be considered strong. it should be noted, however, that in the few cases in which army ant monophyly was not recovered, the alternatives were neither well supported nor consistent .

our analyses also call into question a fundamental split between old world and new world army ant lineages, as suggested by previous phylogenies  <cit> . specifically, support values supporting the monophyly of the old world army ants  are weak in our bi  and ml  analyses of the entire data set. a few of our secondary analyses result in stronger support, such as ry-coding bi analyses of the entire data set  and with the four wildcard taxa excluded ; but, all analyses considered, our data provide weak support. it is true that previous studies included more species of army ants, although they also included less molecular data. future studies including both more taxa and data will be necessary to resolve this issue.

within the putative old world army ants, aenictogiton is always reconstructed as the sister to dorylus with overwhelming support. this result accords with previous morphological  <cit>  and molecular  <cit>  phylogenies that also associate these two taxa. behavioral observations of aenictogiton workers are lacking, and thus we do not know if they possess the same syndrome of behavioral traits shared by all army ants. however, the phylogenetic position of aenictogiton as the sister to dorylus, combined with the fact that no army ant lineage is known to have lost the army ant syndrome, reinforces the prediction that the biology of this group conforms to the army ant syndrome.

within the new world army ants, the genus neivamyrmex is reconstructed as the sister to all remaining genera including cheliomyrmex. this relationship has been suggested, but without strong support, by previous morphological  <cit>  and molecular  <cit>  data sets that sampled all genera of new world army ants. the rarely encountered genus cheliomyrmex  has long been considered to retain primitive morphological and perhaps even behavioral characteristics within army ants as a whole  <cit> . its phylogenetic position as reconstructed in our analyses renders problematic any interpretation in which cheliomyrmex represents the ancestral army ant condition  <cit> .

identifying the sister group to army ants would provide valuable context for understanding the origin and early evolution of the army ant syndrome. our current data are not able to establish this relationship, as various doryline taxa cluster with the army ants depending on the treatment of the data, though always with poor support . however, our analyses do indicate that some taxa possessing certain traits in common with army ant species are not in fact closely related to the true army ants . species within the exclusively neotropical leptanilloidine clade  <cit> , which now includes the genus amyrmex known only from males  <cit> , display some traits similar to army ants including colony emigration and modified queens  <cit> . the leptanilloidines, some cerapachys species such as c. biroi <cit> , and some sphinctomyrmex species display highly synchronized brood cycles, also present in some army ant species. all studied non-army ant dorylines appear to use scouts to initiate the raiding of ant nests, unlike army ant mass foraging; but some doryline species do relocate their nests frequently and carry their brood slung underneath their bodies, behaviors reminiscent of army ants . we caution, however, that essentially nothing is yet known about the biology of many doryline species, preventing detailed analysis of the evolutionary histories of these traits.

diversification of non-army ant lineages
the genera cylindromymex and acanthostichus were robustly resolved as sister groups under all analytical treatments. these results are consistent with previous studies  <cit> , with one notable caveat. the species cerapachys davisi is clustered within acanthostichus with  <dig> percent support under all data treatments. cylindromymex, acanthostichus, and c. davisi are exclusively new world taxa  <cit> ; where their biology is known, they appear to be specialized predators of termites  <cit> . c. davisi is only known from males, which may explain why this species was not previously recognized as a member of the genus acanthostichus. it is here formally transferred to that genus .

all included simopone species form a monophyletic group. this largely arboreal genus is rarely collected and remains one of the poorest known dorylinae groups both in terms of taxonomy and basic natural history. recent revisionary work has begun to remedy the former lacunae, in which a new genus was identified  as distinct from simopone and a second genus newly described  from the old world tropics  <cit> . our phylogenetic analyses confirm the distinctness of these two new genera, with neither tanipone nor vicinopone closely related to simopone s.s.

our analyses strongly indicate the non-monophyly of sphinctomyrmex. this genus is characterized by a diagnostic series of distinct constrictions on the gastral  segments . the old world sphinctomyrmex clade is nested within an old world group of cerapachys lineages that excludes the new world s. stali. because s. stali is the type species of sphinctomyrmex, we informally use the next oldest available name eusphinctus  to refer to the old world clade. until recently s. stali was the only sphinctomyrmex species known from the new world; two more have now been described  <cit> . the phylogenetic separation of new world and old world members of the group provides a newly discovered and striking example of morphological convergence. it is possible that these gastral constrictions represent independent adaptations to allow greater dexterity and movement of the stinging apparatus for protection or for stinging prey.

it has long been suspected that the genus cerapachys is not monophyletic. species within this relatively large genus  show considerable variation in morphological features, especially with regard to abdominal characters  <cit> , and do not share any reliable morphological characters that might represent putative synapomorphies  <cit> . previous molecular phylogenies that included multiple cerapachys species have failed to find support for their monophyly  <cit> , although support for non-monophyletic alternative groupings was weak. our detailed phylogeny now demonstrates without doubt that cerapachys is not monophyletic. more importantly, our results reveal for the first time phylogenetic structure for cerapachys by identifying a series of independent lineages formerly assigned to the genus  as well as establishing some relationships among these lineages. some of these reconstructed lineages correspond approximately to former genera that were synonymised under cerapachys in the past  <cit> . for example, we recover with strong support a clade of “cerapachys” species with marked lateral margination on the petiole , for which the genus name lioponera is available. lioponera is sister to a well supported clade that comprises three robust lineages: the “cerapachys” lividus group, endemic to madagascar; the old world “sphinctomyrmex”, i.e., eusphinctus; and a clade of “cerapachys” species corresponding to the old genus parasycia. elsewhere in the phylogeny, species assigned to cerapachys fall out as follows:  cerapachys splendens is an isolated neotropical species for which no generic name is available;  the erstwhile genus yunodorylus, represented in our study by c. sexspinus and c. paradoxus, is an independent clade;  the erstwhile genus chrysapace, represented by c. sauteri and an undescribed malagasy species, is an independent clade;  the true cerapachys  is distinct, taxonomically isolated, and species-poor;  there is a clade of afrotropical “cerapachys” morphologically similar to c. wroughtoni ; and  there are two groups of species with small eyes and reduced body size that are one another’s closest relatives and that correspond to the former genera syscia  and ooceraea . thus, our molecular phylogenetic results provide strong justification for reclassifying the unwieldy genus cerapachys into a series of coherent monophyletic groups, providing the basis for future taxonomic work on these groups. we use the erstwhile names  here for communication purposes, but we are not proposing formal nomenclatural changes.

we refer to the group containing c. sexspinus as “yunodorylus” because this species was originally described as the new genus yunodorylus and was considered to fall within the army ant subfamily dorylinae sensu stricto <cit> . later taxonomic work transferred yunodorylus to cerapachys <cit>  and described additional species  <cit> . our analyses confirm earlier phylogenies  <cit>  separating yunodorylus from dorylus and other army ants. one of those earlier phylogenies  <cit>  did indicate, with weak support, that yunodorylus still falls within the army ants, but this position for yunodorylus never resulted from any analytical treatments of the current data set.

divergence times and trends within dorylinae
our divergence dating analysis indicates that the crown group  dorylinae originated approximately  <dig>  million years ago  . initial estimates for the age of this group from previous studies were substantially older, with mean ages of  <dig> mya  <cit>  and 99– <dig> mya  <cit> . notably, both of these studies contained a large amount of mitochondrial dna data  which can bias divergence dating studies toward older dates  <cit> . other studies that instead used exclusively nuclear molecular data gave a younger date for dorylinae, with mean estimates of 77– <dig> mya  <cit>  using the semiparametric method r8s and 78– <dig> mya  <cit>  using the same bayesian method  employed in this study. although these mean ages based on nuclear dna data do fall within the 95% confidence intervals of our study, some of the discrepancy in mean age estimates between our study and previous work may be due to the relatively poor fossil record for dorylinae compared to other ant groups. we were able to calibrate only three nodes within the dorylinae, and the placement of these calibrations may be subject to taxonomic and phylogenetic error. a future goal of divergence dating studies in this group should be to develop comprehensive morphological data sets for both extant and extinct taxa. new methods could then be used that simultaneously infer phylogeny and divergence dates using a combined morphological and molecular character matrix  <cit> .

we infer an origin of the crown group army ants at approximately  <dig>  mya, about eight million years after the rise of dorylinae. after this origin, there appears to be a long period without additional speciation  until the crown group origins of each of the four major army ant lineages  between  <dig> and  <dig> million years ago. it is possible that these long branches are at least partially due to unsampled extant basally diverging lineages in aenictus and aenictogiton, although this explanation remains unlikely for dorylus and new world army ants because they have been the focus of more comprehensive taxonomic and phylogenetic attention  <cit> . the presence of long branches in chronograms of extant taxa is often attributed to one of two factors: a long diversification fuse or massive extinction events. a long diversification fuse would be caused by a long period of very low diversification followed by a rapid increase in diversification rate, while the alternative invokes a period of high levels of extinction rates producing ghost lineages that remain unsampled in a tree of only extant lineages  <cit> . in the absence of a good fossil record, distinguishing between the two scenarios remains difficult even using the most sophisticated diversification methods  <cit> . indeed, the present state of dorylinae systematics precludes the rigorous application of objective diversification rate methods that require estimates of total species diversity within each major lineage. it is true that some smaller taxa within dorylinae have been the focus of recent taxonomic treatments, including acanthostichus <cit> , cylindromyrmex <cit> , simopone <cit> , and the leptanilloidines  <cit> , while the army ants have also been the subjects of taxonomic work by a variety of researchers over the past several decades. but the glaring lacunae in the systematics of the group fall within the large genus cerapachys, which, as our study reveals, embodies most of the taxa involved in the initial diversification of the group. the major lineages in our phylogeny currently assigned to cerapachys contain large numbers of undescribed species . comprehensive systematic treatment of all these lineages currently listed as cerapachys will be necessary to achieve reasonable estimates for lineage species diversity within these groups.

in contrast to the long branches leading to the major crown lineages of dorylinae, the internodes connecting many of the lineages near the base of the tree are quite short . our inability to resolve basal diversification within dorylinae is probably linked to these short branches. although a lack of data could be responsible for this situation, our matrix includes  <dig>  variable sites distributed among  <dig> nuclear genes, and no taxon in our matrix was missing any sequence data. rather than an artifact of too little data, these short internodes could instead accurately reflect a rapid radiation of specialized predators. the presence of short basal internodes in our phylogeny also strongly suggests that data of much higher quantity and/or quality, such as those afforded by phylogenomic approaches, will be required to resolve the initial diversification events within dorylinae.

CONCLUSIONS
our molecular phylogeny allows us to define major lineages within dorylinae for the first time. we show that the large genus cerapachys is not monophyletic but instead constitutes about ten distinct lineages, many of which appear to have diversified within a short window of time. the genus sphinctomyrmex resolves as two separate clades, one old world and the other new world, implying convergent evolution of the abdominal constrictions characteristic of the group.

our phylogenetic results are valuable not only for encouraging new systematic and taxonomic work on the group, but also for providing a framework for the comparative biological study of these specialized predators. one goal of future work should be to increase our knowledge of predatory behavior, queen mating and dispersal, and other aspects of doryline biology that may have influenced their rates of diversification.

when viewed from the perspective of morphological evolution, it is now evident that taxa presently defined as cerapachys are grouped together not due to unique common descent, but rather because collectively they retain a similar, generalized morphology. in contrast, some other doryline groups, which evolved within the broad assemblage of cerapachys-like forms, acquired distinctively derived morphological features. this includes army ants  and the two convergent lineages of sphinctomyrmex  . thus, our finding of cerapachys paraphyly is not merely a simple error of taxonomy. we hypothesize that this situation also reflects substantial heterogeneity of evolutionary rates, with taxa that experienced divergent morphological evolution being nested within larger groups that exhibit much greater morphological stasis.

