BACKGROUND
large-scale intervention programmes to control or eliminate a group of tropical infectious diseases are currently underway in many parts of the world  <cit> . these neglected tropical disease  control programmes are primarily based on the administration of highly effective drugs to entire afflicted populations, although additional measures, such as vector control and sanitation, often accompany the drug distribution  <cit> . these diseases have been prevalent in tropical and sub-tropical regions for millennia  <cit>  and have been shown to be very difficult to bring under control so that, following the termination of previous control efforts, infection and disease often reemerge in endemic populations  <cit> . recent theoretical work has highlighted how the difficulty in achieving the elimination of infection may be related to the ecological complexity and heterogeneity inherent in the transmission dynamics of the parasites causing these ntds  <cit> .

two important threshold values that govern the switching of dynamic vector-borne helminth systems from one stable state to another  <cit> , either settling at a stable endemic or extinction steady state, are the threshold biting rate  and the worm breakpoint   <cit> . depressing infection or biting rate levels below these thresholds  is the objective of any elimination programme. mathematical models, based on the dynamic mechanisms by which vector-borne helminth infection occurs, provide an important tool for the calculation of the tbr and parasite breakpoint values  <cit> . however, the likelihood that local parasite transmission dynamics will differ from one community to another means that reliably estimating the values of these thresholds will require the efficient fitting of models to site-specific infection data. such data-driven model-based estimation is also necessitated by the often large number of uncertainties associated with the model structure, parameterization  and prediction  <cit> . for these reasons, the widespread use of process-based models for guiding parasite control based on theoretical predictions has so far been limited.

also, fitting complex ecological models to data is not a trivial task  <cit> , especially when there is uncertainty and a lack of detail in the site-specific infection data available for reliable model parameter estimation. thus, in recent years an increasing focus in work relating to dynamic process-based models for practical applications has been on the development and application of fitting procedures that can allow the use of information from available data to refine and update initially assigned model parameter values  <cit> .

our aims here are threefold. first, we fit a mathematical model of lymphatic filariasis  transmission- against which a global elimination programme is currently underway- to community age-prevalence data from three geographical regions, where two different mosquito species transmit the parasite, to test the hypothesis that elimination thresholds for this major vector-borne disease vary significantly between communities  <cit> . second, we use site-specific data, and a recent approach based on fitting dynamic parasite transmission models to data via computer simulation techniques  <cit> , to update our current knowledge of parameter values  and quantify the extant uncertainty around elimination breakpoint values. finally, we analyse model parameter values estimated from each study area in order to investigate the factors that underlie the observed between-community variation in these elimination thresholds. we end by showing the importance of the present results for the current world health organization  strategy for eliminating lf based on annual mass chemotherapy, by quantifying, given the estimated breakpoint values for a community, the probability of achieving infection elimination locally by deploying the currently recommended global who mass treatment regimen.

RESULTS
data and fitted mf age-prevalence curves for each study community
the  <dig> age-dependent equilibrium curves obtained by resampling the original parameter sets using the sampling importance resampling  algorithm  are plotted against observed microfilarial  data in figure  <dig> for each of the data sets studied here. the results show that, over the range of annual biting rates  found between the study sites and for the two different mosquito vectors, the present models are capable of reproducing mf prevalence curves consistent with observed data. each of the curves is generated by a different model parameter set and the range of curves produced represents the residual uncertainty remaining in the parameters following the bayesian updating procedure. note that  <dig> distinct curves are unlikely to be plotted in each case as those curves with the highest likelihoods will be plotted multiple times.

parameter values
as noted above, an important application of the bayesian model fitting procedure we use is to produce better estimates of the parameters underlying lf transmission. figure  <dig> shows comparisons of the initially assigned flat, or uninformative, prior and the obtained posterior distributions for four of the model parameters following the application of the bayesian updating procedure to the data from each of the study villages. as their posterior distributions differed strongly from their priors , these parameters were illustrated in figure  <dig> to provide a clear depiction of how values of a parasite transmission parameter can be effectively refined or updated by applying the present bayesian melding  procedure to field infection data. more formal comparisons between the prior and posterior distributions of each model parameter for each of the study data sets were conducted using the univariate kolmogorov-smirnov statistic and are given in additional file  <dig>  online. an important finding depicted by these results is that increasing changes in the posterior distributions, relative to initially assigned uninformative priors, will occur as the variability in observed data decreases. thus, all of the posterior distributions were significantly different from the assigned uniform priors for the pondicherry data set, which exhibited the lowest variability in mf prevalence with age , with this comparative difference declining markedly in the case of the more variable papua new guinea  data sets.

biting thresholds and worm breakpoints
we investigated which of the fitted model parameters differed significantly between the study communities and, therefore, may underlie the between-study variations observed for the estimated breakpoints and r <dig> values  via classification tree analysis. figure  <dig> displays the final fitted tree and indicates that, of the various model parameters , variations in the fitted community infection aggregation parameter , acquired immunity  and parasite establishment rate in the human host  may primarily contribute to the differences observed in the infection dynamics and, hence, the breakpoint and r <dig> values estimated between the different study communities investigated here. the results also suggest that differences in the community infection aggregation index, by contributing to many of the earlier splits in the tree, constitute the most important factor that may influence the observed differences in parameter vectors or infection dynamics between the study villages followed, less significantly, by the immunity and parasite establishment parameters. note also that, while the aggregation and immunity variables may constitute site-specific parameters that could be expected to vary between communities  <cit> , the establishment rate parameter, by contrast, is an intrinsic biological parameter, which may differentially influence lf transmission between communities - possibly as a result of interactions with site-specific parameters, such as immunity  <cit> .

impact of locally applicable breakpoints on annual repeated mass drug administration  programmes
the current who-recommended strategy for filariasis control is based on the expectation that six annual doses of drug treatment could eliminate lf from a community. we simulated the impact of a combined annual mass diethylcarbamazine/albendazole  regimen applied at 80% coverage . the analysis was carried out by subjecting each of the resampled  <dig> parameter sets from each village to the recommended regime of six annual dec/alb treatments, after which we determined the proportion of the  <dig> model simulations that crossed their mf prevalence breakpoints. figure  <dig> plots the trajectories followed by each model run for the png village of ngahmbule and shows that, although the overall mean mf prevalence calculated over all of the  <dig> model realizations may fall to very low levels following the six rounds of treatment, approximately half of the  <dig> model runs resulted in a decrease in the parasite intensity and prevalence to a level whereby extinction occurs without further treatment.

discussion
the major result of this study of immediate import to lf elimination is our finding of the occurrence of significant differences in the population dynamics and the resulting transmission breakpoint estimates between the nine endemic villages investigated. although differences in the transmission dynamics of this parasitic disease have been investigated before, they have primarily focused on uncovering the impact of a priori proposed drivers of such differences, such as community vector biting rates and acquired immunity  <cit> . however, this study is the first to use empirical data to disclose the key transmission parameters that underlie observed site-specific differences in filarial transmission dynamics and the resulting endpoints for terminating parasite transmission. the results highlight two important conclusions on this point. first, they support previous results, from sensitivity analyses of our model, that transmission breakpoints in each of the two major filarial infection systems are likely to be highly sensitive to variations in site-specific ecological factors underlying infection dynamics. second, they confirm that such factors are primarily related to the degree of infection aggregation, as well as the magnitude of acquired immunity occurring within endemic communities  <cit> , although differences in the parasite establishment rate- a more intrinsic biological parameter, the values of which are likely to depend on the strength of immunity operating in a community  <cit>  - may also, to a lesser degree, govern between-community differences in the values of such breakpoints.

the monte carlo-based sampling technique used for model fitting has also allowed the first estimates of the extant uncertainty in breakpoint values for eliminating lf. thus, we found, for example, that worm breakpoints, when aggregated over the models for each vector, resulted in a higher spread of values for the anopheline than the culicine models . although this vector-specific discrepancy in the median value for this breakpoint has previously been suggested  <cit>   for the anopheline against only one  for the culicine-mediated filarial infection dynamics), the characterization of variability in the breakpoint values, even within a local setting, is a new outcome of this study. while the uncertainty estimates for both breakpoints and for r <dig> obtained in this study primarily reflect epistemic uncertainty regarding parameter values and their distributional patterns , the possible existence of a range or cloud of extinction breakpoints within a setting, nonetheless, supports the notion that stochastic variability in infection parameters will, in reality, give rise to a distribution rather than a simple point estimate for these variables in natural communities  <cit> . nevertheless, the data-driven finding here substantiates the theoretical conjecture  <cit>  that it may be easier, if all other factors are held constant, to eliminate anopheline rather than culicine filariasis in the field. future work should include further data sets for both culicine and anopheline-mediated filariasis in order to increase the statistical validity of these findings.

our simulations of the impact of the who-recommended drug administration strategy  demonstrate the likely failure of a fixed global strategy that ignores local extinction dynamics. not only may such a strategy produce a great deal of site-to-site variability in the prospects of achieving filariasis elimination but a consideration of the drivers of transmission, such as community abr and r <dig> values, may also have limited usefulness in predicting the likely success of time-bound intervention strategies for accomplishing parasite elimination, especially in those areas where the values of both these variables are high. the importance of this result for filariasis elimination programmes is clear: because the complex dynamics governing parasite transmission may cause filarial transmission breakpoints to vary between communities, any effort which aims to achieve the elimination of this disease must be based on estimates of local thresholds  <cit> .

the results of our parameter estimation have demonstrated that, although a greater knowledge of the natural variability occurring in key filariasis transmission parameters can clearly be gained using the bm model fitting approach, successful parameter updating is critically related to the quality of the available data. thus, the most informative data are those that show low levels of variability, suggesting that in order to be useful, parameter estimation requires that either good quality data are collected and subjected to analysis or else a hierarchical multi-level framework should be developed that allows the combining of data from different communities with as similar transmission characteristics as possible. the bayesian approach employed here will also allow for the future inclusion of further information or data, such as treatment follow-up data from local sites, which may be used sequentially to refine the model-fitting process and, hence, update parameter estimates  <cit> . such updating of the present models with more site-specific and follow-up data may also eventually enable us to determine which components, or even model structure, is necessary to obtain the most parsimonious description of the host-parasite system in different endemic localities  <cit> .

there are further limitations to our modelling approach which need to be borne in mind when interpreting the present results. the most important of these is that, although our deterministic modelling framework has yielded important insights into the extinction dynamics of lf as a result of mass drug interventions, stochastic analogues of our models would clearly enable the investigation of a greater number of sources of extinction, including the role of pure demographic effects and the impact of external drivers of population dynamics such as varying environmental or climate variables. in addition, future work must not only provide a better understanding of the forms and parameter values of the density-dependent processes that need to be included in the model to explain data in different communities, but must also show how these functions may, in turn, interact with different interventions in order to govern the specificity of the parasite population response to control. the use of longitudinal follow-up data in conjunction with model updating procedures, such as the bayesian estimation procedure described here, will allow an analytical framework to achieve this objective.

despite these caveats, the present findings point to important implications for the design of filariasis elimination programmes. first, the difficulty of measuring the key local parameters , critical to differences in estimated transmission breakpoint values, implies that the core difficulty in eliminating complex dynamical diseases, such as filariasis, is fundamentally related to the problem of how best to develop elimination strategies in the face of endpoint uncertainty in different sites. while adaptive management strategies, whereby data from each site or from endemically homogeneous regions could be used to develop and apply local strategies, would provide the optimal solution  <cit> , this is unlikely to be practically possible in most endemic settings. this implies a need to consider strategies developed and used in other fields  for managing complex dynamical systems  <cit> . the first of these might be to rely on achieving local elimination on the assumption that good local elimination everywhere implies good ultimate elimination overall, as long as the local interventions and elimination targets are well chosen. this approach could start by splitting the overall problem into a hierarchy of levels, with objectives for local, short-term elimination initially set at a higher level - for example, achieving disease control first  <cit>  - and then expanded on a longer time scale to accomplish parasite transmission interruption  <cit> . the second tactic may be to avoid focusing solely on meeting the objective of uncertain elimination and exploit the ability of even a relatively poor model to give fairly good guidance to promote good parasite system transitions  and prevent bad transitions   <cit> . previously, we have shown that including vector control with mda can, by increasing the worm breakpoint threshold value, reduce the resilience of the endemic state and, by raising the re-emergence infection threshold, promote the resilience of the parasite-free state, and hence, can play this resilience-enhancing role in sustaining lf elimination  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, complex parasite transmission dynamics and model or knowledge uncertainty demand the careful consideration of the best management strategy required to achieve parasite elimination both locally and globally. local dynamics imply different targets for parasite elimination and anticipatory approaches to the management of elimination, based on globally-set thresholds, are unlikely to achieve global filariasis elimination  <cit> . urgent work is now required to characterize the nature of variability in local parasite transmission and extinction dynamics using adaptive model-fitting methods, and to test and validate alternative management tactics if we are to develop and successfully deploy a more informed theory of parasite elimination.

