BACKGROUND
both male and female pigeons  possess the ability to produce a complete nutrient substance, termed pigeon 'milk', for the nourishment of their young. pigeons generally lay two eggs one day apart, which hatch  <dig> days after they are laid  <cit> . two days before the first egg hatches, pigeon 'milk' begins to be produced in the crop of the parent birds. a similar substance is produced by flamingos  <cit>  and male emperor penguins  <cit> . as in any other bird species, the normal function of the crop is as a food storage area located between the oesophagus and proventriculus where food is moistened before further break-down and digestion through the gastrointestinal tract  <cit> . during the process of pigeon 'lactation', a curd-like substance is regurgitated from the crop to the squab. studies on pigeon 'milk' have shown that the dry matter is made up of 60% protein and the remainder is mostly fat  and a small amount of carbohydrate , in addition to the mineral  content  <cit> . when this diet was artificially replicated and fed to squabs, their growth was either very poor or they died  <cit> , which suggests there is a unique factor or factors present in pigeon 'milk' that is required for squab growth and development. conversely, in a  <dig> study where pigeon 'milk' was fed to chickens, their rate of growth improved by 38%  <cit> . since this study, it has been shown that pigeon 'milk' contains iga antibodies  <cit> , which provides further evidence to suggest that it is more than a nutrient based substance.

the physiological mechanisms governing pigeon 'milk' production and delivery are unknown. it is well documented that the pigeon crop is responsive to the lactogenic hormone prolactin  <cit> , however, histological studies on pigeon crop tissue during 'lactation' suggest that the process is structurally unrelated to traditional mammalian lactation because the pigeon crop is not glandular and secretory processes do not seem to be involved  <cit> .

this study investigated the global gene expression profiles of pigeons that were 'lactating' as well as those that were not 'lactating' to identify genes that were differentially regulated in the pigeon crop during 'lactation'. since the pigeon genome has not been sequenced and there are few gene sequences available in the public databases, we used a chicken microarray to probe gene expression in the pigeon crop. publicly available pigeon genes have 98% nucleotide sequence identity to chicken , and this chicken array has previously been shown to have utility in gene expression studies in other bird species  <cit> .

RESULTS
macroscopic and histological comparison of 'lactating' and non- 'lactating' pigeon crop
macroscopic comparison of the 'lactating' and the non-'lactating' pigeon crop revealed two very different tissues . the pigeon crop lies between the distal oesophagus and the proximal end of the proventriculus. in its 'lactating' form, the crop is enlarged and has a thickened wall with two very obvious lateral lobes . this contrasts with the non-'lactating' crop which is a thin-walled membranous sac . when the 'lactating' crop is opened, the pigeon 'milk' appears as a bed of close-packed discrete rice-shaped pellets, each pellet being embedded in the mucosal surface of the lateral lobes .

histological examination of the wall of the lateral lobes in the 'lactating' crop  revealed a structure consistent with a number of previous detailed descriptions  <cit> . moving from the non-lactating region of the crop into a lactating lobe, there was increasing papillary hyperplasia of the epithelium. this was characterized, firstly, by an increase in the number, and depth, of rete pegs extending from the germinal  layer of the epithelium down into the lamina propria. as these rete pegs became deeper, there was also a concomitant proliferation, and very extensive upward folding, of the germinal layer into the superficial epithelium . at all levels, every microscopic fold of the germinal layer invested a branch of vascularised lamina propria, although these branches became progressively narrower, and the associated blood vessels more attenuated, approaching the luminal surface of the crop wall . within the microscopic folds of epithelium, the germinal layer was mitotically active, and usually  <dig> to  <dig> cells thick whereas the overlying nutritive layer  <cit> , also only  <dig> or  <dig> cells thick, had a pink, highly eosinophilic appearance, indicating high protein content of the differentiated cells  and a ground-glass appearance indicative of hypoxia.

near the luminal surface of the crop, the nutritive layers within each microscopic fold of epithelium began to coalesce, forming a parakeratinised layer. macroscopic folds of the epithelium then resulted in fusion of large tracts of this parakeratinised layer, the end-result being the formation of discrete 'milk' pellets composed of avascular epithelium . the cells within the pellets are nucleated, and are almost uniformly vacuolated. an oil red o stain revealed that the vacuoles contained lipid .

cross-species microarray hybridisation profiling of the pigeon crop
a comparison of gene expression between four 'lactating' and four non-'lactating' female pigeon crops was made using pigeon cdna hybridised to chicken long oligo-nucleotide microarrays  <cit> . when the data was subjected to student's t-test using a significance value of p <  <dig> , a list of  <dig> genes were found to be differentially expressed between 'lactating' and non-'lactating'. of these genes,  <dig> genes are up-regulated in the 'lactating' crop, and  <dig> genes are down-regulated. of the genes up-regulated in 'lactating' crop,  <dig> are greater than 5-fold differentially expressed, and  <dig> are greater than 2-fold differentially expressed. of the genes down-regulated in 'lactating' crop,  <dig> are more than 5-fold differentially expressed and  <dig> are greater than 2-fold differentially expressed. the data has been deposited into the public database arrayexpress .

functional analysis of gene expression in the 'lactating' pigeon crop sac
pathway analysis of differentially expressed genes revealed four pathways enriched in 'lactating' crop tissue; melanogenesis, extracellular matrix -receptor interaction, adherens junction and the wingless  signalling pathway . the most enriched pathway, melanogenesis, represents  <dig> % of all up-regulated genes, closely followed by the wnt signalling pathway, representing  <dig> % of all up-regulated genes. the genes involved in the melanogenesis pathway range from  <dig> -fold to  <dig> -fold up-regulated in 'lactating' crop, the highest fold-change being that of the transcription factor, micropthalmia-associated transcription factor . histological examination of the crop  failed to identify the presence of pigmented melanosomes, which are the products of melanogenesis.

gene expression pathways that were identified as enriched in 'lactating' crop tissue.

^total genes is the number of up-regulated genes  that could be identified by the david program

*mapped genes is the number of genes  that could be mapped to a kegg pathway.

gene ontology analysis of differentially expressed genes revealed two molecular functions that have genes up-regulated only in the 'lactating' crop; those functions being motor activity and antioxidant activity . inspection of the two genes with the molecular function motor activity reveals they are both genes encoding cytoplasmic dynein proteins , which are involved in cellular transport via microtubules. peroxiredoxin  <dig> represents the molecular function antioxidant activity, and is highly up-regulated in 'lactating' crop by 21-fold. further investigation identified three genes encoding heat shock proteins  which can also exert similar effects as antioxidant proteins. analysis of genes annotated by gene ontology as having an immune function revealed three up-regulated genes that are platelet factors/mediators; cxcl <dig> , cd <dig> and coagulation factor vii .

fold change and significance of genes that have a gene ontology molecular function that is present only in 'lactating' crop tissue.

discussion
the 'lactating' pigeon crop has a distinctly different appearance to the non-'lactating' crop that is reflected both macroscopically  and histologically . global gene expression profiling of 'lactating' and non-'lactating' pigeon crop showed that gene expression patterns were also distinctly different in the 'lactating' crop as compared to the non-'lactating' crop.

the proliferation of the crop germinal epithelium  may be induced by the transcriptional stimulatory activity of micropthalmia-associated transcription factor  which is up-regulated in 'lactating' crop by  <dig> -fold. this is a key gene in the melanogenesis pathway  <cit> , which is enriched in 'lactating' crop . there are two different signalling pathways that can participate in the signalling cascade that results in proliferation of melanocytes through the melanogenesis pathway; the mitogen activated protein kinase  signalling pathway  <cit>  and the wingless  signalling pathway  <cit> . the wnt signalling pathway is enriched in 'lactating' crop  whereby seven genes are up-regulated, including the wnt signalling receptor, frizzled homolog  <dig>  by  <dig> -fold and beta-catenin, a mediator of mitf signalling  <cit> , by  <dig> -fold. as there is no evidence of melanocytes in the pigeon crop, in either its 'lactating' or 'resting' state, we propose that either mitf targets a different cell type in the pigeon crop or that the mitf probe on our chicken microarray is similar to another transcription factor in the pigeon that is important in inducing the proliferative signalling pathway during 'lactation'. these signalling pathways may act on a stem cell population that gives rise to the proliferative germinal epithelium which produces the cells that eventually form the tracts of parakeratinised cells termed pigeon 'milk'  through extracellular matrix-receptor interactions. this pathway is enriched in 'lactating' crop , with  <dig> genes up-regulated .

genes that are differentially expressed between 'lactating' and non-'lactating' crop and play a role in the kegg pathways that were identified as enriched in 'lactating' crop tissue.

there are areas of cells in the 'lactating' crop that have an altered, ground-glass appearance . we speculate that this is a result of hypoxia caused by lack of blood supply to the rapidly proliferating germinal cell layer of the pigeon crop, in addition to the oxidative by-products of this rapid proliferation. peroxiredoxin  <dig>  a major cytosolic antioxidant protein encoding gene involved in cell redox homeostasis is up-regulated by more than 21-fold in the 'lactating' crop . other markers of cellular stress include the heat shock proteins  family which proliferate in response to multiple types of cellular stress, including inflammation and hypoxia  <cit> . three of these hsp genes  are up-regulated in the 'lactating' crop by between  <dig>  and  <dig> -fold. as well as their role in stress response, they are likely to play an important role in protein folding and transport  <cit>  in the 'lactating' crop, which produces 'milk' containing a high proportion of protein.

there are multiple immune genes up-regulated in the tissue , including the gene encoding the chemokine cxcl <dig> or platelet factor  <dig> , a gene expressed by platelets  <cit> , which suggests that there is platelet infiltration in the tissue. cd <dig> , a membrane glycoprotein, can function as a platelet adhesion mediator  <cit> , and coagulation factor vii  is part of the clotting pathway stimulated by tissue damage  <cit> . it is possible that if antioxidant and immune proteins are present in pigeon 'milk', they are directly enhancing the immune system of the developing squab as well as protecting the parental crop tissue. moreover, the gene encoding the somatostatin receptor, which has been shown to modulate intestinal activity and inhibit nutrient resorption during periods of inflammation  <cit> , is up-regulated in the pigeon crop during 'lactation' by more than 2-fold . this is not surprising, given that the pigeon crop is part of the gastrointestinal tract. a clear physiological change in the 'lactating' crop is that of lipid accumulation . dumont  showed that this lipid is neutral unsaturated triglyceride, that it is present both in the pigeon crop and the pigeon 'milk', and has a nutritive function. avian keratinocytes, in contrast to mammalian keratinocytes, can accumulate lipid during cornification of the epidermis  <cit> . it appears that in the evolution of the mechanism pigeon 'milk' production process, the pigeon crop has extended on the ability of keratinocytes to accumulate nutritive lipids, to produce a cellular substance for the nourishment of their young. during the process of pigeon 'milk' synthesis, the crop sac produces copious amounts of epidermis, composed of parakeratinised cells, which become cornified toward the luminal surface of the tissue . we found that there is an up-regulation of two acyl-coa synthetase genes  in 'lactating' crop tissue. these genes encode enzymes that are part of the fatty acid oxidation pathway that precedes the synthesis of triglycerides in the cell  <cit> . the fatty acid precursors of these triglycerides are likely to be obtained through the blood supply from oxidised triglycerides of the adipose tissue or liver. this is in agreement with garrison and scow  who proposed that crop triglyceride is sequestered from another organ through the blood supply  <cit> . oxidised triglyceride is transported from the liver or adipose tissue as fatty acids on very-low density lipoproteins  that enter the cell by endocytosis  <cit> . kegg pathway analysis revealed that the endocytosis pathway is enriched in 'lactating' crop . once triglycerides are synthesised in the cytoplasm of the cell, they are packaged into vesicles; the up-regulation of cytoplasmic dynein in 'lactating' crop  suggests that pigeon crop triglyceride is transported via the microtubules to vacuoles within the cell .

fold change and significance of genes that have an immune function.

this study has provided a snap-shot view of some of the processes occurring when 'lactation' in the pigeon crop is well established. due to the unusual nature of 'lactation' in the pigeon it would be interesting to investigate the early stages of the differentiation and development of the crop in preparation for 'milk' production to further ascertain gene expression patterns that characterise crop development and 'lactation' in the pigeon. the use of pigeon-specific genomic or transcriptomic material would allow the identification of genes that are unique to the pigeon or that are dissimilar enough to the chicken to elude identification using a cross-species method.

CONCLUSIONS
the study of gene expression in the 'lactating' crop is starting to shed light on the biological processes occurring during this unusual biological process. the evolution of pigeon crop 'milk' production appears to have developed from the ability of avian keratinocytes to accumulate lipid. the picture that emerges from an analysis of gene expression changes in the crop is of a process that is characterised by a hyperplastic response in the pigeon crop epithelium which results in the accumulation of lipid-containing, cornified keratinocytes in the crop lumen. this leads to localised cellular stress and subsequent expression of antioxidant protein-encoding genes including peroxiredoxin  <dig>  this hypothesised functional explanation is consistent with the histological examination of the 'lactating' crop presented here and in other studies.

