BACKGROUND
the genus leptospira belongs to the order spirochaetales and includes both saprophytic and pathogenic members, such as leptospira biflexa and l. interrogans, respectively. leptospirosis is the most widespread zoonosis worldwide, with more than one million cases annually  <cit> . rodents are the principle reservoir of infections occurring in humans, resulting from renal tubular colonization and urinary excretion of the bacterium  <cit> . humans are usually infected through water that is contaminated with the urine of animal reservoirs. this increasingly common disease primarily occurs in rural environments and poor urban centres subject to frequent flooding. a major barrier to developing effective control of the disease has been our limited understanding of the biology of the bacterium. one of the reasons for this is the slow growth of pathogenic leptospires with a generation time of approximately  <dig> hours; colonies can take up to  <dig> weeks to appear on solid medium  <cit> . furthermore, there are fewer tools for genetic studies of pathogenic leptospires than are available for many other bacterial pathogens. tools for genetic manipulation of the saprophyte l. biflexa have been developed in recent years  <cit> . this work has significantly improved the feasibility of manipulating genes in pathogenic strains. for instance, we first developed systems for targeted mutagenesis and random transposon mutagenesis in the saprophyte l. biflexa and then applied these approaches in the pathogen l. interrogans  <cit> . however, the introduction of exogenous genetic information into pathogenic strains by electroporation  <cit>  or conjugation  <cit>  is still hindered by poor transformation efficiencies. in addition, there is no replicative plasmid vector available for pathogenic leptospira strains. further development and improvement of genetic tools is therefore necessary for functional analysis of leptospiral virulence factors.

high-molecular-weight leptospiral immunoglobulin-like repeat  proteins were previously identified as putative virulence factors in pathogenic leptospira spp.  <cit> . this family of three proteins - liga, ligb and ligc - belongs to the superfamily of bacterial immunoglobulin -like  repeat domain proteins which includes virulence determinants such as intimin from enteropathogenic escherichia coli and invasin from yersinia pseudotuberculosis  <cit> . this superfamily appears to mediate pathogen-host cell interactions, such as invasion and host cell attachment, during infection. several studies recently showed that recombinant lig proteins can mediate in vitro interaction with fibronectin, fibrinogen, collagen, laminin, tropoelastin, and elastin  <cit> . fibronectin-binding sites have also been identified in ligb  <cit>  and fibronectin-binding activity was shown to be modulated by calcium  <cit> . in addition, lig genes are up-regulated at physiological osmolarity  <cit>  and encode surface-exposed proteins that are strongly recognized by sera from human leptospirosis patients  <cit> . lig proteins are also protective antigens in animal models of leptospirosis  <cit> . taken together, these data suggest that lig proteins are major virulence factors and may contribute to the pathogen's ability to attach to host tissues during infection. however, additional research is essential to understanding how lig gene expression modifies this phenotype. we recently showed that the absence of ligb does not lead to a loss of virulence and colonization in the acutely- and chronically- infected animal models  <cit> . this may be due to functional redundancy of other surface-exposed proteins, including liga, in the bacterium.

despite the large evolutionary distance between the pathogenic and non-pathogenic species, we have shown that the leptospira genus shares a core of approximately  <dig> genes, including those encoding the relevant export pathways  <cit> . the saprophyte l. biflexa could therefore represent a good cloning host for the functional analysis of genes from poorly transformable pathogenic leptospira.

in this study, we used the non pathogen l. biflexa serovar patoc as a surrogate host to characterize the role of liga and ligb in leptospiral interactions with eukaryotic cells and key host extracellular matrix proteins.

RESULTS
expression of liga and ligb in l. biflexa
the saprophyte l. biflexa can be transformed at high rates with plasmids based on the le <dig> replication origin, using kanamycin, spectinomycin, or gentamicin resistance as the selectable marker  <cit> . we chose the spectinomycin-resistant plasmid, psle <dig>  as the backbone for our system: this shuttle plasmid containing the le <dig> partition genes is stably maintained in l. biflexa in the absence of antibiotic selection  <cit> . flagellin-encoding genes are usually both constitutively and strongly expressed. in addition, it has been reported that a kanamycin resistant cassette driven by the borrelia burgdorferi flgb promoter is strongly expressed in b. burgdorferi  <cit>  and in l. biflexa  <cit> . we therefore used the flgb promoter from b. burgdorferi to allow strong and stable expression of liga and ligb proteins in l. biflexa serovar patoc . the genes encoding liga and ligb under the control of the flgb promoter were inserted into the l. biflexa replicative plasmid . the patoc wild-type  strain was then electrotransformed by pslepfliga and pslepfligb, and the spectinomycin-resistant transformants were further analyzed. lig expression by the lig-transformed patoc strains was verified by western blot analysis, which showed levels of protein comparable to the production by a low in vitro-passaged l. interrogans virulent strain . however, blots of the ligb transformant showed partial degradation of ligb . the patoc wt, liga, and ligb strains had similar cell growth kinetics in emjh liquid medium, indicating that the expression of the heterologous proteins did not affect cell growth .

the positions of standard molecular mass markers  are indicated on the left.

surface localization of liga and ligb in l. biflexa
liga and ligb proteins have been shown to be surface-exposed proteins in pathogenic leptospira strains  <cit> . this was confirmed in this study with antibodies against liga and ligb . immunofluorescence studies found that antisera to liga and ligb did not label the surface of the patoc wt strain but did label the surface of the liga- and ligb-transformed patoc . the surface immunofluorescence binding assay specifically detected surface-exposed components because antiserum to whole bacteria labelled intact patoc wt, patoc liga, and patoc ligb whereas antisera to cytoplasmic heat-shock protein groel did not label live leptospires but was able to bind to permeabilized leptospires. liga and ligb therefore appear to be surface-exposed when expressed in patoc transformants carrying plasmid constructs pslepfliga and pslepfligb, respectively .

host cell adhesion and translocation of lig-transformed l. biflexa
interactions of patoc wt, patoc liga, and patoc ligb strains with mammalian host cells were assayed by examining adherence of leptospires to mdck cells and translocation of leptospires across polarized mdck cell monolayers. adherence of l. interrogans strain fiocruz l1- <dig> and patoc liga, but not patoc wt and patoc ligb, to mdck cells was found to significantly increase in a time-dependent manner in two experiments . after a  <dig> min incubation period, approximately four times more patoc liga adhered to mdck cells than patoc wt and patoc ligb. the number of adherent patoc liga leptospires per cell at  <dig> min incubation point was comparable  to that observed for the pathogenic l. interrogans strain fiocruz l1- <dig> .

patoc liga and ligb strains did not demonstrate enhanced ability to translocate across mdck monolayers in comparison with patoc wt in three experiments . as reported previously  <cit> , we found that a small proportion  of patoc wt was able to translocate across mdck monolayers after a  <dig> min incubation period. proportions of translocating leptospires recovered from the lower transwell chamber were not significantly different between patoc wt and patoc liga and ligb during the assay's time course . in contrast, > 6% of the inoculum of pathogenic l. interrogans strain fiocruz l1- <dig> was recovered in the lower chamber after  <dig> min of incubation . as previously reported  <cit> , recovery of l. interrogans strain fiocruz l1- <dig> was not associated with significant alterations in the ter , indicating that disruption of tight junctions of the monolayers did not occur during the translocation process. together these findings indicate that whereas expression of liga in the saprophyte patoc was associated with an enhanced host cell adherence phenotype similar to that observed with pathogenic leptospires, it did not impart the ability to efficiently invade and translocate across polarized host cell monolayers.

enhanced adhesion to fibronectin and laminin by lig-transformed l. biflexa
lig recombinant proteins have been shown to recognize in vitro host extracellular matrix proteins  <cit> . the introduction of the liga or ligb gene from pathogenic l. interrogans into the nonpathogenic saprophyte l. biflexa enhanced the adhesion of the latter to the mammalian host protein fibronectin . the lig transformants bound to both plasma and cellular fibronectin approximately two-fold better than the patoc wild-type strain . the wild-type cells showed non-lig-mediated adherence to fibronectin, which may reflect the ability of the saprophyte to interact with related proteins in decaying material that it encounters in the environment. transformation with the lig genes also increased laminin binding  <dig> -fold in comparison to the patoc wild-type strain . however, the liga or ligb cells did not appear to bind elastin better than wild-type cells, and all three strains interacted weakly with type i and type iv collagen .

discussion
the lack of genetic tools has hampered molecular analyses of putative virulence factors in pathogenic leptospira spp. in this work, we showed for the first time that pathogen-specific proteins can be expressed in a saprophytic leptospira and that expression of such proteins are accompanied by an in vitro virulence associated phenotype. the approach used in this study demonstrates that the fast-growing non pathogenic species l. biflexa serves a model for examining pathogenetic mechanisms of l. interrogans. in contrast to l. biflexa, data obtained when e. coli was used as a surrogate host revealed that most of the spirochetal promoters functioned poorly in this genetic background. even when leptospiral proteins are expressed in e. coli, many are found to be insoluble. an additional consideration is that a number of leptospiral proteins undergo post-translational modifications that may not occur in gram negative bacteria  <cit> .

in this study, the l. interrogans liga and ligb lipoproteins were expressed and exposed on the surface of l. biflexa cells. however, the ligb-transformed l. biflexa produced almost no full length ligb protein. this suggests that l. biflexa is an appropriate surrogate host for expression of at least some l. interrogans outer membrane proteins  <cit> . these experimental results confirm genome sequence analyses indicating that most of the known protein export and processing systems of l. interrogans and l. biflexa are highly conserved  <cit> . surface localization of ligs in the model bacterium l. biflexa presents a unique opportunity to study the translocation of lipoproteins through leptospiral membranes. further study could, for instance, include the analysis of the leptospiral lipobox which is distinct from the motifs of e. coli and other gram-negative bacteria. for example, the leptospiral surface lipoprotein, lipl <dig> was not efficiently expressed in e. coli until its lipobox was altered to mimic that of murein lipoprotein  <cit> . analysis of leptospiral lipobox sequences indicates that most leptospiral lipoproteins would be anticipated to not be processed correctly in e. coli  <cit> .

bacterial adhesion is a crucial step in the infectious process.

among members of the superfamily of bacterial immunoglobulin -like  proteins, previous studies have demonstrated that in comparison to the wild type strain, an intimin-deficient enteropathogenic e. coli strain is defective in adherence to cultured cells and in intestinal colonization  <cit> . in y. enterocolitica, an invasin mutant was impaired in its ability to translocate the intestinal epithelium  <cit> . by contrast, we found that a l. interrogans ligb- mutant retained its virulence and ability to adhere to mdck cells  <cit> . this may be due to functional redundancy of other lig proteins such as liga. to determine the function of lig genes in pathogens, it may therefore be necessary to knock-out multiple genes, which would not be feasible in pathogenic leptospira strains.

this study is a complete description of our approach for heterologous expression of pathogen-specific proteins in the saprophyte, l. biflexa serovar patoc, resulting in the acquisition of virulence-associated phenotype. we demonstrate that patoc liga is able to adhere to epithelial cells in a time-dependent fashion, comparable to the pathogen l. interrogans. in addition, levels of binding of patoc liga and patoc ligb to fibronectin and laminin were significantly higher in comparison to patoc wt. however, lig transformants did not appear to bind collagens  or elastin better than wild-type cells. analysis of patoc liga and patoc ligb suggests that the lig proteins are not sufficient for the efficient translocation of the bacteria across the cell monolayers, a characteristic that distinguishes leptospiral pathogens from saprophytes  <cit> . this result suggests that invasion is a more complex process than adherence and may require additional properties unique to leptospiral pathogens. in other words, invasion of cellular monolayers may require a stepwise adherence process involving interactions with a series of host ligands. recently, we described enhanced fibrinogen binding of l. biflexa expressing liga and ligb using the same plasmid constructs described here as part of a general examination of lig-fibrinogen interactions  <cit> , validating the relevance of our heterologous expression system.

studies involving recombinant proteins, including liga and ligb, have revealed a number of proteins that bind to extracellular matrix proteins  <cit> . whether the functions of these putative adhesins are overlapping or synergistic in the interactions of leptospiral cells with eukaryotic cells or monolayers is unknown. liga and ligb proteins contain related yet distinct big domains that may share redundant function  <cit> . for example choy et al demonstrated that portions of both liga and ligb proteins bind fibronectin in vitro  <cit> . thus the function of ligb can be substituted to varying extents by other lipoproteins, including liga, which may play a role in host-cell interactions. the use of l. biflexa as a surrogate host enables functional studies of virulence factors in isolation without interference from activities of competing or redundant outer membrane proteins. further studies expressing distinct regions of liga and ligb in l. biflexa are required to understand the precise role of each domain in the binding of components of the extracellular matrix.

l. interrogans is an invasive pathogen that can adhere and translocate through host cells  <cit> . in contrast to the increased adherence of the liga-transformed l. biflexa strain to mdck renal cells, the ligb transformants did not exhibit enhanced attachment to the eukaryotic cells following four hours of incubation. this may be due to the partial degradation of ligb observed in these transformants by western blots . in contrast, we found that both liga- and ligb-transformed l. biflexa bound fibronectin in significantly greater numbers than wild-type l. biflexa in a solid-phase assay format . the large remaining ligb fragment appears slightly larger than intact liga, suggesting that the degraded ligb may comprise the immunoglobulin-like repeats containing the fibronectin-binding domain  <cit> . these findings suggest that lig-mediated host cell adhesion may involve receptors in addition to fibronectin. the expression and localization of fibronectin and its binding integrins as well as other components of extracellular matrix in mdck cells are dependent on culture conditions  <cit> . it is possible that the large proteolytic fragment of ligb remaining with the ligb transformants retains the fibronectin-binding region but has lost sequences mediating the interaction of ligb with a different and distinct renal cell receptor. further studies with lig transformants could include analyzing lig-mediated host cell adhesion by using additional cell lines representing different species and cell types.

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, by using l. biflexa as a surrogate host, we have shown that lig proteins are factors involved in the attachment to fibronectin, fibrinogen, and laminin and to host cells and can act as microbial surface components recognizing host extracellular matrix proteins. although important advances in the genetic system of the pathogen l. interrogans have been made in the last years  <cit> , this bacterium remains poorly transformable and few mutants have been fully characterized  <cit> . we believe that l. biflexa can serve as a model bacterium for investigating the function of additional leptospiral pathogenesis mechanisms. genetic studies in l. biflexa should provide information about the roles of key components in the pathogenesis of leptospirosis.

