BACKGROUND
during the earliest stages of development, metazoan embryos undergo drastic morphological changes and transcriptional reprogramming. just after fertilisation, while the zygotic genome is transcriptionally inactive, developmental control is ensured by maternal products  loaded in the egg during oogenesis. after a species-dependent number of mitotic cycles, the zygotic genome is activated and takes control of embryonic development, whereas maternal mrnas are actively degraded. known as the “maternal-to-zygotic transition” , this fundamental process is conserved between metazoans  <cit> . zygotic genome activation  occurs in two successive waves: a minor wave involving a few tens of genes, followed by a major wave affecting several hundreds of genes .

after fertilisation, drosophila melanogaster embryos undergo a series of  <dig> fast mitotic divisions without cytokinesis . the first seven mitotic cycles are fast  and synchronous, while the zygotic genome remains transcriptionally inactive. the 8th cycle coincides with the migration of nuclei to the periphery of the embryo . concomitantly, a first wave of zga occurs, leading to the expression of about  <dig> genes  <cit> , including most of the segmentation genes and the genes required for cellularisation at cycle  <dig>  from then on, the duration of mitotic cycles progressively increases up to  <dig> minutes at cycle  <dig>  the second wave of zga involves over a thousand genes  <cit> . this massive transcriptional activation coincides with a long pause  during the interphase of the 14th cycle. during the first thirteen cleavage divisions, the volume of the embryos remains stable while the amount of dna increases exponentially.

using haploid mutants  ratio amounting to the half of the wild type one), edgar et al.  <cit>  have shown that cellularisation was delayed by one mitotic cycle  and proposed that this phenomena was due to the titration of maternal repressors by the increasing amount of dna. pritchard et al.  <cit>  highlighted that fushi-tarazu repression was dependent on maternal repressor tramtrack, itself dependent on the nc ratio. more recently lu et al.  <cit>  have shown that a few zygotic genes are activated depending on the nc ratio. however, a large fraction of the zga wave appears to be independent from the nc ratio and rather depends on the maternal clock model, which assumes that the triggering of gene expression depends on the absolute time after fertilisation. the two afore mentioned mechanisms are not exclusive, and they may play complementary roles in zga.

recently, a combination of genetic and functional genomic studies demonstrated a major implication of the factor zelda between one and three hours after fertilisation  <cit> . zelda has been shown to play a role of general transcription amplifier collaborating with dorsal  <cit> , stat92e  <cit> , and some other maternal morphogens  <cit> . this factor binds the tagteam motif , which has been previously proposed to play a role in the activation of pre-cellular blastoderm genes  <cit> . the tagteam motif is overrepresented in peaks obtained from chip-seq experiments targeting  <dig> transcription factors involved in embryonic segmentation  <cit> . apart from zelda, which has been recently shown to be involved in the two waves of zga  <cit> , all the other factors reported so far are related with the minor wave. thus, other factors remain to be identified in order to understand the mechanisms underlying zga in drosophila, including epigenetic regulation.

the goal of our study is to explore the regulatory mechanisms involved in the activation of zygotic genes during the mzt. for this, we started from three transcriptome studies in early drosophila embryos  <cit> , selected clusters of genes specifically activated during mzt, discovered over-represented motifs in their regulatory region and predicted cis-regulatory modules comprising combinations of these motifs. interestingly, this “factor-centric” analysis suggests an important role for trl, a chromatin-remodelling factor, which led us to further investigate the potential associations between zga-associated cis-regulatory modules and various epigenetic marks.

it has been recently established by numerous studies that various types of histone modifications affect transcriptional activation, including methylation and acetylation of histone tails to cite a few  <cit> . using complementary computational tools, we therefore further investigated the relationship between the presence of binding sites for key transcriptional factors and the presence of different in-vivo histone modifications and dna binding event, focusing on genomic loci associated with zga genes. our computational results prompt a model that tentatively explains the onset of zga by a combination of genetic and epigenetic factors.

RESULTS
selection of zga-responding genes
transcriptome studies used in this analysis
in order to identify novel factors involved in zga, we have used a series of computational analysis tools to revisit three transcriptomic studies:  the first study aimed at detecting genes involved in the process of cellularisation: pilot et al.   <cit>  extracted mrnas at five time points corresponding to fertilisation , slow  and fast  phases of cellularisation, early gastrulation  and late gastrulation , respectively ;  de renzis et al.   <cit>  compared the expression profiles of wild-type embryos to those of embryos deleted for half-chromosomes, in order to analyse the respective contributions of maternal and zygotic mrna during early embryogenesis. they identified five main classes of early expressed genes:  maternal and zygotic;  maternal degraded and zygotic;  purely zygotic;  early-activated zygotic;  secondary targets ;  lu et al.   <cit>  compared expression profiles in haploid mutants versus wild type embryos in order to distinguish genes regulated by the nc ratio from those controlled by the maternal clock .

although these studies addressed distinct questions, the three datasets can be re-analysed and combined to extract genes with marked transcription variations in order to identify specific zga regulatory features.

discrete transition profiles as signatures of co-expressed gene clusters
the main computational analysis tools used in this work are encompassed in the flowchart presented in the additional file 1: figure s <dig> and detailed in the methods section. we first analysed the clusters of co-expressed genes published by pilot et al.  <cit>  and clusters that we generated ourselves with classical clustering methods . published clusters grouped genes with heterogenous temporal profiles . after redoing the clustering with optimized parameters, this heterogeneity largely remained . we therefore decided to apply a custom method  on the temporal profiles from the original studies  <cit> . transcriptome temporal profiles from  <cit>  were converted into “transition values”, defined as the log-ratios between successive time points, which reflect the classical biologist’s perception of changes between developmental stages . using a stringent statistical criterion , transition values are converted into three possible discrete classes: up-regulated , down-regulated  or stable , respectively . each gene is thereby characterized by a discrete transition profile denoted by a string of the letters u, d and s. thus, the expression profiles from pilot  <cit> , which contains five temporal points, were converted into vectors of four transition values and discretized into words of four letters , which can be easily interpreted as qualitative behaviours. for example, the profile “usss”  regroups genes whose rna level increases at the transition between t <dig>  and t <dig> , and then remains stable: this typically corresponds to zygotically activated genes.

stars beside the discrete profiles indicate clusters merged into the zga cluster.

regarding the analysis of the data of lu et al.  <cit> , the transitions between consecutive time points were named by appending the genetic background  to the reached time point, with a suffix specifying an early or late stage . as shown in figure 2d, transition profiles obtained from lu experiments in wild type and haploid embryos can be combined in order to distinguish genes responding to the nucleo-cytoplasmic  ratio from those activated by a “maternal clock”. indeed, genes that depend on nc ratio are expected to respond one mitotic cycle later in haploids than in diploids, since the former embryos contain half the amount of dna. thus, the profile “ usdush”   regroups genes activated at transition to the early 14th mitotic cycle in diploids , but one cycle later in haploids . in contrast, genes whose activation fit the maternal clock model vary at the same absolute time, irrespective of the dna amount. for example, genes having the profile sudush  are activated at 165- <dig> minutes after egg laying in diploids , and at 165- <dig> minutes in haploid . in total, the 32 =  <dig> diploid profiles combined with the 32 haploid profiles can form  <dig> possible transition profiles. however, we obtained only  <dig> different transition profiles,  <dig> of which contained at least ten genes. furthermore, only  <dig> of them were classified as nc ratio or maternal clock responding genes . we left aside the nine remaining clusters because we were not able to interpret the discrete profiles, based on the rules defined in figure 2e and f.

at this stage, we considered each possible discrete profile as the signature of a distinct gene co-expression cluster . interestingly, the most populated profiles  are consistent with zga-related behaviours. for example, the clusters pilot “dsss” , lu “ dsdssh”  and lu “ dsddsh”  correspond to maternal mrnas degraded during the slow phase of cellularisation, whereas the cluster pilot “udss”  regroups genes showing a transient activation during cellularisation. a list of cluster biological interpretations is provided in table  <dig>  strikingly, no gene showed transient activation  or repression  depending on the nc ratio.

grouping of co-expression clusters based on discovered motifs
in addition to the  <dig> clusters obtained from the discrete transition profiles described in previous section , we included six clusters resulting from the previous published studies: five clusters containing maternal and/or zygotic genes defined by de renzis and co-workers  <cit> , and one cluster containing genes activated dependently on the nc ratio, defined by lu and co-workers  <cit> .

in order to detect similarities between clusters containing the same type of genes  and to regroup the most relevant genes for zga regulation analysis, we performed a preliminary discovery of over-represented heptanucleotides  <cit>  in the regulatory regions associated with each of the  <dig> clusters.

motif discovery was performed separately in upstream non-coding sequences, introns, 5’utr and 3’utr in order to cover various types of regulation. the resulting motifs are combined in a matrix containing significance of under- and over-representation of each 7-letters word  in each cluster . here, the significance is defined as minus the logarithm of the e-value. we applied hierarchical clustering on the columns of this matrix, in order to regroup co-expression clusters showing similar predicted regulatory motifs. this motif-based clustering revealed three types of clusters :  ’zygotic’ clusters  made of genes activated at early stages of zga ;  “maternal” clusters containing genes whose mrnas is degraded during early or late cellularisation ;  “maternal+zygotic” clusters containing genes transcribed during oogenesis as well as during zga . this motif-based grouping is consistent with the overlap between clusters in terms of gene composition .

the resulting classification tree shows that the clusters containing only zygotically activated genes appear to have a coherent regulation since they cluster tightly, whereas maternal+zygotic clusters reveal a more complex pattern of regulation. indeed, some motifs over-represented in first introns and 5’utr of maternal+zygotic clusters are also over-represented in upstream sequences of zygotic clusters , whereas the motifs discovered in upstream regions of the maternal+zygotic clusters are also found in upstream sequences of maternal clusters . moreover, clusters containing genes activated during late cellularisation showed none or few motifs and are present at unresolved branches of the hierarchical tree.

we were mostly interested in zygotic activation; the coherent clustering shown by purely zygotic clusters, and the fact that we did not find any specific motif to nc dependent and independent genes led us to merge the ten uxxx and zygotic clusters  into a single cluster totalizing  <dig> genes, hereafter denoted as “zga cluster”, for further analysis .

we evaluated the relevance of this newly defined zga cluster and analysed the enrichment of these clusters in gene ontology terms , using the software tool compare-classes of rsat suite  <cit> . we found  <dig> significantly enriched terms  in the zga cluster that revealed a better enrichment than the purely zygotic  and early zygotic . most of the enriched terms are associated to morphological changes and regulatory processes  that are highly consistent with the developmental embryonic stages studied.

hypergeometric e-value  was computed with the rsat tool, compare-classes <cit> .

zelda, tramtrack and trithorax-like binding motifs are over-represented in zga genes
in order to understand the mechanisms underlying zga regulation, we extended our cis-regulatory motif analysis. the over-represented heptanucleotides found previously were assembled to build position-specific scoring matrices. figure 4b presents a brief synthesis of the resulting motifs, and their correspondence with known motifs. the most significant motif corresponds to the known zelda binding motif , detected in upstream regions of the zygotic clusters and in the first introns of the maternal+zygotic cluster. this result is consistent with a recent publication  <cit> , which indicates that zelda appears to be present in genes activated beyond pre-cellular blastoderm  <cit> . in the newly defined zga cluster, zelda motif significance is even higher in upstream regions , while it is also over-represented in first introns and 5’utrs . the other motifs are less significant in zygotic clusters but have increased significance in the zga cluster. motif discovery also reported a trithorax-like  binding motif in upstream regions of the zga cluster, as well as in the first introns and 5’utr of maternal+zygotic clusters. trl is a maternal factor acting at different transcriptional levels: it is involved in chromatin remodelling complexes, but also regulates rna polii activity by direct interactions with taf <dig> 

remarkably, a motif corresponding to the tramtrack  binding motif was discovered with the de novo approach. ttk is a maternal repressor, which is progressively titrated as the nc ratio increases during early mitotic cycles, thereby releasing the expression of zygotic genes  <cit> . surprisingly, the ttk binding motif is found over-represented in the sequences of pre-cellular activated blastoderm genes and of the genes with the discrete signature “lu usdssh”, but not in the sequences of genes known to depend on the nc ratio, which might be explained by the intervention of some other factors in this mechanism  <cit> .

the ttk protein has been reported to physically interact with trl proteins and to repress trl-mediated even-skipped activation  <cit> . ttk could act either directly by binding dna and repressing the transcription of specific target genes, or indirectly by repressing an activator such as trl. interestingly, the ttk motif is significantly under-represented  in upstream sequences of maternal+zygotic and maternal clusters. this is consistent with a repressing activity of ttk. indeed, the presence of ttk binding sites would result in early inactivation in the presence of maternally expressed ttk. a motif matching the binding motif of caudal  was further detected as over-represented in purely zygotic genes, but not in the zga cluster.

two motifs were discovered in zygotic clusters, as well as in the zga cluster, which do not match any annotated transcription factor binding motif . however “agataca” was previously reported to be involved in chromosome pairing between regulatory regions associated with the mechanism of transvection  <cit> . it thus seems particularly relevant that the strongest over-representation of this motif was found in 5’utrs, as well as in upstream sequences. finally, the analysis of over-represented motifs in the zga cluster revealed four more unknown motifs . logos and significance of all these motifs are displayed in figure  <dig>  as a control, we performed motif discovery analyses on  <dig> randomly selected gene clusters  which did not return any of these motifs . this confirms the biological relevance of the discovered motifs.

based on these results, and in order to predict putative cis-regulatory modules , we scanned each type of zga non-coding sequences with the nine discovered motifs and predicted cis-regulatory modules  by detecting cis-regulatory elements enriched regions  using matrix-scan <cit>  around zga defined genes. we detected  <dig> crers in upstream sequences,  <dig> in the 5’utr, and  <dig> in first introns. because we retrieved non-coding sequences associated with all alternative transcripts, upstream sequences of the smaller transcripts may overlap first introns or 5’utr sequences. moreover, in some genes, the first intron is embedded in 5’utr. about 70% of the upstream sequences, 50% of the first introns and 40% of the 5’utr contain at least one crer . thus, after having merged the crers detected in the different types of regulatory regions, we obtained a final set of  <dig> non-overlapping crers, hereafter denoted as “predicted crms”.

in addition to de novo motif discovery, we analysed the enrichment of the zga cluster for known motifs, using the program cistargetx  <cit> . this tool reveals enriched regulatory features  in a set of regions, and ranks these features using a z-score like enrichements score. consistently, the results reveal a high enrichment for zelda  and trl  binding motifs . in this analysis, binding motifs for dorsal , krüpple  and bicoid  were also reported as significantly enriched, which is not unexpected, given the high level of correlation between the binding of these tfs and zelda. indeed, a first study of in-vivo binding of bcd, cad and kr showed that by far the most over-represented motif under the binding peaks was caggtag, hence the binding motif for zelda  <cit> . however, many of the crer do not contain any binding sites for these factors: of the  <dig> predicted crms, only  <dig>  contain a predicted binding site for bcd, kr, dl or cad, using a threshold of p =  <dig>  on the binding site. hence, the observed enrichment for these transcription factors is restricted to a subset of predicted crms. this can be confirmed using in-vivo datasets for these factors including zelda; we restricted our analysis to the crer containing a predicted zelda binding site , of which  <dig> overlap with an in-vivo zelda binding event, using the zld-chip datasets published in  <cit> . of these zelda-bound crer,  <dig>  do not have any overlap with any of the  <dig> tfs published in  <cit> . hence, zelda bound in these crer is not acting as a precursor for segmentation tfs, which are thus likely to be specifically involved in zga.

crer composition gives insight into zga mechanisms
we analysed the motif composition of the defined crers, to get insight into the respective contribution of each motif to the zga mechanism. a first observation is that roughly 75% of individual binding sites are contained in crers, a percentage that is constant across regions , with the exception of 3’ utr where this proportion is around 60%. this percentage varies depending on which motif is considered . given that the crer regions span between 15% and 30% of the regions analysed for motifs, this proportion of motifs in crer represent a significant enrichment over random expectation, and supports the fact that most of the discovered motif instances are indeed bona fide binding sites.

in order to unveil specific organisation patterns, we used a randomization procedure which shuffles the motif instances across crers, maintaining the total number of instances of each motif across crers, and the number of binding sites in each crer. a first striking observation is the strong over-representation of homotypic crer configurations, which is particularly strong in upstream regions . as homotypic clusters are known to play an important role in the response to morphogens during early embryogenesis, this is not unexpected, but further supports the validity of the crers. the motifs showing the highest over-representations of homotypic clusters are zelda and the unknown motif agataca. for zelda, the prevalence of homotypic clusters might be a way to respond to “temporal morphogens”, as has been suggested previously  <cit> , while clusters of agatac motifs had been identified previously and hypothesized to play a role in chromosome pairing and dna looping  <cit> . while heterotypic configurations are globally under-represented, specific combinations are nevertheless found more often than expected, and might point at particular cooperative mechanisms . for example, zelda is found in heterotypic clusters together with either ttk-like motifs or the previously mentioned agataca motif, suggesting a mechanism by which distant enhancers bound by zelda might be brought into contact with promoter regions with the help of mediator proteins binding agataca- motifs  <cit> .

using in-vivo datasets to investigate epigenetic mechanisms
the motif discovery analysis described in the previous section, and in particular the presence of trl-related motifs, suggests a possible involvement of epigenetic factors in the activation of zygotic gene expression. in order to complement the previous motif analysis, we thus decided to make use of recently published in-vivo datasets and to investigate epigenetic regulation by analyzing chip-seq and dnase <dig> accessibility data, using read densities as well as peaks locations. we focused on the factors cbp , trl  and zelda , modified histones  and open chromatin .

differential motif analysis reveals zga specific associations
after having shown that zga crers reveal specific associations between motifs, we wanted to investigate whether these associations were general, or zga specific. in order to do so, we systematically performed a differential motif analysis with the program peak-motifs   <cit>  between the chip peaks located in non-coding regions associated  and not associated  with genes of the zga cluster .

the zelda binding motif is over-represented in cbp, trl and dnase <dig> zga-peaks vs. non-zga peaks, confirming the importance of this factor for the control of zygotic genome activation . the unknown motif agataca appears also to be systematically enriched in zga vs. non-zga datasets, confirming its relevance to zga specific processes.

the differential analysis of zelda-bound regions at different time points shows that the trl-related motif and agataca are highly differentially enriched, underlying the zga-specific association between these three motifs. as expected, and as a control of the differential analysis, the zelda motif does not appear, being present in zga as well as non-zga peaks.

cbp does not establish direct interactions with dna, but interacts with a large diversity of dna-binding transcription factors. in a recent study, the importance of dorsal for the recruitment of cbp has been shown  <cit> . interestingly, in this study, a strong correlation between cbp and trl binding had also been shown. here, we do not find dorsal binding sites over-represented in zga vs. non-zga cbp peaks. however, a strong enrichment in zelda binding motif might suggest that zelda might take over the role of dorsal for cbp recruitment in the case of zga. the trl motif is found when motif discovery is performed independently on zga and non-zga cbp peaks , showing that cbp and trl are indeed associated, as noted previously  <cit> . the fact that the trl motif does not appear in the differential analysis is likely due to the fact that cbp and trl co-localize also outside zga-specific regions. however, a much stronger overlap between cbp and trl peaks appears around zga-genes: while 18% of trl-peaks overlapp a cbp-peak between 0- <dig> h, the proportion reaches 46% when restricting the analysis to peaks located around zga-genes.

high enrichment of crms for marks of transcriptional and epigenetic regulation
the previous analysis indicates the prominent role played by cbp, trl and zelda around zga-specific genes. we then wanted to investigate in more details the importance of these factors at the precise locations of our predicted crms.

in order to detect specific associations, we analysed the densities of reads from chip-seq experiments under the  <dig> predicted crms regions. to evaluate the level of enrichment, we ran the same analysis on a positive control set  and three types of negative sets:  regulatory regions of the  <dig> zga genes scanned with randomized  motifs,  regulatory regions of  <dig> randomly selected genes, and   <dig> crms not supposed to be active in blastoderm, according to redfly annotations.

for each of these datasets, we computed the density of reads under crms for various marks of transcriptional and epigenetic regulation: zelda , cbp  and trl , histone marks, and dna accessibility profiles, and compared it with the density of reads under randomly selected regions of similar sizes and types . we also computed a p-value using the wilcoxon rank test in order to evaluate the difference of enrichment between zga crms and controls .

the results are displayed as roc curves , indicating the proportion of crms reaching a given density score  versus random regions reaching the same score . the area under the curve  was computed to quantify the relative enrichment of different datasets . the strongest associations were obtained for crms predicted from upstream sequences, as discussed in detail below. however, similar associations were found with crms predicted from other sequence types .

the roc curves  highlight a strong enrichment of zga predicted crms for zelda , trl , cbp  and h3k4me <dig>  as well as dnase <dig> hypersensitive sites  that together correspond to signatures of active enhancer. this alone confirms the biological relevance of our crms defined purely from sequence motifs around zga specific genes. similar levels of association were found in blastoderm-specific crms for marks of active enhancers. however, trl was found enriched for zga crms but not for blastoderm-specific crms . blastoderm-specific crms were also enriched for two repressive marks . this might reflect the tight regulation of the genes controlled by these crms, which are active in few spatially located nuclei, but highly repressed by polycomb-group proteins in the major part of the embryo, as indicated by a recent study by negre and co-workers  <cit> . moreover these repressive marks remain associated with blastoderm crms at later stages .

in contrast, during the time window corresponding to zygotic genome activation , the predicted crms of zga genes  show a significant enrichment for some marks of transcriptional activity  but not for repressive marks , where the red curve is intermingled with the negative controls . this seems consistent with a general activation of many genes in the whole embryo.

figure  <dig> shows the roc curves for crm occupancy by cbp, dnase <dig> and h3k27me <dig> at successive stages of embryonic development. for both zga predicted and blastoderm-specific curated crms, cbp occupancy and dnase <dig> accessibility are clearly restricted to very early stage  corresponding to the two waves of zga , and rapidly decay at later stages. the same trends are observed for trl . in contrast, the strong enrichment of repressive mark h3k27me <dig> in curated blastoderm-specific crms is constant during all the studied period . on the downside, comparing the right and left panels reveals that enrichments curves are more pronounced for experimentally validated blastoderm crms than for zga predicted crms, which likely reflects the generation of false positive among the latter.

previous studies have shown that some of these marks are correlated  <cit>  and do not act independently from each other. using a computational strategy developed previously  <cit> , we used a ranking approach to compute the correlation between these marks for  random non-coding regions of the genome matching positional biases of zga crms,  specifically for the zga predicted crms as well as for  blastoderm crms from redfly and  central nervous system crms from redfly .

most combinations show a global positive correlation, even in randomly selected regions. since random regions have been sampled from locations characteristic of zga crer, this reflects a positional effect specific to upstream or intronic regions. the combination cbp/h3k4me <dig> shows a higher correlation for all three classes of functional elements compared to random regions, as expected from previous studies  <cit> .

however, some combinations show a much higher degree of correlation for zga crers compared to random regions or other crms, notably cbp/trl and h3k4me1/trl. the fact that trl is involved in these zga-specific combinations is interesting, as trl alone is not the best discriminant between zga crers and other regions . while trl and cbp are known to interact  <cit> , our results suggest that the synergy between them is even higher on zga-specific crms and might contribute to the activation of the zygotic genome.

CONCLUSIONS
from transcriptome data to crms prediction and epigenetic context characterisation
the goal of our study was to investigate the mechanism of zygotic genome activation. in order to do so, we  re-analysed published datasets to carefully define a list of zga-related genes,  applied motif discovery approaches to uncover potential regulators of this process, and  combined in-vivo datasets for various epigenetics factors to understand the interplay between the different regulators of the zga.

in particular, using published transcriptome data, we proposed a novel method to cluster gene expression profiles in time-course experiments, which does not require any parameter in order to define co-expression clusters. functional analysis  of the different clusters allowed us to delineate a comprehensive and coherent cluster of genes activated during zga. the motifs discovered in the corresponding genes led us to propose several factors and co-factors potentially acting in trans, along with putative cis-regulatory modules.

analyses of specific associations of predicted crms and epigenetic marks led us to propose a model combining different factors , which presumably bind accessible and active chromatin regions. in particular, we highlighted to importance of a dna-motif, agataca, which is not yet characterized, but might correspond to a structurally important element or a dna-binding motif.

from our results, we ranked the predicted crms combining trl, cbp, dnase <dig> accessibility, and h3k4me <dig> data to select the most relevant ones, which can be visualized in their genomic context using the ucsc genome browser. for example, figure 6c shows the region upstream the tss of the gene crocodile, a purely zygotic gene, whose activation is dependent on the nc ratio and which is involved in the specification of the most anterior head segment.

tentative regulatory model and prediction of novel crms potentially involved in zga control
during the first hour of development, drosophila zygotic genome is transcriptionally silent. as shown in figure 8a, based on the over-representation of trl and ttk binding motifs in zga non-coding sequences, as well as on trl binding profile and on previous studies  <cit> , we propose that, before zga, ttk could exert a general inhibition on trl mediated transcription activation through protein-protein interaction.

as ttk becomes titrated by the increasing nc ratio, trl could be released and become active. moreover, according to the recent rna-seq data from gelbart and emmert, the amount of trl mrna increases from 2h to 4h after egg fertilisation  <cit> . ttk could thus repress trl while its abundance is still low, suggesting a mutually enforced effect of ttk titration  and trl increase . binding of trl could in turn trigger the recruitment of chromatin remodelling complexes. consistently, we found a high association between predicted crms in zga-associated regulatory regions, chip-seq profiles of trl binding, and h3k4me <dig> occupancy.

trl is not a zga-specific factor. what is its exact role during zga? while the answer to this question would require experimental validation, our study suggests a mechanism analogous to what has been recently described for dorso-ventral patterning  <cit> , namely that the specificity of trl action during zga might be conveyed by zelda. this transcription factor has been shown to be primarily involved in the very early stages of embryogenesis, and we find zga-specific over-representation of zelda binding motifs in cbp bound regions around zga-genes . our model thus involves zelda, trl and possibility another factor binding agataca. specific enrichment of the combination of trl, cbp, h3k4me <dig> and open chromatin suggests that the global cofactor cbp could be recruited by these factors at the location of the zga crms. consistently, both trl and cbp contain a q-rich protein-protein interaction domain  <cit> , suggesting potential interactions between these two proteins. the high over-representation of trl binding motif in cbp peaks reinforces this hypothesis. in contrast, the absence of association with acetylated histone  <dig> suggests that cbp might not act as an acetyl-transferase here, but instead could act as a bridge between the transcription factors and the basal machinery.

