BACKGROUND
the world requires a sustainable source of energy for the future. autotrophic organisms have been proposed to reduce the energy dependence of world economy on the fossil oil  <cit> . specifically, biofuel derived from microalgae  <cit>  have been under active investigation. hypothetical yield per hectare, land requirements, eco-friendly production, simple life structure and available scientific technologies are the major advantages to use the microalgae for large-scale biofuel production  <cit> . the hydrocarbon content of algae, specifically fatty acids, isoprenoids and triacylglycerides  <cit> , have the potential to compensate for future decline of crude oil production  <cit>  if algae growth and harvest can be sustained under economically and energetically feasible parameters. genetic and environmental factors affect the lipid constituents of microalgae  <cit>  as well as algae biomass growth. depending on the species-strains and conditions, lipids can constituent up to 80% of algal dry mass  <cit> . for biotechnological applications of algal biofuels  <cit> , existing analytical and computational tools are required to rapidly screen and characterize the strains and environmental conditions. classic methods such as analysis of total triglycerides use a transmethylation procedure to shave off fatty acids  <cit>  but are not be able to screen for alkanes or uncommon hydrocarbons found in botryococcus. similarly, current metabolomics methods analyze free fatty acids by trimethylsilylation and gc-tof mass spectrometry  <cit>  which is not amenable to total fats and pose difficulties to extend towards volatile aliphatics, long chain hydrocarbon and complex lipids in a single analytical method. we here aim at providing a rapid and automated way to assess total hydrocarbon and lipid contents in algae for fast strain discriminations that still can be visualized for the underlying changes in chemical complexity.

amid the algal species relevant for biofuel research are different strains of scenedesmus obliquus, dunaliella salina, botryococcus braunii and chlamydomonas reinhardtii. one requirement for the use of special strains in biofuel production is that the microalgae produce lipids under normal and stress conditions. although the triglyceride content of c. reinhardtii is very low it is used as a common model organism to study metabolism and metabolic networks under different nutrient and light conditions  <cit> . hydrocarbon contents of algal species have been characterized using a variety of analytical tools and procedures. among the traditional techniques for lipid analysis from algae are gravimetric and spectrophotometric techniques   <cit> . gradient centrifugation experiments can be used for rapid analysis and quick comparison of the lipid content of algal species producing high hydrocarbon  <cit> . more selective and sensitive technologies such as gas chromatography  and liquid chromatography  coupled to mass spectrometric detectors  <cit>  provide quantitative and extensive qualitative data of biofuel constituents of microalgae  <cit> . electrospray ionization and atmospheric pressure chemical ionization mass spectrometry  <cit>  and comprehensive two-dimensional liquid chromatography  <cit>   were used for the analysis of triacylglycerides. analysis of free fatty acids, sterols and waxes is usually performed with gas chromatographic approaches using flame ionization and mass selective detectors  <cit> . plant specific phospholipids and galactolipids can be quantitatively profiled using electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry  <cit> . in addition to these compound-specific techniques, pyrolysis-gas chromatography  has been used in combination with pattern recognition for fingerprinting of soils, bacteria, lignin and cellulosic analysis as well as analysis of complex organic matter, but much less applied for lipid profiling. high molecular weight lipids in b. braunii were previously characterized using pygc-ms  <cit>  with the focus on understanding of pyrolysis fragmentations and pitfalls in pygc-ms, referring to structures that were identified using classical analytical methods such as nuclear magnetic resonance  <cit>  and thin layer chromatography  <cit> . however, no comprehensive characterization of the overall hydrocarbon patterns was performed using substructure annotations. in addition, these methods had never been shown to be highly useful for rapid and quantitative comparison of multiple species.

we here present a comprehensive approach using existing computational tools and pyrolysis coupled to gas chromatography/mass spectrometry to phenotype the lipid rich b. braunii and the model organism c. reinhardtii based on their hydrocarbon content. to this end we used mass spectral deconvolution algorithms   <cit>  which we combined with a result filtering algorithm   <cit>  for comparing multiple data sets. in order to get a deeper insight into the chromatogram content we first queried chemical and natural product databases to obtain already known algal compounds. additionally we performed a substructure analysis  <cit>  of deconvoluted mass spectra together with mass spectral library search. an elution order analysis of several substance classes was performed based on their distinct mass spectral patterns. in order to discriminate between hydrocarbon rich species and hydrocarbon low abundant species we applied unsupervised multivariate statistics and furthermore visualized hydrocarbon abundances with the cytoscape visualization software. results can be directly interpreted with respect to the difference in hydrocarbon type and abundance between different algae species that may be important to evaluate strains and hydrocarbon outputs in biofuel reactors.

RESULTS
pyrolysis gc-ms automatically analyzes multiple samples without any pre-treatment
thermal pyrolysis of biological macromolecules produces volatile compounds that are easily detected by gc/quadrupole ms for quantitative and qualitative characterization. we have combined pyrolysis gc-ms  with mass spectral deconvolution, spectra and structural annotations, consistency filtering and multivariate statistics in order to compare and contrast lipid compositions in algae for biofuel-relevant compounds. the workflow is given in figure  <dig>  starting with cold quenching of  <dig> ml-samples of cultures of b. braunii race a, b. braunii race b and c. reinhardtii  to stop further metabolic activity. samples were subsequently freeze-dried and immersed into isopropanol for pygc-ms analysis, without any extraction step that is known to add to analytical variance. this quantity was enough to produce abundant hydrocarbon pygc-ms profile data even at split 1: <dig> injections, with the advantage to use lower split ratios if smaller cell numbers need to be analyzed . carry-over was tested by pyrolysis of  <dig> ml of pure isopropanol after every five runs, observing only minor contaminations by algae samples despite the complexity of lipid compositions. the optimum for pyrolysis temperatures was found at 600째c for  <dig> seconds. below 600째c we observed lower pyrogram ion intensities, likely to insufficient breakdown and release of lipid constituents. however, above 600째c we found a decline in intact high molecular weight pyrolysis products , indicating an increase in thermal breakdown that would decrease the information content of the pyrograms. the pyrolysis auto-sampler enabled automatic injection of up to  <dig> lyophilized algae samples into the pyrolysis chamber per analytical sequence. sequence files can be automatically generated using the study design software setupx  <cit>  which now enables definition of a variety of technology platforms to store and disseminate metabolome data files. pygc-ms eliminated the need for labor intensive and time consuming extraction processes in comparison to conventional hydrocarbon analysis of algal species  <cit> , hence increasing the sample throughput and lowering the costs for algae analysis. using the methods detailed above, a total cycle time of  <dig> minutes was achieved suggesting that pygc-ms can be utilized for automated studies of  <dig> samples per day or up to  <dig> samples per month and instrument, including method blanks and quality control samples. shorter chromatographic run times of  <dig> minutes total analysis time  resulted in compromised resolution of compounds and cross-contamination in the following samples due to wrap-around of high boiling constituents. if higher throughput would be needed, use of a shorter gc column and a fast flash gc heating option concomitant with increased scan rates would further alleviate data acquisition bottlenecks  <cit> .

hydrocarbons with c <dig> to c <dig> carbon chain length were annotated in pygc-ms pyrograms
overall, around  <dig> peaks were consistently detected for the three algae species after spectconnect filtering, of which about 50% were annotated as hydrocarbons in botryococcus strains but only 33% in chlamydomonas . compounds of carbon chain length from c <dig>  to c <dig>   <cit>  were observed in the pygc-ms programs, with increasing retention times from low to high boiling compounds. aliphatic hydrocarbon profiles in figure  <dig>  show that not only the number of hydrocarbons but also the absolute hydrocarbon signal abundance was higher in botryococcus strains compared to chlamydomonas. for each aliphatic or aromatic class, structurally similar pyrolysis products  eluted with distinct retention time intervals of around  <dig> s as validated by serial inspection of their corresponding component mass spectra. since the chromatograms were processed by amdis/spectconnect, it was feasible to detail absence and presence of peaks in heatmaps . these heatmaps revealed that c. reinhardtii indeed did not comprise compounds at more than about  <dig> carbons, but still yield components between c20-c <dig> that were not visible in the hydrocarbon ion trace at m/z  <dig> 

amdis deconvoluted spectra were subsequently used for compound annotation by searching against the nist <dig> mass spectral library at a 70% similarity threshold. biofuel-related pyrolysis products such as fatty acids and their methyl esters, isoprenoids, sterols, vitamins, aromatics and branched and unbranched alkane-type compounds were identified as intact molecules up to 600째c thermal pyrolysis temperatures . hence, it is likely that components detected by pygc/ms consist of intact compounds as well as fragments of thermally degraded larger biomolecules. increasing lengths of side chains were distinguished by an increase of  <dig> mass units reflecting ch2-units. further peaks were identified using the apparent molecular weights and querying the dictionary of natural products database . dnp queries retrieved  <dig> entries for botryococcus dnp of which  <dig> compounds were matched to pyrograms by molecular weight and mass fragmentation pattern . botryococcus is well known for its high content of long chain hydrocarbon contents. up to 70% of the dry weight are long chain hydrocarbons  <cit> . botryococcenes are important hydrocarbons in this alga for which we identified lycopadiene  and botryococcene  in pygc-ms data based on the molecular ions, mass spectral patterns and retention times . the biomarker compound lycopadiene  <cit>  is specifically only found in b. braunii race a. dnp comprised only five chlamydomonas metabolites which did not yield additional pyrogram compound annotations.

algae components in pygc-ms data sets can be characterized by substructure networks
while tables of identified or annotated compounds detected in pygc-ms data sets are certainly useful, such tables do not list all detected peaks and are difficult to compare between species or culture conditions with respect to both identity and quantity. more specifically, unidentified components may comprise substantial amounts of the total dry mass and should therefore be related to known compounds and displayed in quantitative terms to obtain visual overview of differences between algal species or strains. we have here applied substructure characterization using automatic analysis of mass spectral patterns using the amdis 'substructure classifier' post processing feature . the varmuza substructure classifier algorithm  <cit>  in amdis uses various features from mass spectra and annotates them by probable substructures ordered by probability scores, such as 'alkyl hydrocarbon' or 'aromatic naphthalene ring system'. out of the total list of  <dig> classifiers  we selected  <dig> hydrocarbon related classifiers. in addition, using spectral similarity post processing feature, six different similarity classes were detected. four of these classes reflected hydrocarbon spectra. a direct comparison found that substructure annotations performed by the varmuza classifiers in amdis yielded results that were highly consistent to the compound identification by nist ms library search. as many of the compounds belonged to the same chemical class, it can be assumed that mass spectrometry response factors were similar, and hence, that the signal intensities can directly be used to compare the abundance of the different species in hydrocarbon classes. we have visualized the overall outcome of the average qualitative and quantitative presence of algae hydrocarbons in cytoscape  <cit>  networks . the abundances and retention time of the components were represented by the circular node sizes and node colors, respectively. nodes were clustered based on presence in substructure classifiers, represented and labeled as triangular green nodes. components that shared multiple substructures were structurally similar and clustered more closely together in the network than less related structures. these networks facilitate a quick overview of differences in hydrocarbon contents in species. for example, the node 'm'  was much higher in c. reinhardtii algae than in botryococcus, whereas 'b'  was much more prevalent in botryococcus than in chlamydomonas. this finding indicates that the extra-chloroplastidic elongation of palmitate to stearate is much less active in chlamydomonas, which also does not exert high activity of the biosynthetic pathways for long-chain biosynthesis of unsaturated alkanes . conversely, phytadienes  are much more abundant in chlamydomonas, pointing to a much more active photosynthetic apparatus that ultimately enables faster growth rates than in botryococcus. overall, the networks represent multiple features in a single view including peak identifications and classifications, peak abundances and boiling points. the hydrocarbon rich botryococcus algae show a higher number of large red spheres, representing a larger amount of high boiling hydrocarbon compounds. the visual appearance of network instantly reflects the relevant hydrocarbon composition and assists in comparing multiple species and their hydrocarbon contents. until recently such visualizations were only utilized for large genomic datasets but will play an important role for interpreting multidimensional analytical chemistry related studies.

algal species and strains can be easily discriminated by multivariate statistics of pygc-ms data
when comparing the number and overlap of detected compounds, the botryococcus races were apparently highly similar and much more related to each other than to c. reinhardtii. the venn diagram  <cit>   showed that 70% of all hydrocarbons were identical between both botryococcus races, whereas chlamydomonas shared only 43% of its hydrocarbons with either of the botryococcus races. one would thus assume that this high overlap in metabolite identity between the botryococcus races would also be reflected in overall quantitative similarities. the quantitative matrices obtained from amdis/spectconnect deconvolution were directly used to display variance between individual replicate culture samples in comparison to variance between the cultures. unsupervised principal component analysis  showed distinct clusters of the three algal species in a two dimensional projection of the scores of first two principal components. variability within each culture was much lower than between the classes, suggesting a high reproducibility of the pygc-ms analysis for multiple samples. these results confirm that pygc-ms with amdis/spectconnect data processing can not only easily distinguish lipid phenotypes of different species but also differentiate pyrograms of closely related races. we therefore suggest that this approach may be extendable to large scale studies involving routine analysis of algae cultures, for example in biofuel technology.

CONCLUSIONS
we have established that pygc-ms offers a fast track to phenotype algae strains in a cost effective manner, providing both qualitatively and quantitatively important information. preparation for analysis was minimal and could potentially further robotized, unlike methods that are classically used in lipid analysis or metabolomics. specifically, constraining amdis deconvolution results was important to yield clean and consistent data sets that could be used to compare and contrast hydrocarbon contents. for the first time we have used substructure annotation algorithms, mass spectral library matching and chemical database search to automatically assess hundreds of pyrolysis peaks in algae research. visualization of result data sets in network graphs offers an improved tool to highlight differences between algae cultures that can much easier be interpreted than commonly used table representations or box-whisker graphs. we suggest that the integrated approach presented here is an efficient strategy for hydrocarbon phenotyping of microalgae in a rapid and automated manner. this method can be applied to small scale as well as large scale research projects considering screening and physiological studies on microalgae for biofuel applications.

