BACKGROUND
highly dynamic, yet tightly controlled, protein phosphorylation and de-phosphorylation events are important avenues to tweak cell cycle transition processes. cyclin-dependent kinases  lie at the heart of cell cycle control system and their activities rise and fall as the cell progresses through the cell cycle . in budding yeast saccharomyces cerevisiae, the highly conserved sccdc <dig>  phosphatase antagonizes the cdk <dig> functions to allow anaphase regulation and mitotic exit  <cit> . human cells encode three paralogs of hcdc <dig> namely hcdc14a, hcdc14b and hcdc14c  <cit> . in spite of the high conservations between the catalytic domain of all cdc <dig> phosphatases  <cit>  and the complementation of sccdc <dig> by hcdc14b  <cit> , human cdc14s have so far been reported to be involved in functions that are quite diverse than that of budding yeast  <cit> . human hcdc14a was proposed to exert its function at centrosome duplication  <cit>  while hcdc14b was implicated in mitotic progression  <cit> , dna damage checkpoint activation and dna repair  <cit> . nevertheless, hcdc14b depleted human cells display normal mitotic exit and cytokinesis  <cit> . moreover, the viability of hcdc14a or hcdc14b single knockout  vertebrate cells  <cit>  indicate the possible functional redundancy of vertebrate phosphatases. it is noteworthy that most of the previously reported functions of hcdc14a/b were deduced upon sirna depletion  or strong over-expression that causes toxic effects. extent of depletion as well as the functional redundancy of the phosphatases was not taken into consideration partly because of the inability of available antibodies to recognize endogenous hcdc14a and hcdc14b proteins .

genome editing provides an alternative strategy to sirna depletion for hcdc14a and hcdc14b inactivation. currently, several strategies exploiting sequence-specific endonucleases exist for purposeful genome editing, including zinc-finger nuclease , transcription activator-like effector nuclease , and the rna-guided clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats -cas <dig> nuclease system  <cit> . in all these approaches, an endonuclease is programmed to specifically bind the assigned nucleotide sequence and trigger single or double strand breaks . cells can take either high-fidelity homologous recombination  and/or error-prone non-homologous end-joining  to repair this dsb  <cit>  . nhej might alter the dsb site by random insertion or deletion of nucleotides of varying length. on the other hand, homologous recombination can be utilized to deliberately introduce stop codons and selectable markers for ensuring genome disruption .

in this study, we have used dsb-enhanced hr event to incorporate pre-mature stop codons followed by selection markers  within the selected exons of human hcdc14a and hcdc14b genes. nonetheless, cas <dig> and zfn-mediated genome disruption strategies have unfolded complications owing to the in-frame skipping of targeted exons. we presume that interruption due to the incorporation of a large fragment of dna  has structural effects on exon definition as reviewed by valentine  <cit> . loxp site-mediated removal of selection markers from the previously generated knockins prevented exon skipping but left a 45 bp stop-loxp scar within the targeted exon. thus, we report that insertion of large dna fragment into an exon by genome editing leads to its skipping from the final transcript and how this property can be used in genome editing.

RESULTS
disruption of the hcdc14a and hcdc14b loci in human somatic cells
we have utilized compozrtm zfns, designed and evaluated by sigma advanced genetic engineering labs, to make hcdc14a and hcdc14b knockouts in two human cell lines  with stable genotype. zfn-induced homologous recombination strategy was employed to incorporate premature stop codon and selection markers  into the targeted exons of hcdc14a  and hcdc14b  . southern blot analysis has confirmed the successful biallelic targeting of the hcdc14a and hcdc14b loci by neor or puror cassettes .fig.  <dig> strategy for zfn-mediated generation of knockout cell lines. a exon  <dig> of hcdc14a was targeted by zinc finger nuclease . a donor template containing two homologous arms , stop codon and neomycin selection cassette was used for their homologous recombination mediated insertion within the double strand break  site. junction pcr with forward primer  in neor cassette and reverse primer  in the genome outside homology arm confirmed successful targeting and insertion of the selection marker. b exon  <dig> was targeted to knockout hcdc14b gene. as donor template for hcdc14a, neomycin selection cassette was used to generate hcdc14b single knockout. puromycin cassette was used when hcdc14b was knocked-out on top of hcdc14a
−/− cells . forward  and reverse  primers used for the junction pcr are shown in the figure

fig.  <dig> southern blot hybridization to confirm biallelic targeting of hcdc14a and hcdc14b loci in rpe <dig> cells. a map for hcdc14a and hcdc14b genomic locus targeted by zinc finger nuclease . the probes for southern blot hybridization were designed in the right homologous arms . in case of hcdc14a, digestion by hind iii would result in a  <dig>  kb fragment for knockout cells instead of wild-type  <dig>  kb band. for knocking out hcdc14b, neomycin or puromycin inserted donor templates were used. puromycin construct  was used when hcdc14b knocking out was carried out on top of hcdc14a
−/− cells  . on the other hand, neomycin construct was used during generation of single hcdc14b knockout. b southern blot hybridization to confirm hcdc14a knockout  with a hcdc14a specific probe . the expected hcdc14a band sizes were observed for wild type , hcdc14a single  and hcdc14a hcdc14b double knockouts  . c southern blot hybridization to confirm hcdc14b knockout  with a hcdc14b specific probe . the dko  and wt cells have shown anticipated band sizes of  <dig>  kb and  <dig>  kb, respectively. for single hcdc14b knockouts , two extra bands above and below the expected band size of  <dig>  kb  was persistently observed in different clones. absence of wild type bands  in these knockouts confirmed the successful targeting of both alleles



rt-pcr analysis confirming expression of wild type and in-frame exon-skipped hcdc14a/ hcdc14b transcripts
sequencing of the hcdc14a and hcdc14b rt-pcr  products from wild type and selection marker knockins verified the presence of exon-skipped mature mrna in the targeted hcdc14a and hcdc14b clones . the reading frames remain intact as the skipped exons in both the cases  contained nucleotide number that could be divided by three. hence, we have to assume the presence of truncated hcdc14a and hcdc14b proteins.fig.  <dig> rt-pcr analysis to confirm expression of wild type and exon-skipped transcripts. gel images for rt-pcr products of hcdc14a  and hcdc14b  transcripts from wild type  and knockout cells . maps show the locations of primers  used for pcr reaction. the generated dna bands were gel purified and sequenced. sequences of alternating exon junctions are shown in the respective lower panels . in-frame exon skipping can be deduced from the amino acid sequences written above the codons



the 9th exon of hcdc14a includes the active site cysteine and aspartate residues necessary for phosphatase activity  <cit> , suggesting the inactivation of hcdc14a phosphatase from these cell lines. conversely, the catalytically important residues for hcdc14b are located in 9th exon, downstream to the targeted exon  <cit> . thus, in case of hcdc14b the gene interference strategy most likely creates a small truncation of  <dig> amino acids in the hcdc14b protein that might not affect phosphatase activity.

exon-skipping phenomenon is independent of genome editing approach
our zfn-mediated genome editing of hcdc14a and hcdc14b has clearly indicated the skipping of targeted exon from the final transcript. as a faster and more affordable alternative to zfn, there is a recent surge in use of crispr-cas <dig> system for genome editing. we have taken the advantage of crispr-cas <dig> system to target hcdc14a locus with the same donor construct and guide rna that targets the same genomic hcdc14a dna sequence as the zfn. as the lengthy custom design of the zfn was avoided, crispr-cas <dig> strategy was clearly faster and more than 50-fold cost-efficient than the zfn approach. as anticipated, we observed exon skipping in hct <dig> and rpe <dig> cells in which hcdc14a was targeted by crispr-cas <dig> . this further implies that the skipping event is associated with the degree of exon alteration not merely a random outcome of genome editing approach.fig.  <dig> strategy for cas9-mediated generation of hcdc14a knockout hct <dig> cells. a, b workflow for crispr-cas <dig> medicated insertion of neor into exon  <dig> of hcdc14a. guide rnas  targeting the exon  <dig> of hcdc14a gene were designed using the web tool . ‘churh grna insert’ containing the u <dig> promoter and grna scaffold  <cit>  was first synthesized as gblock and cloned into pjet. the intended grnas were inserted through pcr mutagenesis using primers indicated by arrows . the same donor construct  as in case of zfn-mediated genome editing was used to target the locus. c junction pcr  with forward primer in neor cassette and reverse primer in the genome outside homology arms confirmed successful targeting and insertion of the selection marker.d rt-pcr of purified mrna from wt and different crispr-cas <dig> targeted hcdc14a-ko clonal cells. primers were as in fig. 3a. presence of both wild type and exon-skipped rna indicated the targeting of single allele in clone  <dig>  the other neor clones  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> contained bi-allelic knockout of the hcdc14a gene. e the generated dna bands of the rt-pcr were gel purified and sequenced. sequences of alternating exon junctions of hcdc14a are shown and in-frame exon skipping can be deduced from the amino acid sequences written above the codons



minimizing the degree of alteration salvages the exon skipping
as a cause of exon skipping, we hypothesized that large insertion-mediated alteration of the targeted exon affects the pre-mrna structure  <cit> . hence, to avoid large-scale genome editing, we have taken two experimental strategies. first, genomic loci were targeted by the same zfns but with error-prone nhej, with the view in mind to have random smaller insertions or deletions . secondly, the selection markers flanked by loxp sites were removed by cre-recombinase to generate loci with  <dig> base pair insertions including stop codons immediately followed by the single loxp site . in both the cases, sequencing of genomic loci indicated the expected abruptions. similarly, sequencing of the rt-pcr products confirmed the likewise modifications within the targeted exons without their skipping from the mature transcript .fig.  <dig> exon skipping can be abolished by minimizing the degree of alteration. a exon  <dig> of hcdc14b was targeted by zfn to introduce double strand break  and error-prone nhej for random insertion and deletion. in some of the targeted loci, small alterations in the exon  were observed. zfn cutting sites are written in blue font and base deletions or insertions are marked by red font color. sequencing of the rt-pcr products confirmed identical base pair changes without exon skipping . b the selection cassette flanked by loxp sites was removed by cre-recombinase from hct <dig> and rpe <dig> hcdc14b-ko cells. rt-pcr analysis confirmed the presence of stop codon  followed by one loxp site  within the targeted exon in both the cell lines. c semi-quantitative rt-pcr indicated that the exon-skipped mrna level of rpe <dig> cells is less than half of the wild-type mrna. 40 ng of total rna was used and the input rna level was confirmed by gapdh amplification as mentioned by carbery et al.  <cit> . the experiment was performed three times with similar outcome. one representative experiment is shown. the numbers below the agarose gel summarizes the relative abundance of the mrna from three different experiments



semi-quantitative rt-pcr using gapdh as a control indicated that the exon-skipped hcdc14b mrna level was less than half of the wild-type mrna . such decrease in mrna level might be due to transcriptional control  and/or post-transcriptional regulation  of disrupted cellular transcripts. because of the lack of anti-hcdc14b antibodies that detect the endogenous proteins , we were unable to confirm this mrna decrease at the protein levels.

taken together, we describe that insertion of a relatively large dna fragment into an exon can cause exon skipping. if the exon has a length that can be divided by  <dig>  this leads to an in-frame fusion between the alternating exons. in case of hcdc14a, the truncated gene product lacks phosphatase activity because the deleted exon  <dig> contains the active site cysteine residue. since phosphatases can have a scaffold function  <cit> , analysis of this hcdc14a-cys mutant can be used to uncover such a role. in contrast, deletion of the exon  <dig> of hcdc14b most likely results in a small truncation in the n-terminus of hcdc14b away from the nucleolar targeting sequence  <cit> . since the residues required for hcdc14b activity were not affected, it is likely that this truncation does not affect the activity of the phosphatase. however, removal of the selection marker by cre-induced recombination prevented exon skipping and disrupted gene function by introducing stop codons. thus, adenovirus-cre mediated infection of hcdc14b::neomycin cells can be used to introduce an acute knockout of hcdc14b function.

CONCLUSIONS
genome editing is a robust experimental paradigm to assign cellular function to a molecule. simplicity of genome editing through engineered nucleases has recently allured the scientific community to generate knockout cellular models. utilizing selection markers greatly augments the ease of generating knockout cellular clones. however, our study clearly shows that, the selection marker also imposes an inherent size-associated mrna processing difficulty of the targeted exon. in most of the cases, the selection markers overweigh the average length of eukaryotic exon . for example, the 4th exon of hcdc14b is  <dig> bases long compared to the  <dig>  kb of neomycin and  <dig>  kb of puromycin cassette. such massive alterations have the potential to annihilate secondary pre-mrna structure and impede cellular mrna processing leading to exon skipping. well-informed and pre-planned experimental choices should be made to target the suitable exon while editing the genome of higher eukaryotes like in human cells. an alternative strategy could be the introduction of double strand break in an intronic sequence to incorporate homologous recombination mediated subtle changes in the adjacent exon. these exon modifications could be introduced in the donor along with the selection marker. of note, such skipping mechanisms can be useful to engineer proteins with small deletions or for the analysis of acute knockouts in response to cre - induced selection marker removal.

