BACKGROUND
bioscavenging of organophosphate  by human cholinesterases  is emerging as a promising medical intervention for prophylaxis and post-exposure treatment against chemical warfare nerve agents and pesticides, meeting considerable success in pre-clinical studies  <cit> . ches are very efficient in sequestering ops that become esterified to a serine residue at the active site. this covalent bond is very stable and in the case of certain ops is further stabilized by subsequent "aging" reactions. with the phosphorylated enzymes having negligible reactivation rates, ches are effectively "single-use molecular sponges" requiring the application of stoichiometric rather than catalytic doses for effectiveness. thus a production system capable of supplying the forecasted demand for large amounts of active ches is needed.

several strategies for production of ches were evaluated. of the two ches in humans, only the serum enzyme butyrylcholinesterase  can be obtained from natural sources, and large-scale purification efforts from outdated blood-banked human plasma were demonstrated  <cit> . expression in recombinant systems is the only way for producing the physiological target of ops, acetylcholinesterase , which is abundant in muscle and nerve tissues but is normally absent from serum. several mammalian-based recombinant production systems were described including engineered cell cultures  and the milk of transgenic goats  <cit> . as an alternative to these systems that are confronted with being supply-restricted, of limited scalability, high cost and risk of human pathogen contamination, we have introduced plants as a production system for human ache  <cit> . we carefully optimized the expression constructs  <cit> , and purification protocols  <cit>  and demonstrated that plant derived ache-rer from nicotiana benthamiana, which retains all of the catalytic properties of a mammalian-derived enzyme and furthermore that plant-derived ache-rer is capable of completely ameliorating all of the gross clinical symptoms and some of the long-term molecular consequences implicated in op poisoning  <cit> .

despite their promise, there are currently some concerns among regulatory agencies and the public at large, regarding the use of transgenic plants  for the production of protein pharmaceuticals  <cit> . among the raised issues is that of environmental containment . a further perceived difficulty is the regulatory uncertainty whether the lack of tightly controlled growth conditions typical of plant cultivation can satisfy the strict requirements of good manufacturing practice. in this context plant cell or organ cultures grown in bioreactors may prove more adept at clearing the regulatory hurdles associated with plant-based heterologous production systems while maintaining their most important advantages – inexpensive medium consisting of salts and sugar and devoid of mammalian proteins, growth factors and hormones; equivalent purification costs; and unmatched biosafety bearing minimal risk of human pathogens and prions  <cit> .

while several plant cell lines are available for use, more organized organ culture, such as "hairy root" cultures may present additional benefits e.g. genetic and biochemical stability and faster growth rates resulting in larger mass/medium ratios  <cit> . hairy root cultures are obtained by agrobacterium rhizogenes mediated transformation of plant tissue . a. rhizogenes is a common phytopathogenic and naturally-transforming soil bacterium  that is transferred from the bacterial ri plasmid and integrated into the plant nuclear genome. the transformed plant tissue quickly grows into a highly branched mass in a medium consisting of simple salts and sucrose and useful compounds such as secondary metabolites or recombinant proteins can be recovered from the medium or extracted from the plant tissue  <cit> .

here we demonstrate the feasibility of producing human ache-rer in hairy root cultures derived from transgenic n. benthamiana plants expressing the protein via a. rhizogenes mediated transformation. hairy root lines were screened for level of expression of ache-rer and the protein was subsequently purified and its biochemical properties studied and its circulation half-life determined.

methods
cloning, tissue culture and initial screening
a codon-optimized cdna encoding human ache-r with a c-terminal sekdel  was as previously synthesized by de novo assembly and stable n. benthamiana lines were established  <cit> . explants derived from these parental plant lines, along side untransformed wild type  plants, were co-cultivated with agrobacterium rhizogenes  for  <dig> hr in the dark at room temperature on plates containing ms medium containing ms basal salt mixture with vitamins , 3% sucrose  and  <dig> % phytagel . explants were then moved to fresh ms medium supplemented with  <dig> mg/l kanamycin  and  <dig> mg/l timentin . hairy roots thus obtained were grown on solid ms medium or and in  <dig> l flasks containing  <dig> ml liquid culture shaken at  <dig> rpm.

for initial screening, root samples  were lysed in  <dig> vol of extraction buffer  using a fastprep machine . lysates were then clarified by centrifugation at  <dig>  × g for  <dig> min at 4°c. supernatants were removed and enzymatic activity of ache-r was measured .

determination of growth kinetics and 4°c storage protocol
liquid culture growth rate and maximum culture density were determined for hairy roots lines expressing ache-rer as well as wt roots. ms liquid medium  was spiked with  <dig>  g hairy root tissue that had been grown on solid media for  <dig> weeks. roots were removed from liquid culture and dried briefly on paper towels at the corresponding time points. for ache purification experiments, hairy root cultures were typically harvested between 4– <dig> weeks following culture initiation, ensuring maximum culture density. for 4°c storage experiments, roots were grown on  <dig> % agar  slants containing ms salts and 3% sucrose and allowed to grow at room temperature for  <dig> weeks in the dark. slants were then moved to 4°c. at the indicated times, slants were removed and roots were sterilely transferred to  <dig> ml of liquid ms medium and cultured on a shaker at rt for  <dig> weeks. roots were then removed, patted-dry, inspected and weighed.

purification of human acetylcholinesterase
all purification steps were preformed at 4°c. after 4– <dig> weeks of growth remaining media was removed from the growth flask and roots were washed once with  <dig> ml extraction buffer . root samples were disrupted in a commercial blender with  <dig> volumes of fresh extraction buffer and subjected to centrifugation at  <dig>  × g for  <dig> minutes to pellet cellular debris. the supernatant was filtered first with miracloth  followed with a grade  <dig> filter paper . the clarified supernatant was then diluted with pbs to two times initial volume to reduce the metabisulfite concentration and processed by affinity chromatography using  <dig> ml procainamide-agarose  in a  <dig>  cm i.d. econo-column . the column was washed with  <dig> ml pbs and the bound enzyme eluted with  <dig> ml elution buffer  into  <dig> ml fractions. fractions displaying ache activity  were pooled, ammonium sulfate was added to 55%, and the suspension incubated for  <dig> hr. the protein pellet obtained by centrifugation  was re-suspended in  <dig> ml buffer  <dig> , dialyzed extensively against buffer  <dig> for  <dig> hr in a  <dig> kda mwco cellulose dialysis tubing , and concentrated in a macrosep  <dig> kda mwco concentrator  to a final volume of  <dig> ml. sodium azide  was added and solution was stored at 4°c until further use.

biochemical characterization of ache-r
enzymatic activity of ache-r was measured using acetylthiocholine iodine  as the substrate in a spectramax 340pc spectrophotometer  by the method of ellman  <cit>  as previously described  <cit> . the specific activity of pure preparations of plant-derived ache  was used to convert activity protein equivalent. total protein levels were derived using the bio-rad protein assay reagent  with bsa as the standard. the michaelis constant  was determined by measuring and plotting ache activity as a function of atchi concentration and non-linear regression analysis . inhibition curves were generated by plotting residual ache activity  as a function of inhibitor's concentration using the following acetylcholinesterase inhibitors: neostigmine bromide ,  <dig> -bispentan-3-one dibromide , diethyl p-nitrophenyl phosphate  and the butyrylcholinesterase specific irreversible inhibitor, tetra-isopropyl pyrophosphoramide .

protein samples were resolved by sds-page and visualized using a silver snap ii kit  according to manufacturer's instructions.

pharmacokinetics
groups of five 6– <dig> week old male fvb/n mice were injected with  <dig> u of hairy root-derived ache-rer in pbs  or  <dig> μl pbs as vehicle control. blood samples  were drawn by tail vein knick. serum was separated from clotted blood by centrifugation . serum samples were assayed for ache activity in the presence of  <dig> μm of the butyrylcholinesterase-specific inhibitor iso-ompa. data derived from ache-injected mice was normalized to data derived from vehicle-treated mice.

RESULTS
creation of hairy root cultures
previously we described the creation of transgenic n. benthamiana plants expressing the "readthrough" isoform of human ache   <cit> . this isoform is the monomeric and soluble product of one of the mrna splice variants of the single human ache gene, which is up-regulated during exposure to anticholinesterase agents  <cit> . the human enzyme was engineered to contain the endoplasmic reticulum  retention signal kdel . this modification, as well as codon optimization of the gene, enabled the recombinant protein to accumulate to high levels in leaves  <cit> . we selected one of the highest expresser line, 2d, harboring  four copies of the transgene and expressing ache-rer at  <dig> %–1% of total soluble protein  as the parental source of explants for the generation of hairy root cultures  <cit> .

thirteen independent hairy root lines were generated by a. rhizogenes infection and screened for the presence of the transgene and for levels of recombinant protein, assayed by its enzymatic activity . these kanamycin-resistant clones displayed a wide distribution of recombinant protein accumulation, with the highest clone accumulating the transgenic product at  <dig> % tsp while the lowest confirmed positive clones expressed at levels that were at least  <dig> fold lower. we observed a similarly wide distribution of recombinant protein accumulation levels in hairy-root clones derived from a single parental plant with the synaptic ache isoform .

the differences in the apparent expression levels of ache-rer between the hairy root cultures and the parental plants can be explained by several, non-mutually exclusive explanations. for example it is reasonable to expect differences in the size of total soluble protein fraction in roots vs. leaves. it can also reflect a less restrained transgene expression under the pampered culture conditions as opposed to expression levels that can be expected of potted plants in the greenhouse. regardless of the explanation, the higher % tsp observed in hairy roots presents itself as a bonus when purification is concerned.

growth kinetics of ache-rer hairy root cultures
following selection and initial screening, the clone with the highest ache-rer accumulation  was selected for further studies and was cultured in liquid medium. under identical growth conditions, transgenic hairy root cultures were slower to grow and reached stationary phase earlier and at lower densities than wt cultures . thus, transgenic cultures reached peak density  already at  <dig> weeks, when growth rate tempered while the wt cultured continued to grow at a vigorous pace up to  <dig> weeks after inoculation and achieved roughly twice that density . such differences between the growth rates of the transgenic vs. wt cultures were not evident when hairy roots were grown on solid medium. this may indicate that the rate-limiting factor is aeration, although any other number of factors may contribute as well. further optimization of growth conditions may increase the growth rates of the cultures and alleviate the observed limitations. regarding production of recombinant ache-rer, the culture productivity also peaked at week  <dig>  when ache specific activity in the crude extract was  <dig> u/mg . although the stationary phase culture remained viable, accumulation levels of the recombinant protein dropped sharply, possibly reflecting decreased stability of the enzyme due to senescence-induced proteases potentially coupled to decreased translation.

wt hairy roots remained viable when stored at 4°c on solid medium  and could be used to inoculate new suspension cultures for at least  <dig> months. however, and correlating well to its diminished growth characteristics, ache-expressing hairy roots remained viable for only 15– <dig> weeks. methods for longer-term clone banking are still being pursued.

purification of ache-rer from hairy root cultures
following growth in liquid culture for 4– <dig> weeks, the recombinant protein was purified by affinity chromatography and concentrated by ammonium sulfate precipitation. the enhanced accumulation of ache-rer in hairy root cultures compared with the parental plants made additional purification steps  unnecessary to achieve comparable purity and yield to our previously published results . this isolation procedure resulted in an electrophoretically pure ache-rer with an overall 50-fold purification . importantly, neither the choice of the hairy root system, nor the abbreviated purification protocol had any effect on the catalytic characteristics of the recombinant molecule. the hairy root derived enzyme's affinity to the substrate, approximated by the michaelis constant , was identical to that of ache-rer derived from the parental plant , and is also very similar to the native enzyme's value  <cit>  . similarly, binding of substrate to the peripheral anionic site of ache, responsible for its characteristic allosteric inhibition, was apparent at concentrations higher than  <dig>  mm regardless of the source of the enzyme.

as the goal of cholinesterase therapy is to provide a broad-spectrum bioscavenger of anti-cholinesterase toxins, binding of inhibitors to the enzyme was monitored by obtaining inhibition profiles for several cholinesterase inhibitors. the hairy-root derived enzyme showed nearly identical ic <dig> values with representatives of several classes of inhibitors including paraoxon, the active op metabolite of the insecticide parathion), the ache-specific bis-quaternary inhibitor bw 284-c <dig>  and neostigmine bromide, a carbamate . as expected, tetrapyrophosphortetramide , a butyrylcholinesterase-specific op, had no effect on the plant-derived ache .

the purification results presented here, demonstrate the potential for further improvements in increasing the yield. a relative simple modification may be, for example, using a variant of the protein devoid of the er retention signal, which should allow the protein to be secreted to the apoplast. it is yet to be seen if such approach would allow the ~ <dig> kda protein to be released into the medium  as the existing literature is ambivalent about the issue  <cit> .

pharmacokinetics of hairy root-derived ache-rer
the levels of ache activity in serum are typically very low but increase following various stressful insults as is demonstrated here with mice injected with vehicle . following the injection, the mice experienced a ten-fold increase in their serum ache activity, which declined rapidly . to determine the rate of circulatory clearance of hairy root-derived ache-rer, we injected  mice with  <dig> u of the recombinant enzyme and tested plasma samples for residual ache activity in the presence of iso-ompa . the hairy root-derived human enzyme was cleared rapidly with a two-phase exponential decay kinetics . the kinetics of serum clearance of the hairy root-derived ache-r is not appreciably different than that of the endogenous enzyme, probably reflecting the existing mechanisms to retain the normally low levels of activity in the serum  <cit> . stability can be increased by decorating the enzyme with polyethylene glycol on surface exposed lysine residues  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
previously, we reported the creation of transgenic plants that accumulate recombinant human ache-rer to commercially viable levels  <cit> . here we demonstrate that the enzyme can be efficiently produced in hairy root cultures derived from those transgenic plants, that it can be readily purified and that it is 'biosimilar', i.e. biochemically and functionally equivalent to its transgenic plant-derived counterpart with respect to substrate hydrolysis, op binding and pharmacokinetics  <cit> . it is anticipated, but yet to be demonstrated, that the hairy root enzyme can provide similar protection to op challenged enzymes. thus organ cultures can provide both the high level of expression achieved with transgenic plants, with the additional containment and uniformity coming from contained clonal propagation in well-defined culture medium and conditions.

authors' contributions
rrw conducted the a. rhizogenes transformation experiments, obtained growth parameter analysis, carried out many of the biochemical assays and drafted the manuscript. bcg created the expression construct and created the transgenic plants from which the hairy-root cultures were derived and participated in all of the above activities. tsm conceived of the study and participated in its design and coordination as well as wrote the final version of the paper in its originally submitted and revised forms. all authors read and approved the final manuscript.

