BACKGROUND
children exposed to alcohol during gestation can exhibit a spectrum of abnormalities that range from alcohol related neurodevelopmental disorders  to fetal alcohol syndrome , based upon the severity of symptoms. these abnormalities can include facial anomalies, growth deficits, mental retardation, attention deficit/hyperactivity disorders, motor difficulties, learning and memory impairment and psychological disorders such as depression  <cit> . ethanol is teratogenic and exerts pleiotrophic effects in the differentiating nervous system, including induction of cell-death mechanisms  <cit> , disruption of trophic support  <cit>  and deregulation of neurotransmitter networks like the gaba, glutamate and serotonergic systems  <cit> .

during prenatal period of neurogenesis, the number of neuroepithelial cells expands rapidly to generate most of the neurons of the adult brain  <cit>  requiring, as with other tissues  <cit> , the conversion of un-committed stem cells to more fate-restricted neuroblasts, and ultimately neurons. ethanol exposure during gestation may alter the number and types of neuronal stem and blast precursors available for normal development, potentially producing irreversible damage to the developing brain. for example, previous research using brdu incorporation analyses has shown that ethanol suppresses cell-cycle in the ventricular zone while promoting proliferation in the more mature subventricular zone  <cit> . the opposing effect of ethanol on these two cell populations indicates that ethanol disrupts the normal balance of precursor populations and suggests that ethanol may not affect all immature precursors similarly. we know little about the molecular heterogeneity of cortical neuroepithelial cells, though emerging evidence suggests that the neuroepithelium is quite heterogeneous with respect to differentiation and gene expression states of its constituent cells  <cit> . cell surface markers like cd133/prominin- <dig>  sca- <dig> , cd117/c-kit and abcg <dig> , member 2) have been used successfully to monitor stem cell heterogeneity in a variety of tissues  <cit> , and we therefore used these markers to monitor neuronal stem cell heterogeneity following ethanol exposure. we hypothesized that if ethanol influenced the proliferation of neuroepithelial cells, it would also alter the numbers of stem cells within the cortical neuroepithelium.

finally, mechanisms that maintain genomic stability are important during neurogenesis because the frequency of dna synthesis errors and aberrant chromatin assembly are increased during periods of robust proliferation. these errors must be limited, so that neural stem cells do not accumulate and transmit genetic damage to daughter cells. the telomerase complex, a reverse transcriptase enzyme complex, maintains telomeres during dna replication  <cit> , thereby preventing genomic instability and cellular senescence. telomerase is active in all germline tissues, transformed cells and most human cancers  <cit> , but is particularly robust during neurogenesis where it has been shown to function as an anti-apoptotic factor in developing neurons  <cit> . the activation of telomerase during neurogenesis, and the anti-apoptotic role of telomerase in neurons, led us to hypothesize that telomerase is a molecular target for ethanol during neuroblast expansion.

to examine the effects of ethanol on cortical precursor growth and survival, neurosphere cultures were generated from gestational day  <dig> rat fetuses. contrary to our initial hypothesis, prolonged ethanol exposure promoted cell-cycle activity without concomitant increases in telomerase activity, or significant apoptosis. however, despite directly increasing cell cycle activity, ethanol suppressed expression of several stem cell markers, and decreased the future proliferation and differentiation potential of exposed cortical-derived neurospheres. collectively, these data indicate that stem cell diversity, stability, and maturation are likely to be important components of the prenatal brain damage caused by maternal ethanol consumption.

RESULTS
neuronal progenitor cells, including multi-potent stem, and more committed blast cells, can be isolated from the developing cortex, expanded in-vitro as neurosphere aggregates, and subsequently used to generate neurons and glia  <cit> . acutely dissociated cortical progenitors were cultured as neurosphere aggregates in serum-free mitogenic media to model the period of neuroblast precursor expansion during neurogenesis in the rodent. cultured neurospheres were immuno-positive for nestin , consistent with the hypothesis that neurospheres were comprised of immature cells. in contrast, immunofluorescence for the neuronal nuclear antigen  was expressed within the soma of a few progenitor cells at the periphery of the neurosphere, but did not co-localize to any nucleus . the presence of nestin  <cit>  indicates that neurospheres are immature and multi-potent, and the lack of nuclear labeling for neun  indicates that these cells are not yet committed to neuronal differentiation. in contrast, differentiation, induced by removal of epidermal growth factor and culturing neurosphere-derived cells on a laminin substrate, leads to clear nuclear expression of neun  and suppression of nestin immunoreactivity , suggesting that neurosphere-derived cells can be committed to a neuronal lineage. additionally, our flow cytometric data  indicate that, on average, less than 4% of cells in neurosphere cultures are apoptotic, suggesting that a majority of cells are viable in this culture model.

ethanol exposure activates cell cycle activity in primary cortical neurosphere cultures and does not lead to apoptosis
consistent with the above data, morphometric analyses indicate that ethanol significantly increased the density of neurospheres per field . analysis of variance followed by post-hoc statistical analyses indicated that ethanol induced a dose-related increase in the density of neurospheres . we observed a moderate but statistically significant correlation  of  <dig>  ) between ethanol dose and density of neurospheres in the culture dish. when we controlled for the effect of neurosphere size on the density of neurospheres , the partial correlation coefficient between ethanol dose and neurosphere number increased . while an overall analysis of variance indicated that ethanol did not statistically increase neurosphere size , ethanol did lead to a ~2-fold increase in variation in neurosphere size at  <dig> mg/dl and a ~3-fold increase at  <dig> mg/dl within the culture dish, as indicated by an increase in the variance measure . therefore, ethanol-treated cultures exhibited a high degree of variability in neurosphere size compared to untreated cultures, and some of the neurospheres in ethanol treated cultures were extremely large . it is possible that the ethanol-associated increased size and growth rate of neurospheres may translate into decreased viability of stem and progenitor pools within the neurosphere. however, this scenario is unlikely to be true since the overall rate of cell death was unchanged by treatment condition . hence, these data collectively support the hypothesis that ethanol induced cell cycle in neurosphere cultures. one interesting observation was that ethanol-exposed neurospheres loose their spherical shape and exhibit irregular edges, suggesting either a structural disorganization of the neurosphere, perhaps due to variable growth rates within different parts of an individual neurosphere, or alternatively, the merging together of smaller neurospheres.

our observation that ethanol-treated neurospheres exhibited increased heterogeneity in size and assumed a disorganized shape over time suggested that ethanol may promote differential responses among cells within an individual neurosphere. we therefore dissociated neurospheres , and cultured individual cells in mitogenic medium with or without ethanol  to determine if individual cortical precursors could regenerate neurospheres. over a four-day treatment period, control  and ethanol-treated neural progenitors  proliferated symmetrically, to generate morphologically similar daughter cells , and ultimately to generate new neurospheres over a 72-hour period . under the mitogenic conditions used , we only observed symmetrical cell division in control cultures. however, in contrast to control cultures, ethanol-treated neurospheres also exhibited an asymmetric mode of division, where one daughter cell assumed a more differentiated morphology compared to its mitotic partner . one of the asymmetrically dividing pair of cells tended to be non-motile, while the second daughter cell exhibited extensive somatic motility  over a period of  <dig> hours. in a majority of cases, the more morphologically differentiated member of the asymmetrically dividing pair assumed a stellate morphology. occasionally, one of the pair of asymmetrically dividing daughter cells transiently expressed elongated, radial-glia-like processes , before assuming a stellate appearance, despite the continued presence of mitogenic medium.

the presence of asymmetric cell division events in ethanol-treated cultures suggested that ethanol forces progenitor cell maturation, potentially depleting the numbers of self-replicating progenitors in neurosphere cultures. therefore, we next determined the extent to which ethanol altered the future proliferation capacity of neural progenitor cells. we treated neurospheres with ethanol for four days; then dissociated the neurospheres into single cells that were cultured in mitogenic medium for two days. prior exposure to ethanol led to a statistically significant  dose-related decline in the numbers of clonal colonies that were formed from dissociated cells, suggesting that a prior episode of ethanol ultimately depletes the proliferative capacity of cortical progenitors.

ethanol suppresses cell-surface stem cell marker expression but not nestin mrna expression in neurospheres
neurosphere cultures consist of a heterogeneous mixture of immature neuronal stem cells and more differentiated daughter neuroblasts  <cit> . based on our observations that ethanol promoted cell cycle activity, we hypothesized that ethanol would also lead to an aberrant expansion of the stem cell pool in neurosphere cultures. in the initial set of experiments, we utilized flow-cytometry to examine the expression of three stem cell markers, sca- <dig> , cd117/c-kit and cd133/prominin- <dig>  figure  <dig> shows that these stem cell antigens are expressed in vitro in control proliferating neurosphere cultures. however, contrary to our hypothesis, we observed a large and statistically significant decrease in the numbers of cells expressing sca- <dig> , cd117/c-kit  and cd133/prominin- <dig>  on their cell surface, after treatment with ethanol at  <dig> mg/dl . increasing the dose of ethanol did not lead to a further reduction in stem cell antigen expression.

we wanted to examine the extent to which ethanol suppression of cell-surface stem cell marker expression was a generalized phenomenon that could be observed with other, more selective, stem-cell markers. therefore, in our next experiment we examined the expression of the atp-binding multidrug transporter abcg <dig>  an integral membrane protein that identifies stem cells in many tissues including the nervous system  <cit> , and is considered a reliable marker for stem cells  <cit> . we examined the cellular expression of abcg <dig> by flow cytometry in neurosphere cultures exposed to ethanol at the same dosages and time period. figure 7a shows that ethanol significantly reduced the number of live cells that expressed abcg <dig> immunofluorescence after  <dig> days . these data suggest that ethanol does indeed suppress the expression of a specific cell-surface stem cell marker in neurosphere cultures.

in contrast to the above cell-surface markers, nestin is an intermediate filament protein that is expressed by both stem and progenitor cells within neurospheres , and levels decline in differentiated post-mitotic neurons  <cit> . we hypothesized that if ethanol suppressed the expression of cell-surface stem cell markers, it would similarly suppress the expression of mrna for nestin. however, semi-quantitative rt-pcr analysis  showed that there was no change in nestin mrna expression  following ethanol exposure. these data suggest that while ethanol may not decrease the overall size of the precursor pool , it decreases the diversity of stem cells within this pool .

ethanol reduces telomerase reverse transcriptase  mrna levels in neurosphere cultures
telomerase reverse transcriptase  has been shown by others to function as a neuroprotective factor in developing neurons. therefore, we tested the hypothesis that ethanol targets tert transcription in progenitor neuroblasts. reverse transcription pcr  shows that tert mrna levels were modestly but statistically significantly increased  at the low ethanol dosage . conversely, high levels of ethanol  produced a statistically significant decrease in tert mrna levels. we hypothesized that the ethanol-induced changes in tert mrna levels would lead to changes in the activity of telomerase complex itself. however, quantitative measurements of telomerase activity indicate that low and high doses of ethanol do not affect the activity of the telomerase complex . the cycle threshold values in the low and high ethanol-treated groups were identical, reflecting equal amounts of telomerase activity in each sample. the increase in tert transcription following low doses of ethanol  was not followed by a measurable increase in telomerase activity, an unexpected observation in light of the marked induction of dna synthesis and cell-cycle progression illustrated in figure 2a, b. these results suggest that ethanol may uncouple telomerase activation from neuroepithelial cell proliferation.

ethanol prevents subsequent differentiation of cells derived from neurosphere cultures
in the final set of experiments, we examined the effect of ethanol on the subsequent differentiation potential of cortical progenitor cells. we hypothesized that ethanol induction of cell proliferation, would alter the ability of cortical progenitors to differentiate into neurons. rat neurosphere cultures we maintained in control medium or exposed to the low or moderate doses of ethanol  for  <dig> days. following this period of ethanol exposure, we dissociated neurospheres and cultured the constituent cells at low density in the presence of  <dig> nm retinoic acid. neurosphere-derived cells were cultured at low density so that individual cells would have a low probability of contacting another cell. this protocol was followed to reduce the impact of cell-cell interactions and target-derived trophic support mechanisms on neuronal differentiation. we selected retinoic acid as the differentiation stimulus, since previous work in our laboratory showed that retinoic acid is a strong trigger for cortical neuroepithelial differentiation  <cit> . overall, ethanol pre-exposure led to a significant dose-related decline in the number of first-order  and second-order  branches that were induced following retinoic acid exposure . naïve cells, and cells derived from neurospheres pre-exposed to the low dose of ethanol  exhibited a strong differentiation phenotype in response to retinoic acid , including the expression of second-order neurite branching. however, cells derived from neurospheres pre-exposed to  <dig> mg/dl exhibited a marked reduction in neurite branching in response to retinoic acid .

discussion
our data show that ethanol did not induce appreciable apoptosis in embryonic cortical-derived neurosphere cultures. these data are somewhat surprising because the activation of cell death mechanisms is intuitively consistent with ethanol's adverse effects on brain development. however, ethanol induction of cell death may be differentiation stage-specific. for example, previous research in our laboratory demonstrated that ethanol concentrations equal to those used in this study induced apoptosis in more differentiated postnatal cortical  <cit> , and cerebellar explant cultures  <cit> , perhaps because tumor-suppressor genes like p <dig>  and down-stream pro-apoptotic genes like bax are suppressed in proliferating cortical cells and only induced during differentiation  <cit> . clearly, more research is needed to identify genes and mechanisms that confer apoptosis-resistance to precursors, but not differentiated neuronal cells.

ethanol promotes cell-cycle activity
rather than killing cells, ethanol stimulated dna synthesis and promoted cell-cycle progression in cerebral cortical precursors as indicated by the increase in the size variation and number of neurospheres, induction of s-phase, and increased progression through g2/m phases of the cell cycle. on the other hand, ethanol induced asymmetric division in progenitor cells and decreased the cell surface expression of a number of stem cell markers, i.e., c-kit/cd <dig>  sca- <dig> , cd133/prominin- <dig> and the abcg <dig> transporter. in contrast to the induction of cell cycle, asymmetric cell division and loss of stem cell antigens are both indicative of neuroepithelial maturation. these apparently antagonistic data are best explained within the context of normal cerebral cortex development. neurogenesis in the developing cerebral cortex, occurs within two distinct germinal zones, the earlier developing ventricular zone, and the later developing subventricular zone. proliferation within the ventricular zone serves to replenish stem and blast pools  and to generate more mature, fate-restricted daughter progeny . the ethanol-induced asymmetric division and loss of stem cell markers supports the notion that ethanol induces maturation of the stem cell pool. the daughter blast cells or 'proto-neurons' that exit the ventricular zone, migrate in turn to the subventricular zone where they may continue to proliferate and generate neurons, principally by symmetrical division  <cit> . the increased proliferation that we observed in ethanol-treated cultures may therefore reflect the expansion of a 'subventricular-zone-like phenotype'. recent evidence suggests that the first blast cells that migrate out of the ventricular zone are in fact radial glia, and that these cells are also precursors for mature neurons . this view is consistent with our observations that asymmetric division occasionally resulted in the appearance of polarized cells with long  processes that fit morphological criteria for radial glia. further support for this 'two-zone' hypothesis of ethanol's action comes from our observations that ethanol treatment does ultimately deplete the regenerative capacity of cortical neuroepithelial precursors. cells derived from ethanol-pretreated neurospheres exhibited a decreased ability to form new colonies, implying that the loss of stem cell markers does indeed mean that ethanol depletes stem cells from the pool of immature precursors.

overall, this interpretation of these data in terms of stem cell maturation is also consistent with previously published work from other laboratories using alternate labeling indices, showing that ethanol decreases cell proliferation within the ventricular zone, while increasing cell proliferation within the more differentiated subventricular zone  <cit> . increased cell proliferation is a requirement for differentiation in other tissues as well. for example, in the hematopoietic system, the differentiation of cd34+ stem cells into pro-erythroblasts is accompanied by a significant increase in cell cycle. this induction of cell cycle supports successive stages of blast maturation, till the formation of the orthochromatophilic erythroblast, the immediate blast precursor to the differentiated erythrocyte  <cit> .

the consequences of enhanced proliferation on neural differentiation remain to be determined. the diversity of cellular subpopulations that contribute to the lamination of the cortical plate is likely to be disrupted, leading to an overabundance of some neuroblast populations at the expense of others. such population imbalances may be one cause of phenomena like cellular heterotopias that have been observed in brains of children with fas  <cit> , and in animal models of fas  <cit> . while in vitro models suggest that migration defects contribute to the formation of heterotopias  <cit> , the role of aberrant ethanol-driven expansion of specific progenitor pools in heterotopia formation cannot be ruled out.

ethanol limits cortical stem cell diversity in neurosphere cultures
neurosphere cultures consist of a heterogeneous mixture of multi-potent neuronal stem cells and daughter neuroblasts  <cit> . cd133/prominin- <dig> identifies stem cell groups with multi-potent properties in the developing central nervous system of humans and rodents  <cit> . sca- <dig>  identifies hematopoietic cells with the potential to form neurons, while cd117/c-kit  <cit>  and the abcg <dig> multi drug-resistance transporter  <cit>  are expressed in stem cell precursors of the rodent central nervous system. we demonstrate that populations of cortical precursors do express these stem cell markers. nestin mrna was also expressed in cultured cortical precursors, but nestin mrna levels did not change with ethanol exposure, indicating that despite maturational pressure, immature, possibly blast-type cells continue to persist in ethanol-treated cultures. however nestin mrna expression is not informative about the extent to which ethanol affects the heterogeneity of stem cells in culture, because nestin expression is a common phenotype of stem and more differentiated blast cells. in contrast, ethanol significantly decreased the numbers of cells that expressed cell-surface sca- <dig>  c-kit, cd <dig> and abcg <dig>  the absence of an appreciable degree of apoptosis in ethanol-treated cultures, suggests that ethanol influences the diversity of the stem cell pool, rather than cell survival per se. in the context of the previously noted requirement for cell cycle induction as a component of stem cell to blast cell transformation  <cit> , it is interesting to note that the suppression of the stem cell marker sca- <dig>  <cit> ) promotes myoblast proliferation. consequently, our observations that ethanol induces cell cycle and decreases the expression of stem cell markers is mutually consistent with the hypothesis that ethanol drives stem cell to blast cell transformation in cortical neuroepithelial precursors.

the functions ascribed to the stem cell markers that we utilized in this study are particularly relevant to the issue of ethanol's impact on cell fate determination. for example, cd <dig> and c-kit are important components of lipid raft micro-domains  <cit> , that sequester cell-signaling machinery. in bone marrow, stem cell factor/c-kit interactions form a critical component of stromal-driven differentiation of several hematopoietic lineages  <cit> . therefore, changes in the composition of lipid rafts are likely to result in significant alterations to signaling mechanisms that drive stem cell differentiation, and in the brain, lead to aberrant development. sca- <dig> is also a signaling molecule, linked to the cell-surface by a phosphatidyl-inositol anchor, and is important for stimulating hematopoietic stem cell renewal  <cit> . sca- <dig> expression is suppressed in hematopoietic stem cells, during the process of lymphocyte differentiation  <cit> . while sca- <dig> may well exhibit different developmental-stage associated kinetics in the neuroepithelium, ethanol-dependent depletion of sca- <dig> in the neuroepithelium may similarly drive precursor maturation and prevent the renewal of a stem cell pool. interestingly, both sca- <dig>  <cit>  and cd117/c-kit  <cit>  share the src-like tyrosine kinase fyn as a common signaling intermediary, suggesting that the two cell-surface molecules mediate common functions during development. fyn in turn, mediates ethanol-sensitivity and dependence in the adult animal, and a fyn polymorphism is predictive of alcohol dependence in human populations  <cit> , further suggesting that ethanol's effects in the developing and adult brain are likely to be mediated by common mechanisms. finally, ethanol suppression of the expression of multi-drug resistance transporters like abcg <dig> is also likely to be clinically significant. multi-drug resistance transporters are thought to protect stem cells from damage by non-selectively extruding a wide variety of cytotoxic compounds  <cit> . ethanol exposure, by suppressing abcg <dig> expression, may decrease the survivability of neural stem cells in the face of subsequent toxic insults, including perhaps, subsequent episodes of ethanol exposure.

ethanol's effect on telomerase activity and tert transcription
rapidly dividing tissues are susceptible to errors in dna synthesis that can lead to dna damage, chromosomal instability and cell death. the telomerase complex maintains chromosomal ends, and consequently ensures chromosome stability during dna synthesis . telomerase activity is robust during embryogenesis  <cit>  and is particularly elevated in the proliferating neuroepithelium. though activity is decreased following cellular differentiation, the catalytic component of telomerase  continues to be expressed widely in post-mitotic neurons where it appears to function as a neuroprotective factor  <cit> . the lower dose of ethanol  resulted in increased tert mrna levels, perhaps as a compensatory protective response. in contrast, the suppression of tert mrna expression at high doses  is inconsistent with the observed increase in cell cycle progression at that dose. interestingly, tert physically associates with the anti-apoptotic kinase akt  <cit> , and a reduction in tert expression levels has the potential to render dividing cortical precursors susceptible to future apoptotic stimuli, , even if ethanol itself does not induce apoptosis.

because we observed that ethanol increased cell cycle activity in neurosphere cultures, we hypothesized that ethanol would also increase telomerase activity. surprisingly, ethanol had no effect on telomerase activity. the lack of coordination between telomerase activity and changes in cell cycle activity suggests that dna synthesis is likely to be incomplete in telomeric regions, increasing genomic instability in proliferating, ethanol-exposed neuroblasts. recent research indicates that the prenatal rodent neuroepithelium normally exhibits a significant degree of genetic mosaicism in which 33% of all cortical precursors display some degree of chromosomal aneuploidy  <cit>  and loss of heterozygosity  <cit> . it is surprising that the developing neuroepithelium tolerates such a significant degree of genetic instability without negative sequellae. however, given a high tolerance for mosaicism, any increases in genetic instability among ethanol-exposed cells of the neuroepithelium may not result in apoptosis, but in altered patterns of gene expression due to mechanisms like gene shedding  <cit> , consequently altering neural differentiation. an intriguing possibility, supported by the discrepancy between telomerase and cell cycle data, is that the accumulation of progenitors with greater than g <dig> dna content in ethanol-treated cultures represents increased aneuploidy rather than increased progression through cell cycle per se.

ethanol pre-treatment prevents stimulus-dependent neuronal differentiation
the loss of stem cell markers, and evidence for increased cell division led us to hypothesize that ethanol exposure would promote the further maturation of the cortical stem and blast cells. however, contrary to our hypothesis, ethanol pre-treated neural progenitor cells were refractory to retinoic acid stimulation. though retinoic acid is a potent stimulator of neuronal differentiation  <cit> , it appears to have growth-stimulatory effects in part, by stimulating neurotrophic signaling via factors like glial-derived neurotrophic factor and neurotrophin- <dig>  <cit> . since ethanol has been previously shown to interfere with growth factor signaling mechanisms in a variety of neural differentiation models  <cit> , it is likely that ethanol disrupts growth factor signaling to interfere with the response to retinoic acid as well. the developmental consequences of delays in neuronal differentiation are likely to be profound. even if the effect of ethanol is transient, the inside-out lamination of the cortical plate is likely to be significantly disrupted, because later-generated neural precursors do not appear to be able to populate earlier-developing cortical plate laminae, after the critical period for the generation of that specific lamina has been passed  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
in toto, our data support the hypothesis that the elimination of neural stem cell diversity contributes to the etiology of prenatal brain damage caused by maternal ethanol consumption. rather than inducing apoptosis, ethanol stimulates cell-cycle activity and eliminates stem cell antigen expression. it is likely therefore, that ethanol drives the stem cell to blast cell transformation, ultimately depleting the reserve regenerative capacity of cerebral cortical neuroepithelium. secondly, the uncoupling of telomerase activity from cell-cycle induction suggests that ethanol exposure may hasten telomere decay and cellular senescence, rendering maturing neuroblasts susceptible to genetic damage as they proceed through cycles of maturation-driven proliferation. finally, if the ventricular and subventricular zones are indeed 'proto-maps' of the mature cortical plate  <cit> , restrictions in the diversity of the stem cell pool are likely to translate into loss of diversity of neuronal and glial phenotypes that populate the mature cortical plate. while the developmental consequences of perturbing the cortical stem cell pool have not been adequately assessed in experimental systems of ethanol-induced brain damage, one likely sequel to such perturbations is a permanent transformation in the phenotypic composition of the neural network of the cerebral cortex.

