BACKGROUND
vegetable oils are currently used as food, feedstock for the chemical industry and as liquid biofuels . the demand for vegetable oils for bio-fuel production has increased enormously in recent years due to increased costs and instable and finite supplies of fossil fuels, and the desire to reduce greenhouse gas  emissions. in addition to traditional oilseed crops, a number of new species are now being explored for the purpose of bio-fuel production. jatropha  is one of these new species and has received much attention as a source of renewable oil for the production of sustainable and affordable biofuels. despite the recent interest in jatropha, it essentially still is a wild species that has not benefitted yet from programmes of crop improvement. the agronomy of the species, now treated as an agricultural crop, is still poorly understood. this sudden boom in jatropha has therefore led to an unbalanced development, with a fast implementation of large plantations and processing units, while essential questions around jatropha crop growth, crop management and production have not been addressed adequately. wild jatropha accessions were used to setup plantations, often not well adapted to local environments and local production systems. maladaptation of jatropha accessions to the new use has often led to inadequate seed and oil yields per hectare. the challenge is to develop well adapted, robust, high yielding jatropha varieties for a range of climates and agrosystems, since only high seed and oil per hectare will guarantee a good profitability and a high ghg emission reduction  <cit> . wide genetic variation is required in breeding for major agronomically important traits like seed and oil yield, seed and oil composition, flowering behaviour, tree morphology, disease resistance and the absence of anti-nutritional factors that currently block the use of jatropha seed meal in animal feeding. plant breeding programs need such genetic variation to be able to combine positive traits from different parents to provide the required profitable and sustainable jatropha varieties of the future.

jatropha is a perennial tree or shrub that produces fruits containing seeds rich in oil  <cit> . it grows in semi-arid tropical and subtropical climates, does not tolerate frost, and flowers only under specific temperature, radiation and phenological conditions  <cit> . the oil and derivatives of the oil are very suitable as a bio-fuel  <cit> . most simply, the oil can be used without modification in the form of pure plant or vegetable oil to fuel stationary diesel engines. if the oil is esterified with methanol, the resulting methyl esters of jatropha oil form bio-diesel, which can replace or be mixed with fossil oil based diesel.

not much is known about genetic diversity in jatropha curcas and this hampers breeding of jatropha towards varieties with higher value as energy crop and with better adaptation to different forms of abiotic and biotic stresses. before its use as a bio-energy crop, jatropha was used for medicinal products, and as a live fence around arable land. because the plant is toxic, animals do not eat the plant. therefore, a dense jatropha hedge keeps animals out of arable land and protects arable crops against animal grazing. the plant was also used to obtain plant oil for the production of soap  <cit> . for these traditional purposes naturally occurring ecotypes were used. only recently, the use of jatropha as a bio-energy crop has started on the basis of such existing ecotypes without any plant breeding for bio-energy production related traits. with respect to bio-energy production, jatropha still has to be considered an undomesticated wild species  <cit> .

genetic diversity in jatropha curcas was found to be very low in asian, african and south american  germplasm  <cit> . tang et al. <cit>  used a set of six amplified fragment length polymorphism  primer combinations that yielded  <dig> aflp-markers to analyse genetic variation in asian j. curcas accessions and found low genetic variation in material from china. also in south america, the reported genetic variation is limited  <cit> . south and central america have been reported as centres of biodiversity and possible centres of origin for j. curcas, since it is believed that jatropha was native in america only. the portuguese collected jatropha in america and took the plant to cape verde, south-africa, madagascar, india and finally to indonesia. it is conceivable that only a very low number of genotypes of jatropha was collected and transferred to africa and asia and that this is the cause of the low level of genetic variation in africa and asia. if this is true, it is expected that genetic variation in south and central america is much higher than in asia and africa. however, only few studies have reported the extent of genetic variation of jatropha germplasm from all these continents simultaneously  <cit> . recent studies on genetic diversity have found high genetic variation in material from chiapas mexico, which shares a border with guatemala, indicating high genetic variation in this region  <cit> . genetic diversity in this species has mainly been analysed at the molecular marker level. it is much more interesting to relate relevant traits for bio-energy production to the molecular variation, but detailed analyses on this are lacking so far.

in this study, we analysed the genetic variation in the collection of the jatropha curcas evaluation programme  in order to identify new genetic variation to be used in breeding programs of jatropha. the jep collection contains  <dig> accessions from asia , africa , south-america  and central america . the analysis of genetic variation included analysis of molecular marker variation, variation in seed traits , and early growth traits.

RESULTS
molecular variation
using a set of ssrs  <cit>  in the jep collection, polymorphisms for  <dig> ssrs were found. using trap-pcr with  <dig>  ssr-primers from non-polymorphic ssrs,  <dig> additional polymorphisms were identified. aflp analysis of the jep collection yielded  <dig> polymorphic bands with  <dig> primer combinations. the polymorphic ssrs, trap-primers and aflp yielded  <dig> polymorphic dna-markers among the accessions in the jep collection .

allele frequencies and pic values in ssr makers
using the published ssr-primers we found the same fragment lengths as reported in literature. the percentage of ssrs with polymorphisms was 32% in the set of accessions from africa, 58% for the set from asia, 79% for the set from south america and 89% for the set of accessions from central america. the mean number of alleles per polymorphic ssr was for  <dig>  for africa,  <dig>  for asia,  <dig>  for south america and  <dig>  for central america. the pic  values from the different ssr markers were higher in the set of central american accessions .

genetic structure of jep collection related to region of origin
the markers scores of  <dig> dna markers were used to determine the genetic distances between  <dig> accessions in the jep collection using jaccard’s coefficient and upgma clustering analysis. the average jaccard’s similarity coefficient was  <dig>  , indicating high genetic diversity in the jep collection. using the genetic distance, a neighbour joining tree was constructed that groups genetically similar accessions and separates genetically dissimilar accessions . a group of  <dig> accessions, mainly from asia and africa, did not show molecular polymorphisms for any of the  <dig> dna markers for which the other accessions were polymorphic, which indicates that these accessions are genetically identical for these dna markers. the other accessions from asia, africa and south america showed more polymorphisms, but are nonetheless highly genetically similar to the group of  <dig> accessions that were genetically identical. in contrast, a high level of polymorphism with these dna markers was found for the accessions from central america .

fst-values indicated that the groups of south american and asian accessions hardly differ genetically, but a moderate level of genetic difference was found between the groups of asian and african accessions . this is not surprising in view of the large number of asian, african and south american accessions without any polymorphisms for the dna markers analysed. fst-values between central american accessions and other regions  showed large to moderate genetic differentiation. amova results were significant  and indicated a high percentage of genetic variation within geographical regions  and a much lower extent of genetic variation across regions .

***fst >  <dig>  indicates large genetic differentiation.

**fst between  <dig>  and  <dig>  indicates moderate genetic differentiation.

*fst between  <dig>  and  <dig>  little genetic differentiation.

 fst <  <dig>  indicates negligible genetic differentiation.

fixation index  between the geographical regions of central and south america, asia and africa.

pca on the basis of the dna-marker data shows a clear separation between accessions from central america and the ones from africa, asia and south america . the pca shows four different clusters. the accessions from central america are separated into three highly differentiated clusters . most of the accessions from africa, asia and south america occur in one single cluster . cluster a mainly contains accessions from the south and south east regions of guatemala. cluster b has a mixture of accessions from the northern and southern regions of guatemala. cluster c has mixture of accessions from central america with one south american and one african accession, and cluster d contains the majority of accessions from africa, asia, south america, and only very few from central america.

the analysis of the population by structure  <dig> . <dig>  <cit>  indicated two main populations  can be distinguished, which are visualized in the cluster analysis in figure  <dig>  one group exclusively contains accessions from central america and the other group contains accessions from central america, asia, africa and south america.

seed and seedling traits
seed weight, seed hull and seed oil content
the average seed weight of the accessions in the jep collection ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig>  g per seed. seed hull percentage ranged between 32%. and 52%. the average oil content in the seed  of the accessions varied between  <dig> and 40% of the whole seed . the average seed oil content of all accessions was 28% with no significant differences between the regions.

seed oil fatty acid composition
fatty acid composition of the seed oil showed large variation in the jep collection. the content of palmitic acid  showed significant differences between regions ; accessions from south america showed the highest percentages , followed by accessions from africa , asia  and central america  . the content of stearic acid  did not show significant differences between regions . palmitoleic acid  contents were very low, but the small differences between regions were statistically significant . accessions from asia, africa and south america showed similar values between  <dig> - <dig> % of oleic acid content , whereas accessions from central america showed significantly lower c18: <dig> content . the linoleic acid content  of accessions from central america was significantly higher  than that of accessions from asia, africa and south america . α-linolenic acid  levels were very low  for all regions . the ranges of fatty acid contents of c18: <dig> and c18: <dig> were high in all regions , but these ranges were highest for central america. this is also reflected in the higher coefficients of genetic variation  in central america than in the other regions for c18: <dig> and c18: <dig>  the sum of c18: <dig> and c18: <dig> was rather constant at about 78%.

a. fatty acid percentage. b. coefficient of variation of the fatty acid between regions. c. fatty acids range  in different regions.

seedling growth and morphology
significant and large genetic variation was found between accessions in the jep collection for almost all of the observed early growth and morphology traits . a fast early growth is very beneficial as it is one of the factors positively influencing the yield of seed and oil in the first year of establishment. a positive correlation  was found between all biomass variables  and plant height, first leaf length and width and total leaf area and absolute growth rate. the broad sense heritability  of most traits was high , except for cotyledon number and petiole weight . table  <dig> shows the variability for phenotypic traits between the regions in the jep collection. central american accessions, on average, had the highest total growth rates . also, for most traits, the coefficient of genetic variation was highest in the set of central american accessions. especially for total leaf area and for root and petiole dry weight, but not for total above ground dry weight for which the coefficient of genetic variation was not highest in central america.

no significant difference between accessions for petiole dry weights .

rgr, rue and nar differences statistically significant at p <  <dig> .

difference for all other traits statistically significant at p <  <dig> .

note: rgr = lwr*sla*nar .

means over all accessions, minimum, maximum values of accession means, genetic standard deviation  and genetic coefficient of variation , broad sense heritability .

cvg is the coefficient of genetic variation . plant height and plant weights were determined 59 days after germination.

relative growth rate  and its components
rgr ranged from  <dig> - <dig>  d− <dig> between accessions . rgr averages per country ranged from  <dig> - <dig>  d− <dig> . no significant differences in the average rgr between the  <dig> regions  were observed  . significant differences were found for specific leaf area  and ranged from  <dig> to 416 cm2 g− <dig> . leaf weight ratio  also showed significant differences  and ranged from 34% to 55% among all individual accessions . variation between accessions for net assimilation rate  correlated highly with variation in rgr  and in rue .

* = statistically significant at p <  <dig> .

ns = non-significant, p >  <dig> ; rgr differences between the top two countries  and bottom two countries  are significant in pairwise comparisons, although the overall analysis of variance shows no significant differences between countries.

rgr is the relative growth rate. sla is the specific leaf area. lwr is the leaf weight ratio as percentage of total plant weight and nar is the calculated net assimilation rate. for each region, the countries are sorted according to increasing rgr.

relating phenotypic variation in early growth traits to molecular variation
population analysis based on phenotypic variation in early growth traits showed significant variation between accessions from the different regions. a dendrogram based on euclidean distances showed four different groups . the largest group b contains the majority of accessions from asia and africa, all accessions from south america and few accessions from central america. group a and d are composed by few accessions from asia, africa and central america and group c only contains accessions from central america.

a mantel-test between the molecular marker and the phenotypic early growth trait similarity matrices showed a low but significant  correlation between the genetic and phenotypic similarity matrices indicating that the genetic structure of the jep collection  is reflected also in the phenotypic variation .

discussion
this is the first published comprehensive study of jatropha curcas biodiversity among a world wide collection of accessions that assesses both molecular genetic variation nd variation in phenotypic traits. large phenotypic variation between jatropha accessions in the world-wide jep collection was observed in plant characteristics like early growth traits, flowering type, tree architecture and leaf shape and size. most phenotypic variation was found among accessions from central america . it was at first unknown whether this variation was only due to environmental variation or due to genetic factors.

the dna marker analysis showed that the large phenotypic variation in the jep collection is accompanied by a large genetic variation at the genome level. in previous studies in which some of the ssrs used here were developed, no ssr polymorphisms could be found in the  jatropha accessions  <cit> . in our study we find a high degrees of polymorphism for the same ssrs in the total jep collection. pic values  were higher in the set of accessions from central america than in sets from other regions. the low pic values for asia found here, where the pic-values were even  <dig> for some markers, confirm the low level of genetic variation in accessions from asia previously found by others . this was consistent with the fact that  <dig> accessions from asia and africa did not show any polymorphism for the markers evaluated.

cluster analysis by upgma  and pca  demonstrated that accessions from asia, africa and south america were genetically highly similar, and cluster together in both analyses. still, amova and fst-values indicated that variation is present within accessions from all four regions, but is highest in the set of central american accessions. central american accessions did not show a clear geographical distribution in the different cluster analyses , which indicates that the central american accessions do not form isolated populations, but can be regarded as a large inter-mating population in which a high level of genetic variation has been maintained. pca analysis, however, showed four groups: one cluster of mainly asian, africa and south-american accessions and three clusters of guatemalan accessions. these three guatemalan clusters show three distinct genetic groups; one with partial geographical separation, but two groups contain accessions from geographical regions in guatemala that are widely apart. this shows that different genetically distinct types of jatropha occur, but that the genetic distinction does not follow a strict geographical separation in guatemala. the absence of a clear geographical separation between distinct types might be due to migration of farmers within guatemala. farmers, using jatropha as a hedge for cattle, took along jatropha cuttings and seeds when migrating to new areas  <cit> .

not only do accessions differ in their genetic constitution, but also show wide variation in phenotypic traits like seed hull, oil concentration and fatty acid composition. interestingly, in the group of accessions from asia and africa that did not show differences at the genetic level - as inferred from the total absence of polymorphisms in dna-markers - still variation in early growth traits and morphological traits was found. apparent genetic differences between accessions that do not differ in dna-marker profile have been reported in other studies from asia for in traits like seed weight and seed oil content  <cit> , the seeds of the different accessions were produced in the country of origin of the accessions and therefore environmental differences within and between the countries of origin may also have caused the differences  <cit> . fatty acid composition also varied between accessions, especially with respect to the ratio of c18: <dig> to c18: <dig>  the content of saturated fatty acid  and unsaturated fatty acid  in the seed oil did not differ much between the regions . this high content of ufa was also observed in other studies, for example in accessions from mexico with ufa percentages between 74–83%  <cit> . the relatively low sfa is an advantage of jatropha oil compared to palm oil as it gives a lower cloud point when making biodiesel from the oil. a too high ufa content can increase the oxidative instability of biodiesel and for that reason it is important to breed varieties with a higher c18: <dig> content as this has the advantage of giving a lower cloud point – enabling use of the biodiesel in colder areas of the world – and a higher oxidative stability compared to oil with highly unsaturated fatty acids  <cit> . the concentration of sfa and ufa  are not only controlled by genetic factors, but also by environmental conditions such  and post-harvest process conditions affect the fatty acid composition. in jatropha, altitude can affect fatty composition through effects of temperature  <cit> . in soybean, genetic differences in the effect of temperature on fatty acid profiles have been reported  <cit> , indicating that it may be important in jatropha to test genotypes in environments with different temperatures in order to select genotypes with a stable, desired fatty acid composition across environments.

early growth evaluation under greenhouse condition showed phenotypic variation and high heritability values for almost all the seedling traits . this indicates a high level of genetic variation in the variation of these traits. surprisingly, the large group of asian and african accessions with no or only few polymorphisms in dna-markers, also showed a considerable variation in early growth traits. this phenomenon of highly variable growth traits is also observed in many jatropha field experiments and commercial plantations, even when seed from a single genetic source was used. a possible explanation for such phenotypic variation among accessions that do not show differences in dna-markers might lie in epigenetic variation, for example through differences in dna-methylation that do not lead to differences in the nucleotide sequence of the dna, but can lead to differences in expression of the methylated genes. such epigenetic variation has been reported in jatropha  <cit> .

although variation for early growth traits in the genetically uniform asian accessions was found, the variation for the early growth traits was much higher in the group of central american accessions . the group of central american accessions not only had the highest level of genetic variation for the traits compared to other groups, but also showed significantly higher early growth rates, resulting in higher total leaf areas, dry weights, and plant heights. these traits that lead to larger and stronger plants are important for surviving the first stages in the field after transplanting, especially under dry conditions , and for taking advantage of short precipitation periods.

specific leaf area values  ranged from  <dig> to 416 cm2 g− <dig> and leaf weight ratio  from  <dig> to 55% among all individual accessions. these ranges are smaller if average values per country are calculated . the range among accessions of the calculated net assimilation rate  was large:  <dig> - <dig>  g m <dig> d− <dig>  nar was highly positively correlated with the relative growth rate . sla and lwr were negatively correlated to rgr and nar. differences in sla explained 19% and differences in lwr explained 40% of the variation in rgr. a highly negative correlation between sla and nar was found . a negative correlation between nar and sla has also been reported in other plant species  <cit> . a high sla implies a thinner leaf and a lower density of nitrogen and chlorophyll per area of leaf. therefore, the photosynthetic capacity per leaf area for plants with low sla is usually lower than for plants with a higher sla. the calculated nar reflects such differences in photosynthetic capacity to assimilate co <dig>  a high nar is beneficial, as a higher photosynthesis rate is the basis for a higher growth rate at the same light interception fraction. a high sla can also be beneficial in situations with lower light levels, for instance in intercropping systems where different species are combined and competition for light may be present. a plant with a high sla  may expand its leaf area at a higher rate than a plant with a lower sla, as it needs less dry matter to produce the same amount of leaf area, leading to a higher light interception capacity. this study shows that in j. curcas genetic variation occurs in both sla and nar, but also shows the trade-off between the two, as expressed in rgr .

sla proved to be highly negatively correlated with dry matter content of leaves . this relation is not fully unexpected. the amount of leaf area per amount of leaf dry matter reflects two aspects of leaf morphology: the thickness of the leaf and the density of the leaf. the density of the leaf is the amount of dry matter per volume of leaf. at the same density, leaf thickness and sla will show a strictly positive and linear relation. at the same thickness, density and sla will be positively related. one cause of variation in density is variation in the water content of the leaf. clearly the density of dry matter increases when the dry matter content of the leaf increases. apparently, such variation in density is present in the studied set of accessions under greenhouse conditions, and this variation in density caused associated changes in sla. a high level of genetic variation was found for rgr and its components sla, lwr and nar in the jep collection. in order to interpret the impact of an increase in rgr by plant breeding better, it will help to realise that an increase of only 10% in rgr can result in a difference of 20% in absolute dry matter accumulation in 60 days. such improvements in early growth would be large enough to justify selection for early growth in breeding programs of jatropha curcas.

our results clearly indicate that outside central america  there is no significant genetic variation in jatropha curcas. this is supported by similar results from chiapas mexico , where high genetic variation was found in jatropha curcas <cit> . in other studies with accessions from asia, africa and south america, low to moderate variation was found  <cit> . these results also support the hypothesis that jatropha was probably distributed by portuguese seafarers from central america, through the caribbean via the cape verde islands to other countries in africa and to asia  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
in this study we found a high level of genetic variation in jatropha curcas both in terms of dna-marker polymorphisms and in phenotypic traits. the analysis of genetic variation in the jep collection showed that variation in jatropha is concentrated in central american accessions. the results obtained from the jep collection also showed that accessions from asia and africa without genetic variation for the markers evaluated in this study still show phenotypic variation. possibly, the phenotypic variation is associated with genomic areas not covered by the dna-markers used in this study, but it is very likely that epigenetic variation exists in the genetically uniform asian and african accessions that causes part of the phenotypic variation. central american accessions always showed a much higher genetic and phenotypic variation for the seed traits and early growth traits analysed than accessions from other regions. this makes central america an important source of new genetic variation in jatropha that will prove useful in widening the genetic variation available to jatropha breeding programmes.

