BACKGROUND
a central debate in neotropical biogeography concerns the importance of pleistocene climatic and geological events in generating current species richness  <cit> . molecular evidence across several taxa supports a scenario where most of the observed divergence and speciation events occurred prior to the pleistocene  <cit> , and are associated with paleogeographic events of the late miocene  <cit> . more recent studies, however, suggest a more significant role to the climatic cycles of the pleistocene than what was previously hypothesized  <cit> . in this paper we contribute to this debate by exploring the phylogeography and population history of the largest terrestrial amazonian mammal, the lowland tapir  whose genus has a history in south america confined to the pleistocene.

tapirs  were part of a community of large neotropical browsers that largely disappeared at the end of the pleistocene  <cit> . as the last representative of this community, tapirs are key actors in forest dynamics as functionally important seed dispersers and predators  <cit> , often being called forest "gardeners" or "architects"  <cit> . the genus tapirus has four extant species, the malay tapir  in south asia, and three neotropical species: the mountain tapir  in the andes' central mountains, the baird's tapir  in central america; and the lowland tapir  occupying the widest distribution, from venezuela to northern argentina, and from the brazilian atlantic forest to the ecuadorian sub-andean foothills, and variety of habitats   <cit> .

current knowledge on lowland tapir evolutionary history is based on a well-studied fossil record for the southern part of its range  <cit>  but a more sparsely explored fossil record in the amazon region. moreover, only a single study focused on estimating dates of tapirus divergence using sequence variation at the mitochondrial cytochrome oxidase ii gene  <cit> . inferences from the fossil record indicate that the genus became widespread in the nearctic by the early pleistocene  <cit> , and migrated into south america between  <dig>  to  <dig>  million years before present  during the great american biotic interchange  <cit> . the earliest south american species, t. merriami, is recorded in the marplatan south american land mammal age  in the pliocene  <cit> . then during the ensenadan salma, a number of other tapirus species co-occured in the fossil record, suggesting a wave of diversification within south american  <cit> . this pattern follows into the lujanian salma, when the genus likely experienced a second period of diversification, with several species occurring sympatrically: t. olivaresi, t cristatellus, t. mesopotamicus, t. rioplatensis, t. tarijensis  <cit> . the earliest fossil records of t. terrestris are reported at this period , in the mesopotamian region of northern argentina  <cit> . other records are more recent, in southwestern brazilian amazonia  and in northern uruguay .

morphological data suggest that t. terrestris, t. pinchaque, and t. mesopotamicus  form a monophyletic group, and t. bairdii forms a monophyletic group with north american tapirus extinct species  <cit> . thus, the fossil record in combination with morphological analyses indicate that tapirus diversified within south america during the past  <dig>  my bp, similarly to other recently arrived north american taxa  <cit> , with t. terrestris likely emerging in the late pleistocene. two other inferences can be made from the fossil record. first, as in other lowland amazonia species , the lowland tapir's origin of diversification and spread is likely western amazonia, where fossils of several distinct tapirus species , are purported to have occurred in sympatry in the past  <dig> ky bp  <cit> , indicating this region's important role in neotropical diversification during the mid to late pleistocene. second, the earliest fossil records of lowland tapir are reported for the late pleistocene in the southern range of the genus' current distribution  <cit>  indicating the range expansion of the lowland tapir was rapid.

several mechanisms of diversification have been proposed for the pleistocene  <cit> , leading to either allopatric or parapatric divergence. the refuge hypothesis proposes that a series of alternating climatic changes caused by croll-milankovitch cycles combined with the andes and other higher elevation terrains to allow for the formation of humid forest refugia interspersed by areas of dry forest and open grasslands. within the refuges, lowland forest dwelling species remained isolated, creating an opportunity for allopatric speciation, evidenced in current centers of species endemism  <cit> . such refuges during times of climate cooling have been shown to account for divergence in other parts of the world , and the hypothesis is one of the most commonly tested in biogeographic studies in amazonia . however, the existence of rainforest refugia in amazonia is controversial  <cit> , and centers of endemism, do not match well across taxa  <cit> . in addition, allopatric divergence in rainforest refugia does not seem a likely mechanism to explain divergence of the lowland tapir as the species' distribution ranges across south america  <cit>  including large areas of savanna  <cit> . allopatric divergence within amazonia has also been hypothesized to occur as a result of restricted gene flow across large rivers within the amazon basin. this "river-barrier" model predicts independent lineages occurring on opposite banks as a result of restricted gene flow  <cit> . geological data suggest that the amazon river attained its current flow during the late pleistocene  <cit> , and molecular evidence proposes that the amazon river has been a significant barrier for several taxa, including monkeys  <cit>  and carnivores  <cit> . under this scenario the river would be expected to separate independent lowland tapir lineages on either side of its banks.

finally, it is possible that divergence occurred in parapatry rather than allopatry  <cit> . the gradient hypothesis proposes that divergence can occur across steep environmental gradients without physical barriers to gene flow and predicts that sister lineages occur in adjacent habitats  <cit> . in amazonia, specific tests have rejected the gradient hypothesis in rodents  <cit>  and in birds  <cit> . nevertheless, the andean foothills provide the sharp change in ecotone assumed by the gradient hypothesis, a feature that has been used to explain why the region is a hotspot for diversification in the absence of geographic barriers  <cit> . in the case of the tapirus genus, the occurrence of mountain and lowland tapirs in adjacent habitats along the andes elevational gradient  <cit>  indicate that a gradient model of diversification is possible  <cit> . to test this hypothesis, it is necessary to demonstrate that these species are sister taxa  <cit> .

here, we examined genetic variation at cytochrome b  to investigate lowland tapir tapirus terrestris demographic and population history. we examine how molecular information regarding the early history of the genus can explain variability in the fossil data and contribute to the understanding of diversification processes in the neotropics. the lowland tapir is also an increasingly threatened species  <cit> , with a distribution that includes several ecogeographic units commonly used to identify priority areas for biodiversity conservation  <cit> . to date, it is unclear how well this conservation scheme reflects tapir history and the likely success of conservation efforts for different tapir lineages. in this regard, we apply coalescent approaches to:  determine the most likely timing of divergence among lowland tapir cytb lineages;  determine population structure of lowland tapir cytb and explore the paleogeographic events that may have contributed to this structure;  investigate the species' demographic history; and  examine how the inferred evolutionary history is currently reflected in areas of conservation priority.

RESULTS
sequence variation, phylogenic relationships and dating divergence
a total of  <dig>  unambiguous bases of the cytb gene were sequenced from three mountain tapirs from the central andes, colombia, and  <dig> lowland tapirs widely sampled across the species distribution range . in lowland tapir sequences, we observed  <dig> polymorphic sites , and a bias against guanidine . thirty-five haplotypes were identified with a mean pairwise difference of  <dig> %, hdof  <dig>  ±  <dig> , and π of  <dig>  ±  <dig> . haplotypes hte  <dig> and hte  <dig> were found at more than one sampling site: french guiana and bolivia, and peru and colombia/brazil border, respectively . finally, two polymorphic sites  were observed among the three mountain tapir sequences.

* refers to  on figure  <dig> 

the median joining haplotype network , and the gene genealogies inferred by maximum parsimony, maximum likelihood, and bayesian coalescent approach  consistently inferred a four-clade structure. in the bayesian approach, all four clades had posterior probability values >  <dig> , and all clades are represented in the strict consensus trees derived from maximum parsimony and maximum likelihood inferences. clade i groups haplotypes found in western amazonia: southeast peruvian amazon, ecuadorian amazon, colombian amazon and western brazilian amazon. clade ii, similar to clade i, includes haplotypes sampled in the ecuadorian and colombian amazon, eastern peru, and eastern colombia. clade iii clusters haplotypes from north amazonia: northern atlantic colombia, venezuelan and colombian llanos and french guiana. clade iv includes all haplotypes found from south amazonia including brazil , argentina, and bolivia, and some from eastern peruvian amazon. clade iv had the widest geographic distribution, with haplotypes occurring in three of our four defined geographic regions . finally, there was little support for reciprocal monophyly of lowland and mountain tapirs. in the haplotype network, the mountain tapir haplotypes grouped with clade ii, and in the bayesian analyses, the hypothesis that mountain tapirs have a basal position had a posterior probability of  <dig> .

using a bayesian inference framework, we took two approaches to measure the time of divergence among the four identified clades. in the first approach we used fossil data to calibrate the molecular clock with the timing of the rhinocerontidae and tapiridae split, and a well know split within rhinocerontidae. the inferred mean substitution rate was  <dig>  × 10- <dig> substitutions/site/million years, leading to the inference that divergence between the asian and the two south american tapir species occurred earlier than the pliocene . all clades within lowland tapir are estimated to have diverged some time between the mid-pliocene and the mid-pleistocene. in particular, clade i is estimated to have diverged between  <dig>  and  <dig>  my bp , followed by the split between clade ii and clade iii , and clade iv between  <dig>  and  <dig>  my bp . within the four clades, only a few subclades were strongly supported, with divergence events ranging from mid to late pleistocene . in the second analysis, we set a strong prior on the mutation rate based on estimates for perissodactyl cytb mutation rates  <cit> . this approach inferred a mean substitution rate of  <dig> ×10- <dig> substitutions/site/million years , which leads to an estimate of tmrca of lowland tapir in the mid to late pleistocene . under this scenario, the split between clades i and ii occurred before the start of the last glacial maximum  ; while clades iii and iv are estimated to have emerged more recently, possibly during the lgm .

population structure and diversity
we tested the partitioning of genetic variation across three different sampling groupings according to:  the four phylogenetic clades, as outlined above;  four geographic regions: the andean foothills, western amazonia, south amazonia and north amazonia, which largely mirror the geographic distribution of haplotypes within clades; and,  ecoregions . using amova, we found significant structuring of genetic variation for all three hypotheses of population structuring . in the first grouping,  <dig> % of the observed variation was found among groups , and resulted in significant  population differentiation across all pairwise comparisons with indices ranging from  <dig>   to  <dig>  . gene and nucleotide diversities varied among these four clades, with lower nucleotide diversity values recorded for clades iii and iv . grouping samples by the four geographic regions found  <dig> % of the observed variation among groups  . indices of nucleotide diversity were greatest in the two groups from the western amazonia region: andean foothills and western amazonia . the south amazonia group had significant pairwise population differentiation indices  to all other groups, and the same was observed between north amazonia and andean foothills groups. finally, similar levels of among-group variation to those recorded for geographic grouping were observed when partitioning by ecoregions  . nucleotide diversity estimates also varied among ecoregion units, with the highest diversity found in the rainforest ecoregion . in contrast, although low levels of genetic structure were observed among most of sampling sites, populations from the argentinean dry tropical forest and from the venezuelan llanos were significantly isolated from populations in other ecoregions .

above diagonal: fixation index . below diagonal: associated p-values.

*number refers to figures  <dig> & 3

demographic history
we explored lowland tapir demographic history across the same three different groupings of samples:  phylogenetic;  geographic, and  ecogeographic. in the phylogenetic grouping, we found significant negative values for fu's fs  and tajima's d  for clade iv, indicating population expansion . this was mirrored by the inference by bayesian skyline plot  of a two-fold population size increase occurring 15- <dig> ky bp in this clade . in clade i, only fu's fs  was significantly negative. in the geographic grouping, we observed significant negative values for fu's fs test  and the tajima's d  only for the south amazonia group. in the ecoregional grouping, significant negative values were observed with fu's fs test only, in the upper amazon  and in the southern dry forests .

phylogeography
samova was used to identify maximally differentiated genetic groupings and identify potential phylogeographic breaks. at k =  <dig>  the sampling sites from northwest of the continent , were grouped separately from all other sampling sites . at k =  <dig>  the groupings were  western samples: colombian amazon , western brazilian amazon , ecuadorian amazon , peruvian amazon ,  northern samples: french guiana , venezuelan llanos , and western colombia ; and  southern samples: bolivia , southern peru , argentina , and brazil  . at k =  <dig>  the french guiana sampling site  is grouped separately from the two other northern sampling sites . at k =  <dig> to  <dig>  sampling sites from the upper amazon region are separated according to river basin separations . at k >  <dig>  bolivian  and argentinean  samples are grouped separately.

to test the different proposed biogeographic hypotheses we compared a null model of allopatric divergence among the four geographic areas with colonization models based on different effects of gradient and river-barrier mechanisms of divergence . the reconstructed gene genealogy had an observed slatkin and maddison  s =  <dig>  for both alternative hypotheses, the null model was rejected at a p ≤  <dig>  under a wide variety of generation steps and effective population sizes .

a assuming a generation time of  <dig> years, which gives  <dig>  yr bp and  <dig>  my bp for  <dig>  and  <dig>  generations, respectively.

s values are obtained from  <dig>  trees simulated under a null model of allopatric divergence . similar values were obtained for scenario c in figure  <dig>  trees were simulated under neutral coalescent with no migration under varying generation times and effective population sizes. observed s =  <dig> 

discussion
the role of quaternary climatic and geological events in promoting divergence and increasing rates of speciation is the subject of intense debate  <cit> . in the neotropics, the phylogeography and population history of mammals have been investigated in several taxa, including bats  <cit> , carnivores  <cit> , primates  <cit> , rodents, and marsupials  <cit> . here, we aimed to contribute to this discussion by exploring the evolutionary history, and population genetic structure and dynamics of the lowland tapir, a habitat generalist and widely dispersed species whose ancestors likely arrived in the continent during the early quaternary  <cit> . in doing so, we specifically attempted to estimate time of divergence and identify climatic and geological events that potentially contributed to shaping lowland tapir biogeography, and aimed to provide data relevant for the conservation of this increasingly threatened species.

estimating divergence time among populations
on average, mitochondrial dna mutates at a faster rate than nuclear dna  <cit> , resulting in it becoming a convenient tool for reconstructing the recent history of populations and species  <cit> . we applied both the novel approach of ho and colleagues  <cit>  and the more traditional method based on dating interspecific nodes using fossil data  <cit>  to estimate the mutation rate, and thus the timing of divergence of south american tapir clades. mutation rate estimates were an order of magnitude higher with the former than with the latter method, and resulted in significantly different mean estimates of tmrca, as seen by the lack of overlap in tree height 95% hpd . such differences have been reported and discussed elsewhere  <cit>  and are generally attributed to differences in intra- and interspecific rates of mutation  <cit> . consequently, we are not able to a priori judge the relative importance of climatic or geological events happening in the late pleistocene versus early pleistocene in shaping lowland tapir history.

in order to decide which estimate is more accurate, we would need to test the hypothesis that intra- and interspecific mutation rates have converged  <cit> . in the case that convergence has occurred, applying fossil data to inform the time of divergence of interspecific tree nodes is expected to result in accurate estimates of the mutation rate. if convergence has not occurred, then fossil calibration is expected to significantly underestimate the mutation rate  <cit>  and the method of ho and colleagues  <cit>  is then expected to result in more accurate estimates of the mutation rate. unfortunately, without ancient dna samples to specifically measure the substitution rate, it is not possible to test the convergence hypothesis. nevertheless, we believe that other lines of evidence indicate that convergence between intra- and interspecific mutation rates has not occurred. in particular, it has been argued that intra- and interspecific rates of mutation in vertebrates should converge within  <dig> my of two lineages becoming separated  <cit> , setting a maximum time for convergence to occur. it has also been demonstrated for adélie penguins, a species with similar generation time to lowland tapir, that convergence of intra- and interspecific rates has not been reached after  <dig> ky of two lineages becoming separated  <cit> , thus setting a minimum age of separation before convergence is expected to occur.

an examination of the data available for lowland tapirs contained within the above period highlights an unexplained gap between previously published molecular data and fossil evidences. previous molecular work estimated that lowland tapirs emerged in the early pleistocene, soon after their ancestors crossed the panamana isthumus  <cit> , which would suggest that convergence between mutation rates has likely occurred. however, an examination of the current fossil record seems inconsistent with this observation. the fossil record includes a number of tapir species described for the period ca.  <dig> my bp throughout south america, particularly in argentina and uruguay, but none are classified as t. terrestris  <cit> . instead, the earliest unambiguous fossil described as t. terrestris is dated between 80- <dig> ky bp  <cit> . this means there is an almost  <dig> my gap between the earliest described lowland tapir fossil and the time of emergence of lowland tapir previously estimated  <cit> .

the observed incongruence could be either due to too sparsely studied fossil record, although this is not likely due to the wide distribution of tapirs and the extensive paleontological studies  <cit> , or, to a large previous overestimate of the age of lowland tapir. this later alternative is supported by the similarity of divergence estimates of this study with those of neotropical carnivores whose ancestors also arrived during the great american biotic interchange  <cit> . thus, it seems more parsimonious to accept that the ancestor to modern lowland tapirs arose around  <dig>  and  <dig>  my bp , as estimated without calibration of an external node. this would place greater importance on climatic and/or geological events towards the end of the pleistocene in driving neotropical diversity than previously proposed  <cit> .

our conclusions, nonetheless, are based solely on one mitochondrial gene and relatively small sample size, and thus are subjected to large coalescent and sampling variance. nevertheless, our data suggest novel hypotheses about the history of lowland tapir, and therefore, the potential mechanisms acting to shape neotropical diversity, which can be further tested using multiple nuclear genes and additional samples.

lowland tapir biogeography
our statistical phylogeography analyses allowed us to reject a null model of allopatric divergence across four major biogeographic regions of the amazon, as suggested for other taxa  <cit> . however, it did not distinguish between the two alternative hypotheses of population biogeography . sampling multiple nuclear genes across additional loci will allow for more accurate estimates of the species' tree and possibly distinguish between the hypotheses. nevertheless, the rejection of the null hypothesis suggests that lowland tapir history may be complex, and potentially includes separate colonization and population expansion events.

phylogenetic reconstruction inferred two deeply divergent lowland tapir clades in western amazonia , with mountain tapirs diverging from one of these lineages. the role of western amazonia in lowland tapir history has remained a mystery largely because of the paucity of described fossils for the region. a recent report characterized at least three species of tapir occurring in sympatry in the acre and rondônia region  <cit> , which led to the hypothesis that the region is a center of origin for tapirs  <cit> . our phylogeographic analysis, along with the observation of high genetic diversity in this region , supports this scenario, suggesting a similar history as that reported in primates  <cit> , carnivores  <cit> , and rodents  <cit> , and adds to reports asserting that western amazonia has played an important role in divergence and speciation in the neotropics  <cit> .

what has led the western amazon to be a region of high diversity is still unclear, and will likely only be elucidated with additional data on the region's geology. the lack of obvious geographical barriers undermines hypotheses of allopatric divergence to explain the observed structure and diversification in western amazonia  <cit> . an alternative hypothesis is that the altitudinal gradient of the andean foothills along with pleistocene glacial cycles  <cit>  has lead to parapatric divergence among tapir lineages, a model of divergence also proposed for other taxa in western amazonia and andean foothills . at the surface, this hypothesis has support from the adjacent distributions of mountain and lowland tapirs along an elevational gradient from lowland forests to sub-tropical montane habitats  <cit> . here, bayesian analysis indicates little support for lowland and mountain tapir reciprocal monophyly, favoring a paraphyletic relationship. this suggests three scenarios: first, divergence occurred over a relatively short period of time and we are not able to capture the actual relationship with our data  <cit> ; second, mountain tapirs speciated by paraphyly; and third, mountain tapirs are an ecotype of lowland tapir, similar to what is observed in reindeer  <cit> . in all cases, mountain and lowland tapirs are sister taxa, suggesting a gradient model of divergence.

the results are consistent with phylogeographic patterns reported for other species in the same region , thus supporting the scenario that external factors  were significant in shaping the history of taxa in this region  <cit> . however, external mechanisms have been shown to be unnecessary to explain genetic biogeographic structure, as the intrinsic nature of the genealogical process alone can produce significant spatial structure in genetic variation  <cit> . in this regard, future work should concentrate in testing whether independent sections of the genome have similar biogeographic signatures to conclusively rule out stochastic genealogical factors in determining observed structure in genetic diversity  <cit> .

the spatial distribution of the other cytb clades  suggests that the regions north and south of the amazon river are occupied largely by independent lineages derived from those largely found in western amazonia. two main dispersal scenarios can be suggested to account for this pattern. first, assuming that western amazonia is the origin of dispersal, two separate and independent migration events led to the colonization of the two regions. alternatively, one lineage colonized one area , and subsequently originated a new wave of colonization that occupied the second area across the marajó archipelago . in both cases, and assuming extrinsic factors, a barrier to gene flow is required to avoid admixture and thus dilution of the observed genetic structure, as the geographic boundaries of the lineages' distributions overlap along the amazon river. although lowland tapirs are well known swimmers, the river has been reported to be a barrier to jaguars , another similarly large and capable swimmer  <cit> . thus, it is plausible that the river is the barrier predicted to account for the current geographic distribution of these two lineages.

finally, clade iv, which includes all samples from south of the amazon region , a number of haplotypes found in peru, haplotypes from the rio negro , and one haplotype from bolivia that is shared with french guiana, has an unusually wide geographic distribution when compared to haplotypes of the other three clades. this pattern is generally interpreted as resulting from rapid-range expansion  <cit> , a hypothesis that is supported by the bsp, and fu's and tajima's tests. although the geographic origin of this expansion remains an open question, the expansion is estimated by bsp to have started around the end of the last glacial maximum , assuming that intra and interspecific rates of mutation have not converged. this would suggest that the lgm significantly reduced lowland tapir population size, similarly to what has been reported for carnivores  <cit>  and ungulates  <cit> . alternatively, the expansion also coincides with the extinction of the neotropical herbivore megafauna, and thus a lessening of interspecific competition may have allowed lowland tapir populations to expand into previously unavailable habitat.

the biogeographical history of the lowland tapir, therefore, is not completely resolved. future work should explore the potential roles of western amazonia, the amazon river, and the lgm in shaping lowland tapir history and biogeography. although external factors may not have contributed entirely to the observed structure  <cit> , comparative phylogeography through the observation of similar patterns across taxa  <cit>  provides an indication that more than stochastic coalescent and sampling effects are contributing to the distribution of genetic variation in this species.

population diversity, structure and conservation implications
lowland tapirs are experiencing rapid decline in the brazilian atlantic forest and in the colombian and venezuelan llanos, and local extinctions have already been reported in argentina, and southern and eastern brazil  <cit> . this decline is attributed to habitat loss and subsistence hunting, and has prompted a "vulnerable" listing for the species in the iucn red list  <cit>  and the development of a conservation action plan  <cit> . however, a key element to any successful action plans is a clear understanding of a species' population history, dynamics, and structure  <cit> . even though we only examined one mtdna locus, which can limit our conclusions, our results begin to elucidate such an understanding, providing valuable information for tapir conservation. first, a recent comprehensive status assessment based on habitat sustainability has assigned a low probability of long-term survival for peripheral populations   <cit> . for these same populations, we find lower levels of haplotypic diversity  than observed in other areas. this could be due to the reported population decline, but it is also plausible that they have lower genetic diversity because they are at the periphery of the range  <cit> . in either case, such populations are most likely to harbor unique diversity, as suggested by the samova results, and thus be important in terms of conserving genetic diversity  <cit> .

second, we find little support for the use of ecoregions in delimiting areas of lowland tapir conservation priority. south american ecoregions have been defined on the basis of species richness, beta-diversity, and endemism  <cit> . tapirs inhabit a wide range of habitats, and thus occur in a number of ecoregions, from savannas and woodlands to lowland and lower montane forests, and as a generalist herbivore they have a broad diet, feeding opportunistically on a wide variety of plants and fruits  <cit> . studies on jaguars  <cit> , crab-eating foxes  <cit>  and now lowland tapirs indicate that population genetic structure of large neotropical mammals does not necessarily mirror ecoregion boundaries, undermining the utility of these regions to predict evolutionary significant units  and management units   <cit>  for large neotropical vertebrates. instead, we observed geographic overlap in four phylogenetic clades, precluding delimitation of esus; and regions occupied by several independent lineages, making mu status inappropriate. nevertheless, western amazonia is an important area for tapir conservation due to its lineage endemism and representatives of other lineages.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study, we derive a number of novel hypotheses to explain lowland tapir biogeography and history. the strengths of these hypotheses include that they complement the fossil record, mirror patterns reported for sympatric taxa, and outline specific alternatives to explain the observed spatial distribution of lineages. in particular, we propose that mountain and lowland tapirs are native to south america, and mountain tapirs may have speciated from the lowland tapir by paraphyly along the steep environmental gradient provided by the andean foothills in western amazonia. differing from previous molecular work but similar to the fossil record, we propose that divergence among lowland tapirs occurred during the late quaternary, possibly as a consequence of periods of glaciations resulting in significant changes to habitat via cooling, desiccation, or dynamic changes to the river basins  <cit> . we also propose that independent dispersal events led to the colonization of the regions north and south of the amazon river and these lineages have remained largely separated due to the barrier that the river represents. finally, our data suggest that a population expansion occurred after the lgm. however, a more thorough examination based on nuclear genes and additional sampling is required to obtain more accurate estimates of the tmrca and to test if the observed geographic structure is indeed a result of extrinsic factors. more accurate estimates will also put us in a better position to judge if geological and climatic effects have shaped lowland tapir genetic diversity, either in the late pleistocene or earlier. finally, similar to other large neotropical mammals, the lowland tapir exhibits low levels of genetic structuring at the continental scale. from a conservation perspective, our data questions the utility of ecogeographic regions in establishing conservation priorities. instead, we see western amazonia and periphery populations emerge as an important harbors of both older and younger lineages, and potentially unique diversity respectively. further studies across species and habitats at large spatial scales may assist in identifying evolutionary regions across taxa that may be better suited for conservation planning in the neotropics.

