BACKGROUND
the genetic basis of the observed phenotypic divergence between humans and chimpanzees has since long intrigued scientists. since humans and chimpanzees diverged 5– <dig> million years ago  <cit>  their genomes have acquired a multitude of lineage specific mutations, including nucleotide substitutions, insertions and deletions , duplications and inversions. the sequence divergence caused by substitutions and indels has been estimated to  <dig> – <dig> %  <cit>  and 3–7%  <cit> , respectively. several hypotheses have been proposed to reconcile the observed overall low sequence divergence with the large phenotypic differences between humans and chimpanzees. these hypotheses include sequence divergence of protein coding genes  <cit> , gain and loss of genes  <cit> , differential gene expression  <cit>  and divergent patterns of alternative splicing <cit> . in this study we have focused on the role of nonsense mutations and frame shift indels that cause premature termination codons  in chimpanzee protein coding genes. the dramatic effect of this type of mutations has been described in a number of human genes  <cit> .

ptcs have the capability of changing the pattern of alternative splicing and expressed protein isoforms, since mrnas affected by ptcs will either be degraded by nonsense-mediated decay  or translated into truncated protein sequences  <cit> . the coupling of ptcs and nmd has previously been suggested as a novel mechanism to regulate gene expression  <cit> .

although the occurrence of genes with premature stop codons in human genes has been described on a genome wide scale  <cit>  there is no parallel study in the chimpanzee. two previous studies  <cit>  have examined ptcs in chimpanzee genes using the high quality genome sequence of chromosome  <dig> . in the initial publication of the chimpanzee genome sequence the identification of ptcs was hampered by the low quality of the sequence  <cit> . by using the current  chimpanzee assembly and stringent quality criteria we have overcome this problem and here we report the first genome wide study of ptcs in the chimpanzee. chimpanzee specific ptcs were identified in  <dig>  genes, which were further studied with respect to their genome location and context, biological function and the position of the ptc within genes.

RESULTS
detection of premature termination codons in chimpanzee protein-coding genes
in an attempt to identify chimpanzee genes with ptcs we have analyzed pairs of human-chimpanzee genes. annotations of all human protein coding genes were collected from the ensemble database  <cit> , resulting in a total of  <dig>  genes and  <dig>  associated transcripts. chimpanzee genes and transcripts were inferred from human annotations and human exon coordinates were translated to the chimpanzee genome using the liftover tool . translation between the genomes depends on a pairwise alignment  and we required all chimpanzee exons in a transcript to have the same orientation and be located on the same chromosome after the translation. failure to translate coordinates accurately may be due to e.g. lack of sequence in a region or problems in aligning regions with large indels or lots of repeats. both human and chimpanzee exon sequences were concatenated into complete coding sequences, translated into amino acid sequences and then screened for ptcs in the chimpanzee. several filtering steps were employed to ensure that the detected ptcs were not a result of incorrect gene predictions or low quality of the chimpanzee assembly . gene predictions were required to have correct start and stop codons in human and a correct start codon in chimpanzee. to account for the lower quality of the chimpanzee assembly we required the region surrounding a ptc to have a quality score >  <dig>  corresponding to less then  <dig> sequencing error in  <dig>  bp.

after filtering, a total of  <dig>  genes and  <dig>  associated transcripts remained. the genes were divided into two datasets:  ptc genes where one or several of the associated chimpanzee transcripts were affected by ptcs, and  non-ptc genes where none of the annotated transcripts were affected by ptcs in the chimpanzee. in the present study all analyses will be based on genes instead of transcripts, thereby avoiding the bias introduced by different genes having different numbers of transcripts.

approximately 8%  of the chimpanzee genes were affected by ptcs, indicating that the genes were either pseudo genes in the chimpanzee  or that the genes had a different transcriptional pattern as compared to the corresponding human genes .

furthermore, we determined the type of mutational event leading to the ptc. indels were found to be the causative mutation in approximately 70% of the ptc genes  and in the remaining 30%  of the genes the ptc was caused by a substitution. the exact location of the premature termination codons and the type of mutational event is detailed in the additional file  <dig> .

characteristics of genes with ptcs in the chimpanzee
the density of ptc genes varies both between and within chromosomes
an estimated 8% of all chimpanzee genes were affected by ptcs. this figure is higher then the 5% we reported in a previous study of chromosome  <dig>  <cit>  and the discrepancy is likely to be due to differences in density of ptc genes between chromosomes . in the present study, the proportion of ptc genes varied from  <dig> to 16% for the autosomes, and a significant difference between chromosomes was observed . the y chromosome had a strikingly high percentage  of ptc genes. the y-chromosome is known to have an increased proportion of inactivating mutations in the chimpanzee lineage and a large number of pseudo genes  <cit> , thereby explaining the increased fraction of ptc genes observed in this study. the proportion of ptc genes was next estimated for  <dig> mbp-windows across all chromosomes and a significant variation between different chromosomal regions was observed . this suggests that the large-scale chromosomal structure influences the density of ptc genes, although the cause for this effect is unclear.

the proportion of ptc genes was correlated to both indel divergence and proximity to the telomere
having noticed that the proportion of ptc genes varied both between chromosomes and between  <dig> mb windows from the same chromosome, we sought to understand the underlying reasons. the density of ptc genes in a particular region may be affected by several genomic properties such as gc-content, presence of repeats, cpg-islands, segmental duplications, substitutions, indel divergence or the distance to the telomere or centromere. to study the relationship between the density of ptc genes and these genomic properties, we divided the chromosomes into non-overlapping  <dig> mbp windows and applied a regression model, evaluating the relationship between the fraction of genes in the two datasets  and each genomic feature. occurrence of ptc genes was found to be significantly associated with both indel divergence and distance to the telomere. the other genomic properties showed no correlation with the occurrence of ptc genes, or a similar correlation to non-ptc genes. the results indicate that ptc genes were in most respects similar to non-ptc genes.

the correlation with indel divergence  was higher for the ptc genes  as compared to the non-ptc genes. the observed association was significant but rather weak, possibly as a result of the genomic alignment obtained from ucsc  <cit> . the indel divergence estimated from the alignment was only  <dig> %, which was considerably lower than the 3–7% previously reported  <cit> . this is explained by the alignment parameters having been optimized not to allow for gaps longer then  <dig> bp. although the majority of indels are shorter than  <dig> bp  <cit> , longer indels contribute more to the indel divergence since they include more base pairs. thus, given that indels >  <dig> bps were not taken into account, the correlation seen between ptc genes and indel divergence was most likely underestimated. a correlation between ptc genes and indel divergence was further supported by the fact that approximately 70% of the ptcs were actually caused by indel events.

in addition to indel divergence, the proportion of ptc genes in a region increased with proximity to the telomere . the closer to the telomere, the more likely the gene was to be affected by a ptc. telomeres are known to have an increased indel divergence  <cit>  and therefore we combined these two variables in a multiple regression model . the combined model has a higher r-value then the previous regression analyses, suggesting that the two variables should be considered together.

ptcs were preferentially located in distal parts of the gene and in regions with less functional domains
to examine the relative location of ptcs within affected genes, each gene was partitioned into windows covering 5% of the length, and the proportion of genes with ptcs in a specific region was estimated. the results showed a higher frequency of ptcs in the distal parts of the genes than in the central region. when a ptc occurs early in the transcript, the nucleotide sequence will most likely not be translated into a protein but instead be subjected to nmd  <cit> . on the other hand, when the ptc occurs late in the transcript, translation it is likely to take place and result in a truncated protein sequence. to further investigate the consequences of ptcs we searched for a relationship between the location of ptcs and functional domains of the gene, using the pfam database  <cit>  to map functional domains onto the ptc genes. all ptc genes were matched against the pfam database  <cit>  and the relative location of pfam hits was recorded. a negative correlation  was found between the location of ptcs and the location of pfam matches , suggesting a stronger selection against ptc in functional regions of genes. the results support the assumption that ptcs may be tolerable as long as the termination codon does not disrupt the structure of centrally located functional domains in the protein.

olfactory receptor genes were overrepresented in the ptc dataset
the biological functionality of genes in the two datasets was assessed using gene ontology  <cit>  classifications. all three ontologies; biological process, cellular component and molecular function were used for the classification and the fatigo tool  <cit>  was used to test if any go classes were overrepresented in the ptc dataset compared to the non-ptc dataset. we found that ptc genes were significantly overrepresented in three go classes: olfactory receptor activity, sensory perception of smell and g-protein coupled receptor protein signaling pathway . these go terms are to a large extent overlapping, and  <dig> of the ptc genes were found in all three go classes .

* note that the go terms overlap. the two groups olfactory receptor activity and sensory perception of smell are identical and these  <dig> genes are in turn included in the group g-protein coupled receptor activity.

all ptc genes mapping to the go terms olfactory receptor activity and sensory perception of smell belong to the olfactory receptor  superfamily of genes. there are almost one thousand or genes known in human, with ~50% of them being pseudogenes  <cit> . the or genes belong to the g-protein coupled receptor  hyperfamily, explaining the presence of g-protein coupled receptor protein signaling pathway in the go classification. it is generally thought that the number of functional or genes have been reduced in the primate lineage as compared to other mammals, and different selective mechanisms have been proposed  <cit> . a recent study  <cit>  suggested that humans and chimpanzees have similar numbers of or genes and also comparable fractions of pseudogenes. the repertoire of or genes expressed has been suggested to differ between species, allowing for species-specific adaptations of odor perception  <cit> .

among the  <dig> ptc genes that were overrepresented in all three go categories , all but two have only a single annotated transcript. this implies that these genes are pseudogenes in the chimpanzee, since all known transcripts have been silenced. for the two genes with several annotated transcripts, the effect may be different. most likely these genes were not completely switched off but rather the range of available transcripts was altered.

the effect of ptcs on alternative splicing
a surprisingly high proportion of the genes in the study were found to have ptcs, but not all affected genes represented pseudogenes. approximately half of the genes in the study have multiple annotated transcripts and the same holds true for the ptc dataset. the majority of these genes have at least one transcript unaffected by the ptc, suggesting that most ptc mutations do not switch off the gene, but rather a specific transcript. furtermore, the ensembl prediction that ~50% of the genes have multiple splice variants is likely to be an underestimate since recent studies have shown that nearly all human multiexon genes have multiple splice variants  <cit> . thus it is reasonable to assume that virtually none of the multiexon genes with ptcs in chimpanzee were entirely silenced by the mutation.

depending on the location of the ptc, the affected mrna may either be translated into a truncated protein product or become degraded by nmd  <cit> . the coupling of ptcs and nmd has previously been proposed as a novel mechanism for regulating gene expression  <cit> . by selectively silencing transcripts, the coupled action of ptcs and nmd may modulate gene expression and alter the repertoire of expressed isoforms, thereby providing for species-specific patterns of alternative splicing.

since there are no de novo annotations of chimpanzee genes and transcripts, the present study is based solely on human annotations  <cit> . it is possible that in some cases where we predict a ptc in a chimpanzee gene, the chimpanzee may instead have different gene structure and/or different splice variants, thereby adding to the transcriptional complexity. to study this in more detail it would be necessary to perform large-scale sequencing of the chimpanzee transcriptome.

CONCLUSIONS
we have performed a genome wide study of premature termination codons  in the chimpanzee to estimate the frequency of such events and further characterize the affected genes. we found that ~8%  of the genes had at least one transcript affected by a ptc. indels rather than substitutions were the main cause of ptcs. we observed both inter- and intra-chromosomal fluctuation in the density of ptc genes and this variation was related both to local variations in indel divergence and proximity to the telomere. within genes, ptcs occurred towards the 5' and 3' ends of the genes, thereby preserving functional domains in the central part of the genes. this indicates that selection against ptcs was stronger in the central and more conserved functional parts of proteins.

gene ontology classification revealed that ptc genes were overrepresented in the groups associated with olfaction. this was especially intriguing since the repertoire of olfactory receptors in primates has been extensively studied and it has been shown that many olfactory receptor genes have become pseudo genes in the primate linage  <cit> . premature termination codons are most likely a major factor in the pseudogenisation process.

approximately half of the genes in this study had multiple annotated transcripts and in most cases the ptc did not affect all of the transcripts. instead of becoming pseudo genes, the affected genes seemed to have certain transcripts silenced by the ptcs. transcripts affected by ptcs will either be degraded by nmd or produce truncated protein isoforms. either way, the ptcs result in a different a transcript repertoire between humans and chimpanzees and ptcs may therefore contribute to the factors determining the phenotypic differences between the species. the phenotypic differences between humans and chimpanzees has been attributed to divergence in protein coding genes  <cit> , gene expression  <cit>  and alternative splicing  <cit>  as well as gain and loss of genetic material  <cit> . indels and substitutions causing ptcs potentially affect several of these mechanisms, in particular the pattern of gene expression and alternative splicing. moreover, the paired action of ptcs and nonsense-mediated decay has been suggested as a novel mechanism to regulate gene expression  <cit>  and the observed frequent occurrence of ptc mutations further support the hypothesis that divergent gene expression and alternative splicing affect the phenotypic divergence.

