BACKGROUND
the coding regions  of most eukaryotic genes are interrupted by non-coding sequences . the intronic sequences from primary transcripts  are removed and the exons are spliced to generate functional mrnas  <cit> . in many organisms, pre-mrnas are alternatively spliced to generate multiple mrnas from a single gene  <cit> . it is becoming clear that alternative splicing generates distinct proteins with altered functions from a limited set of genes  <cit> . the effects of alternative splicing on proteins include production of protein isoforms with loss or gain of function, altered subcellular localization, protein stability and/or posttranslational modifications  <cit> . furthermore, alternative splicing plays a role in regulation of gene expression through processes such as regulated unproductive splicing and translation  and mrna recruitment  <cit> . alternative splicing is also implicated in evolution of organisms  <cit> . the availability of the complete genome sequences of many multicellular eukaryotic organisms and large sets of full-length cdnas and ests has permitted comprehensive analysis of alternative splicing. more recently, global analysis of alternative splicing has also been performed using splicing sensitive mircroarrays and new generation sequencing technologies  <cit> . these analyses have shown that alternative splicing is highly prevalent in multicellular eukaryotes. in humans, 95% of multiexon genes undergo alternative splicing resulting in the generation of two or more transcripts from a single gene  <cit> . analysis of alternative splicing in flowering plants by aligning the available cdnas/ests to genome sequences has shown that pre-mrnas from ~ 30% of genes are alternatively spliced  <cit> . alternative splicing in some specific gene families such as genes encoding serine/arginine-rich proteins is extensive, resulting in a five-fold increase in transcriptome complexity  <cit> . in addition, stresses have been shown to dramatically alter the splicing pattern of many plant genes  <cit> . in mammalian systems, exon skipping is most prevalent, whereas in flowering plants up to 55% of alternative splicing events are intron retention  <cit> . it is suggested that the variations in frequencies of different types of alternative splicing events between plant and non-plant systems reflect the differences in gene architecture and pre-mrna splicing between these organisms  <cit> . in contrast to multicellular organisms, very little is known about the prevalence and types of alternative splicing in simple unicellular photosynthetic eukaryotes from which land plants have evolved. recent completion of the chlamydomonas genome and the availability of a fairly large number of ests  <cit>  permit global analysis of post-transcriptional events including alternative splicing in a unicellular photosynthetic eukaryote.

chlamydomonas shares many features with cells of more complex eukaryotic plants and animals. chlamydomonas, like land plants, is an autotroph and contains a chloroplast. furthermore, like animals, it can grow as a heterotroph and is mobile. chlamydomonas diverged from land plants about one billion years ago  <cit> . about 93% of the  <dig> mb genome of chlamydomonas reinhardtii has been sequenced  <cit> . gene models in the latest version  of the chlamydomonas genome sequence predict  <dig>  protein-coding genes and about half of these gene predictions have cdna/est support. analysis of the chlamydomonas genome revealed that it contains many genes that are specific to both plant and animal lineages, reflecting its unique position in evolution  <cit> . because of the many advantages chlamydomonas offers, it is considered to be the "green yeast" for studying various eukaryotic cellular processes  <cit> . for over five decades, chlamydomonas has been used as a model system to study many aspects of photosynthesis, structure and function of flagella, and a variety of other biological processes. more recently, it is being used to investigate mechanisms that regulate biofuels production  <cit> . analysis of alternative splicing in chlamydomonas allows comparison of alternative splicing between simple unicellular photosynthetic eukaryotes and highly evolved flowering plants.

furthermore, this will also aid in understanding how alternative splicing has evolved during the evolution of land plants. hence, we have performed a comprehensive analysis of alternative splicing in chlamydomonas reinhardtii. we have used the blat tool  <cit>  and a modified version of the sircah software for the detection and visualization of alternative splicing  <cit> . detailed results, including alignments and splice graphs for each cluster exhibiting alternative splicing are available on our "chlamydomonas as" site http://combi.cs.colostate.edu/as/chlamy/. our results show that alternative splicing is prevalent in chlamydomonas, although the extent of it is less than in land plants. the relative frequency of different splicing events in chlamydomonas is very similar to higher plants.

RESULTS
properties of introns
unlike other unicellular eukaryotes , the vast majority of genes  in chlamydomonas have introns . the percentage of intron-containing genes in chlamydomonas is higher than in plants and humans.

previous comparative studies on gene structure in flowering plants and animals have revealed a number of significant differences in their gene architecture  <cit> . for example, land plant genes are shorter than animal genes with fewer exons and shorter introns  <cit> .

furthermore, plant introns are rich in t or t/a, which is necessary for the recognition of splice sites and efficient splicing of pre-mrnas  <cit> . chlamydomonas shares both plant and animal features in its gene architecture. the average number of introns in chlamydomonas is similar to humans. however, the median size of exons  and introns  is similar to flowering plants. the gc content of chlamydomonas is 64%, which is significantly higher than the gc content of multi-cellular organisms. introns in protein coding genes of metazoans have four signals that are necessary for accurate splicing of pre-mrnas. these include two consensus sequences at the 5' and 3' splice sites with conserved gt and ag dinucleotides, respectively, a polypyrimidine tract at the 3' end of the intron, and a branch point located about 17- <dig> nucleotides upstream of the 3' splice site  <cit> . however, in land-plants the branch point is not obvious; the 3' end of plant introns are rich in t nucleotides  <cit> . although the 5' and 3' splice sites in chlamydomonas introns are similar to land plants and humans  the 3' end of introns in chlamydomonas is enriched in c in place of a polyprimidine tract .

extent and types of alternative splicing
we developed a pipeline for detection and visualization of alternative splicing in chlamydomonas based on est-to-genome alignments using blat  <cit> , and a modified version of the sircah alternative splicing detection software  <cit> . details are found in the methods section and additional file  <dig>  for est data we used a recently constructed est dataset containing  <dig>  ests processed using cdna termini to anchor transcripts to their correct positions in the genome  <cit> . ests were aligned to the genome and grouped into clusters that overlap in their genomic coordinates and occur on the same strand. our alignment and alternative splicing detection pipeline resulted in  <dig> clusters that show  <dig> alternative splicing events. the alternative splicing events in each cluster are summarized with splice graphs  <cit> . example splice graphs are shown in figure  <dig>  a companion website provides visualization of the est alignments and splice graphs for each cluster showing alternative splicing, as well as access to the alignments themselves and additional information . of the clusters that show alternative splicing,  <dig> were associated with predicted genes in version  <dig>  of the chlamydomonas genome  <cit> .

we classified all observed alternative splicing events into the following five groups: intron retention , alternative 5' splice site , alternative 3' splice site , events where both the 5' and the 3' end of an intron are alternatively spliced , and exon skipping . the relative frequency of the various types of alternative splicing events is very similar to those observed in other plant species, with intron retention making up almost half of the events. detailed statistics are provided in table  <dig> 

this table shows the number and frequency of each type of alternative splicing. percentage of the total number of events is shown in parentheses. the statistics for arabidopsis and rice are from  <cit> .

splice site strength
we compared the splice site strength of the 5' and 3' splice sites in all types of alternative splicing events to those of constitutively spliced genes using the protocol described in  <cit> . consistent with observations in other organisms  <cit> , splice sites that participate in alternative splicing are weaker than constitutive splice sites, and all the differences are statisitically significant . the most significant difference is found at the 3' splice site of alt3' events. in each alternative splicing event, we identified the prevalent splice form as the one supported by the largest number of ests. we observed that in the case of alt5' and alt3' events the splice sites for the non-prevalent splice forms are weaker than those of the prevalent splice form; the latter are weaker than those observed in constitutive splicing . these differences are also highly statistically significant.

average splice site scores and p-values for alternative splicing events and constitutive splicing are shown here. all scores are computed with respect to the splice site motif of the constitutive splice form, following the protocol used in  <cit> . in all cases, the scores for the alternatively spliced form are lower than for constitutive splicing. the p-values are based on a comparison of the scores for each type of alternative splicing event with the scores for constitutive splicing, and are computed using the wilcoxon signed-ranks test. except for the case of exon skipping, the 5' and 3' sites refer to the splice sites of an excised intron. in exon skipping the 5' and 3' sites are the splice sites flanking the skipped exon.

splice site scores and p-values for the 5' and 3' sites of prevalent and non-prevalent splice forms. the table shows data that support two hypotheses:  non-prevalent splice sites are weaker than splice sites associated with the prevalent splice form;  prevalent splice sites are weaker than splice sites associated with constitutive splicing. the "avg. score" columns provide the average score of splice site occurrences. for the comparison of non-prevalent with prevalent splice forms, the scores are computed with respect to a motif model of prevalent instances; for the comparison of prevalent and constitutive splicing the scores are computed with respect to a model of the constitutive splice sites.

length and gc content of retained introns and skipped exons
alternatively spliced introns and exons in multicellular organisms were shown to have different length and nucleotide composition than their constitutively spliced counterparts  <cit> . we compared the length of retained introns and skipped exons with those that did not exhibit alternative splicing. this analysis revealed that retained introns are shorter than those that did not exhibit alternative splicing. the median size of retained introns is  <dig> bp compared to a median size of  <dig> bp in constitutively spliced introns. the difference is more pronounced in chlamydomonas than in arabidopsis, where median sizes are  <dig> bp compared to  <dig> bp  <cit> . skipped exons are shorter than exons that are not known to exhibit alternative splicing with a median size of  <dig> bp compared to a median size of  <dig> bp in constitutively spliced exons.

in land plants, introns have high at content, whereas exons are gc rich. subsequently, a high percentage of a/t or t was reported to be important for efficient splicing of introns in flowering plants. proteins that bind to u-rich stretches in pre-mrna have been reported in plants  <cit> . in chlamydomonas, we found that retained introns have a gc content of 57% as compared to 62% for constitutive introns. furthermore, short, in-frame introns have an even lower gc content . similarly, skipped exons have a lower gc content as compared to constitutive exons . all these differences are highly statistically significant . in arabidopsis, the opposite trend is observed; retained introns have a higher gc content  <cit> .

impact of alternative splicing on predicted proteins
alternative splicing often results in the occurrence of a premature termination codon   <cit> . transcripts with ptcs are potential targets for degradation through non-sense mediated mrna decay   <cit> . several recent studies suggest that the alternative splicing of pre-mrnas is coupled to mrna degradation through regulated unproductive splicing and translation,   <cit> . to analyze predicted proteins, we focused on clusters that have full-length cdnas and a single alternative splicing event so that we can predict the effect of alternative splicing on the resulting protein. out of the  <dig> clusters showing as,  <dig> correspond to annotated genes. of these,  <dig> have published start codons, and  <dig> had a single as event, and include a stop codon within a full-length est. in  <dig> out of these  <dig> clusters, whenever alternative splicing occurred in the coding region, the non-prevalent splice form led to a shorter protein because of a ptc, resulting in a protein that is around 50% shorter . in arabidopsis 78% of alternative splicing events occur in the coding region and about 50% of these have a ptc  <cit> . it has been shown in plants that transcripts with a ptc undergo nmd, and some of the components involved in nmd have been reported in plants  <cit> . interestingly, the predicted proteome of chlamydomonas contains components of nmd such as upf <dig> and exon-junction complex proteins, suggesting that the nmd might play a role in the regulation of gene expression.

we considered a subset of the clusters with a full-length cdna, a single alternative splicing event, and a published start codon in the jgi version  <dig>  genome annotation. for these clusters we show the number of events in a utr and the number of events in the coding sequence, where utrs were detected by the location of where as occurred with respect to the published start codon and the first stop codon in the reading frame. for events in the coding sequence, we show the average reduction in the length of the predicted orf that results when comparing the prevalent splice form with the non-prevalent splice form. in all cases but one, the non-prevalent splice form is shorter as a result of a premature termination codon. for ir, the prevalent form is always the one where the intron is spliced, and the non-prevalent form retains the intron. for es, the prevalent form always contained the exon while the non-prevalent form skipped it.

alternative splicing motifs
since introns have four loosely conserved signals, it is thought that other sequences may be involved in regulated splicing. in metazoans and land plants, protein factors such as sr proteins and hnrnps have been shown to regulate splicing by binding to such splicing regulatory elements either in exons or introns and to enhance or prevent the usage of a splice site  <cit> . we performed a motif analysis of retained introns in comparison to constitutive introns using the dme program  <cit>  . while we didn't find statistically significant motifs in retained introns, constitutively spliced introns consistently produced such motifs. all the motifs were tandem repeats of di-nucleotides or tri-nucleotides. the consensus sequence for the top scoring motif was tgctgctg. a complete list of motifs with their associated p-values is presented in table s <dig> in additional file  <dig>  simple repetitive elements have been shown to bind splicing regulatory proteins such as srs and hnrnps and contribute to regulated splicing  <cit> . in chlamydomonas there are several sr and hnrnp proteins that share significant sequence similarity with splicing regulators in multicellular organisms.

experimental verification of alternative splicing
for experimental verification, we chose two of the clusters corresponding to ornithine decarboxylase  <dig>  and asparagine synthase , and performed reverse transcription pcr . amplification of dnase-treated rna with primers corresponding to these genes did not yield any products , suggesting no dna contamination in our rna. our rt-pcr analysis with primers corresponding to the first and last coding exons showed six splice variants with odc <dig>  and two splice variants with asyn . alignments of previously-available ests predicted two alternative splicing events in odc <dig> and three in asyn. to identify the type of splicing events in each of these splice variants, we have cloned and sequenced all amplified products. the types of alternative splicing events and their influence on the predicted proteins are presented in figures 3d and 3e. complete nucleotide and predicted amino acid sequence of all splice variants for both genes are provided in supplement  <dig>  our rt-pcr results show that odc <dig> produces more isoforms than predicted from est alignments, suggesting that the available ests/cdnas because of their limited number, do not predict all alternative splicing events in a gene.

sequence analysis has revealed that five of the six forms are due to alternative splicing of the 4th intron, which is the largest in this gene. in a study of alternative splicing of sr genes, which undergo extensive alternative splicing in arabidopsis, it was found that in almost all sr genes the longest intron was involved in generating multiple transcripts by alternative splicing. the alternative splicing events observed in odc <dig> include intron retention, alt5' and alt3' events. only one of the six isoforms produced the full-length protein of  <dig> amino acids, which contains all of the seven conserved signature motifs of odc1; the remaining five splice variants are predicted to produce three different truncated proteins with  <dig> to  <dig> amino acids due to in-frame translation termination codons. none of these three proteins contain conserved regions found in odc <dig>  hence are not likely to be functional. in humans, splice variants that have a premature termination codon at more than  <dig> nucleotides upstream of the last 3' exon-exon junction are known to be degraded by nmd  <cit> . five of the six splice variants of odc <dig> meet this criterion, hence are likely to be the targets of the nmd surveillance system. interestingly, all five splice variants with a ptc are abundant and in some cases are present in higher levels when compared to the functional transcript , suggesting some type of regulatory role for these other transcripts. three of the four splice variants of the asyn gene also encode truncated proteins . two of these isoforms  are also likely targets of nmd. of the three predicted splice variants for the asyn gene we verified one of them , and detected a novel splice variant . asyn transfers the amide group of glutamine to aspartate to form asparagine and plays a role in nitrogen metabolism  <cit> . although land plants have one or more asyn genes it is not known if the pre-mrnas from these undergo alternative splicing  <cit> .

ornithine decarboxylase is a key rate-limiting enzyme in the biosynthesis of polyamines, which are required for cell growth and cell division in chlamydomonas and other organisms  <cit> . it catalyzes the formation of putrescine from ornithine. odc is present in algae and animals. however, higher plants such as arabidopsis do not have odc and synthesize polyamines via a different pathway  <cit> . odc pre-mrna in animals also undergoes alternative splicing. however, the 5' untranslated region is alternatively spliced in animals and this event controls ribosomal entry on the odc mrna  <cit> . the physiological significance of odc <dig> isoforms in chlamydomonas remains to be studied. it is possible that the ptc forms may be involved in regulating the level of the functional isoform through regulated unproductive translation and splicing. in addition to these two genes  splice variant predictions for a few other genes were verified by others  <cit> . a recent analysis of thylakoid membrane proteins provides support for alternative splicing resulting in the generation of two proteins from a single gene  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
during the last six years, the estimates of the extent of alternative splicing in flowering plants has increased from 5% to 30%  <cit>  due to an increase in available est and full-length cdna sequences. it is likely that the percentage of chlamydomonas genes known to undergo alternative splicing will increase as more ests/cdnas become available. deep sequencing of the chlamydomonas trascriptome under various conditions using next generation sequencing technologies should provide information on the real extent of alternative splicing. however, it is also likely that the prevalence of alternative splicing is roughly four-fold less than in flowering plants. we found that 3% of chlamydomonas genes are alternatively spliced; in arabidopsis, with a similar number of ests/cdnas used in this analysis, about 12% of genes were predicted to be alternatively spliced  <cit> .

there are only a few cases of alternative splicing reported in chlamydomonas  <cit> . in several of these the protein coded by splice variants was found to be different, suggesting that proteins generated by alternative splicing may have different functions. in support of this, alternative splicing in some of these genes has been shown to have a physiological role. hence, the observed alternative splicing events reported here are likely to be important in regulating gene expression and protein function. furthermore, alternative splicing may also contribute to the regulation of functional transcript levels through rust.

our analysis indicates that alternative splicing is prevalent in chlamydomonas reinhardtii. however, the extent of alternative splicing is much lower than what is observed in land plants. the frequency of different alternative splicing events is similar to flowering plants, with about half of all splicing events representing intron retention. our finding that a large number of genes in chlamydomonas undergo alternative splicing, together with the simplicity of the system and the availability of powerful experimental tools  suggest that this organism can serve as an attractive experimental system to understand the mechanisms involved in regulated splicing.

