BACKGROUND
over the past few decades, evolutionary biology has had an increasing impact on biomedical research  <cit> . evolutionary theory can address pertinent questions related to the control of infectious diseases and particularly to pathogen virulence  <cit> . rna viruses serve as exciting models for testing this theory because of their potential for rapid evolution. for instance, a striking feature of the human immunodeficiency virus  <dig>  is the rapid population dynamics resulting in a high degree of genetic diversity within and between infected individuals  <cit> . the virus can then capitalize on this genetic diversity to evade a host immune response  <cit> . nevertheless, host-virus coevolution is also important with respect to disease progression  <cit> . viral evolution can be strongly shaped through antiviral pressure applied by the host's immune system  <cit> .

a few complications in the study of host-virus coevolution are the different genetic backgrounds of the host and the genetic diversity of the infecting viral population. the model of monozygotic twins infected synchronically through exposure to the same viral population, therefore, provides an opportunity to examine the population dynamics of hiv while holding a number of confounding variables constant. here we exploit hiv- <dig> as a model system  <cit>  to examine the population genetic processes and epigenetic influence on viral evolution. we collected nucleotide sequence data from the genes protease , reverse transcriptase , and envelope  in each monozygotic twin. using these data, we estimated relevant population genetic parameters, including recombination rates, genetic diversity, growth rates, and selection pressure to compare between the two host individuals. while these twins have identical genetic backgrounds and were infected with the same source of hiv , they have remarkable differences in their clinical courses. twin a is almost normal in terms of immune system  and growth, whereas twin b is almost  <dig> years delayed in terms of size and had many complications including a rare neoplasm.

recent studies focusing on monozygotic twins are conflicting on whether hiv evolution can be predictable  <cit>  or unpredictable  <cit> , related to the immunological repertoire recruitment in these hosts. those studies examined immune responses, viral evolution, and disease outcome in monozygotic twins infected simultaneously with the same virus. they showed that immune selection driven by dominant sequences in each host could contribute to specific pathways of hiv- <dig> evolution. the same natural model is also investigated here; however we focus on the evolutionary processes acting on hiv- <dig> evolution in identical twins by characterizing the population genetic parameters, including positive selection in the viral population. if the viral evolution is predictable, we expect to see similar population dynamics in both twins. however, if there is significant epigenetic impact on viral evolution, then we would see differences in the population dynamics and associated population genetic parameters.

RESULTS
the phylogenetic analysis of env revealed clear evolutionary differences between the viral populations present in each twin , with twin a showing much longer branch lengths compared to twin b. the viral populations from each twin formed reciprocally monophyletic groups with a shared most recent common ancestor compared to hiv- <dig> control sequences , as one would expect given the same source population of hiv. twin a also had much high levels of genetic diversity compared to twin b . the phylogenetic network reconstruction of rt  also indicates distinct viral populations for each twin, with a relatively higher number of internal sampled genotypes in twin a in comparison with twin b. twin b has a higher number of tip haplotypes , suggesting that selection is acting with more force on twin b compared to twin a. both phylogenetic and network reconstruction analyses showed similar results for all genes analyzed  . growth rates were also different between the hiv populations infecting the two twins with twin a showing a rate, at least, two times higher than twin b . interestingly, recombination rates were relatively similar except for rt where the recombination rate  was three times higher in twin a. in both twins the substitution rate was higher than the recombination rate, as indicated by the low estimates of r . the ratio of the per-site rate of recombination to the per-site rate of mutation  in all genes was less than one, indicating that mutation plays a more significant role in producing novel genetic combinations than recombination and is, therefore, the major force driving the evolution of these viral populations . moreover, the beast analyses showed that twin a had a higher relative genetic diversity than twin b and showed different population dynamics through time . in env, after a similar starting point in both twins, the relative genetic diversity remained constant until just recently when both twins had a sudden decrease in diversity followed by an exponential increase with twin a increasing to much higher levels of diversity compared to twin b. in pro, both twins showed a gradual increase in the relative genetic diversity until just after drug therapy intervention. then twin b starts to increase in diversity before twin a  two years prior to twin a ; see methods). twin a then has a steeper increase in diversity relative to twin b before their levels come together at higher levels. in rt, after a short initial starting point in both twins, twin a rapidly develops higher diversity than twin b through time with both patients showing increases in diversity over the last two years, but twin a maintaining a relatively higher level of diversity compared to twin b.

lamarc's confidence intervals  around the estimates of each parameter are given between brackets. ns = number of sequences.

we also investigated the extent to which natural selection has impacted the viral populations for each twin. significant evidence of adaptive selection was detected in rt from twin b  and in env from twin a  using paml . the bayesian approach identified  <dig> positively selected sites  under model m <dig> and  <dig> positively selected sites under model m <dig> in env from twin a. all of the  <dig> sites detected under model m <dig> were also found by model m <dig>  models m <dig> and m <dig> also detected one site under selection in rt from twin b . this site is not documented as a drug resistance mutation site in rt. even though they are not detected as positively selected sites in rt, we found, in both twins, m184v mutation that is associated with conferring resistance to 3tc. also we detected t215f and k219q mutations in rt in twin b, which are associated with conferring resistance to azt. there are  <dig> positions known to be associated with protease inhibitors  <cit> . some amino acid changes were seen in pro in both twins, but none of these changes are known to confer drug resistance. a recent study by nozawa et al.  <cit>  pointed out the low sensitivity of paml for detecting positively selected sites, however this claim has been rejected by yang et al.  <cit>  who provide strong support to the sensitivity of this statistical method for inferring positive selection in dna sequences and for comparative analysis of genomic data  <cit> . recombination can confound the inference of selection. we, therefore, tested for recombination using gard  that detected a single recombination breakpoint in env for both twins and in rt for twin b. the rel  selection analyses, that took into account the presence of recombination inferred through gard, clearly indicated that in env, positive selection was stronger for twin a, while no difference was detected in the other genes .

lnl = likelihood values; ω = estimate of dn/ds ; p = proportion of sites under diversifying selection ; pss = number of positively selected sites with a posterior probability >  <dig>  . all comparisons between nested models  were significant.

the column gard indicates the location of breakpoints, ω is the estimate of dn/ds. pss are positively selected sites for the rel analysis.

*if recombination was detected, the selection analyses were performed taking into account the resulting partition.

our goal was to investigate hiv- <dig> evolution in identical twins infected synchronically at birth with the same blood transfusion. we found compelling distinctions between the viral populations from each twin with respect to their population dynamics, phylogenetic structure, growth rates, recombination rates, genetic diversity, and selection pressures. these results were unexpected due to a combination of having identical starting points with respect to both the infecting viral population and the host genetic background. that coupled with the seemingly limited pathways of evolution for both immune evasion and evolution of drug resistance  <cit>  would lead one to predict similar patterns of genetic diversity and dynamics in viral populations resulting in similar clinical outcomes. instead, we found higher growth rates, higher genetic diversity, and higher recombination in rt in the healthier twin a compared to twin b. we also found sites under diversifying selection in env in twin a whereas twin b had only one site under selection in rt . thus, the higher genetic diversity and higher number of selected sites in env appear to be associated with slower disease progression, results concordant with that found in a broad study of disease progression in infants  <cit> . similarly, the twins differed in their population dynamics and these differed by gene region. the rt and env regions showed the viral population in the healthier twin a with higher levels of genetic diversity throughout the history of infection even when there were significant shifts in overall levels of diversity. on the other hand, pro showed the viral population in twin b with a gradual increase in diversity post drug therapy with a more rapid increase in twin a that was delayed by the same time period as the delay in the rt inhibitor . this result suggests that the shape of the response to drug therapy in terms of the hiv population diversity might be diagnostic of future disease progression, but further study with larger sample sizes are needed to better test this response as predictive of disease progression. nevertheless, these twins clearly show very different responses to infection.

this difference in viral population dynamics is concordant with the differences observed in the clinical courses in each twin. the immune system in twin a shows cd <dig> t cells at an almost normal rate. the immune system in twin b is depressed, hence no strong selective pressure is acting upon its virus population to evolve fast  <cit> . all these results combined provide strong evidence that, at least in this case, the replicate evolutionary experiment did not result in an identical outcome demonstrating the importance of selective response to random epigenetic factors impacting disease progression  <cit> .

indeed, some studies in monozygotic twins revealed increasing epigenetic differences with age  <cit> . additionally, there is a clear potential for founding effects upon infection  <cit> , even in the context of a blood transfusion as the viral population in a shared blood donation is certainly reduced in genetic diversity and number compared to infectious virus from an infected individual. the combination of a reduced effective population size coupled with strong selective pressure is a key ingredient for founder effects  <cit> , resulting in populations with very different characteristics as evident here in both the population dynamics and immunology. clearly, the early impact of founder effects and epigenetic factors on viral population dynamics has diversifying impact over time as the viral populations undergo independent evolution - even in the face of similar genetic selection pressures, identical genetic starting points, and identical host genetic backgrounds . this epigenetic drift during development can be either stochastic  or determined by environmental factors  <cit> . host-virus interactions in early stages hiv infection are presumed to have a large impact on the disease course and viral evolution  <cit> , yet they are exceptionally difficult to study because researchers are typically not able to design experiments to investigate viral dynamics at infection. our study capitalizes on the infection of monozygotic twins through a common contaminated blood transfusion to demonstrate that even more complicated epigenetic factors need to be taken into account in developing hypotheses associated with genetic diversity, population dynamics, selection pressure and their association with disease progression.

CONCLUSIONS
we used monozygotic twins infected at birth from the same blood transfusion contaminated with hiv- <dig> to study the association of population genetic and phylogenetic diversity with disease progression and clinical outcomes. we documented that these twins had very different clinical outcomes with twin a being relatively healthy compared to twin b. associated with this slower disease progression in twin a, we found phylogenetic differences, higher growth rates, and higher genetic diversity in the hiv population and higher recombination rates in rt. we also found differences in population dynamics across all three gene regions. these differences suggest that epigenetic factors are important in disease progression and can impact viral genetic population dynamics.

