BACKGROUND
species diversity, endemism and structure are predicted to be lower in marine vs terrestrial assemblages because populations are less prone to diverge when dispersal potential is high and prominent barriers are absent . molecular markers, with their unprecedented power to delineate and describe biological relationships, show nevertheless a rather intricate and multi-layered picture of marine biodiversity. many poor dispersers and/or habitat specialists often display extreme levels of cryptic phylogeographic structure across their wide distributions , including divergent regional lineages of uncertain biological status . true cryptic  species are also commonly identified within morphologically conserved, hyper-diverse and/or poorly-studied taxonomic groups , and even within large, ecologically dominant organisms such as canopy-forming kelp  <cit> . in the ne atlantic, for instance, two new fucoids have been genetically identified  in the past 10 years alone  <cit> .

remarkably, the number of endemic  cryptic species, often recovered within allegedly wide-ranging congeners, is also accumulating, particularly throughout tropical/subtropical archipelagos . endemism may be a stable feature in the evolutionary history of some species, while for others just a transient state. for instance, nascent species are often spatially restricted, at least for some time  <cit> . species may also endure climatically adverse periods in rather restricted “refugia”, before expanding their ranges again or becoming extinct . in the terrestrial realm, many modern  “climatic relicts” are concentrated in atypically cooler  areas, such as southern mountain ranges  <cit> . similar patterns may emerge, at least at the population level, in marine systems, for instance associated with cooler upwelling areas  <cit> .

modern phylogenetic analyses have also clarified marine species relationships and boundaries, often challenging traditional taxonomic classifications . phylogenetic discordance and/or genomic admixture reveal that hybridization and gene introgression occur in a diverse range of marine taxa . perhaps unsurprisingly, hybridization has been found to be particularly frequent among sessile broadcast spawners  that form dense aggregations of closely related species, such as some corals  <cit>  and canopy-forming seaweeds . a range of sexual and clonal corals is suspected to be of actual hybrid origin  <cit> , but marine hybrid speciation, including via allopolyploidy , is otherwise very poorly documented. evidence for ancient polyploidization events and for modern polyploid taxa has been accumulating across much of the tree of life , and its incidence and evolutionary significance may be more general than previously appreciated.


hesperophycus californicus and pelvetiopsis limitata are the extant members of two monotypic genera of canopy-forming fucoid seaweeds  endemic to the temperate rocky-shores of the north-east pacific. both occur in mid/high intertidal assemblages, although with complementary biogeographical distributions. warm-temperate h. californicus is present from punta eugenia  to monterey bay , whereas cold-temperate p. limitata occurs from point conception  to vancouver island . a third putative species, p. arborescens, was described from just south of monterey  <cit> , but has never enjoyed much practical recognition and use. collectively, these species/genera form a monophyletic lineage that is sister to fucus  <cit> , a much more speciose genus  with a centre of diversity in the north atlantic. the genus fucus has been the focus of much physiological, ecological, and phylogeographical research , but reconstructing its evolutionary history has long been complicated by poor morphological discrimination, low marker resolution, incomplete lineage sorting, and hybridization/introgression  <cit> . hesperophycus-pelvetiopsis have received considerably less attention, but preliminary tests for newly developed molecular markers immediately revealed multiple taxonomic and phylogenetic conflicts consistent with cryptic diversity and reticulate evolution.

this study aimed to identify all genetic entities present within this complex, and to describe their phylogenetic relationships, morphological differences and biogeographical ranges. we reveal a single genus  with four species, adding to this complex two narrow-endemic, pseudo-cryptic species from california , the latter of recent allopolyploid origin, a process so far unknown in brown seaweeds.

methods
sampling, dna isolation and amplification, genotyping and sequencing
a comprehensive panel of populations of pelvetiopsis limitata sensu lato  and hesperophycus californicus was sampled along the entire ranges of these species in the ne pacific. preliminary results showed that p. arborescens and a fourth entity were genetically distinct, so additional populations  were sampled to include all the morphological and genetic diversity present in the complex. whole individuals were also sampled for descriptions of the general morphology of each recovered genetic entity. these were collected at the sites where they had been genetically identified and morphometric measurements, photographs and herbarium pressings were made. in total,  <dig> population samples containing  <dig> individuals  from  <dig> sites spanning punta baja  to cape meares  were analysed . samples of apical tissue were collected every meter along 30 m, or haphazardly along 25–100 m, depending on the local spatial patchiness at each site, and were preserved dehydrated in silica-gel crystals until dna extraction. genomic dna was extracted from ca. 8 mg dehydrated tissue using the nucleospin®  <dig> plant ii kit , and diluted 1: <dig> 

all individuals were screened for the 23s/trnk mitochondrial intergenic spacer , as this marker was previously shown to provide good inter- and intra-specific resolution in the sister genus fucus, and some propensity to cross species barriers  <cit> . the ‘universal’ fucoid/kelp primers of  <cit>  were used to amplify a large  <dig>  kb fragment spanning the mtigs in a few individuals. new primers were designed in conserved genic flanking regions from these sequences to specifically target the mtigs of hesperophycus-pelvetiopsis .

a geographically diverse panel of individuals representing all genetic entities inferred with the mtigs was used to assess cross-amplification and polymorphism of  <dig> microsatellite loci developed de novo for p. limitata. these were identified in silico by screening with msatcommander  <cit>  a genomic dna library  using shotgun  <dig> pyrosequencing. from these,  <dig> loci were selected to produce multi-locus genotypes for all hesperophycus-pelvetiopsis individuals .

amplified fragments were analyzed in an abi prism 3130xl automated capillary sequencer  at ccmar, portugal. amplicons were pre-cleaned with exosap  and sequences were aligned, proofread, and edited in geneious  <dig>  . microsatellite alleles were manually scored in strand  <cit>  using the genescan™  <dig> liz™ size standard .

data analysis
haplotype/sequence networks were constructed in network  <dig>  using the median-joining  algorithm  <cit> . phylogenetic relationships were reconstructed using bayesian and maximum likelihood  inference methods. nucleotide substitution models  were compared with jmodeltest  <dig>  <cit>  and the best-fit model selected based on the akaike information criterion. bayesian analyses were performed using mrbayes  <dig>  <cit> . two parallel metropolis-coupled markov chain monte carlo searches, each with four chains , were run for  <dig> generations, sampling trees and parameters every  <dig> generations. the number of substitution rates, among-site rate variation, and base frequency priors were set according to the substitution model selected, leaving the remaining options as default. average standard deviation of split frequencies between runs and cold chains log-likelihood stationarity were inspected to assess inter-run convergence and run length sufficiency, respectively. based on the latter,  <dig> generations  were discarded as burn-in. the remaining  <dig>  <dig> trees sampled were used to produce 50% majority-rule consensus trees and to calculate branch posterior probabilities. maximum likelihood analyses were performed with phyml  <dig>  <cit>  using the atgc bioinformatics platform . nodal support was calculated using  <dig> bootstraps. trees were rooted with fucus spp. inter-specific divergence within pelvetiopsis and within the two major lineages of fucus was compared by estimating kimura’s two parameter  distances between ancestral haplotypes defining each recovered species.

summary statistics of the microsatellite genetic diversity, including microsatellite allele frequencies, mean allelic richness , nei’s gene diversity , observed heterozygosity , and inbreeding coefficients  were calculated with genetix  <dig>  <cit>  for all populations. the number and delimitation of multilocus genotypic clusters and its congruence with mtigs phylogroups was visually inspected with a factorial correspondence analysis  implemented in genetix, and with a bayesian, model-based genetic admixture analysis implemented in structure  <dig>  <cit> . in the latter, individuals were pooled into one dataset for analyses, without a priori population assignments. each number of assumed genetic clusters  was run five times using a burn-in of  <dig>  iterations and a run-length of  <dig> , <dig> iterations.

RESULTS
a total of  <dig> mtigs haplotypes  were recovered. the mtigs recovered three main clades that partially conflicted with a priori species delimitations. h. californicus was congruent, whereas three well resolved phylogroups were apparent within p. limitata sensu lato . these included : 1) p. limitata sensu stricto , 2) p. arborescens, and 3) a new, undescribed cryptic species, p. hybrida sp. nov., genealogically closer to h. californicus. mtdna clades were well resolved  but resolution was insufficient to establish the sequence of cladogenesis . mean sequence distances between hesperophycus-pelvetiopsis clades ranged between  <dig>   and  <dig>  , the same magnitude of that found between the two major lineages of fucus . haplotype diversity within inferred entities was rather low , with  <dig> populations  fixed for a single haplotype .fig.  <dig> genealogical relationships of pelvetiopsis spp. based on mtigs data. a mtigs haplotype network; the dots represent inferred, unsampled haplotypes and the small rectangles represent inferred indels. b reconstructed 50% majority-rule consensus phylogenetic tree. numbers above and below the branches are bayesian posterior probabilities  and maximum likelihood bootstrap support values , respectively. for clarity, outgroup  branches were collapsed , with the horizontal length of the triangle representing the distance from the branches’ common node to the tip of the longest branch



 <dig>  ±  <dig>  
 <dig>  ±  <dig>  
 <dig>  ±  <dig>  
kimura’s two-parameter  sequence distances  within and between  major mtigs clades of fucus  and pelvetiopsis. the number of sequence comparisons is shown in brackets. p. californica is a synonym of hesperophycus californicus





patterns of microsatellite cross-amplification and polymorphism varied markedly between loci, with four  failing to produce clear products in at least one species, and four  revealing inter-specific differences only . populations of h. californicus and p. arborescens typically exhibited homozygote excess . in contrast, fixed heterozygosity was apparent in a high proportion of loci that successfully amplified in p. limitata  and p. hybrida  , resulting in extremely high  heterozygote excess  in all their populations . the occurrence of  <dig> alleles at a single locus was very rarely observed. in p. hybrida, each allele in heterozygote loci was identical or similar in size to either p. arborescens or h. californicus, although some peak imbalance  was noticeable at loci pl <dig> and pl <dig> . homozygosity was only observed when p. arborescens or h. californicus produced similar-sized alleles , or when amplification failed in one of them . in p. limitata, alleles were shared with h. californicus or p. arborescens, or were species-specific. the congruence between the recovered genotypic clusters and the mtdna clades was absolute . as expected given its fixed heterozygosity and allele sizes, both structure  and fca  analyses indicated that p. hybrida was genetically intermediate  between h. californicus and p. arborescens. contrastingly, allele states didn’t reveal any obvious genealogic relationship between p. limitata and its extant congeners.fig.  <dig> genotypic entities within pelvetiopsis as assessed with microsatellite loci. a structure plot for k =  <dig>  showing inferred taxonomic entities at the bottom and mtdna clades at the top. b fca plot, with individuals labelled according to inferred genetic entities. note the congruence between sequence and typing data and between different analyses





a posteriori, all four genetic entities could be recognized based on their general morphology . a combination of several characteristics, including maximum length, frond width, presence and distribution of cryptostomata in vegetative and reproductive parts, and shape of receptacles, was particularly helpful to confirm species identities in the field . the large sampling effort of this study allowed us to establish the distribution range of each species . the southernmost species, h. californicus, was genetically confirmed from baja california to monterey bay whereas cold-temperate p. limitata was confirmed from point conception to n oregon. p. arborescens and p. hybrida exhibited much more restricted  distributions centered in the monterey  and san luis obispo counties, respectively. the first was mostly found in the carmel area, with the southernmost population  representing an isolated collection. p. hybrida was also found in remote san miguel island, and its distribution in other channel islands remains a possibility. no species were collected on the mainland between mexico and point conception.fig.  <dig> general morphology and shape of receptacles of pelvetiopsis spp. a
hesperophycus californicus , b
p. limitata, c
p. hybrida, and d
p. arborescens



fig.  <dig> inferred latitudinal distributions of pelvetiopsis spp. distributions based on the geographical origin of genetically-determined species samples , and also based in literature records. note the overlapping ranges of species between point conception and monterey bay




discussion
crypticism, allopolyploidy and biogeography of pelvetiopsis spp.
our analyses revealed multiple taxonomic, phylogenetic and genomic inconsistencies within hesperophycus-pelvetiopsis, notably the occurrence of 1) more genetic entities than the two initially recognized species, 2) species/gene conflicts, and 3) stable, genome-wide heterozygosity in two entities. such conflicts often reflect incorrect taxonomy  or natural evolutionary processes such as incomplete lineage sorting and introgressive hybridization, among others  <cit> . here, both types of factors were readily identified.

in contrast with h. californicus, genetic data clearly supported multiple entities within p. limitata sensu lato. one of these undoubtedly corresponds to the previously described p. arborescens, as confirmed by its characteristic morphology and occurrence at the type locality . another one, the newly recognized pseudo-cryptic pelvetiopsis hybrida, was found to be genetically intermediate between h. californicus and p. arborescens, with all available evidence indicating an allopolyploid origin . all four entities corresponded to genetically discontinuous clusters that were found a posteriori to further exhibit distinctive morphological characteristics. all combinations of species pairs  were found locally co-occurring in at least a few sites between point conception and monterey bay . examples include p. limitata, p. arborescens and h. californicus all along the monterey peninsula, p. hybrida and h. californicus throughout san luis obispo county, and p. limitata and p. hybrida in the same county around hazards . despite close proximity, local ongoing hybridization between species was never detected. given their genetic and morphological integrity in sympatry, these four entities  clearly correspond to good biological species.

molecular analyses nevertheless revealed a key hybridization event in the evolutionary history of hesperophycus-pelvetiopsis. specifically, p. hybrida  exhibited fixed heterozygosity in a high proportion of microsatellite loci, with allele states clearly indicating the contribution of h. californicus and p. arborescens genomes. genomic heterozygosity in sexually reproducing organisms is not expected beyond f <dig> hybrids, because independent  segregation of chromosomes and successive generations of mating necessarily generate a proportion of homozygotes while pulling genotypic frequencies of populations towards hardy-weinberg equilibrium. in selfing species and/or with very restricted gametic dispersal, inbreeding would actually promote an excess of homozygotes, as observed here in h. californicus and p. arborescens, and in other fucoids sharing similar life-history and reproductive traits  <cit> . p. hybrida cannot result from the recurrent formation of f <dig> hybrids, since currently it doesn’t overlap its distribution with p. arborescens, one of its inferred ancestors. a clonal hybrid swarm is also unlikely because p. hybrida produces fully functional sexual gametes  and also because vegetative propagation by fucaceae has never been reported in intertidal wave-swept habitats. clonal lineages are present only in sheltered environments such as salt-marshes, estuarine mudflats and land-locked bays, and exhibit distinctive morphologies characterized by dwarf and curly habit, vegetative proliferation and lack  of reproductive structures and anchoring holdfasts . attached, open-coast clones have only been reported from the atidal, brackish baltic-sea, where they result from the reattachment of breaking vegetative fragments  <cit> . this process requires motionless time  on a substrate to develop rhizoids, something that can happen in the baltic subtidal where sea surface can be still for prolonged periods , but not in the wave-swept intertidal rocky-shores sites where p. hybrida occurs.

under sexual reproduction , only allopolyploidy can account for the generationally stable, genome-wide hybridity of p. hybrida. at least in selfing species, allopolyploidy is more likely to result from the self-fusion of unreduced gametes of f <dig> hybrids than via triploid bridges  <cit> , although the actual pathways can only be guessed at. in any case, genome duplication may have been the key event restoring hybrid fertility, since p. hybrida originates from relatively divergent species. despite the fixed heterozygosity of individuals, the very low number of individuals exhibiting three alleles  in at least one locus indicates that most homeolog loci actually occur, as expected in low-dispersal selfing species, in the homozygous state.

organellar genomes are maternally inherited in brown seaweeds  <cit> . mitochondrial sequence data thus allow us to identify a northern female h. californicus and a male p. arborescens as the diploid ancestors of p. hybrida. the small mtdna divergence and the  identical microsatellite allele states further argue for a relatively recent evolutionary origin. however, we show that mtdna haplotypes are no longer shared between p. hybrida and h. californicus, and that the modern ranges of p. hybrida and p. arborescens do not overlap. complete mtdna lineage sorting and range shifts can occur on relatively short time-scales , but here the results clearly indicate that hybridization was not extremely recent and is not ongoing presently. in p. limitata, microsatellite data was also compatible with multiple homeologue chromosomes, but allele states didn’t reveal any obvious relationship with any of its extant conspecifics. ongoing karyotyping and sequencing of multiple nuclear loci will allow confirmation of the genealogical relationships and ploidies inferred here for h. californicus, p. arborescens and p. hybrida, and explore the hypothesis that p. limitata corresponds to a second, cryptic paleopolyploid species.

the hypothesis that p. limitata had also an allopolyploid origin is striking because currently this cold-temperate species shows the widest latitudinal span of all recognized species , and is the only species occurring north of monterey bay. by comparison, p. hybrida showed a much more restricted range in mainland california and in san miguel island . low-dispersal organisms might take some time to migrate and colonize new habitats. it can be hypothesized that this rather recent species is still in the process of equilibrating with its climatic niche . remarkably, its inferred paternal ancestor, p. arborescens, was only found in an even narrower, non-overlapping stretch of coastline spanning about  <dig> ° in latitude . this degree of endemism is rare in temperate marine species, and in related fucoids is normally associated with newly emerged, extreme habitats  and/or past climates . within its small range, p. arborescens was always found in small scattered patches and only along a high intertidal fringe typically above all other intertidal fucoids . notwithstanding its dynamic evolutionary history, currently this species may be better described as an extremely vulnerable climatic relict  <cit> . finally, the most southern species, h. californicus, also exhibited a fairly wide latitudinal range, although south of point conception this was very discontinuous and mostly restricted to offshore islands  and prominent capes   <cit> . this species exhibited a marked phylogeographical break at point conception that should be further investigated.

the rich coastal biota of california, including its luxuriant seaweed flora, has been extensively surveyed in the past decades; the intertidal fucoid assemblages in particular are conspicuous and easily accessible for amateurs and trained phycologists, and are routinely included in coastal monitoring programs . the discovery of a new pelvetiopsis illustrates how much cryptic diversity may be hiding within more problematic groups and in more remote areas and depths. remarkably, all pelvetiopsis were present along the transitional coastline between point conception and monterey bay, either as relict  or evolutionarily recent  endemics, or, for more widespread species, overlapping the southernmost  and northernmost  parts of their ranges. this modern hotspot of biodiversity, refugial persistence and evolutionary opportunity probably results from its relatively stable climatic history and high spatial habitat heterogeneity. the narrow endemic species nevertheless raise conservation concerns and deserve finer detail monitoring, particularly p. arborescens. its restricted range, rarity and ecologically marginal vertical distribution make it particularly vulnerable to demographic stochasticity and to extreme el niño events and ongoing climatic changes.

the identification of three phylogenetic clades comprising four species  calls for a taxonomic revision of the complex . specifically, available data do not support the historical separation of hesperophycus and pelvetiopsis, and a new combination for hesperophycus californicus  is therefore proposed. in addition to the formal description of the allotetraploid p. hybrida, the practical recognition of rare p. arborescens is also warranted.table  <dig> taxonomic update of hesperophycus-pelvetiopsis






pelvetiopsis californica  neiva, j., raimondi, p.t., pearson, g.a., serrão, e.a. comb. nov.


pelvetiopsis hybrida neiva, j., raimondi, p.t., pearson, g.a., serrão, e.a. sp. nov.

diagnosis: perennial, general morphology and size similar to pelvetiopsis limitata, but distinguished from it by the occurrence of cryptostomata on the abaxial side of young frond tips, and by blunt, usually not bifurcated, receptacles; distinguished from pelvetiopsis californica by its smaller size  and by the absence of abundant cryptostomata on both sides of fronds  and on receptacles. distinguished from p. arborescens by its larger size , wider fronds , and blunt receptacles. this is an allopolyploid species derived from p. californica and p. arborescens, as assessed by a cloned nuclear intron and multiple codominant microsatellite markers.




originality of allopolyploid speciation
the recognition of two narrow-endemic, pseudo-cryptic species within pelvetiopsis is certainly remarkable, but the allopolyploid nature of p. hybrida is truly unexpected and completely original both from a taxonomic  and ecological  perspective. variance in genome size estimates in seaweeds have been attributed to palaeo-polyploidization events  <cit> , including in fucales  <cit> , but direct genetic evidence for modern polyploids remains scarce  <cit>  and nearly non-existent in brown seaweeds . for instance, unlike p. hybrida, suspected macrocystis x pelagophycus allopolyploids could not be confirmed genetically based on this benchmark . surprisingly, positive correlates of plant polyploidy, including perenniality and ability to self, are common in many speciose genera of canopy-forming brown seaweeds , some of which also display some propensity to hybridize. for instance, in the closely related and well-studied genus fucus, hybridization between related species has been frequent and ongoing but the primary evolutionary consequence has only been introgressive gene-flow .

why is allopolyploidy featuring in recent pelvetiopsis evolution while virtually unknown across its entire class? globally, whole genome duplication appears to require relatively stringent conditions; hybridization for instance is taxonomically widespread and frequent  <cit> , whereas polyploidy is common in plants  <cit>  and a few vertebrate lineages  <cit>  but infrequent in most other taxonomic groups  <cit> . even in plants, high variation in the frequency of polyploidy implies different propensities for polyploidization, or at least polyploid establishment, in different lineages  <cit> . in related fucus, chemotactic attraction of sperm by eggs is cross-specific  <cit> , and the potential for gamete contact in mixed stands can be high . yet, hybridization  is only known between related species and is often asymmetric  <cit> . for instance, natural hybrids normally involve male  f. serratus x female  f. evanescens, presumably because sperm allocation is much higher in dioecious vs hermaphrodite species  <cit> . speciation of p. hybrida on the other hand involved the interaction of two divergent self-compatible hermaphroditic species. this is unlikely to be a coincidence. allopolyploids seem to originate more frequently when crosses involve genomically divergent species  because more severe meiotic conflicts presumably prevent diploid hybrids from backcrossing/introgressing with parental species , and result in higher numbers of unreduced  gametes. this is consistent with inter-lineage allopolyploid speciation in pelvetiopsis vs intra-lineage  introgression in sister fucus. it does not really offer, however, a general explanation for why allopolyploidy is otherwise so rare among brown seaweeds.

it should be noted that p. hybrida was found co-occurring in sympatry with its ancestor p. californica  throughout much of its distribution. niche differentiation is acknowledged as a pre-requisite, or at least facilitator, allowing initial establishment and long-term survival of viable  neopolyploids as stable species, by alleviating potential competition with longer-established diploid ancestors . both polyploidy and hybridization have saltation effects, and any adaptive phenotypic trait may be more readily conserved  due to cytotype isolation. in any case, ecological differences need not be great. floristic meta-analyses show that budding speciation  is common in plants, with sister species often differing in subtle habitat preferences conducive to fine-scale parapatry/allopatry  <cit> . the importance of fine-scale environmental heterogeneity and of reproductive traits  is also known to promote species divergence in the shallow marine realm. in sister fucus, for instance, the integrity and vertical distribution of closely related species is maintained along strong vertical gradients by small differences in stress tolerance, even in the face of moderate gene-flow  <cit> . similar patterns are also apparent in mixed pelvetiopsis stands occurring between point conception and monterey. the average vertical ranges of p. hybrida and p. arborescens were always above those of h. californicus and p. limitata where they co-occurred . likewise, very local  patterns of distribution suggest an important role for wave action in limiting their distributions. whether these ecological differences are among the immediate effects of allopolyploidization is unclear, since they cannot be separated from other evolutionary processes  driving subsequent niche divergence  <cit> .

because of the very limited genomic differentiation of p. hybrida from its extant ancestors, this species is particularly suited to investigate how divergent parental genomes are transferred and functionally integrated in a new species and might contribute to adaptive diversification. the rocky intertidal zone provides one of the best natural laboratories for examining the relationships between abiotic constraints, biotic interactions, and ecological patterns in nature  <cit> . a few sites where different combinations of species coexist have already been identified, and field observations and experimental work may identify niche differences allowing coexistence at these local scales, including among species with partially shared genetic backgrounds.

CONCLUSIONS
this study revealed a much more diverse and evolutionarily complex picture of ne pacific pelvetiopsis than previously anticipated. in addition to the confirmation of the big sur endemic p. arborescens, molecular data allowed for the first time the identification of a stable allopolyploid marine species  with clearly discernable phylogenetic relationships , morphology, and geographical distribution. ongoing analyses of nuclear sequence data support our inferences regarding p. hybrida, and are consistent with the hypothesis of p. limitata corresponding to a second, cryptic paleopolyploid. allopolyploid speciation remains otherwise unknown in brown seaweeds, and until some ecological, biological or reproductive originality is identified, its unique occurrence within pelvetiopsis will remain enigmatic. the diversity hotspot between point conception and monterey bay likely reflects its relatively stable climatic history and its regionally high habitat heterogeneity. this conspicuous seaweed genus from the well-studied californian intertidal illustrates how much diversity  potentially remains undiscovered in other  marine groups and regions.

additional files

additional file 1: genetic diversity within populations of pelvetiopsis spp. allelic richness , nei’s gene diversity , observed heterozygosity , and multi-locus inbreeding coefficient  were estimated for each population of each inferred species. 


additional file 2: primer sequences and amplification details for all markers. 


additional file 3: microsatellite allele frequencies in populations of pelvetiopsis spp. loci are separated by vertical lines, with loci names on top and allele sizes  on the bottom. the presence of an allele in a population is indicated by a circle with an area proportional to its frequency. population codes as in additional file  <dig>  horizontal lines separate the inferred species, where p. californica is a synonym of hesperophycus californicus. grey squares identify different allele sets co-occurring in each individual of p. hybrida and/or p. limitata. dashed squares mark the allele sets where allele drop-out was detected. 


additional file 4: morphological characteristics useful for field discrimination of pelvetiopsis spp. 




the authors thank all the numerous people that contributed during the many sampling campaigns, particularly the partners in the pisco monitoring program, melissa redfield,

karah ammann, maya george, christy bell, rachael williams, nathaniel fletcher, david lohse, dr. ladah’s ice team at cicese, don canestro for hosting at kenneth s. norris rancho marino reserve, marta valente and ana balau  for sequencing and genotyping work, and michael guiry  for nomenclatural advice and for the essential information publicly available in algaebase.

funding
this work was funded by the portuguese fct  through programs extant , genekelp , marfor , uid/multi/04326/ <dig> and a postdoctoral fellowship to jn ; by the mexican conacyt  grant sep-conacyt, cb-2013-01- <dig>  # 625262; and by the american david and lucille packard foundation and bureau of ocean energy management.

availability of data and materials
mtigs sequences and microsatellite sequences were deposited in genbank under accession numbers ku872204- ku <dig> and ku872191- ku <dig> respectively. genotypic data were deposited in figshare repository @ https://figshare.com/s/b191318c8ef3f0c <dig> 

authors’ contributions
jn, eas, la, ptr and gap designed the research. jn, eas, la, kam, lbl and gap collected the samples. jn, nm, lg, cp, ncc developed the markers and obtained sequence and genotypic data. jn and dcr conducted the morphometric analyses. jn, nm and gap conducted the phylogenetic analyses. jn, eas and gap led the writing. all authors read, edited, and approved the final manuscript.

competing interests
the authors declare that they have no competing interests.
