BACKGROUND
recent studies have demonstrated numerous biological properties of mesenchymal stem cells , as well their potential application to treat complex diseases or injuries to tissues that have difficulty regenerating, such as those that affect the central and peripheral nervous system. thus, stem cell therapy is a promising alternative for the treatment of these diseases because of the high capacity for self-regeneration, the low immunogenicity, and the paracrine, anti-inflammatory, immunomodulatory, anti-apoptotic and neuroprotective effects of mscs.

during ischemic damage or severe tissue damage, mscs can be attracted to the site of injury, where they secrete bioactive factors that influence the process of tissue repair and regeneration  <cit> . according to baraniak and mcdevitt  <cit> , stem and progenitor cells are able to produce and secrete a large number of factors, including growth, angiogenic, antifibrotic, anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressive factors and compounds responsible for the homeostasis of the extracellular matrix , as well as antioxidants and anti-apoptotic molecules that play important roles in the regenerative process. in addition to producing cytokines, chemokines, growth factors and extracellular matrix molecules, it is noteworthy that stem/progenitor cells play an important role in the consume of pro-apoptotic factors and inflammatory molecules  <cit> . all these properties are great attractions for the use of cell therapy in many diseases that affect animals and humans. however, preclinical and clinical trial data are fundamental to provide the scientific basis in support of stem cell therapy. the therapeutic window, the strategy of cell delivery, the cell doses and the possible secondary effects should be evaluated in clinical studies  <cit> . because horses are commonly affected by musculoskeletal, neurological and reproductive disorders, the equine species can be used as a model for experimental mscs therapy.

mscs derived from the bone marrow  and adipose tissue are the two most common types of stem cells used in therapeutic approaches to repair and/or regenerate tissues in horses  <cit> . the studies involving mscs therapy of horses have focused mainly on osteoarticular and tendon injuries  <cit> , with few reports of its use in other tissues, such as the nervous system. thus, the application pathways most used until now for the clinical treatment of horses are intralesional and intra-articular. preclinical studies that evaluated the safety of mscs transplantation by other pathways, such as intrathecal, are lacking in equine medicine. an intrathecal injection is less invasive than an intralesional injection, can extensively deliver cells through the cerebrospinal fluid   <cit>  and is a more feasible routine for treatment of equine cns injuries.

in this context, the purpose of this study was to evaluate the feasibility and safety of intrathecal transplantation of autologous bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells  in horses.

RESULTS
cultivation, characterization and differentiation capacities of the bm-mscs
the cells from the mononuclear fraction of the bm exhibited adherence to the culture dish between  <dig> and 48 hours and fibroblastoid morphology starting at four days of cultivation. confluence  and homogeneity of the culture were obtained after approximately three week of cell culture.

the immunophenotyping analysis revealed a high level of expression of the cd <dig> marker x¯=97± <dig> %, a lower level of expression of the cd <dig> marker x¯=71± <dig> % and the lack of expression of the cd <dig> marker x¯= <dig> ± <dig> %.

the differentiation potential of the mscs was demonstrated in vitro by a positive response to the osteogenic, adipogenic and chondrogenic differentiation media by the tenth, eighth and twenty-first day of exposure, respectively.

the mscs that initially had a fibroblastoid morphology acquired a predominantly polygonal morphology after exposure to the osteogenic medium and deposited large amounts of calcium-rich extracellular matrix, as shown by positive staining with alizarin red .figure  <dig> 
differentiation assay of mesenchymal stem cells for osteogenic, adipogenic and chondrogenic lineages.  osteogenic differentiation. note calcium deposits stained with alizarin red.  adipogenic differentiation. note the intracellular presence of lipid droplets stained with oil red.  chondrogenic differentiation.  toluidin blue staining. note the presence of metachromatic areas in pink  indicating the presence of extracellular matrix containing proteoglycans.  alcian blue staining. note the presence of areas in blue indicating the presence of extracellular matrix containing proteoglycans beyond the presence of gaps  possibly containing chondrocytes. bar = 50 μm.



adipogenic differentiation was confirmed by the deposition of lipid droplets in the cytoplasm, as demonstrated by positive staining with oil red o . chondrogenic differentiation was confirmed by the deposition of a hyaline matrix rich in proteoglycans, as demonstrated by positive staining with toluidine blue and alcian blue .

bm-mscs transplantation
the anesthetic protocol used for the bm-msc transplantation, including the csf tap, proved to be appropriate and safe for both groups. no animal showed clinical alterations or allergic reactions that could be attributed to the bm-msc transplantation, compared with the control group .

clinical and neurological evaluations
neither clinical nor neurological alterations were observed in the treated group  or cg animals during the exams conducted pre- and post-transplantation. all the animals exhibited a normal locomotion pattern , and neurological deficits were not detected, according to the classification of mayhew et al.  <cit> . in addition, no significant alterations in the integrity of the brain  were observed during the neurological examinations performed for both groups.

hematological analysis
the median values obtained for the hematological variables  before  and after transplantation  are presented in table  <dig>  there were no significant differences  between the values for the tg and cg groups or between the values at the chosen time points. however, the only variable that increased  in both groups pre and post-transplantation was basophil, but there was no difference between groups. it is noteworthy that this increase was not accompanied by eosinophilia.table  <dig> 
median of hematological variables before and after the treatments of treated groups  and control 



variables
before transplantation
after transplantation

groups
groups

cg
tg
cg
tg

hematocrit 

protein 

platelets 

fibrinogen 

leukocytes


neutrophils



lymphocytes



eosinophils



basophils



monocytes

*asterisk represents difference  between moments  by the wilcoxon test.

all values were presented as median.



csf analysis
the csf samples collected from the animals in both groups were clear, colorless and not coagulated, both pre- and post-transplantation.

no significant differences  between the cg and the tg pre-  and post-transplantation  were observed in the csf density or ph, or the contents of red blood cells, nucleated cells, globulins, proteins, glucose, and pro-mmp- <dig>  as shown in table  <dig>  moreover, no significant changes  in the csf data obtained pre- and post-bm-msc transplantation were observed in the tg or the cg.table  <dig> 
median of cfs variables before and after the treatments of treated groups  and control 



variables
before transplantation
after transplantation

groups
groups

cg
tg
cg
tg
differences  between moments and treatments were not observed for none of the variables.

au: arbitrary units.

all values were presented as median.



expression of mmp- <dig> and - <dig> in csf
only the presence of pro-mmp- <dig>  was detected in the csf from the animals in the two groups; the differences between the values for the groups and the values for the same group at the different time points were not significant  . latent or activated forms of mmp- <dig> were not detected in any of the csf samples.

discussion
in the present study, the safety of mscs transplantation through the csf was demonstrated by the results obtained from laboratory analysis and by the absence of alterations in the studied groups. the most interesting finding of our study was the absence of the expression of mmp- <dig> and mmp- <dig> in the csf, particularly in their activated forms, after bm-msc transplantation.

characterization and differentiation assays of the mscs
in the present study, the bm-mscs isolated from the horses were characterized according to the criteria established by the international society of cellular therapy for human mscs  <cit> ; i.e., they demonstrated the characteristics of adherence to plastic, fibroblastoid morphology, high expression of the cd <dig> marker , no expression of the hematopoietic cell marker cd <dig>  and they responded positively to osteogenic, adipogenic and chondrogenic differentiation media. furthermore, the expression of cd <dig> , a surface glycoprotein important for the interactions and cell adhesion of mscs, was also observed.

some of these characteristics of the mscs observed by our group have also been reported in studies that characterized the mscs from equine adipose tissue  <cit> , bone marrow  <cit> , peripheral blood  <cit> , the matrix of the umbilical cord  <cit> , amniotic fluid  <cit> , gingival tissue and periodontal ligaments  <cit> .

bm-msc transplantation
concern with the safety of bm-mscs intrathecal transplantation through the atlanto-occipital space of the horses in the tg guided the selection of the vehicle to be for the cells and the method of preparing the cells. thus, the bm-mscs were washed three times to remove residual fetal bovine serum  that could induce an immune response in the animals. this measure appeared to be adequate because the animals displayed no changes after the transplantation. there is strong concern regarding the use of fbs in the culture medium, particularly for humans, considering that in addition to the possibility of immune reactions, prions, viruses and zoonotic agents could be transferred  <cit> . according to dimarakis and levicar  <cit> , serum contains a variety of proteins that can bind to the cultured cells, thereby serving as antigens for immunological reactions after transplantation. due to the controversy regarding the use of fbs, toupadaskis et al.  <cit>  used equine mscs to study the possibility of substituting fbs with autologous serum , and showed that the rate of cell proliferation with fbs was higher  than with as. therefore, the authors suggested that substituting only as may not be a viable alternative for cell expansion under the current experimental conditions and that further studies must be directed at determining methods whereby immunogenicity can be reduced without affecting the growth rate of the mscs. additionally, these methods could include the initial culture and cell expansion with fbs and subsequent cell expansion with as to reduce the immunogenic potential  <cit> .

the phosphate-buffered solution  vehicle used for transplantation/in both groups was shown to be adequate and safe, as demonstrated by the absence of complications, particularly in the cg. this vehicle has been used in experimentally induced tendinopathy in horses  <cit> .

the concentration of the bm-mscs transplanted in this pre-clinical study was similar to that used by lim et al.  <cit>  for lumbar administration to a rat model of stroke induced by occlusion of the middle cerebral artery. in their study, doses of  <dig> and  <dig> mscs derived from the blood of human umbilical cords that were administered intrathecally had significant effects on recovery from ischemic damage. these findings support the hypothesis that bm-msc transplantation via an intrathecal pathway is feasible and safe, and suggest great prospects for the use of cell therapy in treating neurological diseases in other species.

clinical evaluation
the absence of clinical alterations, including neurological signs, observed in the tg under the conditions of this study demonstrated that the procedures performed did not dramatically change the neural environment, indicating that a csf pathway can be used for bm-mscs transplantation in horses. in laboratory studies of animals and humans, the csf pathway has been used for the transplantation of mononuclear cells and allogeneic mscs, without evidence of serious adverse effects  <cit> .

in a study conducted with  <dig> humans affected by degenerative conditions , yang et al.  <cit>  performed a total of  <dig> intrathecal and intravenous administrations of allogeneic mononuclear cells from umbilical cord blood without observing serious adverse effects. the most common collateral effect  was headache, which was attributed to postural hypotension, a known complication of lumbar puncture that resolves spontaneously without the need for drastic interventions.

hematological and csf analyses
the csf performs four major functions in the central nervous system , including the physical support of the neural structure, excretion, intracerebral transport and control of the chemical environment of the cns  <cit> . among these functions, the one that motivated us to conduct this study was the possibility of the csf transporting mscs, which have the potential to migrate, to sites of injury.

the transplantations performed in our study did not cause significant differences in the csf values  of the tg and cg. the density of the csf  <cit>  and its contents of erythrocytes, nucleated cells, protein and glucose  <cit>  pre- and post-transplantation were within the normal ranges for the equine species. the pre- and post-transplantation ph values obtained using reagent strips were also considered normal in the laboratory where the analysis was conducted.

the median pre- and post-transplantation values for the pro-mmp- <dig> contents of the csf from the cg and tg were similar to the average value  determined by melo et al.  <cit>  in healthy dogs that were used as controls in a study conducted recently to evaluate the expression of mmp- <dig> and mmp- <dig> in the csf and serum of dogs with neurological signs and visceral leishmaniasis. our results cannot be compared with those of other studies conducted with equine species due to the difficulty of finding information in the literature about the mmp contents in the csf of this species. thus, the values obtained, particularly the pre-transplantation values for pro-mmp- <dig>  will serve as a reference for further studies.

similarly, the values for the hematological variables also did not differ  between the groups or between the time points studied, demonstrating that the treatments did not affect those variables.

expression of mmp- <dig> and - <dig> in csf
mmps are a family of zinc- and calcium-dependent endopeptidases that are responsible for degrading and remodeling the extracellular matrix, including its collagen, elastin, gelatin, proteoglycan and glycoprotein components  <cit> . an important characteristic of mmps is their latency. these proteases are secreted in a pro-form , requiring activation by a variety of mechanisms before becoming functional  <cit> . in the present study, the activity of only pro-mmp- <dig>  was identified in the csf, with no difference  between the values of the groups or of each group at the two time points studied. according to rosenberg  <cit> , gelatinase a is a constitutively expressed molecule that is normally found in brain tissue and csf. mmp- <dig> has been demonstrated in the astrocytic processes of normal brain, particularly those adjacent to vessels, the ependymal cells and the pia mater. the presence of mmp- <dig> in the astrocytic processes near the surface of the brain suggests that this metalloenzyme may play a role in the homeostasis of the brain fluid or in regulating the blood–brain barrier. bergman et al.  <cit> , who studied  <dig> clinically healthy dogs, also obtained results similar to ours, observing only the presence of pro-mmp- <dig> and the absence of mmp- <dig> in the csf.

the lack of evidence for latent or active mmp- <dig> , particularly in the group treated with mscs, supports the hypothesis that the transplantation pathway tested by our group is safe, considering that according to rosenberg  <cit> , mmp- <dig> is markedly dysregulated under the inflammatory conditions of many diseases. high levels of mmp- <dig> have been observed in the csf of human patients and animals affected by neurological diseases that involve intense neuroinflammation, such as visceral leishmaniasis  <cit> , traumatic cerebral injury  <cit> , meningitis  <cit>  and multiple sclerosis  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
intrathecal transplantation of autologous bm-mscs in horses does not cause clinical alterations, particularly in the variables evaluated in the neurological examinations and the hematological and csf analyses, including the expression of mmps. therefore, this pathway for the delivery bm-mscs was shown to be feasible and safe, raising the possibility of performing future clinical trials to treat neurological diseases in horses.

