BACKGROUND
whereas most animal phyla share the capability to repair damaged tissues and some organs, whole body reconstitution from small fragments is a rare event in deuterostomes and is mostly confined to protostomes like sponges  <cit> , cnidarians  <cit>  and flatworms  <cit> . an exception is the dramatic botryllid ascidians phenomenon of whole-body regeneration  from minute vasculature fragments  <cit> , best studied in b. leachi. as the capacity for wide-range regeneration is limited in chordates  <cit> , wbr may be used as a model system for studying the restricted regeneration ability and the basic mechanisms underlying vertebrate regeneration.

the mediterranean urochordate b. leachi  is a common shallow water encrusting colonial sea squirt  <cit> . each colony is composed of few to thousands of genetically identical modules , each 2– <dig> mm long, embedded within a semi-translucent gelatinous matrix, the tunic. zooids are arranged in systems of two parallel long, often serpentine, rows connected to each other through a delicate, one cell thick blood vessel network  <cit> . numerous pear-shaped extensions  stretch from the ramifying vasculature toward the colony margins .

wbr in b. leachi develops in areas deprived of zooids such as marginal ampullae . in fact, even a single ampulla, containing approximately 100– <dig> blood cells, is capable of regenerating a whole functional organism within 10– <dig> days from isolation  <cit> . through highly coordinated processes of vessels' movement, anastomoses and coalescence within the tunic matrix, an opaque mass of cells is formed at 'selected' tunic spots , along with a new circulatory system that is gradually being established. three distinctive morphological phases for wbr were identified on the cellular level  <cit> . phase i  entails the formation of a new microenvironment through restructuring of the vessel architecture. morphologically, this phase involves the detachment of vascular epithelium from the tunic embedment, followed by cellular divisions in the vascular epithelium, which creates dozens of small compartments  within vasculature lumens. therefore, while in other epimorphic regeneration systems restoration starts with the formation of a transient structure termed blastema, the b. leachi wbr is noted by de-novo structuring of regeneration niches. phase ii  is characterized by homing of lymphocyte-like cells, their aggregation within regeneration niches and their subsequent proliferation. yet, nothing is known regarding the cell origin and the homing process of these cells. morphologically, multiple foci of regeneration are initiated simultaneously. this distinguishes the b. leachi wbr from most other regeneration model systems studied, where normally only a single restoration center is formed. during phase iii , the race for predominance between collectives of foci  culminates in the maturation of only a single bud to a functional filter-feeding adult ascidian-zooid equipped with an incurrent  and outcurrent siphon . this system is therefore the first documented case of wbr reveals the capability of restoring not only the soma, but also the germ line  <cit> .

the exact cellular and molecular mechanisms of b. leachi wbr in which the entire urochordate body plan is formed from a few somatic cells have yet to be well understood. elucidating the molecular schemes could revolutionize our understanding concerning the nature of regeneration and functions of pluripotent adult stem cells  in wbr and other regeneration processes. in b. leachi, as in many other marine organisms with yet poorly established genetic backgrounds, the ease and reproducible methodology of expressed sequence tags  can be employed for generating reliable molecular profiles of multi-gene expressions underlying the complex wbr process  <cit> . by focusing on a library of ests originated from early stages of b. leachi wbr , we wish to address one facet of the molecular machinery governing wbr, the cell signaling and transcription factor profiles. this stems from previous observations  <cit> , which imply that signaling pathways could be common themes in initiating epimorphic regeneration events in multicellular organisms.

RESULTS
est library of whole body regeneration reveals multiple putative signaling pathway components
we previously assembled a normalized and subtracted est library, enriched with genes expressed in early stages of b. leachi whole body regeneration  . because of previous findings  <cit> , of particular relevance to us are  <dig> % of the transcripts  which are significantly similar to known genes involved in cell communication and signaling. the relatively high profile level of putative genes functioning in cell signaling and transcription points to genome-wide involvement of signaling processes at onset of b. leachi wbr.

of the  <dig> unique putative cell-communication and signaling molecules ,  <dig> transcripts have multiple representations  and  <dig> are singlets, all potentially protein-coding transcripts. this suggests that the putatively rich wbr transcriptome has not been yet thoroughly sampled and that high copy transcripts were not manifested, implying that normalization was highly effective. only matches with less than a  <dig> e- <dig> chance occurrence probability were classified as significant. in general, the identified transcripts revealed a broad range of functional categories with alleged roles in diverse biological processes including cell signaling, chemotaxis and cell determination . these  <dig> transcripts represent putative components of major signaling pathways, including nuclear receptors , protein kinase , notch/delta , jak/stat , g-protein coupled receptors  transforming growth factor beta  and others, illustrating a complex profile of signaling systems activated during early phases of b. leachi wbr.

domain search that was carried out on all sequences revealed the broad presence of conserved characteristic domains  sustaining the predicted function of the proteins in signaling responses. for example, domain search of notch transcripts revealed ankyrin repeats , mediating protein-protein interactions, a nod , nodp domains present in many notch proteins from multiple species, and an egf-like domain , all present in a large number of membrane-bound and extracellular proteins . domain search on stat protein identified stat binding domain, the characteristic dna binding domain of stat proteins. domain search on protein kinase family members identified a catalytic domain  belonging to serine or threonine-specific kinase family members featuring catalytic and activation loops, an atp binding pocket, a substrate binding pocket, and a cnh domain  found in nik1-like kinases.

temporal expression of signaling genes during wbr
in order to confirm the specificity of the est library to wbr and determine the exclusive up-regulation of transcripts during b. leachi wbr, series of rt-pcr reactions were performed on mrnas from intact ampullae and incised ampullae at onset of wbr , using sequence specific primers . sixteen transcripts encoding for putative proteins with diverse functions were chosen from the list, based on their roles as key signaling pathway components . the list of chosen transcripts included genes repeatedly present  in the est library, such as bax inhibitor  and transmembrane receptor notch , as well as singlet category genes including hgf activator, rab- <dig> oncoprotein, interferon gamma inducible protein, mnk and map4k, and others. as expected, the rt pcr analysis  revealed specific transcript up-regulation during b. leachi wbr; low or no expression in intact ampullae compared to elevated expressions in regenerating ampullae at early wbr stages , suggesting the involvement of the signaling transcripts in the restoration of zooids in b. leachi.

expression-patterns of representative cell signaling genes and transcription factors during wbr
to further elucidate the participation of est library expressed genes in wbr, we analyzed the spatio-temporal expression patterns of seven representative signaling transcripts from the list . this was done by conducting in situ hybridizations on paraffin embedded tissue sections of: bl-rap1a, bl-cnot, bl-slit, bl-stat , bl-rab- <dig>  bl-bax inhibitor and bl-mnk  overall representing the jak/stat signaling pathway, the ras oncogene family and the protein kinase family. since we do not have a full open reading frame for these seven genes, their gene ascription remains putative.

an overview of the expression patterns of these seven transcripts is depicted in fig.  <dig>  the in situ hybridization analyses examined three stages of regeneration: day  <dig> , we used intact ampullae attached to b. leachi colonies, in which expressions were assessed along blastogenic cycles a-c , as well as marginal ampullae immediately after separation from b. leachi colonies . day three represented phase i of wbr in which lacunae of blood vessels are formed within the tunic embedment  and day eight represented phase iii of wbr in which bud development and organogenesis is taking place .

intact peripheral ampullae and centrally located blood vessels within b. leachi colonies  were not stained with any of the probes . in contrast, expressions of all seven transcripts were clearly documented in ampullae at day three and day eight of wbr, concurrent with bud development. in these preparations, we noticed a strong expression restricted to a morphologically distinct sub-population of large, round circulating cells . this sub-population of blood cells is uncommon in the colonial vasculature during regular blastogenic cycles a-c, but appears widespread throughout regenerating ampullae as from early stages of wbr . the most frequently circulating cell types, morula cells  and lymphocyte-like cells were not stained in the in situ hybridization sections.

at day three, bl-rap1a, bl-cnot and bl-slit displayed a similar expression pattern, found within conglomerates of circulatory cells within niches located at the periphery of the regenerating fragment , in juxtaposition to the blood vessel's epithelium . at regeneration day eight staining was not present in regenerating buds , but appeared within distant sites in which no regeneration was observed . bl-stat and bl-rab- <dig> revealed a similar distribution pattern. at day three of wbr, preceding the formation of regenerating buds, staining was distributed systemically within most regeneration niches, in a subpopulation of large blood cells with both central and peripheral fragment locations . at day eight, bl-stat transcripts were generally located in cells inhabiting marginal niches  although few of them were documented in niches occupied by developing buds . at day eight, bl-rab- <dig> transcripts were restricted to distant niches  and were not documented in niches occupied by developing buds . bl-bax inhibitor and bl-mnk were expressed differentially within regenerating niches. bl-bax inhibitor showed at day three a ubiquitous expression within regenerating niches , but at day eight was completely absent from niches undergoing degeneration . bl-mnk displayed at day three a ubiquitous expression within only few niches . however, at day eight of regeneration, bl-mnk was confined to small cell aggregates within distant niches  and was absent from developing buds  similarly to the aforementioned transcripts. specific sense probes for all seven studied transcripts were used as controls, revealing no detectable staining pattern .

expression-patterns of representative cell signaling genes and transcription factors during stage d of blastogenesis
blastogenesis involves a weekly and cyclical process  in which new zooids are developed from the body wall of parental zooids. this process culminates in a transient 24– <dig> h period  termed 'take-over'  <cit> , in which parental zooid's tissues go through synchronized apoptosis and are gradually resorbed by circulating phagocytic cells concurrent with their replacement by a new generation of buds. both humeral and cellular components of the vasculature network play an active role in coordinating and executing the 'take-over' process  <cit> . in contrast to blastogenic stages a-c in which no expression was observed in either transcripts , in blastogenic stage d we observed many large round cells that were positively stained for the seven transcripts , resembling that of early stages of wbr. stained cells are preferentially localized to peripheral sites and are observed to adhere to epithelial walls of blood vessels.

discussion
the phenomenon of whole body regeneration  in botryllid ascidians is a poorly understood, rare phenomenon in chordates. this remarkable intricate developmental system sets the botryllid wbr assay  <cit> , as one of the most appropriate model systems for studying evolutionary issues related to regeneration. in this paper, we studied further the molecular machinery governing wbr by focusing on cell signaling and transcription factors expressed at the onset of b. leachi wbr . we characterized  <dig> genes, representing signaling pathways such as tgf-β, receptor tyrosine kinase , notch/delta, jak/stat, nuclear receptors, g-protein coupled receptors  including ras oncogene and zinc-finger family members and revealed the expression patterns of seven representative transcripts during regeneration and colony astogeny. these transcripts include members of jak/stat signaling , the ras oncogene family  and the protein kinase family , as well as bl-cnot, bl-slit and bl-bax inhibitor. expressions of the transcripts were restricted during regeneration to a sub-population of large circulating blood cells, which also appeared, in smaller numbers, at blastogenic stage d. the exact nature and lineage of this cell population awaits further investigation as they appear as a central cellular component to b. leachi wbr. however, the systemic expression of these transcripts throughout regenerating fragments at early stages , illustrates at the molecular level the systemic induction profile proposed earlier  <cit> , following the documentation of multiple buds regenerating within a single isolated fragment. we also noticed that stage d inaugurates the idiotypic molecular signature of early wbr process , implying that the molecular mechanisms underlying early stages of wbr are analogously activated during colony astogeny, at the takeover  phase.

during early stages of wbr, circulating cells are recruited to specific sites where regeneration niches are formed. these totipotent cells aggregate and subsequently proliferate in these developmental sites  <cit> . rap1a, a member of the ras oncogene family, is a positive regulator of t cell behavior through its roles in directing integrin activation and augmenting lymphocyte responses  <cit> . rap1a suppression inhibits cell adhesion  <cit> , while it's constitutively active form is sufficient to induce integrin mediated cell adhesion or cadherin-mediated adhesion  <cit> . following the roles played by rap1a, we suggest that the putative bl-rap1a may function directly in selectively recruiting specific circulating cell types to active areas of regeneration through an adherence-based mechanism, thereby facilitating their conglomerate and subsequent activation. following the same line, slit has an evolutionarily conserved role as a guidance molecule in directing the migration of diverse cell types during embryonic development  <cit>  cancer  <cit>  and immunity  <cit> . the idiotypic expression patterns of bl-rap1a and bl-slit  suggest a similar role in the recruitment of particular cells during wbr to regenerating sites  and degenerating sites .

bax inhibitor is an intracellular multi-membrane-spanning protein, originally identified for its evolutionarily conserved function in suppression of programmed cell death by hindering bax's pro-apoptotic functions  <cit> . during wbr, bl-bax inhibitor is expressed systemically at very early stages  and at day eight its expression is confined to several regeneration niches , while absent from others . wbr involves a unique strategy in which the development of numerous regenerative sites is followed by only a single mature bud  <cit> . bl-bax inhibitor may thus play a protective role within regenerating niches or be a part of the mechanism underlying the selection between regenerating and degenerating niches. during stage d of blastogenesis, massive apoptosis occurs in the colony, within parental zooid's tissues and within 20%–30% of circulating haemocytes  <cit>  during which the proapoptotic bax protein is also documented  <cit> . our finding of the expression of bl-bax inhibitor within circulatory cells  during this stage is an important and intriguing observation, as it is commonly believed  <cit>  that blastogenic stage d represents a 'destruction' cell death phase, not a rejuvenilization process.

regeneration of organs and tissues is a widespread phenomena in the animal kingdom, revealing diverse strategies and varying roles of different cell types  <cit> . within this array of regeneration phenomena, the b. leachi wbr system is fundamentally different from other model systems for regeneration by key properties at the morphological, cellular and mechanistic levels  <cit> . on the other hand, the outcomes of this and earlier study  <cit>  point toward widespread and shared molecular pathways between b. leachi wbr and other regenerating model systems  <cit> . in this regard, it appears that only a few molecular cascades partake in most of the developmental pathways in the animal kingdom  <cit> . cell signaling pathways may play major and important roles in this phenomenon by preceding the successful development of a single bud to the state of a functional zooid, while eliminating all other co-initiations within a single isolated fragment. detailed depiction of cell signaling repertoire and networks within wbr phenomenon needs to be addressed in further controlled studies. above results provide the first directions into the molecular machinery dictating b. leachi wbr, and highlight the importance and benefits of employing est-based genome-wide analyses.

CONCLUSIONS
screening of an est library from early stages of whole body regeneration in the colonial chordate botrylloides leachi revealed  <dig> genes, belonging to notch/delta, protein kinases, jak/stat, nuclear receptors, ras oncogene family members, zinc-finger family members, gpcrs and tgf-β signaling. together, with rt-pcr analysis we corroborate the involvement of these signaling pathways during whole body regeneration. we broadened our search by detailing the expression pattern of seven representative genes from the cell-signaling category and documented their expression pattern during whole body regeneration. the possible participation of these signaling pathways in other regeneration scenarios of diverse model systems as compared to the urochordates' whole body regeneration process, may disclose common and basic processes for development and regeneration in multicellular organisms.

