BACKGROUND
numerous recent efforts in systems biology have tried to characterize the set of all possible pairwise physical interactions or the binary protein “interactome” of an organism  <cit> . most proteins perform their functions through interactions  <cit> . thus, these large-scale maps are critical in elucidating the biological roles of functional products of genes that are identified by large-scale genome and cdna sequencing projects. because most of these efforts are discovery-oriented and try to explore previously unknown functionalities, it is of utmost importance to ensure that the resultant maps are of high quality. erroneous results at this stage could propagate into both ill-conceived hypotheses and futile downstream experiments. moreover, it has been shown that high-quality interaction networks can provide key insights into fundamental topological and biological properties of cellular systems  <cit> . although there are numerous databases  <cit>  that try to systematically curate the entire repository of interactions for different organisms, there has been very little effort in filtering out unreliable ones. this has led to low overlaps between independent publications and resultant confusion as to which interactions are correct  <cit> .

there are two major types of protein-protein interaction data – binary physical interactions and co-complex associations. while some databases distinguish between these two orthogonal datasets, others fail to do so. binary interactions represent a direct biophysical interaction between two proteins. on the other hand, co-complex associations provide information about co-membership in a complex. a lot of these associations may actually represent indirect interactions  <cit> . the biological information conveyed by these two kinds of interactions is different and for many applications it is necessary to have a clear distinction between these two.

there are two major methods to obtain a global map of binary interactions – literature-curation  and high-throughput experiments   <cit> . lc refers to systematically collecting interaction data from thousands of small-scale studies directed at validating a single or a few specific hypotheses. on the other hand, ht experiments produce large-scale interaction maps. because most lc data are generated by hypothesis-driven experiments, it is much easier to infer biological function from those studies as compared to ht experiments. on the other hand, although the search space of some ht experiments might be focused on certain functional groups, most ht experiments are not designed to detect the presence or absence of specific interactions. any experiment can have two kinds of bias – “assay bias” and “sampling bias”. the first arises because no assay is perfect and all experiments – ht or small-scale have their own characteristic biases  <cit> . however, small-scale studies also have a sampling bias, i.e., they are typically focused on one or a few proteins of interest and hence selectively sample interactions from only a part of the search space. ht experiments are free of this sampling bias, i.e., the search space is scanned without a priori expectations  <cit> . thus, for many global topological analyses, it is often necessary to use only the ht datasets.

here, we describe a publicly available protein-protein interaction database, hint  that directly addresses the above three issues and provides high-quality binary and co-complex interactions for human, s. cerevisiae, s. pombe, and o. sativa. the binary interactomes have also been divided into lc and ht subsets. using these datasets, we show that there are significant sociological sampling biases in lc datasets, i.e., well-studied proteins tend to have more interactions in lc datasets for both human and s. cerevisiae. finally, using only the high-quality ht interactions for human, we find that disease genes  with more interactions tend to cause more diseases. even though this result is unexpected in light of previous findings that interaction hubs are less likely to cause disease  <cit> , it will help understand mechanisms of various disease processes and develop corresponding treatments.

RESULTS
data source for protein-protein interactions
the set of all protein-protein interactions for the organisms was downloaded from the public databases – biogrid  <cit> , dip  <cit> , hprd  <cit> , intact  <cit> , irefweb  <cit> , mint  <cit> , mips  <cit>  and visant  <cit> . not all four organisms were present in all the databases. though some of the databases mentioned above store both genetic and physical interactions, only physical interactions were used in building the interactomes. certain tools  <cit>  also provide scoring schemes for protein-protein interactions. however, we do not include these for hint as they integrate both computational predictions and experimentally determined interactions. our goal is to provide a repository of only experimentally well-validated high-quality protein-protein interactions.

building the database
the next step was to remove low-quality interactions. for ones supported by ht publications, a non-redundant list of papers was compiled and each publication was manually examined to verify that the actual experiments used by the authors agree with the evidence codes cited by the curators. all papers for which there was an error in this matching process were removed. moreover, papers that do not validate the interactions obtained were also not included in hint. although some ht affinity purification followed by mass spectrometry  experiments producing co-complex associations report confidence scores, most binary ht experiments do not. for co-complex interactions, we require all interactions to be reported by two papers or more to ensure quality. for ht binary experiments, some report datasets of different levels of confidence – usually, core vs. non-core. we always include the highest-quality dataset . moreover, we ensure that every single interaction included is high-quality . within this high-quality dataset, the users of hint are free to choose their own confidence cutoff based on any combination of the number of supporting publications and evidence code. for lc interactions, it is not possible to replicate this process, as the number of papers is too high. it has been shown that a large fraction of the lc interactions supported by a single publication cannot be verified  <cit> . curation is an extremely painstaking process and we acknowledge that there may be some high-quality interactions supported by only one publication. however, it is impossible to distinguish them from the larger fraction that has been demonstrated to be of lower quality/erroneous  <cit> . our goal here is to present to the community only a high-quality dataset that is free of potential biases due to differential curation of the same source publication. only those lc interactions that are supported by two or more publications are preserved in our database. table  <dig> provides a summary of the source databases used . table  <dig> reports the number of high-quality interactions in each of these databases in each category . 

for the binary network, we generated two sub-interactomes – the high-quality lc  and the high-quality ht  sub-interactomes. interactions that are supported by both forms of evidence belong to both.

tables  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> provides summary statistics for the different interactomes and their sub-classes. the numbers refer to unique entries and any interaction validated in multiple orientations  or by different research groups is counted as a single entity. we find that the average degree for both s. pombe and o. sativa are much lower than that of human or s. cerevisiae for both binary and co-complex data. this shows that the s. pombe and o. sativa interactomes are still mostly unexplored. there is also a sharp increase in the average degree from binary to co-complex for s. cerevisiae. this is expected given that models to generate topologies of co-complex networks tend to include several or all possible combinations  <cit> . however, the same does not hold true for human. this probably indicates that the human co-complex interactome is underexplored as compared to the s. cerevisiae one. 

note: there are no high-quality ht experiments for s. pombe. hence the whole interactome is lc. there are no high-quality lc experiments for o. sativa. hence the whole interactome is ht.

quality control
there has been a great deal of effort in the literature at discovering new protein-protein interactions in different species to gain an understanding of the entire interactome of that organism. however, due to experimental errors and inaccurate curation, databases often contain interactions that are low quality/erroneous  <cit> . since accuracy is of paramount importance in generating new hypotheses using these interaction data, it is essential to have an easily accessible repository of high-quality binary protein-protein interactions. hint is a repository created by combining information from commonly used databases. to ensure quality control, we adopt the following protocol. since the number of ht publications is relatively low as compared to the vast number of small-scale studies, we manually inspect each of the ht studies . we ensure that high-quality ht experiments included in hint have been verified by orthogonal traditional assays . some experiments that do not perform any validation of their screen are considered low-quality and therefore removed. more recently, we developed a statistical framework to comprehensively evaluate the quality of ht datasets verified by orthogonal assays in both human and s. cerevisiae <cit> . using this framework, we can quantitatively and experimentally measure the quality of individual interactions, as well as the whole dataset. the quality of interactions reported by a ht experiment can be measured by two independent statistical parameters – the number of interactions validated, i.e., the “validation rate” and the number of interactions that could be re-tested in the validation carried out, i.e., the “retest rate”. the first parameter is a measure of the confidence associated with the validation carried out , while the second one directly assays the reproducibility of the ht experiment. we carried out a comprehensive re-curation for all ht experiments included in hint. a list of these parameters for all the ht experiments can be found in additional file 5: table s <dig> and additional file 6: table s <dig> 

on the other hand, since it is impossible to manually check all small-scale studies, we require two independent publications to report the same interaction for it to be included in our dataset. this is because while some interactions from dedicated small-scale studies are high-quality and have been repeated multiple times in the literature, a significant fraction of interactions from small-scale experiments are not easily reproducible. in fact, many of the interactions that cannot be reproduced are supported by only one publication, were not produced by dedicated experiments and were often not even mentioned in the paper   <cit> . more importantly, it has been experimentally shown that such interactions are indeed of low quality  <cit> . thus, our repository of high-quality interactions contains only manually validated ht experiments and interactions from small-scale studies that have been reported at least twice in the literature.

to further validate the filtering approach used we adopted the following method. for each organism and interaction type, percentage overlaps between all pairs of databases that contain data relevant to that category were calculated before and after filtering. since all these databases are curating the same information, we would expect the overlaps between any two of them to be high. however, that is not the case and we find low overlaps between pairs of databases. this supports our hypothesis that some of the information contained in these datasets is low-quality/incorrect. however, if our filtering scheme successfully removes these low-quality/incorrect interactions, the pairwise overlap between databases should increase considerably after filtering. we find that this is indeed the case. for each organism and interaction type, there is a significant enrichment in the average pairwise overlap between databases after filtering . specifically, let the maximum number of interactions for a certain organism and interaction type that can be common to a particular database pair before and after filtering be denoted by mbi and mai respectively, where i is an index to denote the database pair. let the percentage overlaps before and after filtering for that pair be denoted by pbi and pai respectively. the average percentage overlap for that organism and interaction type before  and after filtering  are calculated as:

 avpb=∑imbixpbi∑imbi 

 avpa=∑imaixpai∑imai 

querying the database
the database has two major parts – a query interface and a batch download for the entire interactomes of the organisms. figure  <dig> illustrates the user interface of hint. the pooled interactions can be queried in the following manner.

the organism of interest is selected from a drop-down menu followed by entering the query proteins separated by semi-colons. up to a maximum of  <dig> proteins can be entered per query. the database supports entrez gene ids  <cit>  and gene names for proteins in human, orf names and gene names for proteins in s. cerevisiae <cit>  and s. pombe <cit>  and uniprot ids for o. sativa <cit> . the user also has the option of specifying the cutoff number of publications for each of the query proteins. one can also specify a particular evidence type for searching interactions. for each interacting protein, the gene name is listed in the first column followed by the list of pubmed ids of the papers supporting this interaction in column  <dig>  the last column lists the psi-mi evidence code  <cit>  that describes the kind of evidence supporting the interaction. the gene names are linked to the ncbi entrez gene database  <cit>  for human and s. cerevisiae, the genedb database  <cit>  for s. pombe, and the uniprot database  <cit>  for o. sativa. the pubmed ids link to the ncbi website for the relevant abstracts.

for batch download, separate links are provided for binary and co-complex interactomes for each organism. the binary interactome is also divided into the lc and ht networks. one notes here that the lc and ht networks are not completely mutually exclusive. there are certain protein-protein interactions that have been discovered both by ht experiments and by lc. there are included in both interactomes.

using hint, it will now be possible to analyze, visualize, and generate reliable hypotheses about a part of or the complete interactome of the four different organisms – human, s. cerevisiae, s. pombe, and o. sativa. future efforts may be directed at similarly collecting and filtering data for other organisms and also updating the current dataset based on new findings.

binary vs co-complex
hint clearly distinguishes between binary and co-complex interactions. the binary network represents direct interactions between two proteins. on the other hand, the co-complex network merely indicates membership of a group and does not necessarily imply pairwise interactions. in most cases, the exactly topology of the complex is unknown. two primary methods – the spoke model and the matrix model are used to represent these complexes. however, both models are approximations and merely suggest possible topologies  <cit> . since different reports base their choice of model on study-specific conditions, all co-complex associations were included as curated in the source databases. no re-curation was performed. moreover, compared to co-complex interactome models, binary maps have a greater fraction of transient signaling connections and inter-complex connections  <cit> . since these two datasets represent fundamentally different biological entities, their overlap is low  and it is important to differentiate between them in certain studies. for example, recent studies have examined how mutations may either lead to complete loss of gene products or edge-specific changes in the interactome  <cit> . we show in a recent study that the pathogenesis of human disease can be better understood by looking at the position of mutations on interaction interfaces  <cit> . these approaches are applicable to direct binary interactions, as it is more difficult to infer interface pairs from co-complex associations. the latter can be resolved using information on three-dimensional structures of protein complexes if these are available. thus, based on the context, it may be more appropriate to use one interactome over the other. moreover, there are significant differences in the topological properties of these two networks. we calculated the clustering coefficient  <cit>  and the edge betweenness  <cit>  for the different interaction networks in hint. clustering coefficient measures the density of clustering in an interaction network  <cit> . we find that co-complex networks have a significantly higher clustering coefficient  than binary networks . this shows that co-complex associations tend to be much more dense in terms of topological structure. edge betweenness is used to detect community structure in networks. a higher betweenness value for an edge indicates that it connects different modules and disrupting this edge will fragment the network into disjoint components  <cit> . we find that binary networks for both human and s. cerevisiae have a significantly higher betweenness  than co-complex networks for the two organisms . this suggests that co-complex associations form tightly regulated modules and binary interactions are often used to form links between these modules. we did not use the s. pombe or o. sativa networks for our global topological calculations as these interactomes are highly underexplored at this stage and the small number of interactions available make the networks unsuitable for global analyses.

ht protein-protein interactions in understanding human disease
people have realized in the last decade that a human disease is rarely the consequence of an isolated abnormality in a particular gene but is generally the outcome of complex perturbations of the underlying cellular network  <cit> . this has led to systematic studies of interactome networks and numerous insights have been obtained from such studies. the structure of these networks is governed by key biological principles and changes in their global properties may be linked to human disease  <cit> . further advances in such studies are expected to uncover the biological significance of disease-associated mutations discovered by genome-wide association studies  <cit>  and help in identifying biomarkers and novel drug targets  <cit> .

previous studies have shown that protein hubs tend to be essential genes  <cit> . therefore, one interesting question is whether a lot of the hubs are disease genes. using the ht interactome, we examined the distribution of disease genes across number of protein-protein interactions. we found that disease-genes tend not to be hubs . this result is consistent with earlier studies that find that disease genes are usually non-essential and occupy peripheral positions in the human interactome  <cit> . the finding is logical in light of an evolutionary argument – for essential genes, mutations would be more likely to affect fitness to the extent of causing embryonic lethality  <cit> . 

however, we were unable to reproduce the same results using the lc interactome . there is a significant increase  of percentage of disease genes with degree for proteins that have at least one interaction. this led us to believe that the difference could be due to study biases in the lc data. to systematically analyze if this is true, we plotted the average number of publications against the number of interactions of proteins separately for the ht and lc interactomes. intuitively, there should be no strong correlation between these two entities as the number of publications associated with a protein should have no connection with its degree. the average number of publications does not vary significantly with degree for the ht dataset but increases dramatically for the lc interactome . this illustrates the strong study bias in the lc data – proteins with a greater number of interactions tend to be revisited more often by small-scale studies. our results are consistent with earlier findings that the degree of proteins in the lc interactome is strongly correlated with the number of publications associated with them  <cit> . this makes the lc interactome unsuitable for global topological analyses. the low overlap between the ht and lc interactomes  also confirms that these are in fact two separate networks that need to be appropriately used based on the context.

to further investigate whether protein interactomes can help us understand disease mechanisms and uncover previously unknown disease genes, we used the ht human interactome to analyze what fraction of disease genes are disease-hubs, i.e., genes causing multiple diseases. we examined the distribution of disease-hubs as a function of their degrees . we observed that proteins with a higher number of interactions are significantly more likely to be disease hubs . though this may seem contradictory to earlier findings in figure 5a, these two are in fact independent results. it is true that if a disease gene has more interactions, there is a higher probability of its fitness being affected. however, in figure 5d, we focused only on disease genes. by virtue of the fact that these are observed in the population as disease genes, their mutations are less likely to cause embryonic lethality. therefore the evolutionary constrains in figure 5a do not apply here. it is logical to expect that a disease protein with multiple interactions will have a greater propensity for causing multiple diseases. this is because a protein with more interactions is involved in more biological functions  <cit> . this result also means that protein-protein interactions are important in the pathogenesis of many human diseases. further studies on alteration of interactions by disease mutations may reveal insights into molecular mechanisms of various diseases and provide information about potential drug targets.

CONCLUSIONS
hint is a comprehensive repository of high-quality binary and co-complex physical interactions in human, s. cerevisiae, s. pombe, and o. sativa. it establishes and implements systematic techniques for separating interactions based on both type  and data-source . making these distinctions is critical for many applications. using only the ht dataset, we demonstrated that human disease genes with a greater number of interactions tend to cause more diseases. future directions involve implementation of the same techniques for other organisms of biological interest.

