BACKGROUND
measuring the non-independence  of positions  within a molecule – particularly a protein – is a major challenge of molecular evolution, as witnesses the large methodological effort achieved during the last decade . several theoretical and experimental arguments link the non-independence of sites to structural and/or functional constraints in proteins. the mechanism most often invoked is the occurrence of compensating mutations, either locally or distantly. local coevolution may reflect direct residue-residue interaction, whereas distal coevolution is supposed to be the result of more complex mechanisms like secondary structure shifts  <cit> . but coevolution may also be defined in a broader sense, as correlated evolution: two sites are said to be non-independent if they tend to undergo substitution events in the same branches of the tree. such events are called co-substitutions  <cit> .

the main pitfall in coevolution detection  is to distinguish the functional signal from the phylogenetic noise. the latter is due to the shared history of all sites, represented by the underlying phylogenetic tree. several methods have been developed to assess the departure from independent evolution  <cit> . they differ by  the statistic used to measure non-independence , and especially whether it explicitly accounts for the compensatory nature of mutations or not,  the assessment of the level of statistical significance  and  the way they deal with phylogenetic inertia  <cit> . global evidence of non-independent evolution between sites has been reported. it has been shown that amino acids in close proximity  or belonging to the same proteic domain  <cit>  tend to evolve in a more correlated way than randomly chosen sites. the specific task of pointing to non-independently evolving sites in a given data set, however, suffers from methodological fuzziness and/or deficient software implementation. this probably explains why coevolution detection methods are not routinely used in pipelines for genomic annotation.

here we introduce a new methodology to detect coevolving groups of sites within a molecule, based on the evolutionary history of these sites. the process is inferred by probabilistic substitution mapping, as we presented in a previous work  <cit> , and is now extended to the protein case. the mapping procedure provides, for each site, an estimate of the number of substitutions in each branch of the tree. this procedure is extended to account for the biochemical properties of the amino acids, by weighting substitution events according to the physico-chemical distance between amino acids. we then define coevolving sites either as sites showing correlated substitution histories, extending the approach of  <cit> , or by sites exhibiting explicit compensation.

it is likely that in proteins one substitution can be compensated by several other substitutions occurring at different positions. looking for pairs of coevolving sites, as attempted so far, may therefore underestimate the coevolution signal in proteins. performing an exhaustive search of groups of arbitrary size, however, is inefficient, and in most cases impossible, due to the high number of possible combinations. clustering techniques are standard methods designed to cope with this issue. surprisingly, these methods have never been applied to the detection of coevolution. we present here a hierarchical clustering approach to detect good candidate groups of coevolving sites. a statistical procedure is introduced to evaluate the significance of candidate clusters through parametric bootstrap. using four example data sets, each with its own specificity, we provide evidence that this methodology is successful in making robust predictions of non-independently evolving positions.

RESULTS
algorithm
given a sequence alignment and a tree, we first define a statistic measuring coevolution for an arbitrary group of sites. then we introduce a method aiming at seeking candidate coevolving groups by clustering sites according to the coevolution statistics. finally, we develop a statistical test to assess the significance of candidate groups.

defining a coevolution statistic
coevolution, as any evolutionary process, should be studied in the light of the phylogeny underlying the data, in order to distinguish functional correlations  from phylogenetic correlations . mapping substitution events onto the phylogeny  is a way to fully incorporate the evolutionary history of each site and has proved to be a powerful approach to infer coevolving positions  <cit> . substitution mapping consists of estimating, for each site, the number of substitutions that occurred on each branch of the phylogenetic tree. these numbers are stored as a substitution vector for the site , and can be computed using an empirical bayesian approach . the site-specific, branch-specific numbers of substitutions depend on the set of ancestral states at inner nodes  <cit> , the length of the branch and the rates of substitution between amino acids . since the ancestral states are inferred, we have to account for the uncertainty in the reconstruction, by averaging over all possible pairs of ancestral states. a fast, analytical procedure has been developed to achieve this calculation  <cit> .

here we introduce a generalization of this procedure called "weighted substitution mapping" . it is dedicated to proteins and means weighting the different types of substitutions according to the resulting change in a given biochemical property of interest . in the following, weighted substitution vectors are noted v*. entry k of vector vi∗ is then the estimated amount of biochemical change  having occurred at site i in branch k.

the amount of coevolution for a pair  of sites is measured by the correlation coefficient of the two substitution vectors   <cit> :

 ρij=covsd×sd. 

if the two sites tend to undergo substitution events in the same branches, ρ will be positive and tend toward one. this measure is generalized to a group of arbitrary size s by defining the amount of coevolution for the group as the minimal pairwise correlation between sites in the group:

 ρ=min⁡i,j∈ <dig> .s{ρij}. 

from a geometrical point of view, the correlation coefficient is the cosine of the angle between the two substitution vectors, and the minimum correlation coefficient corresponds to the cosine of the maximum angle between the vectors of the group .

the ρ statistic evaluates the tendency of sites to undergo correlated changes, irrespective of the compensatory nature of these changes. weighted substitution mapping, however, offers the possibility to track the direction of changes, by giving opposite weight to x → y and y → x changes. the resulting signed, weighted vectors  can be used to test the compensatory nature of changes. the underlying assumption is that a given chemical property of a group of coevolving sites  would tend to be conserved, whereas the properties of individual sites may change. we hereby define c, the compensation index:

 cij=1−|v˜i+v˜j||v˜i|+|v˜j|, 

where |v| is the length of vectors, that is the l2-norm:

 |v˜i|=∑bvib <dig>  

in case of perfect compensation , c equals  <dig>  on the other extreme, if the vectors are identical, c equals  <dig>  this measure can be generalized for a group of s sites:

 c=1−|∑i=1sv˜i|∑i=1s|v˜i|. 

compensation is high when the normalized length of the sum vector of all substitution vectors in the group  tends to 0→. the correlation  and compensation  statistics therefore define two distinct detection methods, to be applied sequentially to a given data set.

as previously shown in several works, the interpretation to be given to coevolution statistics highly depends on the evolutionary rate of the sites under consideration  <cit> . here we measured the variability of a site i by taking the length ni of its corresponding substitution vector :

 ni=∑bvib <dig> ni∗=∑bvib∗ <dig> 

in the case of unweighted vectors accounting for multiple substitutions  <cit> , this measure is proportional to the site-specific substitution rate. for weighted vectors, the n* statistics provides a new measure of the site-specific rate of change of a given biochemical property – note that the scale of n* depends on the weighting scheme used. the variability of a group of s sites was then defined as the minimum length of substitution vectors of all sites in the group, nmin:

 nmin=min⁡i∈ <dig> .s{ni},n∗min=min⁡i∈ <dig> .s{ni∗}, 

which is a conservative measure since slowly evolving positions are the less informative. nmin is a nuisance variable on which the coevolution statistics mechanically depend.

a clustering approach to select candidate groups
as the size of the tested groups augments, an exhaustive approach quickly becomes intractable, and heuristics should be developed. to detect groups  of coevolving sites, we performed a cluster analysis of the substitution vectors. we used a complete linkage hierarchical clustering procedure, with the pairwise correlation and compensation distances defined as  <dig> - ρij and  <dig> - cij respectively. the clustering procedure starts with the pairwise distance matrix d, and perform the following steps:

 <dig>  find the pair  in d with the lowest distance, and cluster the two corresponding sites.

 <dig>  remove the two selected sites u and v in the matrix, and add the new pair  as a single entry.

compute all distances between the  pair and each remaining group using the formula:

 d) = max, d) 

 <dig>  go back to  <dig>  until the matrix size reaches  <dig> 

the use of the maximum function defines the 'complete linkage'. each step defines a new cluster, and reduces the matrix size by  <dig>  every cluster of the resulting bifurcating tree is considered as a candidate coevolving group of sites.

assessing the significance of the amount of coevolution
the significance of the clusters was evaluated by parametric bootstrap. one thousand data sets with the same number of sites as the one of interest were simulated, using the estimated tree and parameters. the substitution vectors were computed and the clustering was performed. for each group in the resulting trees, we stored the size of the group, and the corresponding coevolution statistic  and nmin values. we hence obtained, for each group size, the joint distribution of ρ  and of nmin under the null hypothesis of independence between sites. we then computed the p-value for a group of sites by conditioning over nmin. for instance, for the coevolution statistic ρ:

 p-value = pr 

where the ρobs is the measured value for statistic ρ. since nmin is a continuous variable, we used a window centered on nminobs to evaluate the p-values:

 p-value=n1+1n2+ <dig> 

where n <dig> is the number of simulation points with nmin ∈ , and n <dig> is the number of simulation points in this range with a correlation greater or equal to the observed value. ω defines the size of the window. in this work we set it to 20% of the range of nmin values.

one potential problem is the fact that nested clusters are not independent. assume for instance that a triplet of sites actually coevolve. this should result in a significantly high ρ for the triplet itself, but perhaps also for pairs within the triplet, or even for certain n-uplets including the triplet, thus falsely duplicating the number of significant groups. to correct for this, the method outputs only one cluster – the one with the lowest p-value – when a series of nested clusters is detected. this is a conservative approach, and an improvement over pairwise methods, which typically tend to output large networks of residues , pair , pair , etc, e.g.  <cit> ).

controlling the false discovery rate
since we are performing repeated tests, we need to control for the global discovery rate. the clustering approach makes it impossible to rely on classical techniques, due to the non-independence of the tested groups. here we assessed the false discovery rate by simulations: we conducted our analysis on several data sets simulated under the null hypothesis of independence. as an approximation, and to save computation time, we used the same simulated data sets as those used for computing the single groups p-values: one simulated data set was tested against the  <dig> remaining ones, and the p-values of the output clusters were recorded. this procedure was repeated  <dig> times. now we pooled all the candidate clusters from the  <dig> analyses, and sort them by p-value. then we sought the p-value threshold separating the 1% most significant clusters  from the remaining 99%. this threshold is then applied to the real data set to ensure a 1% false discovery rate – only groups of the real-data analysis with a p-value lower than this threshold are considered significant after correction for multiple tests.

case studies
to assess its performance, the method was tested on four data sets, each with distinct properties. we now present the detailed results of these analyses and check the predictions with respect to substitution patterns and known protein structure and annotations.

application to rrna
we applied the new clustering approach with unweighted substitution mapping to a previously studied bacterial rrna data set, containing  <dig> large subunit sequences with  <dig>  sites  <cit> . two hundred and sixty five clusters with a p-values lower than 1% were detected, containing  <dig> pairs. two hundreds and forty nine of these pairs  match already known structural stem pairs  <cit> . the pairwise approach  <cit>  detected  <dig> pairs, among which  <dig> structural pairs . the clustering approach hence has even lower false-positive rate than the pairwise approach. the power increase is probably due to the more elaborated p-value computation procedure. higher order groups are distributed as this: four triplets, one quadruplets, two 5-uplets, one 6-uplets, and one 10-uplet. these groups may be of biological interest but their study is beyond the scope of this article. a detailed list of detected groups is provided as supplementary material.

application to myoglobin
we applied the clustering approach to a myoglobin data set, which has been already scanned for coevolving pairs in previous works  <cit> . this data set contains  <dig> sequences, and  <dig> sites without gaps. in addition to the unweighted mapping, which ignores the nature of the substitutions, we tested four weighting schemes: volume, polarity and charge difference, and the synthetic grantham chemical distance, a combination of volume, polarity and atom composition  <cit> . we ran both the correlation and the compensation tests .

the correlation test yielded  <dig> groups with a p-value lower than 5%, among which  <dig> remain significant after correction for multiple testing . only two groups with a p-value lower than 1% were found , indicating that the coevolution signal is weak in this data set, consistent with  <cit> . the compensation method leads to  <dig> groups at the 5% level , among which  <dig> were significant at the 1% level, and two at the  <dig> % level .

3d dist.: maximum pairwise 3d distance between alpha carbons . 3d p-value: test if the sites are closer than expected by chance. fdr: tell if the group remains significant after a correction for having a global false discovery rate of 5%. ‡ symbols indicate groups detected by both the correlation and compensation analyses, † symbols indicate groups overlapping with a detected group in the compensation analysis .

legends are the same as in table  <dig> 

detailed examination of the detected groups revealed interesting patterns. several sites were in significantly close proximity , and sites arg <dig> and ser117). several sites  appeared to be located close to the heme group . finally, we noticed a tendency for sites in helix ends to coevolve , a trend already mentioned by  <cit>  and  <cit> .

application to srk
the s-locus receptor kinase  is a molecule controlling self-incompatibility in various species of brassicaceae  <cit> . the srk gene is involved in pollen recognition, and is known to be under balancing selection, which results in trans-specific polymorphism  <cit> . the srk protein is a transmembrane protein, with a cytoplasmic domain responsible for the kinase activity, and an ectodomain involved in receptor recognition. the ectodomain is highly polymorphic. it includes three hyper-variable regions , and several sites reported as undergoing positive selection  <cit>  . no three dimensional structure is available for this protein. the data set we used contains  <dig> sequences and  <dig> ungapped sites from the ectodomain.

the correlation test yielded  <dig> groups with a p-value lower than 5% after correction for multiple testing, among which  <dig> were significant at the 1% level . the compensation test resulted in  <dig> significant groups at the 5% level, among which  <dig> remain significant after correction for multiple testing, and seven groups at the 1% level . the most significant group is a pair of sites , detected using the unweighted mapping and the volume, polarity and grantham weighted mappings with the correlation statistic. the corresponding unweighted mapping, shown in figure  <dig>  illustrates how correlated the substitution histories of these two sites have been. these sites had been reported as being under positive selection by sainudiin et al.  <cit> . they are also detected with the compensation method and a grantham weighting scheme, with a higher p-value. site  <dig> is detected as coevolving with site  <dig>  for conserving a global polarity level. another significant group of interest is the pair , detected with the grantham weighting, for the compensation test. these two sites are also reported to be under positive selection and are located in the second hyper-variable region. together with the study of sainudiin et al.  <cit> , these results suggest a role for these sites in ligand recognition.

legends are the same as in table  <dig>  sites in bold font are reported to be under positive selection by sainudiin et al.  <cit> .

legends are the same as in table  <dig> 

the two tests detected sites that are conserved though all the alignment, except for the q6l8r2_rapsa allele. sites  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> for instance show a conserved polarity throughout the alignment, excepted for the q6l8r2_rapsa allele, which shows polarity change for the five sites. this allele is however very divergent from the other alleles . it belongs to the so-called class ii category, which contains only few alleles that are all recessive to alleles from the class i category  <cit> . these two categories form two distinct clades separated from each other about  <dig> millions years ago  <cit> .

application to map
the last example of application is a data set previously studied for coevolution by gloor et al.  <cit> . the coevolution signal was higher in this data set, probably at least partly because of the higher number of sequences , which leads to more powerful tests: a total of  <dig> groups with p-value < 1% were detected with the correlation test . surprisingly, the compensation statistic led to a lower number of detected groups . most of the groups were pairs or triplets of sites in contact or in significantly close proximity . several sites were also located in or close to the active site. substitution maps for these groups clearly pointed to a large number of cosubstitution and compensatory events, as illustrated by figure  <dig> 

the most significant groups were also detected by gloor et al.  <cit> . they found two kinds of coevolving pairs: one involving sites in close proximity, and a set of interconnected residues belonging to a large cluster. gloor et al.  <cit>  used mutual information , after correcting for slowly evolving sites. their statistic, however, does not account for the underlying phylogeny, which may lead to several false positives. in their study, this problem was addressed by considering only the most significant correlated sites, assuming that their correlation is above the background phylogenetic noise. by fully incorporating the phylogeny, we were able to confirm three of their predictions and add several new ones. these confirmed pairs are the three most significant ones according to our correlation method, and appear to be in contact in the three dimensional structure. a large proportion of our new predictions also appear to be close in the tertiary structure . we were not able to confirm the most significant pair of gloor et al.  <cit> , neither pairs involved in the large network they report, with the exception of pair  detected for volume compensation and which is close to the ligand. for some of the detected groups no obvious structural interpretation was found. in some cases, these apparent false positives corresponded to sites having undergone correlated changes of evolutionary rate. figure  <dig> shows such an example. the five sites in figure  <dig> are reasonably variable in general, but invariable in the top-most clade of the tree – presumably because they are under strong functional constraint in this group. since changes are concentrated in a subset of the branches, the probability that these sites undergo co-substitutions by chance is higher than estimated using a model in which changes can occur throughout the tree, as in the simulations. this is a newly-reported mechanism by which correlated evolutionary patterns can appear in the absence of biochemical interaction between sites.

legends are the same as in table  <dig>  only groups with a p-value lower than 1% are reported. a global false discovery rate  of 1% was used when correcting for multiple testing.

legends are the same as in table  <dig> 

it appears that the coevolution signal is weaker in proteins than in rrna. fewer groups are detected, with higher p-values and lower correlation statistics. these are groups for which changes occur more frequently in the same branches than expected by chance, but the linkage is not as strong as in rrna.

implementation
the mapping procedure is available as dedicated classes in the bio++ phylogenetics library, from version  <dig>   <cit> . the coevolution detection can be reproduced using the comap program, including the pairwise analysis  <cit>  and the clustering analysis . for the clustering analysis, comap performs the clustering and the simulation part. as an option, it performs maximum likelihood estimation of model parameters prior to coevolution analysis, and supports a wide range of commonly used model of evolution, from jukes-cantor to general time reversible for nucleotides, and the dayhoff and jtt models for proteins, using the dcmutt implementation  <cit> . comap can also read any user-defined model following the paml format  <cit> . the p-value computation is done in r, using two scripts distributed along with the program. comap is open source and distributed at  <cit> . the rrna and protein data sets are also available at this address, together with the results and the scripts used to run the analysis, which may serve as examples for running the coevolution analysis on other data sets. running time, including the five types of mapping, was between two and five hours for the four data sets analyzed in this study, with a intel xeon  <dig>  ghz computer.

discussion
in this article we present a new test for detecting coevolving groups of sites based on weighted substitution mapping and a clustering approach. the method is original in  detecting groups of arbitrary size,  accounting for the biochemical properties of amino-acid changes,  distinguishing compensatory evolution from other kinds of correlated evolution,  providing the substitution maps corresponding to the detected groups, so that the user can assess the relevance of the detected signal, and  being available as a user-friendly program with reasonable running times, easy to integrate into any sequence analysis pipeline.

when applied to a benchmark rrna data set, the method recovered mostly pairs of sites, as expected, and was more powerful than the approach of  <cit> , although the latter method had been specifically designed to detect pairs. when applied to protein data sets, the method detected candidate groups of coevolving sites of size two to ten. many of these groups appear relevant from a structural or functional point of view. when applied to the map data set, the method detected a higher number of groups than the method of gloor et al. <cit> , thanks to a more efficient phylogenetic control strategy, and direct assessment of the significance of groups of size higher than two. coevolving residues were typically located in close proximity, or at the ends of helices, or corresponded to positively selected sites. the method also yielded coevolving groups of sites showing no obvious structural links. we now discuss in more details the various newly-introduced methodological improvements, and the biological mechanisms potentially underlying correlated evolutionary patterns.

weighted substitution mapping
a new probabilistic weighted substitution mapping was developed, thanks to the introduction of a weight matrix. a similar approach has been used by  <cit>  and  <cit> , without taking into account ancestral states reconstruction uncertainty. this mapping procedure can have some general interest beyond coevolution detection. it may converge toward the sub-alphabet approach , by using amino-acid categories  and defining the weight wx,y as equal to one if x and y do not belong to the same category, zero otherwise. any other amino-acid index or distance may be used, as the ones available in the aaindex database  <cit> . the mapping is achieved using a fixed topology, assumed to be known. we have previously shown that the coevolution analysis is robust to variations of the underlying tree topology  <cit> .

clustering
a usual pitfall when trying to detect coevolving sites without a priori knowledge is the high number of putative groups to be tested. an exhaustive approach is possible when only pairs of sites are targeted, but not for groups of arbitrary size: computing 2n - n -  <dig> p-values proves to be rapidly unfeasible. one possibility to overcome this issue is to limit the number of groups to test, thanks to the use of multivariate analysis  or clustering techniques for instance. here we used a hierarchical clustering approach, which outputs n -  <dig> clusters of size ≥  <dig>  a convenient property is that clusters of a same given size are independent and do not overlap. the clustering approach was useful for coevolution detection in drastically reducing the number of groups to be tested.

measuring cluster significance
we used two distinct measures of the amount of coevolution for a group. the first one, ρ, is the minimum pairwise correlation of sites within the group, and aims at detecting sites with correlated substitutions . for a pair of sites, the ρ statistic is therefore equal to the correlation between the two  substitution vectors, a measure we introduced in a previous work  <cit> . the second statistic, c, explicitly accounts for the compensatory nature of substitutions. in a previous study, we showed that the coevolution statistic depends on the evolutionary rate of the sites, since slowly evolving sites tend to have artificially high correlation . it is therefore necessary to include a measure of the site variability when assessing the significance of the correlation. we previously used the minimum posterior rate, a measure which is not easily generalizable to the case of weighted vectors. we hence used the length of substitution vectors as a measure of variability in this study. in the case of unweighted vectors, this measure is highly correlated to the posterior rate. to assess the variability of a group of any size, we used the minimum length of the corresponding substitution vector, nmin. this is a summary statistic, since the variability of the group would be fully described only with the complete set of site-specific lengths. the nmin measure is hence an approximation we employed to reduce the number of required simulations. our approach may easily afford additional summary statistics in order to better account for group variability. we tried using both nmin and nmax. this did not affect the results, but removed some artificially detected groups of large size . the results presented in this paper were obtained by using nmin only and restricting the analysis to groups with a reasonable size, that is, lower than  <dig> 

mechanisms of non independent evolution
in this work, coevolution has been defined in a broad sense, i.e. as equivalent to non-independent evolution. sites are considered as coevolving when they tend to undergo  substitutions in the same branches of the tree. co-evolution is hence seen as a non-random distribution of substitutions across the tree and alignment. this non-random distribution, however, may be due to distinct processes. the most intuitive scenario invokes compensatory mutations: one perturbing mutation at a site is compensated by one or several mutations at other sites to maintain a higher order structure. this mechanism corresponds to the definition of coevolution sensu stricto, used in most previous works. it relates to  epistasis: the selection coefficient of a mutation at one site depends on the states at other sites. correlated substitution does not necessarily imply compensation, or this compensation may not be seen at the single-molecule level. sites involved in the recognition of an interacting partner, for instance, may tend to coevolve and be compensated by changes in the interacting molecule. more rarely, sites involved in adaptive process may also undergo correlated changes. selection toward a new optimum requiring more than one substitution could explain the departure from independence  <cit> . this scenario should explain the signal detected in the srk gene, where several coevolving sites have been previously reported to be under positive selection.

another potential reason for non-independent evolution is a local relaxation of constraint involving several sites, the so-called heterotachy/covarion process  <cit> . if a structural or functional unit, generally required for proper functioning of the molecule, becomes useless in a specific lineage, then the sites forming this unit will accumulate changes in this lineage. this results in a correlation of rates, which may lead to correlated substitution mappings . this correlation appears significant if a constant rate among sites is assumed when performing simulations. this may be corrected by using a covarion model as the one proposed by  <cit> . the two tests we introduce should help distinguishing between correlated states and correlated rates. in agreement with recent work by hakes et al.  <cit> , our analyses suggest that the former mechanism, neglected up to now, could explain a substantial fraction of the detectable correlated patterns.

CONCLUSIONS
the flexible coevolution analysis we propose may provide powerful insight for understanding the evolutionary history of specific genes, similarly to positive selection detection analyses. another open issue is the importance of coevolutionary processes in protein evolution in general  <cit> . systematically applying our approach to a large number of data sets for which structural information is available could help making progress with this respect.

