BACKGROUND
in comprehensive studies examining the aetiology of ventilator-associated pneumonia , staphylococcus  aureus and pseudomonas  aeruginosa have been found to be the most frequently isolated gram positive and gram negative organisms, respectively  <cit> . nosocomial pneumonia in intensive care units  caused by s. aureus has increased steadily over the past two decades  <cit> . after only a few days of mechanical ventilation, the cuffed polymer endotracheal tube is coated with a thick bacterial biofilm which has to be regarded as a continuous source of bacterial colonization of the lower respiratory tract ultimately resulting in vap  <cit> . treatment of infections associated with medical devices is often frustrated by the inability of antibiotics to penetrate biofilms and the increasing resistance of microbes to antibiotics  <cit> . in unpublished studies, we have identified bacterial colonization of  <dig> colony forming units /ml on cuffed tracheotomy tubes after  <dig> days of use.

silver tracheotomy tubes with inherent antimicrobial properties previously used in patients with a permanent tracheostomy have been replaced with polymer tracheotomy tubes which have improved patient comfort. with the increasing use of un-cuffed polymer tracheotomy tubes, monitoring of biofilm formation has become important and regular reprocessing of the un-cuffed tracheotomy tube  <dig> to  <dig> times a day is usually recommended by the manufacturer in order to avoid infections.

in order to lengthen medical device usage and to improve patient safety with higher quality polymer tracheotomy tubes, coating with an antimicrobial agent has been suggested  <cit> . octenidine-dihydrochloride  could represent a candidate compound since it has a broad-spectrum antimicrobial activity and low toxicity. studies on resident skin flora have demonstrated the bactericidal and fungicidal efficiency of oct  <cit> .

the aim of this study was therefore to develop an oct coated tracheotomy tube in cooperation with the heimomed company and to investigate the antimicrobial inhibitory effect of coated oct on experimental biofilms formed by s. aureus and p. aeruginosa in-vitro. the oct coating was then tested for resistance to the tube reprocessing procedures of brushing, rinsing and disinfection with glutaraldehyde.

RESULTS
significant differences in bacterial contamination were observed between uncoated and oct coated tracheotomy tubes .

contamination with s. aureus
contamination with s. aureus showed the mean concentration of  <dig> cfu/ml on oct coated tracheotomy tubes  was significantly lower compared to uncoated tubes . after five rounds of chemical reprocessing, a hundred fold difference between the colonization of both tube groups  was observed. following five further procedures of chemical and mechanical reprocessing, recontamination with s. aureus led to the similar colonization of both tube types . these results are illustrated graphically in figure  <dig> 

contamination with p. aeruginosa
prior to reprocessing, significant differences were seen between the mean concentration of p. aeruginosa colonization on oct coated tracheotomy tubes  of  <dig> cfu/ml and uncoated tracheotomy tubes  of  <dig> cfu/ml . after reprocessing, no statistical differences were observed , p =  <dig>  .

discussion
the goal of this study was to design an oct coated polymer tracheotomy tube and to investigate antimicrobial inhibitory effects of the coating on s. aureus and p. aeruginosa colonization in vitro.

in current clinical practice, the use of polymer tracheotomy tubes leads to the early development of a thick biofilm followed by colonization of the lower respiratory tract as a potential risk factor for vap, especially on cuffed tubes which are used for ventilation in icu patients. biofilm development starts after  <dig> hours and becomes abundant after  <dig> hours  <cit> . different antiseptic agents embedded in or coated on polymer tracheotomy tubes have been proposed as an approach to reduce the bacterial burden and lower the risk of vap development  <cit> . in this study, together with the manufacturer we developed oct coated polymer tracheotomy tubes and investigated them in an experimental in vitro setting. the chemical, antimicrobial and toxicological properties of the bispyridine oct has been described previously  <cit> . oct is a potential non-alcoholic mucous skin and wound antiseptic, which destroys bacterial cells by interacting with their cell wall and intracellular components. even at low concentrations , oct is considered bactericidal and fungicidal. in this study, a thousand-fold reduction in s. aureus colonization before reprocessing was achieved by oct coating of the polymer tracheotomy surface. although this result shows a favourable reduction required for antimicrobial medical devices  <cit> , this activity vanished rapidly after tube reprocessing. colonization of p. aeruginosa was inhibited less by the oct coating than s aureus even before any reprocessing. in cuffed, single use tracheotomy tubes at the icu, oct coating might be of significant benefit because of the reduced s. aureus and p. aeruginosa bacterial burden. however, in the long-term use of un-cuffed polymer tracheotomy tubes, a benefit for the patient would not be expected due to the insufficient antimicrobial effects after daily reprocessing procedures as suggested by the manufacturer. these results are in contrast to recent studies that reported a sufficient reduction of p. aeruginosa on skin and dental plaques after application of oct  <cit> . it is possible that the low concentrations of the oct coating and poor adhesion to the tracheotomy tube polymer surface may explain the low antimicrobial effect. superficial adhesion is thought to be rapidly eliminated by brushing and chemical reprocessing procedures. an alternative antimicrobial strategy might be to silver coat tracheostomy tubes which could prevent bacterial colonization more reliably and efficiently  <cit> . although silver coating might be of clinical interest in the future, up to now its impact on vap incidence has not been investigated thoroughly.

the results of this study have some limitations. we did not demonstrate the actual presence or examine the nature of the developed biofilms such as by using scanning electron microscopy of the colonized tracheotomy tubes in the presence or absence of oct. however, the methods utilized are able to detect the presence or absence of bacterial colonisation even after a short time of  <dig> hours, which represents the initial step in any biofilm formation. moreover, there is no marker suggesting a change in the pathogen metabolism after  <dig> hours. a study in vivo would be required to strengthen our results and some animal models suitable for investigation of tracheotomy tubes exist. however, in view of the discouraging results in vitro, we did not pursue further testing in vivo as we believe that based on our data, animal tests would be ethically unjustifiable. finally, although vap is associated with specific pathogens, bacterial biofilms have been described to be polymicrobic and the overall composition may greatly influence the bio-burden and infectious nature of the biofilm.

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, oct coating of tracheotomy tubes shows an antimicrobial effect and reduces colonization and biofilm formation on polymer tracheotomy tube surfaces. this effect diminishes quickly after reprocessing of the tubes. therefore, despite the known antimicrobial effects, the use of oct for antimicrobial coating of tracheotomy tubes seems to be ineffective in the absence of methods that allow sustained attachment of the antimicrobial compound to the tube.

