BACKGROUND
prokaryotes are able to adapt to a wide range of environmental
conditions, including extreme variations in temperature, pressure, salinity,
ph and radiation [ <dig> 
2]. as temperature interferes
with the cell structure and function, it is considered one of the most
life-limiting physical parameters and thus acts as a determinant of the
distribution of living organisms across the earth  <cit> .

most of the earth’s biosphere  is cold. large land areas
are permanently frozen or unfreeze for only a few weeks in the summer, while
the temperature of 90% of the ocean water is lower than 5°c. representatives
of all three life domains  have successfully
colonized these cold ecosystems  <cit> . microorganisms adapted to cold conditions are
classified as psychrophiles when their optimal temperature for growth is
approximately 15°c or lower and as psychrotrophic when their optimal
temperature for growth is above that level  <cit> .
free-living bacteria constantly monitor the environmental temperature and
can detect temperature changes by thermosensors, which are biomolecules
sensitive to such changes [ <dig> 
7]. at low temperatures,
several adaptive mechanisms are activated to maintain membrane fluidity,
transport, transcription, translation, cell division, metabolism and enzyme
activity and to avoid intracellular ice formation  <cit> .

the compatibility of organisms with their habitat temperature is
determined by their genetic architecture  <cit>  and their ability to respond to environmental
variations by changes in gene expression. however, the sets of genes
required for adaptation to low temperatures have not yet been fully
identified  <cit> . to address
this gap, several genomes, transcriptomes and/or proteomes of cold-adapted
microorganisms have been investigated  <cit> .

omic research has been recently advanced due to the introduction of
next-generation sequencing  technologies and increasingly sensitive
proteomic techniques, such as two-dimensional difference gel electrophoresis
tandem mass spectrometry , which provide a wide variety of
data  <cit> . the rna-seq method,
in which complementary dna fragments are sequenced using ngs  <cit> , opened new horizons for the analysis
of the prokaryotic transcriptome as it allowed the quantification of
differential expression as well as an understanding of the bacterial rna
type diversity and its regulatory mechanisms. the transcriptomes of several
pathogenic or bacteria with environmental and/or biotechnological relevance
were sequenced by rna-seq under various conditions, and the results were
published . however, the microbial adaptation to
extreme environmental conditions was poorly investigated by this
method.

exiguobacterium antarcticum strain b <dig> was
isolated from a biofilm in ginger lake, king george island, antarctica
, and its genome was sequenced  <cit> . this species is a relevant model for
the study of the microbial ability to survive and proliferate within a wide
temperature range, as it grows in temperatures ranging from -3°c to 42°c
 <cit> , with an optimal growth
temperature of 37°c  <cit> .

in the present study, we identified the main genes involved in e. antarcticum b <dig> adaptation to cold and defined
the global gene expression in response to temperatures of 37°c and 0°c
through the generation of omic data. we confirmed the relevance of some
genes previously reported in the literature to thermal adaptation and also
describe new findings that allow a better understanding of the lifestyle of
this psychrotrophic organism.

methods
bacteria and growth conditions
bacterial cultures were diluted to optical density  <dig>  at 600 nm
 and grown in tryptone soy broth  at 0°c or
37°c under constant agitation at 210 rpm until reaching od <dig>  <dig> – <dig> ,
which corresponds to the middle of the exponential growth phase. at this
point, total rna and protein extractions were performed separately. for
rna extraction, a culture volume  was immediately mixed with an
equal volume of rnalater® . for protein extraction a 500 ml
culture volume was used. biological triplicates were prepared for each
omic experiment.

rna extraction, enrichment of mrna and rna-seq
aliquots of 2 ml were centrifuged for sediment the cells, at 5000 g
and 4°c for 10 minutes. the bacterial total rna was extracted using
chargeswitch® total rna cell kits
 according to the manufacturer’s instructions, and
adding a mechanical lysis step using a precellys© grinder . the total rna
amount was measured by fluorometry using a qubit™
- quant-it™ rna assay kit . messenger rna
was enriched using ribominus™ transcriptome
isolation kit  , and the amount of recovered
rna was measured as described above.

the enriched rna samples were used to build strand-specific rna-seq
libraries. two libraries, one at each experimental condition , were prepared using a
solid™ total rna-seq kit. fifty-base pair  fragments were sequenced
using the solid™  <dig> plus system according to the manufacturer’s
instructions . two replicates from each
experimental condition  were employed in the preparation of
fragment libraries using ion total rna-seq kit and sequenced using 316
chip in an ion torrent personal genome machine™ .
all the procedures were performed according to the manufacturer’s
instructions.

transcriptomic analysis and validation
the quality reads were mapped against the e.
antarcticum b <dig> annotated genome  using
clc genomics workbench™ .
the reads obtained using solid™  were cut to 35 bp using
an in-house developed script and filtered  using the software quality assessment  <cit> . in the case of the reads obtained
using the ion torrent platform , the
software clc genomics was configured to discard reads shorter than 35 bp
or longer than 150 bp.

the reads that did not map to noncoding rna , rrna or trna
regions, were counted by clc genomics software and included in the
statistics of possible coding regions as "reads per kilobase million"
  <cit> . for the solid
datasets, two measurements of expression were performed and compared; in
one measurement, the multireads were discarded, while in the other, they
were counted according to the criteria depicted in additional file
1: figure s <dig> 

to assess the differential expression between the two investigated
temperatures, the rpkm obtained in the previous step were analyzed using
r package degseq  <cit>  as
follows: the rpkm values of the solid datasets  and the
mean rpkm values of each experimental condition corresponding to the
datasets sequenced using ion torrent  were compared,
thus generating log base 2-fold change values  and
p-values.

protein extraction and two-dimensional analysis
the 2d-dige technique was used to characterize the protein expression
profile. for protein extraction, cell lysis was performed using french
press  after the cells were washed using 10 mm
tris–hcl buffer at ph  <dig>  supplemented with 1 mm dtt. the soluble
proteins were then obtained by centrifugation at  <dig>  g for 30 minutes,
which was followed by ultracentrifugation at  <dig>  g for 90 minutes.
wide-range ph strips were first used to identify the ph values associated
with the greatest protein concentration . to perform 2d-dige, the samples were
quantified and 120 μg of protein extract was precipitated with
methanol/chloroform and resuspended until a final concentration of
3 μg μl- <dig> was achieved. in each sample,
54 μg of protein was labeled with  <dig> pmol cy <dig> or cy <dig>  and an internal
standard containing all the samples from all replicates was labeled with
cy <dig>  each replicate was mixed and applied to the same gel following
dilution with rehydration buffer  buffer) and 50 mm dtt. strips of 18 cm
and ph 4– <dig> were used for isoelectric focusing in an ettan™ ipgphor ii  following a five-step protocol: 100 v for one hour,
500 v for two hours,  <dig>  v gradient for two hours,  <dig>  v gradient
for three hours and  <dig>  v step until reaching
60000 v h- <dig> with a constant current of
75 μa per strip. following the isoelectric focusing, second dimension
separation was performed using an ettan™ daltsix electrophoresis unit . the resulting gels were digitized using an ettan™
dige imager , and the images were analyzed using
image master 2d platinum v. <dig>  . the protein spots
exhibiting ±2-fold differences in relative volume were considered
differential spots. only the differential spots that exhibited
significance in anova  were taken into consideration.

following the analysis of expression, the differential spots were
picked from preparatory gels containing 450 μg of protein each using
ettan™ spot picker . the proteins were digested
with trypsin, 20 ng μl- <dig> , at
58°c for 30 minutes. the peptides were then extracted from the gel and
placed on an anchorchip  <dig> plate for use in a maldi-tof/tof autoflex
iii™ mass spectrometer , in positive reflector
mode, for identification. the resulting ms and ms/ms  spectra
were analyzed using mascot  and compared to genomic data corresponding to that of the
group firmicutes deposited at the national center for biotechnology
information  nr database .

RESULTS
absolute expression analysis and the detection of differentially
expressed genes by rna-seq
e. antarcticum b <dig> transcriptomes were
sequenced after culture growth at 0°c and 37°c. one replicate from each
experimental condition  was sequenced using the solid™
system , and two additional replicates from each
experimental condition  were sequenced using
the pgm ion torrent platform  to validate
the thermo-specific expression profile of e.
antarcticum b <dig> . in the step of library preparation, the
ribosomal rnas  were depleted. thus, the ncrna
reads were filtered from our data set, and the remaining reads that
aligned to mrna regions were used for the gene expression estimate
.table  <dig> 
rna-seq dataset statistics



r1-0

r1-37

r2-0

r3-0

r2-37

r3-37
*number of reads generated in the sequencing of each
replicate.

**number of reads remaining after quality treatment
that were used in mapping.



we analyzed the expression levels of  <dig>  annotated regions of the
e. antarcticum b <dig> genome, of which
 <dig>  were protein-coding genes and  <dig> were pseudogenes. relative to the
r1- <dig> and r1- <dig> datasets, the results obtained with and without the
inclusion of multireads showed that the latter represented only 2%
 and  <dig> %  of the total number of
aligned reads and that they were concentrated within a few of the
assessed regions. for that reason, the final rpkm values of the vast
majority of transcripts corresponding to either temperature 
are derived from reads that were mapped in one single region . however, the presence of transcripts whose expression fully
depended on the multireads  is noteworthy . some of
these transcripts corresponded to genes conserved in the e. antarcticum b <dig> genome and are relevant for
thermal adaptation, such as genes encoding cold-shock proteins. similar
results for the multireads were found in the other replicates . thus, we considered the results that used the multireads in the
rna-seq analysis. this type of approach is scarcely reported in the
literature  <cit> ; however, as our results show, the
multireads exerted minimal interference on the transcriptome rpkm
calculation and were only relevant in the calculation of the rpkm of
extremely conserved genes, such as those encoding cold-shock proteins.
the relevance of the inclusion of the multireads became evident when we
performed the differential proteome analysis. the greatest relative
volume values in the dige gels corresponded to cold-shock proteins . this finding validates
the use of multireads in the calculation of the rpkm of those
genes.

the biological replicates obtained using the ion torrent platform
proved to be highly reproducible under both temperatures 
. a comparison of the datasets
from both platforms showed that no expressing region appeared in the
results obtained using the ion torrent platform only, i.e., all regions
were also detected in at least one of the libraries sequenced using solid
. in addition, the
efficiency of transcript detection by the ion torrent platform was
proportional to that of the solid platform . the venn diagram in figure 
1c provides an overall view of
the total number of analyzed regions that were expressed  in each set of replicates. solid rna-seq
 covered 99%  of those regions, and most
transcripts  were expressed at both temperatures. the
percentage of regions covered by ion torrent rna-seq was  <dig> %
, and  <dig> %  of them were expressed at both
temperatures.figure  <dig> 
absolute expression analysis by solid
rna-seq and ion torrent rna-seq. the upper
panels describe the correlation between the biological
replicates sequenced on the ion torrent platform at
temperatures of 0°c  and
37°c .  venn diagram showing the total
number of expressed regions in each replicate set.  correlation between the
expression levels of transcripts detected by solid  and those
detected by ion torrent at each or both temperature
conditions.



the expression levels of  <dig> regions were zero in all sequenced
replicates. in total,  <dig> of these regions were annotated in databases as
genes encoding hypothetical proteins with no predicted function, and five
were annotated as pseudogenes. we also found transcripts that mapped in
regions predicted to be pseudogenes. although the occurrence of
pseudogene transcription is reported in the literature, these regions may
have been mistakenly assembled and/or erroneously annotated in bacterial
genomes  <cit> .

among the  <dig>  genes expressed in all the replicates, those that met
the following criteria were considered to be differentially expressed:
 genes with the same log2fc value sign, i.e., those that appeared as
up-  or downregulated  in the results of both platforms, and 
genes with a log2fc absolute value ≥ <dig> and a p-value < <dig> . a total of
 <dig> genes met both criteria and, therefore, was considered to be
differentially expressed by e.
antarcticum b <dig> between the two temperatures.

protein expression profile on 2d-dige-ms/ms
analysis by 2d-dige detected  <dig> spots that were differentially
expressed between 0°c and 37°c , of which  <dig> were downregulated and  <dig> were
upregulated at the colder temperature . these differential spots were recovered
from the preparative gels, and  <dig> of them were identified. these spots
are indicated by their match id in figure   <dig>  these  <dig> spots corresponded to  <dig> different
proteins. the relative differential expression range varied from - <dig> 
 to + <dig>  . the expression levels of  <dig> of the 13
identified proteins were corroborated by the rna-seq results ; however, the
gene expression levels differed between the techniques .figure  <dig> 
differential proteome gel of
e. antarcticum
b <dig> grown at 0°c and 37°c.
spots in red correspond to bacteria grown at 0°c and labeled
with cy <dig>  while those in green correspond to bacteria grown
at 37°c and labeled with cy <dig>  the spots identified by ms/ms
are indicated by blank arrows with the corresponding match
id.



influence of temperature on e.
antarcticumb <dig> gene regulation
the transcriptome results obtained by the two platforms relative to
all e. antarcticum b <dig> genes and all
the proteins identified by ms/ms are described in additional file
3: table s <dig> and table s <dig> 
the main molecular mechanisms involved in the adaptation of e. antarcticum b <dig> described in the present
study are summarized in figure   <dig>  and their relevance to culturing at cold conditions is
more thoroughly addressed below.figure  <dig> 
main differentially expressed genes and
effects observed on the
e. antarcticum
cells grown at both temperature
conditions. the arrows exhibiting a plus sign
indicate increased expression, and the arrows with a minus
sign indicate reduced expression at 0°c. the locus tag of
each gene is indicated below their representation. genes
clustered with full lines indicate operon arrangements, and
those linked by dotted lines exhibit variable distances in
the genome but perform similar cell functions.



cold-shock proteins
cold-shock proteins  homologues possess rna chaperone activity
thus are able to destabilize the secondary rna structures formed as a
result of exposure to cold that might impair transcription and
translation  <cit> . nine
classes of csp are described and classified according to their
homologues found in the bacterial model escherichia coli. e. antarcticum b <dig> has six genes that
encode homologues of the main cold-shock proteins . all of them
are conserved, are 201 bp long and have the nucleic acid-binding
domain characteristic of this protein family  <cit> . due to these characteristics,
we had to take the multireads
alignment into consideration to estimate these genes expression levels
in a satisfactory manner . as a consequence, we detected these
genes in all the replicates, and all were differentially expressed
. four csp genes
were upregulated in the colder condition, while two other csp genes
were downregulated .
different levels of expression of multiple csp homologues of the same
organism are reported in the literature  <cit> . psychrobacter arcticus has two csp homologues, one of
which was highly expressed across the full temperature range, while
the other was downregulated at -6°c  <cit> . in pseudomonas
putida, the transcriptomes analyzed by rna-seq have
detected the expression of five csp homologue proteins, three of which
were upregulated and two of which were downregulated upon a reduction
in temperature  <cit> .table  <dig> 
differential expression of some
significant
e. antarcticum
b <dig> genes between the temperatures
0°c and 37°c



cold shock response

csha

cshb

transcription, translation and
regulation

nusa

nusg

infb

infc

rbfa

sigw

sigd

protein folding

clpb

grpe

dnak

tig

grol

gros

htpg

cell membrane
adaptations

lcfa

energy metabolism

cbab

ctae

ctad

ctac

pyruvate metabolism –
anaerobic

pfla

pflb

ldh

pyruvate metabolism –
aerobic

pdhd

pdhc
acetyltransferase component of pyruvate


in e. antarcticum b <dig> proteome,
one cold-shock protein, csp <dig>  was detected and identified by ms/ms in
higher levels of expression at 0°c. it was found in four different gel
spots, one of which exhibited a relative volume  <dig> times higher at 0°c
than at 37°c . that pattern of dispersion was most likely
due to post-translational modifications. modified proteins might be
easily detected and identified using gel-based methods  <cit> . the displacement to the left
of that same protein  is characteristic of
modifications in the pi value . that same behavior was found for the bacillus subtilis cold-shock protein cspb
and was attributed to the addition of a formyl group to the molecule
 <cit> . this finding
shows that csp <dig> is the most abundant of the six cold-shock proteins,
denoting its relevance for cell adaptation to cold.

recently, a study demonstrated that in e.
coli the cspc intracellular levels are inversely related
to the concentration of the heat shock protein groesl  <cit> . in the e. antarcticum b <dig> the genome sequence of the main cold
shock protein described  shows higher identity  with the
cspc class of bacillus subtilis. in
our data, the concentration of csp <dig> also increases at 0°c followed by
a decrease in the concentration level of the protein groesl. this
observation was corroborated by the two omics approaches used here.
cspc protein acts by stabilizing the transcripts of several genes
including the alternative sigma factor rpos gene, which regulates several other genes for
survival under stress conditions  <cit> . this is an expected response, since
psychrotrophic organisms, such as e.
antarcticum b <dig>  are only adapted to low temperatures,
requiring more complex molecular adaptation processes then those
observed for psychrophilic bacteria. however, different csp homologues
also might be involved in different cell functions or types of stress,
e.g., nutritional, osmotic and oxidative stress .

as a part of the cold shock response, dead-box rna helicases might
contribute to resolving secondary rna structures, thus allowing for
their efficient translation and later degradation  <cit> . in the present study, we found
the overexpression of two genes encoding homologues of those proteins
at 0°c compared to 37°c . similar results were reported in exiguobacterium sibiricum, p. putida, bacillus cereus and p.
arcticus; in the latter two organisms, increased
sensitivity to cold was found in deleterious mutants of those proteins
 <cit> .

transcription, translation and regulation
among the most abundant mrna species in e.
antarcticum transcriptomes, those that encode elongation factor  and ribosomal
proteins stand out; among the latter, several components of the 30s
and 50s subunits were induced in the cold condition . several
genes encoding transcription and translation factors that might
contribute to rna and protein synthesis in the cold were overexpressed
at 0°c compared to 37°c, including the transcription factors nusa and nusg, the translation initiation factors if- <dig> and
if- <dig> and the ribosome binding
factor rbfa . similar gene expression changes in response to
cold were also found in other microorganisms, such as e. sibiricum  <cit> , p.
arcticus  <cit> , p. putida
 <cit>  and m. catarrhalis  <cit> .

we found differential expression of two genes encoding alternative
sigma factors: sigw was repressed,
and sigd was induced by cold
. an alternative
sigma factor might be required by rna polymerase holoenzyme to alter
the expression of some genes or specific prokaryotic regulons
simultaneously. in bacillus
subtilis, the regulon sigw contains genes associated
with cell wall-related functions and adaptation to alkaline shock
 <cit> , and the gene sigw was found to be expressed more lowly
at cold  <cit> . similarly,
the gene sigd, which is related to
a regulon of genes involved in flagellar synthesis, is one of  <dig> genes
included in an operon, all of which participate in flagellar synthesis
and bacterial chemotaxis  <cit> . all those genes comprising the sigw regulon,
including the sigw gene, were
upregulated at cold . these findings suggest that bacterial
motility might be significant at low temperatures and that these
genes, which were annotated as organized in an operon in the e. antarcticum b <dig> genome, are expressed as
a polycistronic mrna molecule.

furthermore, flagellar synthesis in planococcus halocryophilus is favorable at low
temperatures   <cit> ; however, in e.
sibiricum, which is a closely related species, the genes
involved in flagellar synthesis were repressed at - <dig> °c compared to
28°c  <cit> .

protein folding
in the e. antarcticum response
to cold, only trigger factor-tf was overexpressed . this protein has been recently
described as the primary chaperone in pseudoalteromonas haloplanktis grown at low
temperatures and is involved in protein folding or refolding
 <cit> . the remainder of
the e. antarcticum b <dig> chaperones
were underexpressed at 0°c in both the transcriptome and the proteome
. these
proteins were frequently reported to be repressed in the cold and to
participate in the heat shock response .

cell membrane adaptations
among the cell changes needed for microbial adaptation to cold,
those involving the cell membranes are some of the most relevant and
best documented. according to the available reports, an increase in
the amount of short- and branched-chain unsaturated fatty acids seems
to contribute to the maintenance of cell membrane fluidity and,
consequently, function at low temperatures  <cit> . in e.
sibiricum and p.
arcticus, the expression of a gene associated with fatty
acid desaturation was found to increase in the cold, corresponding to
temperatures of - <dig> °c vs. 28°c and -6°c vs. 17°c, respectively
 <cit> . in e.
antarcticum, we did not find a consistent increase of
the expression of the desaturase enzyme-encoding gene  at 0°c. this enzyme is activated by
the two-component system desk-desr  <cit> . desk is a histidine kinase coupled to the
membrane that senses the change in membrane fluidity and activates the
regulatory protein desr, which binds to the promoter region of the
desa gene, inducing desaturation
of fatty acids. evaluating the genome of e.
antarcticum b <dig>  we observed that the desk gene is truncated, which would
explain the lack of response of the desaturase desa to low temperature. however, the notorious ability
to adapt to cold environments leads us to believe that other pathways
are used for this purpose. for example, we found the overexpression of
the gene lcfa , the product of which is related to
long-chain fatty acid degradation  <cit> , probably resulting in the use of short-chain
fatty acids, to help maintain membrane fluidity.

thermal stress induced by exposure to low temperatures affects the
cell osmotic balance, resulting in a large cytoplasmic water efflux
similar to the one occurring under salt stress. therefore, one of the
mechanisms used by the microorganisms to protect themselves from
osmotic imbalance and intracellular ice formation consists of
accumulating compatible solutes inside the cell  <cit> . thermal differential expression of membrane
proteins associated with the transport of such solutes was observed in
bacteria native to cold environments compared to other bacteria
 <cit> . e.
antarcticum has several genes that encode membrane
proteins associated with the transport of compatible solutes; however,
only one of them was overexpressed in the cold condition .

we also found expressed genes whose products participate in the
carotenoid synthesis pathway. the presence of such transcripts
indicates that the orange color of e.
antarcticum b <dig> colonies  is due to the
production of such pigments, which has been frequently reported in
polar microorganisms [ <dig> 
19]. in these
microorganisms, the pigments might contribute to the adjustment of
membrane fluidity to low temperatures  <cit>  as well as to protection against ultraviolet
 radiation. therefore, they may prevent cell oxidation
 <cit> . such a
protective mechanism is most likely highly relevant for e. antarcticum b <dig> survival in antarctica,
which exhibited one of the highest temperature rise rates on earth in
the last 50 years  <cit> .

other remarks
the energy metabolism of e.
antarcticum exhibits changes similar to the ones shown
for e. sibiricum  <cit> , while the high solubility of
o <dig> at low temperatures is one of the reasons
that led us to believe that the metabolism of this bacterial species
is mainly aerobic. although pyruvate molecules are transformed into
large amounts of acetyl-coa through the action of the
pyruvate-dehydrogenase complex , the final pathway of aerobic energy production
involving the cytochrome c oxidase is repressed. this effect might be
due to the low metabolic rates exhibited by cells in cold environments
 <cit> . as the genes
associated with anaerobic fermentation are also repressed, the excess
acetyl-coa molecules are probably used in the synthesis of amino acids
or fatty acid molecules, the latter being extremely relevant to
thermal adaptation as cited above in cell membrane adaptation
topic.

enzymes involved in the combat against oxidative stress, such as
peroxiredoxin and superoxide dismutase, were repressed at 0°c compared
to 37°c. the latter was differentially expressed in the proteome,
while its log2fc value in the transcriptome was not significant. such
repression may occur due to the low concentrations of superoxide
radicals and reactive oxygen species that are produced during aerobic
metabolism, which is repressed at 0°c compared to warmer temperatures.
additionally, several genes organized in operons and related to
purines and pyrimidines synthesis were repressed at 0°c compared to
higher temperatures. frank et al.,  <dig>  <cit>  found that p. putida shuts down the transcription of
such operons following exposure to cold. a total of  <dig> genes encoding
hypothetical proteins were differentially expressed according to both
platforms , which points to the need to improve the
understanding of the adaptive mechanisms exhibited by psychrotrophic
organisms.

CONCLUSIONS
temperature is a critical parameter to determine life distribution on
earth extreme environments, and its habitat compatibility is finally
determined by the intrinsic genetic architecture  <cit> . the combined approaches used in the
present study allowed us to verify the molecular mechanisms of cold
adaptation primarily manifested as changes in gene expression, and
secondarily as differential protein expression. two next-generation
technologies, with different sequencing depth, yielded a satisfactory
coverage and similar transcriptomics profiles, which was also endorsed by
the proteomics results. our findings suggest that e.
antarcticum b <dig> exhibits a complex regulatory network governing
gene expression, that ensure its survival and growth in environments
exhibiting wide temperature variations, as a psychrotrophic organism. a
large number of genes were identified as differentially expressed among the
two growth temperature conditions, 0°c and 37°c, it were probably related to
maintain the integrity of macromolecules and the biological process,
preserving the cell structure and function. to adapt to low temperatures,
this bacteria overexpresses four of the six cold-shock proteins genes
present in its genome, which were the most abundant transcripts, as well as
the proteins identified at 0°c. these findings validate the use of
multireads and even permitted to evidence post-translational protein
modifications. together with the increase of these homologues, a parallel
regulation of other proteins might also contribute for the efficient
transcription, translation and protein folding process. moreover, the broad
molecular cold adaptation process require modifications at membrane level,
with changes in lipid composition and/or in the capture of compatible
solutes; at energy production, reducing the aerobic metabolism; and probably
at cell communication under stress conditions, through chemotaxis and
motility. the variation in expression of genes encoding hypothetical
proteins, and alternative sigma factors without regulons descripted in
e. antarcticum b <dig>  highlight the
necessity for additional investigation of this organism. further integrated
analyses are required to understand the switch control of the thermo
sensitive pathways, helping to unveil the lifestyle of the bacterial species
isolated from the antarctica region.

availability of supporting data
the data sets supporting the results of this article are available in
the sequence read archive  repository under the accession number
srp <dig> 

electronic supplementary material
additional file 1: electronic file  containing two additional
figures.
figure s <dig> – definition of
the positions of reads with more than one genome mapping
possibility .
 mapping criterion used when the alignment was
performed including a parameter to discard multireads.
 different genes with one conserved region; reads
aligned to this region are discarded.  genes present
in more than one copy; all the reads aligned to these
genes are discarded.  mapping criterion used when the
alignment was performed including a parameter to include
multireads .  different
genes with one conserved region; reads aligned to this
region are distributed between both genes as a function of
the expression of their non-conserved regions.  genes
present in more than one copy; reads aligned to these
genes are equally distributed between both copies.
figure s <dig> –
contribution of multireads to rpkm final value. the
graphic depicts the percent contribution of multireads to
the final rpkm values of the transcripts expressed in the
libraries sequenced on the solid platform at 0°c and 37°c
. 

 additional file 2: electronic file  with an image of the initial
two-dimensional gel stained with colloidal
coomassie. two-dimensional gel obtained with
a 24 cm ph 3– <dig> nl strip digitized using image scanner ii
. most of the spots formed in the
two-dimensional gel were detected in the acidic range.


 additional file 3: excel
file containing two additional tables:
table s1- rna-seq analysis
of
exiguobacterium
antarcticum
b <dig> growth at 0°c and
37°c. summary of the rna-seq data
corresponding to all the replicates sequenced using solid
or ion torrent. table s2
– proteins identified by ms/ms. each identified spot
corresponds to a match id different from the gel. the
mascot score, gene, locus tag, accession number, protein
name, relative volume, fold change, theoretical pi, mw and
identified peptides of each protein are described in the
table. 

 additional file 4: contains
two additional tables: table s <dig> – expression of genes
encoding
e. antarcticum cold shock
proteins
. comparison of the
results of csp-encoding gene expression with or without
multireads. table s <dig> –
expression of the genes included in the operon for
flagellar synthesis and bacterial chemotaxis. the 31
operon genes were expressed more highly at 0°c than at
37°c; this operon includes the gene encoding the sigma d
alternative factor . 

 competing interests

the authors declare that they have no competing
interests.

authors’ contributions

hpmbd and rab perform the experiments, analyzed the data relevant
to the bacterial transcriptome and proteome and wrote the manuscript. phcgs,
rtjr and arc helped with the transcriptome analysis. fn, cipn, dag, dms and
amcp helped with the proteome analysis. mspc, amcp and va helped with the
manuscript. vhp provided the bacterial sample and helped with the
manuscript. mpcs and as designed the project and directed the laboratory
analysis and manuscript preparation. all authors read and approved the final
manuscript.

the present study was supported by the brazilian agencies: conselho
nacional de desenvolvimento científico e tecnológico - cnpq, coordenação de
aperfeiçoamento de pessoal de nível superior - capes, rede paraense de
genômica e proteômica - rpgp, programa antártico brasileiro - proantar of
the ministério da ciência e tecnologia – mct, rede proteoma nacional -
mct-finep, rede mineira de biomoléculas – fapemig. mpsc would like to thank
fundação para a ciência e tecnologia  for the grant
pest-c/eqb/la0006/ <dig>  the cooperation project capes-fct and cipn for
fellowship sfrh/bd/62051/ <dig> 
