BACKGROUND
global loss of biodiversity, fueled by unprecedented anthropogenic influences, has elevated the importance of conservation biology in mainstream public consciousness. despite this increased attention, one of the most fundamental challenges of conservation remains unsolved and contentious: how do we accurately identify and delimit manageable units of biodiversity  <cit> ? since species are one of the fundamental units of biology, this challenge is rooted in taxonomy  <cit> . successful conservation, however, also relies on our understanding of diversity below the species level  <cit> , as evolutionary and ecological potential is often recognized at the population level  <cit> .

evolutionarily  significant units  were originally developed to facilitate objective prioritization of conservation units  below the species level  <cit> . at a time when conservation managers  were grappling with sometimes-trivial subspecific classifications  <cit> , esus aimed to refocus conservation resources on populations exhibiting the most distinct evolutionary characteristics. however, as with species concepts in taxonomy , alternate definitions and operational criteria of esus have proliferated  <cit> , as have alternate qualifiers for cus /demographic units   <cit> , discrete population segments   <cit> , and service-providing units   <cit> ). starting with relatively conceptual, integrative origins  <cit>  that were criticized for their subjectivity  <cit> , various redefinitions of the esu have focused on more objective methods for discriminating populations that have evolutionary potential, such as: 1) the use of consistently congruent gene phylogenies  <cit> , 2) reciprocal monophyly of mitochondrial dna  or allele frequency divergence at nuclear loci  <cit> , and 3) diagnostic characters  that exclusively cluster individuals or populations using the phylogenetic species concept  <cit> . while alleviating some subjectivity, these redefinitions met criticism focused on inconsistent phylogenetic reconstruction  <cit> , the stringency of reciprocal monophyly and diagnostic characters  <cit> , and the utility of the phylogenetic species concept  <cit> .

in the midst of this operational debate, crandall et al.  <cit>  have argued that a dichotomous designation  betrays the goal of esus and undermines biological complexity. they presented eight categories to discern population distinctiveness based on genetic and ecological exchangeability sensu  <cit> , and proposed that dichotomous use of the term esu be abandoned in favor of a more holistic approach  <cit> . along similar lines, fraser & bernatchez  <cit>  contended that all esu concepts share the same “fundamental essence” and goal, but differ in specific optimality criteria. following the unified species concept  <cit> , these authors described a framework for adaptive evolutionary conservation that recognizes the situational strengths and weaknesses of each esu definition and integrates them to define biologically meaningful esus anywhere along the evolutionary continuum  <cit> . in the past 15 years, conceptual redefinitions of the esu have been replaced by new alternate classifications and subdivisions of cus. de guia & saitoh  <cit>  proposed the use of full and partial esus to distinguish populations described based on knowledge of both neutral and adaptive genetic variation from those described using only one aspect of their variation, respectively. demographic or management units  that describe demographically independent populations , have also become commonplace alongside the more commonly discussed esu  <cit> .

balancing the complexity of the evolutionary continuum with the practical inventory needs of conservation management is an augean task, and it can be instructive to reevaluate old decisions. here, we reassess the conservation status of an endangered butterfly in california in light of its range-wide population structure and phylogeny. lange’s metalmark butterfly, apodemia mormo langei  <cit> , is an endangered subspecies characterized by a constrained range and a unique phenotype. described from the banks of the sacramento-san joaquin river system downstream of sacramento, california, this single site remains the only recognized location for this taxon. due to habitat loss from sand mining and other activities, and these butterflies’ low vagility and constrained distribution, the population is extremely geographically restricted, and was placed on the us endangered species list in  <dig> under the endangered species act  . the antioch dunes national wildlife refuge  was established in  <dig> to protect a. m. langei as well as two species of wildflowers . lange’s metalmark has undergone several boom-and-bust cycles, but is being maintained through extensive conservation efforts by several organizations, including a captive rearing program  <cit> .

apodemia mormo langei is a member of a variable species group, the a. mormo species complex. three species are currently recognized in this complex: a. mormo  <cit> , a. virgulti  <cit> , and a. mejicanus  <cit> . apodemia mormo occurs across western north america, from mexico to canada, and is by far the widest ranging metalmark species  in north america. apodemia virgulti and a. mejicanus are found in the american southwest and western mexico  <cit> , and a. mejicanus also has an isolated population in colorado  <cit> . the species complex shows considerable variation in wing markings, voltinism, flight periods, host use, and oviposition behavior  <cit> . although most feed exclusively on plants in the genus eriogonum , some also feed on krameria   <cit> . due to this variability, most of which is found in the southwest region of the usa, there is significant taxonomic interest in the group. currently  <dig> described subspecies are recognized in the complex  <cit> , but the number and status of these taxa is far from settled .

in this study, we investigate the identification and demarcation of biological units in the a. mormo species complex, from both an evolutionary biology and a conservation biology point of view. we use mitochondrial gene sequence data and microsatellite markers to describe range-wide population structure and phylogenetic relationships in the a. mormo species complex, including the endangered subspecies a. m. langei. to objectively relate our genetic assessment of the group to preexisting taxonomy, we compare a selection of morphological characters based on taxonomic designations to the genetic diversity across the species complex. in light of our new genetic data, we then reassess the conservation status of a. m. langei under various definitions of cus.

RESULTS
mtdna
we sequenced the entire cytochrome oxidase subunit i  gene for  <dig> specimens and conducted a maximum-likelihood search of  <dig> unique haplotypes . all specimens of the a. mormo complex fell into two clades denoted as the western and the eastern lineage, except for the three specimens from the eastern slope of colorado  which were  <dig> % divergent from other individuals in adjacent localities. the eastern lineage comprised all a. mormo complex haplotypes from individuals on or east of the continental divide, as well as from locality  <dig>  on the western slope of the colorado rockies. it also included two sonora, mex sites , the lone nevada site , and one individual from a site in san bernardino co., california . the western lineage comprised all other haplotypes from west of the continental divide. the average percent sequence divergence between these two clades was  <dig> %.figure  <dig> maximum-likelihood tree of all unique coi haplotypes outside the a. mormo group: letters indicate state or province where collected: az: arizona; bs: baja sur; ca: california; co: colorado; si: sinaloa; so: sonora. locality numbers are given after state/province codes. numbers above branches indicate bootstrap support.



within the eastern lineage, two major clades are observed: one consisting of the mexican haplotypes, the one sample from nevada, and the outlier from san bernardino, ca ; and the other containing the remaining eastern haplotypes . with the exception of one small clade of haplotypes from wyoming and montana with 94% bootstrap support and two distinct monophyletic clades comprised of montana  and saskatchewan & montana haplotypes , all other clades showed shallow relationships with little geographic pattern .

the western lineage was composed of four major clades, labeled w1-w <dig> . clade w <dig> was composed of specimens from the five northernmost collection locations in california , including the antioch dunes population of a. m. langei. although branch lengths within this clade were short, divergence of  <dig> % was observed relative to the rest of the western lineage. relationships between the three remaining western clades were unresolved, but each was moderately divergent from the others. excluding one outlier from santa barbara co., ca , clade w <dig> included specimens from four geographically intermediate populations in central california  as well as one in south central california . clade w <dig> was comprised of the majority of the individuals from south-central and southern california. finally, clade w <dig> included all individuals from the pacific northwest, but interestingly, also included several individuals from south-central californian populations . the only western lineage to exhibit significant substructure was clade w <dig>  which displayed four main internal clades . divergence of these clades ranged from  <dig> % to  <dig> %, but exhibited little geographic pattern.

regionally, tests of neutrality  agreed and rejected the null hypothesis of constant population size only for populations east of the continental divide . all other tajima’s d statistics were not statistically significant. fu’s fs statistics was significant globally and for california regionally, and supported models of population growth or purifying selection in both cases. no statistically significant signatures of population bottlenecks/overdominant selection were observed regionally, or in any populations individually .table  <dig> 
descriptive statistics and tests of isolation by distance: descriptive statistics, population differentiation values, and isolation by distance  results for all microsatellite data  and for localities separated regionally 



region
avg. h
obs

alleles/locus
f
st
ibd
r
2
tajima’s
d
fu’s
f
s
 <dig> 
− <dig> 
 <dig> 
 <dig> 
− <dig> 
− <dig> 
− <dig> 
alleles/locus refers to the average number of alleles per locus. bolded numbers indicate significant values .



microsatellites
six microsatellite loci were genotyped for  <dig> specimens. across all localities, observed heterozygosity ranged from  <dig>   to  <dig>  , and strong population differentiation was observed overall . in pair-wise tests of differentiation, most population pairs were significantly differentiated . when considering sets of populations regionally , the pacific northwest showed statistically lower heterozygosity , while populations east of the continental divide showed the lowest genetic differentiation. considering all localities, there was a weak, but significant signature of ibd . regionally, significant signatures were observed in the pacific northwest and east of the continental divide, but not in california. observed heterozygosity and pair-wise fst values for all populations are provided in additional file 1: table s <dig> 

in a total analysis of all samples, structure estimated the presence of two genetic clusters , one corresponding to populations in california and the other corresponding to those in the pacific northwest and east of the continental divide. further substructuring divided these two clusters into six , and we will focus on these six clusters. analyzing the populations from west and east of the continental divide separately, which enabled removal of the locus that did not amplify for each , resulted in similar clustering to k =  <dig> . considering k =  <dig>  two clusters corresponded to populations east of the divide , one to the pacific northwest, and three to california and mexico. dapc estimated a larger number of clusters globally , but these clusters simply split the three regional groupings  into several smaller, overlapping clusters . overall, dapc and structure both delimited the three main regions.figure  <dig> discriminant analysis of principal components: dapc based on microsatellite data for a) global dataset, and for populations from b) california , c) the pacific northwest , and d) east of the continental divide . symbol shapes and colors within each region distinguish localities , and a. m. langei is circled.



dapc and structure were also run on regional datasets in an attempt to elucidate population structure at that scale. regional structure analyses did not provide any additional resolution, and all regions mirrored the global analysis . dapc, however, provided resolution for the pacific northwest and californian populations, but not for those east of the continental divide . in the pacific northwest, the two most geographically distant populations  were separated from a main cluster including the remaining populations . in california, dapc clustering roughly matched ancestry estimates from structure, although as in the global dapc analysis, more genetic clusters were estimated , which graphically resembled over-splitting of the main groups. similar to the clustering in the pacific northwest, in california, a main cluster was observed that showed some geographic substructure . several populations from northern california  were separated from this main cluster, however, including the population of a. m. langei at antioch dunes .

the structure clusters corresponded well to the clades found with mtdna: the two clusters east of the divide corresponded to the eastern lineage, the pacific northwest cluster to clade w <dig> of the western lineage, and the remaining three california/mexico clusters to clades w1-w <dig> of the western lineage. correspondence between these latter clusters and haplotypes, however, was less straightforward. figure  <dig> compares a distance-based tree generated from microsatellite allele frequencies, to a tree generated from a reduced, but comparable, mtdna dataset . respectively, these two trees correspond to the clusters from structure , and to the overall mtdna tree . when comparing these two trees, several main differences are observed and are numbered as follows in figure 4: 1) the cananea, mex population clusters with the western instead of the eastern samples; 2) the jawbone and limestone camp populations of south-central california cluster with the northern california hull mt. and ladoga samples; 3) the antioch apodemia mormo langei samples cluster with tumey hills, arroyo bayo and del puerto populations rather than with mt. diablo and vallejo samples; and 4) the mendota area population clusters with the southern california camp pendleton and point loma samples rather than with the geographically closer tumey hills, arroyo bayo and del puerto samples.figure  <dig> trees comparing microsatellite and mitochondrial dna sequence data: left: neighbor-joining tree constructed from microsatellite genetic distances, and right: maximum-likelihood tree generated from reduced mtdna dataset. terminal tips have been manually condensed to simplify groupings in order to show correspondence between trees, indicated by dashed lines; numbered circles on dashed lines correspond to major differences between the trees as mentioned in results. the thick dashed line indicates a. m. langei. locality names are followed by locality numbers, with sample sizes in parentheses. shading around branches indicates specimens of a. m. langei or a. m. nr. langei , or localities including specimens assigned to a taxon other than a. mormo . unshaded branches indicate specimens of a. mormo. numbers above branches indicate bootstrap support, and numbers/letters below branches indicate main mtdna clades  or main structure groupings .



morphology-based taxonomic assignment and concordance to genetic data
in order to objectively relate the specimens in this study to taxonomic nomenclature,  <dig> wing characters  were selected to differentiate the  <dig> subspecies in the a. mormo species complex recognized by  <cit>  . most specimens were assigned to one of a. mormo mormo, a. mormo langei, a. mormo cythera, a. mormo tuolumnensis, a. mejicanus, a. mejicanus pueblo, a. virgulti, or a. virgulti nigrescens . all specimens from the northern part of the range—bc, wa, or, id, mt, wy, sd, nd, and sk—were classified as a. mormo mormo on the basis of geographic origin only, due to lack of phenotypic variation and because the nominate subspecies is the only one that is considered to occur in those areas  <cit> . a few intermediate specimens were classified as a. nr. mormo or a. mormo nr. langei. although a. mormo langei was described based on its unique phenotype  <cit> , some individuals from populations in central california have been discovered with similar phenotypic characters, including orange scaling over the forewing discal cell spot and hindwing basal spots as well as orange scaling medially on the hindwing . specimens in this study from mendota area , display these characteristics and were assigned to a. m. nr. langei.figure  <dig> illustration of eleven wing characters and selected states: in character names, “f” refers to a forewing character, “h” to a hindwing character, and “b” to a character on both pairs of wings. in the descriptions, “df” refers to “dorsal forewing” and “dh” to “dorsal hindwing”.



table  <dig> summarizes taxonomic designations of specimens for which genetic data was obtained. overall, there is little relationship between taxonomic designation and membership to either mtdna clades or structure groupings. while some subspecies display relatively narrow genetic characteristics , most display variable signatures with both mtdna and microsatellites. haplotypes  <dig> and h <dig>  which formed the sister clade to the main a. mormo complex lineage, assigned to a. mejicanus pueblo, giving  <dig> % divergence between a. mejicanus pueblo and other a. mejicanus specimens. additionally, despite their phenotypic similarity, individuals of a. m. langei and those assigned to a. m. nr. langei  exhibit different mtdna haplotypes and microsatellite groupings.table  <dig> 
comparison of genetic clades/clusters and taxonomic determinations: main mitochondrial dna clades and microsatellite clusters from structure exhibited by specimens assigned to each taxonomic entity that was sampled from the
a. mormo
species group


mitochondrial dna clades
microsatellite clusters

name
og
e1
e2
w1
w2
w3a
w3b
w3c
w3d
w4
1
2
3
4
5
6

a. mormo mormo

a. mormo cythera

a. mormo langei

a. mormo tuolumensis

a. nr. mormo

a. m. nr. langei

a. virgulti virgulti

a. virgulti nigrescens

a. mejicanus mejicanus

a. mejicanus pueblo
og refers to haplotypes  <dig> and h <dig>  which were placed as outgroups to the main eastern and western lineages.



the taxonomy and systematics of the a. mormo complex is unsettled , and we do not assert that these morphological designations are an answer to the delimitation of units within this taxonomic complexity. rather, we use these designations, based on multiple interpretations and sources, to provide an objective link between our genetic data and the preexisting taxonomic nomenclature. for consistency’s sake, we follow the names used by  <cit> , despite his warning that his arrangement of taxa within the a. mormo complex “should be considered tentative.” as discussed below, we hope this study can provide insight for a taxonomic revision in the future, which should include a more thorough treatment of the morphology of the group .

discussion
our study represents the first dna-based treatment of the apodemia mormo species complex. both maternally inherited mtdna and biparentally inherited microsatellites show deep divergences across the continental divide, as well as along the west coast. within these regions, fine-scale population structure varied from being almost absent east of the continental divide and in the pacific northwest, to being highly structured in california. mitochondrial dna and microsatellite markers roughly agreed on population relationships, although several discontinuities were observed when comparing the two marker sets. this data provides a starting point for a reassessment of the taxonomy of the group. accordingly, we reevaluate support for a. m. langei as an esu under multiple definitions, and as a federally listed endangered species.

range-wide population genetic structure/phylogeography
across its range, the a. mormo complex includes several distinct lineages. the most pronounced of these is the mitochondrial divergence between haplotypes  <dig> and h <dig>  assigned to a. mejicanus pueblo, and the rest of the a. mormo complex, including other specimens assigned to a. mejicanus. this is the largest intraspecific divergence observed in the complex, and these populations merit further attention and focused collecting to elucidate their phylogenetic and taxonomic placement. apart from these divergent haplotypes, both mitochondrial and microsatellite loci support deep divergences across the continental divide and between the pacific northwest and california. although some genetic variation exists east of the continental divide , the nexus of diversity for both marker types is found in california. here however, the concordance between mtdna and microsatellites breaks down. microsatellites show some populations of pure ancestry , that tend to cluster geographically, but also many admixed populations and individuals. mitochondrial dna also shows several “pure” clusters of geographically proximate populations, in which all individuals belong to the same clade. some of these roughly match clusters displayed by the microsatellite dataset, although the geographic positions of the breaks between clusters overlap. california also contains many populations of mixed mitochondrial ancestry, including individuals exhibiting haplotypes from the eastern lineage  and the pacific northwest .

populations in california exhibit higher regional population differentiation  than both other regions, and populations east of the continental divide show the lowest, despite having comparable levels of genetic diversity  to california. despite low vagility in these butterflies, only weak signatures of ibd are observed in the pacific northwest and east of the continental divide. virtually no signatures of ibd were observed in california, which is unsurprising given the lack of geographic structure in microsatellite groupings. populations in the pacific northwest were not only distinct, but exhibited statistically lower genetic diversity  than the other regions, as well as fewer average alleles per locus. this confirms previous findings  <cit>  but mtdna haplotypes matching those found in the pacific northwest were also found in central california. given the lower genetic diversity compared to other regions, and the presence of these mtdna haplotypes, it is likely that the pacific northwest region was populated by post-glacial migrants originating in california, who experienced a population bottleneck during this process. similar patterns have been observed in other species occupying recently glaciated areas , and this pattern is known as the leading edge hypothesis  <cit> . tajima’s d and fu’s fs statistics potentially support recent population bottlenecks in the pacific northwest, but these results were not significant. east of the continental divide, a model of non-neutral sequence evolution was supported , and interestingly, we also observed eastern mtdna haplotypes in southern california, nevada, and mexico. the presence of these eastern haplotypes west of the continental divide may indicate a southwestern origin for the eastern lineage, departing from the previously hypothesized great plains origin presented by  <cit> . if the signature of non-neutral evolution of this mtdna is due to recent population expansion in this region , this would likely make this origin/divergence older than that for the pacific northwest. more detailed sampling between california and these two regions will help to resolve these phylogeographic hypotheses, and may reveal finer scale population structure that our sampling omits.

california’s high haplotypic and genetic diversity could be attributed to multiple phenomena. first, introgressive hybridization between neighboring populations can create patterns of admixture and facilitate movement of mtdna haplotypes between populations/species , which is possible given the close relationships of members within this complex and their geographic proximity. however, under this scenario we would expect adjacent localities to share more haplotypes than distant ones , particularly in organisms that have low vagility, such as a. mormo  <cit> . isolation by distance was virtually nonexistent and not statistically significant in california; furthermore, sites that shared identical mtdna haplotypes were as frequently tens to hundreds of miles apart as they were adjacent. therefore, a more likely explanation for this diversity may be retained ancestral polymorphism . apodemia mormo’s low vagility and high habitat specificity  <cit>  restricts its dispersal ability, which can lead to high levels of phylogeographic subdivision via limited gene flow  <cit> . this scenario, combined with high genetic diversity and differentiation observed in california, supports the hypothesis of retained ancestral polymorphism.

comparing genetic data and taxonomy
we found little to no concordance between our taxonomic designations and genetic placement with either mtdna or microsatellites. the nominate subspecies of the group, a. m. mormo, exemplifies this point at the largest geographic scale considered in this study. from california to british columbia and from new mexico to saskatchewan these butterflies can be more-or-less phenotypically identical, but exhibit deep genetic divergences in both their mitochondrial and nuclear genomes. regionally, geographic proximity is a better predictor of genetic similarity than phenotypic appearance. however, within the three broad regions considered here, some areas exhibited stronger taxonomic/genetic/geographic correspondence than others. northern californian populations, for example, display higher correspondence between genetic variation and geography than in southern california , and even some correspondence between taxonomic assignment and mtdna subclades . conversely, in southern california there is no taxonomic/genetic correspondence, and some mtdna haplotypes  are shared between sites and species .

it is important to reiterate that the taxonomy of the a. mormo complex is far from resolved, and we do not present our morphological taxonomic treatment as a resolution to this situation. rather, this treatment aimed to provide a relatively objective comparison between our genetic data and the preexisting taxonomy. our focus on characters associated with a. m. langei, and use of dorsal characters only, narrows the scope of this treatment. given the morphological complexity within the group, we hope this genetic data can provide a novel lens with which to reevaluate the entire a. mormo complex, although such a reevaluation is beyond the scope of this study.

apodemia mormo langei
due to its federally endangered status, the single population of a. m. langei at antioch dunes provides a pertinent focus for this genetic assessment of the a. mormo complex. within northern california , individuals from antioch dunes form a monophyletic mtdna subclade , and are most closely related  to individuals from geographically proximate populations . genetic distance estimates generated with microsatellites, on the other hand, place antioch dunes in closer relationship to tumey hills, arroyo bayo, and del puerto  to the south. while discordance between maternally- and biparentally-inherited markers is not uncommon  <cit> , it does suggest complexity in the evolutionary history of a lineage, which can affect conservation implications. despite their morphological similarity, a. m. langei is quite genetically divergent from individuals assigned to a. m. nr. langei, collected in the mendota area . several individuals from this population shared some of a. m. langei’s distinct phenotypic characters, but exhibited divergent mtdna  and high levels of admixture with microsatellite loci. the habitats of these populations are not particularly similar, and the use of different eriogonum hosts  makes it unlikely that convergent evolution is responsible for the phenotypic similarity.

placed in the context of the entire species complex, a. m. langei is no more genetically distinctive than most populations in california, and other populations exist in this region that exhibit higher mitochondrial and nuclear divergence. additionally, some of the morphological characteristics that earned a. m. langei its subspecific status are found in other populations in california. in this light, does this current data support esu status for a. m. langei and, if so, under what esu criteria? along with many populations in northern california, the population at antioch dunes is reciprocally monophyletic with respect to mtdna , satisfying half of moritz’s  <cit>  criteria. this mitochondrial pattern may also support criteria such as lack of “genetic exchangeability” , “long term isolation”  <cit> , and “highly-restricted gene flow from other such lineages within the higher organization level of the species”  <cit> , although the lack of quantitative determination of these criteria highlights their subjective nature. microsatellite loci support a. m. langei’s genetic distinctiveness, but only with regional, ordination-based methods , not with individual-based bayesian clustering methods . ecologically, a. m. langei is potentially distinctive, as its host eriogonum nudum var. psychicola reveal  <dig> is also an endemic of the antioch dunes  <cit> . group-wide information on a. mormo hosts, however, is relatively sparse , so we are reluctant to draw broad conclusions about the variability of host plants as criteria for “ecological exchangeability”  <cit>  or general ecological distinctiveness. below the level of an esu, a. m. langei’s low vagility combined with its moderate genetic distinctiveness likely demonstrates demographic independence, a criterion of dus  <cit> . in fact, our sole use of potentially neutral genetic loci  may be more appropriate for defining dus  <cit> , and some argue that without both types of loci, our conclusion is inherently limited to defining a “partial esu” rather than a “full esu”  <cit> . regardless, defining dus quantitatively  would require increased sampling and finer-scale genetic data.

collectively, these data provide conflicting support for a. m. langei’s evolutionary significance. while more data  will provide insight into this issue, we expect that the multifarious nature of the a. mormo complex will undermine future determinations that a. m. langei is more evolutionarily divergent than other isolated populations in northern california. however, this study’s focus on evolutionary significance is not an effort to describe or compare all members of the a. mormo complex evolutionarily, but to address whether genetic data support a. m. langei’s federal listing. as we have illustrated, this question can be answered differently depending on the esu criteria considered. while one side of this answer is that genetic data do not support a. m. langei’s federal listing, we believe that such an interpretation oversimplifies the role of endangered species with regard to ecosystems, particularly in the case of the antioch dunes. balancing the evolutionary significance of a single species against conservation efforts for an entire ecosystem is an exceptionally difficult task, particularly when valuation of those species to the “success” of conservation is not tied to obvious economic value  <cit> . apodemia mormo langei is undeniably a “flagship species”  <cit>  for the antioch dunes ecosystem , but how can a value be placed on public perception or engagement? additionally, should the momentum of several decades of conservation effort towards this ecosystem be included in a valuation? these conceptual questions are much farther-reaching than the scope of this study, however for these reasons we are not arguing for the delisting of a. m. langei. we hope our genetic assessment of the complex provides a foundation to reevaluate the taxonomy of the group as well as current and future conservation efforts, and we stress that these reassessments should occur in that order. without a thorough understanding of the group’s taxonomy and systematics, conservation prioritization may not be maximally efficient. this is particularly true for invertebrates, as federally recognized units of conservation below the subspecies level are generally only applied to vertebrates .

CONCLUSIONS
here we used several genetic markers to assess range-wide population genetic structure of the a. mormo species complex. we then used this information to reassess the evolutionary significance of a federally endangered subspecies within the group. we found highly divergent lineages across the range of the a. mormo complex, indicating a complex evolutionary history. the nexus of genetic diversity was observed in california, where delimitation of highly structured populations agreed poorly with taxonomic designations. apodemia mormo langei is no more genetically unique than various other populations of a. mormo in california, and even some of the morphological characteristics that earned it subspecific status are not unique. these results indicate that both the taxonomy and conservation prioritization of the a. mormo complex should be reassessed, both with a more fine-grained genetic survey and a greater focus on locally adapted phenotypic traits.

