BACKGROUND
fluorescent tags are commonly used to monitor proteins and peptides in microscopy and spectroscopy experiments  <cit> . however, incorporation of these labels may affect protein structure or block protein-ligand interactions; therefore it is important to verify that specific tags and labelling locations are suitable for a particular application. in the context of amyloid aggregation studies, in which proteins or peptides associate to form various oligomeric structures, it is necessary to investigate potential perturbations of the aggregation reaction due to the presence of the label. in particular, because multiple fibril types may be grown from one protein or peptide  <cit> , it is essential to ensure that incorporation of a label is compatible with multiple aggregation pathways.

in this paper, we present tem and other characterizations of fluorescently labelled aβ <dig> peptide and αs protein. aβ is associated with alzheimer's disease, while αs is linked to parkinson's disease; therefore fluorescently labelled αs/aβ constructs may be useful for understanding the initiation and progression of these common human neurodegenerative disorders. indeed, fluorescently-labelled aβ and αs constructs have been used in numerous studies of protein interactions, trafficking, and degradation, as well as in investigations of structural changes linked to amyloid aggregation . however, relatively few researchers have examined the effects of these fluorescent tags on aβ/αs aggregate morphologies  <cit> .

high-resolution imaging techniques, including tem and atomic force microscopy, enable identification and classification of aggregates, which may include protofibrils, amyloid fibrils containing varying numbers of strands, and amorphous aggregates. in contrast, methods used to quantify fibril production, such as thioflavin-t binding, light scattering, fourier transform infrared spectroscopy, and circular dichroism spectroscopy, cannot discriminate among different types of β-sheet rich species  <cit> . nevertheless, tem imaging provides no quantitative information about aggregation kinetics or about the concentrations of the observed fibrils. in addition, rare species or aggregates that do not stick to the tem grids may not be detected. therefore, tem can confirm the presence of a particular type of aggregate, but it cannot prove that a type is disallowed.

we examine aβ <dig>  peptides tagged with three extrinsic fluorophores . these labels were selected because their emission peaks are reasonably well-separated, making them potentially useful for multi-channel imaging or fluorescence cross-correlation spectroscopy applications. in addition, peptides tagged with these dyes are readily available from commercial sources.

for αs, we compare small organic dye  with fluorescent protein  labelling. alexa fluor  <dig>  egfp, and hilyte fluor  <dig> have similar excitation and emission spectra, and therefore are compatible with similar optical systems. in addition, investigations of the effects of fluorescent protein tags are particularly important given the high potential value of these tags for in vivo and cell-based experiments  <cit> . however, the large size of most fluorescent proteins  compared to αs , as well as the potential environmental sensitivity of fluorescent protein tags, raises questions regarding the suitability of αs-fluorescent protein constructs for aggregation studies  <cit> .

our tem images show that several extrinsic fluorescent labels do not preclude the growth of multiple fibril varieties for aβ <dig> and αs. in contrast, we observe two distinct types of rigid aggregates when αs-egfp solutions are incubated near physiological ph. moreover, disruption of the egfp tag results in the growth of additional species. therefore, although the fluorescent protein label does not prevent aggregation of the αs-egfp construct, the fibrillization pathway is affected by the conformation of the egfp tag. we believe that our images will provide a starting point to assist researchers in fluorophore selection for aggregation studies, although additional characterizations will be necessary for some applications.

RESULTS
extrinsic dye labelled aβ <dig> aggregates
for the tamra and hilyte fluor  <dig> labelled aβ <dig> samples shown in figure  <dig>  the solutions initially appeared uniformly fluorescent when viewed by eye . after incubation in aggregation-promoting conditions, fluorescent clumps were apparent in the bottom of these sample tubes, while the supernatants of these solutions became more transparent, suggesting that the tamra and hilyte fluor  <dig> tags were incorporated into the observed aggregates. furthermore, the labelling efficiencies were high for the synthetic aβ <dig> peptides we examined , and similar images were obtained for all three fluorophores; therefore the observed fibrils likely contained tagged peptides.

potential applications of fluorescently labelled peptides include two-photon imaging and two-photon fluorescence correlation spectroscopy. the two-photon action cross-sections of amca and tamra are sufficient for these applications  <cit> . however, the cross-section for hilyte fluor  <dig>  which is an analogue of alexa fluor  <dig> has not been previously determined, as far as we know. therefore, we measured the two-photon action cross-section for hilyte fluor 488-aβ <dig>  and compared this curve to the free alexa fluor  <dig> dye cross-section . we find that hilyte fluor  <dig> is a good two-photon probe when excited at ~760- <dig> nm and ~940- <dig> nm, although its cross-section does not coincide exactly with the alexa fluor  <dig> spectrum.

alexa-488-αs aggregates
when aggregates grown from αs variant proteins labelled with alexa fluor  <dig> are imaged using tem, we detect both rigid fibrils  and flexible "tfe fibrils" , which are similar to species previously observed for unlabelled αs in solutions containing tfe or detergents  <cit> . the rigid fibrils are most frequently narrow  and straight, but may also appear twisted and thicker, with widths ranging from 10- <dig> nm. the "tfe fibrils" are typically ~10- <dig> nm wide. as was observed for the aβ <dig> peptides, fluorescent aggregates grown from alexa fluor  <dig> labeled αs variant proteins were typically visible by eye after incubation.

for human wild-type  αs, n-terminal  and c terminal  labelling is compatible with growth of both fibrils types . we also investigated fluorescent aggregates grown from two parkinson's disease-associated αs variants, a30p and a53t αs. for a30p αs, both n terminal and c terminal labels were examined , while for a53t, we examined only n terminal labelling . although we do not investigate a wide range of solution conditions for the variants, we do observe fluorescently labelled aggregates for both mutants. therefore, it is likely that both c terminal and n terminal labels may be employed for multiple αs variants.

note that our images do not enable direct comparisons of aggregation properties of proteins labelled at the c vs. n termini because of variability in solution conditions and incubation times, as well as the possible presence of oligomeric species in the stock solutions. therefore, we are only able to observe that certain structures are not precluded by the label, but cannot determine whether a label or labelling location may tend to favour a particular type of aggregate. more detailed studies are necessary to determine whether labelling has any subtle effects on aggregation pathway selection.

egfp-αs aggregates
we observed fibrils when samples containing  <dig> μm and  <dig> μm αs-egfp in pbs were prepared using unfiltered αs-egfp stock solutions . however, we were unable to detect fibrils via tem when protein stocks were filtered  prior to incubation when all other solution conditions, including incubation time and protein concentration as measured by uv absorbance at  <dig> nm, were held constant. similar results were obtained for αs-egfp in tris buffer with  <dig> mm nacl; we observed fibrils in a  <dig> μm unfiltered sample , but were unable to find fibrils in a sample prepared using a filtered protein stock and identical solution conditions and protein concentration. interestingly, the addition of a small amount  of dialyzed, unfiltered protein to samples prepared using filtered protein resulted in the formation of αs-egfp fibrils . although tem imaging is not a quantitative technique, these preliminary results suggest that "seeding" samples with unfiltered or pre-aggregated material may promote fibril formation. however, additional experiments must be done to verify this result.

additional images of αs-egfp fibrils gown from seeded or unfiltered solutions at ph ~ <dig>  in various buffer conditions are shown in figure 4h-j. the αs-egfp fibrils appear to have a thin, straight core , around which winds a somewhat indistinct or blurry helix. the total fibril diameter is ~ <dig> nm, and the helical period is variable, ranging from ~ <dig> nm to over  <dig> nm. in some samples, shorter, untwisted, multi-stranded rigid fibrils were also observed .

when αs-egfp solutions containing fibrils were examined by eye, they appeared uniformly fluorescent, unlike the extrinsic fluorophore-labelled αs samples in which fluorescent aggregated material was clearly visible at the bottom of the tubes. this may be a result of αs-egfp fibrils remaining suspended in solution, or the fibril fraction may be a minor component of the sample. alternatively, the egfp tag may be quenched or altered in the αs-egfp fibrils  <cit> .

fluorescent protein tertiary structure can be disrupted by extremes of ph  <cit>  or by the addition of moderate-to-high concentrations of tfe  <cit> . loss of native tertiary structure results in loss of green fluorescence and a shift in the absorbance peak  <cit> . in figure  <dig>  we show that the spectral features of acid-denatured αs-egfp are similar to those of egfp alone. in addition, fluorescence loss occurs above ~10% tfe for both egfp and αs-egfp after incubation for >  <dig> hours at 37°c .

discussion
in this paper, we have demonstrated that several small extrinsic fluorescent tags are suitable for use in aβ <dig> and αs aggregation studies. we show that the amca, tamra and hilyte fluor  <dig> labels do not preclude the formation of many types of amyloid and fibrillar aggregates for aβ <dig> . these results are in accordance with previous studies of aβ, which demonstrated that extrinsic fluorophore labelling does not prevent the formation of classic amyloid aggregates  <cit> . in addition, the alexa fluor  <dig> tag does not prevent the formation of classic amyloid fibrils and "tfe protofibrils"  <cit>  for wt αs labelled at position  <dig> or position  <dig>  and it appears that this tag is also suitable for studies of a30p and a53t αs .

in contrast, we find that egfp labelling of αs favours the formation of two types of rigid aggregates when protein solutions are incubated near physiological ph . however, we have only been able to observe fibrils in samples that have been seeded with pre-aggregated material. moreover, it is not clear whether the αs-egfp fibrils retain their fluorescence; fluorescent clumps formed in samples containing αs labelled with alexa fluor  <dig>  but no similar clumps were seen in the αs-egfp samples. recently, van ham, et al. observed a reduction in fluorescence for fibrils formed from yfp labelled αs, which they attribute to energy migration förster resonant energy transfer , rather than disruption of the yfp tertiary structure  <cit> . it is possible that a similar effect occurs for αs labelled with egfp tag, but we cannot verify this with our current data. additional experiments are necessary to determine whether the native egfp fold remains intact in the αs-egfp fibrils.

interestingly, we are able to grow fibrils from αs-egfp in solutions in which egfp tertiary structure is likely disrupted . given the fact that denatured fluorescent proteins are aggregation-prone  <cit> , and the observation that amyloid fibrillization may be a universal property of polypeptides  <cit> , it is possible that the properties of the egfp tag, rather than the smaller αs domain, dominate the fibrillization reaction under these conditions. therefore, care must be employed when using the egfp tag to study protein aggregation in potentially denaturing conditions.

CONCLUSIONS
we have presented tem images and other characterization of aggregates composed of fluorescently labelled proteins. our images support the use of several small intrinsic fluorescent tags in studies of αs and aβ <dig> aggregation. in addition, we present images of fibrils grown from αs labelled with egfp. near neutral ph, αs-egfp fibrils are rigid and often feature an indistinct helix wound around a rigid core. acid or tfe denaturation of the egfp tag results in the formation of additional types of αs-egfp aggregates. our images may assist researchers in the selection of labels and in optimization of experimental conditions for protein aggregation studies involving fluorescence techniques.

