BACKGROUND
parasites are thought to be a major cause of evolutionary change due to the deleterious fitness effects they impose on their hosts  <cit> . coevolution between hosts and parasites has resulted in the evolution of several mechanisms to avoid or limit these deleterious effects, including behavioural modifications, boundary defences  and finally the immune system . following theory on the evolution of life-history traits  <cit> , the evolution of the immune system is thought to be shaped by costs of resistance, as investment in fighting infection by mounting and then maintaining an immune response should divert resources from other fitness-related traits  <cit> .

these costs fall into two broad categories. constitutive costs of resistance arise from a negative genetic covariance between immunity and other fitness-related traits   <cit> . inducible costs of resistance are the physiological costs incurred by hosts when mounting an immune response  <cit> . such inducible costs of mounting an immune response can be measured by comparing the fitness of individuals that are challenged with infection but successfully fight it off, to the fitness of hosts that are unchallenged  <cit> . the mechanistic cause of these costs  is thought to be the energy requirements necessary to fight infection, but they could also be linked to direct deleterious effects of immune effectors on the host itself .

both inducible and constitutive costs may play a role in maintaining polymorphism for resistance to infection. specifically, host genotypes enduring costs  may be outcompeted when the threat of parasitism recedes. a great number of studies, particularly in invertebrates, have tested for the presence of both forms of costs of resistance. costs are clearly present in some systems , but not in others, where they may be transient or manifest only in a subset of life history traits. some examples of cost-free resistance appear certain. for example, more than  <dig> years after their introduction outside the range of their natural parasite, microphallus sp, an experimental study found that potamopyrgus snails are still resistant, which would not be expected if resistance bore fitness costs  <cit> . costs are almost certainly not universal.

details given for each study are: the species studied , whether a cost was found or not , whether the lines used in the experiment where selected before, and if so the object of the selection , how the animal's immunity was challenged  and finally what were the environmental conditions tested .

daphnia magna, a planktonic crustacean found in temperate freshwater ponds, has been the object of considerable research regarding parasitism [reviewed in  <cit> . substantial genotypic variability for resistance has been found in natural populations  <cit> , while studies incorporating environmental variation  have found pervasive genotype-by-environment interactions, indicating that the environment may change the fitness consequences of parasitism  <cit> . past studies on costs of resistance in daphnia magna indicated no constitutive costs, but detectable costs of launching an immune response . we sought to extend understanding of the costs of launching an immune response by testing if costs were enhanced with successive exposures to the parasites, or under certain  environmental conditions. this investigation of induced costs of exposure yielded results that did not agree with previous work  <cit> . in an effort to settle the issue, we gathered additional data sets that were originally produced for other questions, but which were suitably designed such that costs of induced immunity could be probed. in sum, we present the results of five experiments to show that, under a variety of genetic backgrounds, exposure protocols, and environmental conditions, costs of immunity are only occasionally detected in the d. magna-p. ramosa system.

methods
below, we describe the detailed methods of the three main experiments, which are new experiments designed to test for costs of resistance. for brevity, we only report the results and a tabular summary of methods for the additional experiments . the detailed methods for the set of additional experiments are reported in the additional file  <dig>  however, the following descriptions of host and parasite biology, as well as the general experimental schemes, are applicable to all experiments reported.

daphnia magna clones and pasteuria ramosa strains
daphnia magna is a filter-feeding crustacean zooplankter that reproduces by cyclical parthenogenesis. pasteuria ramosa is a gram-positive bacterium that is an obligate, spore-forming endoparasite of d. magna. hosts become infected with p. ramosa by filtering transmission spores present in the water or sediments at the pond bottom. infection causes host castration and gigantism, as well as premature death. within the host, p. ramosa goes through a developmental process that culminates in the formation of spores. host death is essential for transmission, mature spores being released from the remains of dead infected hosts. p. ramosa spores are horizontally transmitted only, i.e. there is no evidence of transovarial infection  <cit> .

in the main experiments, we used  <dig> daphnia clones, named gg <dig>  gg <dig>  gg <dig> and gg <dig>  which were originally collected in germany from a population near gaazerfeld  <cit> . two strains of the parasite p. ramosa were used, sp <dig> and sp8; they each originated from the same gaarzerfeld population and have been used to infect daphnia in the laboratory for over a decade . the daphnia hosts were maintained in the laboratory in a state of clonal reproduction, whereas the p. ramosa strains were kept frozen until needed for the experiments. from carius et al.  <cit> , we know that gg <dig> and gg <dig> are relatively susceptible clones to a variety of parasite strains, whereas gg <dig> and gg <dig> are mostly resistant. similarly, sp <dig> is a relatively highly infective p. ramosa strain, whereas sp <dig> is comparatively innocuous. the specific infection levels expected for the different host-parasite pairs are indicated in table a <dig> .

general experimental protocol
to equilibrate maternal effects prior to the experiments, replicate jars of each host clone were kept under controlled conditions for three generations: 20°c , a set light:dark cycle , and fed equal amounts of chemostat grown algae  per daphnia per day . replicates contained  <dig> females, either in a  <dig> ml or  <dig> ml jar of daphnia medium, depending on the experiment . medium was changed every  <dig> to  <dig> days.

aat 20°c, degree-day equivalent for other t°

b hosts were collected from a scottish population in summer  <dig>  see duncan and little evolution  <dig>  61:796-803

for each experiment , the d. magna clones  and the p. ramosa strains  used are indicated. the protocol used for the exposure is given, described by the number of spores per daphnia added , the number , the length  and the age  of the individuals when each exposure was performed. the environmental conditions of the experiment are detailed. for food, the algae species  and the quantity  are indicated. the temperature at which the experiment was performed , the number of replicates per treatment , the number of individuals per jar , the jar size, the controls used  and the total length of the experiment  are also given.

for each experiment , the finding  or absence  of inducible costs of immunity in response to exposure is indicated for the traits tested. details of the type of challenge and experimental environment for each experiment are also given.

for the parasite exposures, we used a split-brood design: offspring  of each replicate jar were split into the different treatments . on the day of exposure, the medium was changed, a teaspoon of sterile sand and a solution of p. ramosa spores  or a sham solution  were added to each jar. exposure length was variable among experiments . during the exposure, the sand was stirred daily, and the daphnia were fed with low amounts of food . the combination of sand and low food increases bottom grazing behaviour, thus increasing the chances of daphnia encountering the parasite spores.

after the exposure period, all daphnia were transferred to new jars with new medium. the medium was changed when hosts produced a clutch, or every  <dig> or  <dig> days if they did not. the recording of infection status began from  <dig> to  <dig> days after exposure: by this time infected individuals were red in colour, larger and had mostly ceased reproducing. individuals that died before infection assessment were removed from the analyses. the presence of a clutch was checked for daily or every other day , and the number of offspring and clutch date were recorded. when an individual was dead, the death date was recorded and the individual was transferred into a  <dig>  ml eppendorf tube, dried and frozen at -20°c. frozen daphnia were later crushed in casy®ton solution and p. ramosa transmission stages were counted using a casy® model dt electronic cell counter . the total experiment length was variable among experiments . tables  <dig> and  <dig> provide a summary of the protocols and treatments used in the different experiments. additional details of each experiment can be found in additional file  <dig> .

statistical analyses
to test the effect of the treatment on the proportion of hosts that became infected, we used generalized linear models of the form: proportioninfected = geno*expo , where the response variable proportioninfected is a proportion  and the explanatory variables are categorical: geno is the daphnia genotype  used  and expo is the type of treatment . genotype is a fixed effect rather than a random effect because it is both replicated and we were interested in clonal means. models were checked for overdispersion. for other traits, we used general linear models  of the form: trait = geno*inf*expo , where the response variable trait is continuous  and inf is the infectious status . normality of residuals was checked and the data were log-transformed when necessary to ensure normality. for analyses of age of first reproduction and for age of death  we also used cox's proportional hazards models  of the form trait = geno*expo*inf. hosts that did not die by the end of the experiment were entered as censored data. for experiment  <dig> , the degree-day was used as the time scale to allow comparisons between temperature treatments; this is the product of the real day by the temperature, and is used as an approximate measure of daphnia physiological time  <cit> .

the models were simplified according to crawley  <cit> : significance of the different terms was tested starting from the higher-order terms. non-significant terms  were removed. when an interaction term was significant, each level of the factors in the interaction were then analysed separately. factor levels of qualitative variables that were not different in their estimates were grouped, as described by crawley  <cit> . this process gives the minimal model. analyses were performed using the r freeware package  or the jmp  <dig> .

RESULTS
a results summary is provided in table  <dig>  indicating whether evidence for costs of resistance was detected or not. as this study aims at identifying potential costs of resisting parasites, only data from uninfected hosts are presented, which includes both unexposed individuals  and exposed but not-infected individuals . the results on costs of parasitism  are presented in additional file  <dig> .

experiment 1: single exposure, four clones
in this experiment, we exposed four clones of daphnia with relatively extreme resistance phenotypes , while gg <dig> and gg <dig> are generally resistant   <cit> ) to different strains and doses of p. ramosa . for a total of  <dig> exposed individuals, we report measurements of four life history traits: age at first reproduction, size , lifespan and lifetime number of offspring . we were thus able to examine inducible costs of resistance, by comparing between unexposed and exposed-but-uninfected individuals. note that for survival, only the glm analyses are reported, as the coxph analyses led to identical results. the rates of infection observed in this experiment for the various host clones and parasite strains were similar to those expected from an earlier study . we found a significant effect of the genotype for the age at first reproduction , for size , for lifespan  and for the total number of offspring . however, while this shows that there are genotypic determinants for performance, they do not appear to be related to resistance phenotypes.

induced costs of resistance are indicated when the performance of exposed-but-uninfected individuals is poorer than that of unexposed controls. for age of first reproduction, there was no difference between controls and exposed-uninfected individuals for any clone, regardless of exposure dose . for body size, the 3-way interaction geno:inf:expo was significant, but we found no clear effect of exposure , all treatment sizes being globally similar to that of controls. the significance of the 3-way interaction is probably due to gg <dig> uninfected individuals exposed to high dose of sp <dig> being smaller than expected, and gg <dig> uninfected individuals exposed to sp <dig> being larger than expected . for the age of death, we found no effect of exposure, except for gg <dig> individuals exposed to high dose of sp <dig>  for which lifespan is shorter than controls . finally for the total number of offspring produced during the individuals' life, again only gg <dig> individuals exposed to a high dose of sp <dig> showed significantly lower fecundity than controls . the analysis of other fecundity related traits  indicates that this lower fecundity is essentially due to a reduction of the clutch number, which is probably linked to the reduction of their lifespan.

experiment 2: multiple exposures, two clones
in this experiment, we tested for inducible costs of resistance, by applying multiple parasite exposures. the assumption is that repeated exposures lead to repeated, and thus more costly, immune responses. two host clones  and gg <dig> ) were exposed to spores of p. ramosa strain sp <dig>  three exposure treatments were carried out, with hosts being exposed either once, twice or four times to  <dig>  spores each time . a total of  <dig> individuals were analysed for the same traits as in experiment  <dig> . again, the glm and coxph analyses are similar, so only the glm is reported. rates of infection observed in this experiment were lower than that observed in experiment  <dig>  as expected due to the lower spore dose used . in comparing the performances of exposed-but-uninfected individuals to controls, we found no effect of the number of exposures either for the age of first reproduction , the time to death  or for the total number of offspring . however, we found a genotype effect in each case, confirming experiment 1: gg <dig> individuals reproduce earlier , die later  and reproduce more  than gg <dig> individuals.

experiment 3: one or two exposures, three temperatures, one clone
given recent research on the environment-dependent nature of infection outcomes in host-parasite systems  <cit> , we performed this experiment to test whether costs of resisting infection were temperature dependent. we chose a single host clone  and parasite strain  and exposed a total of  <dig> individual daphnia to either single or double doses  of p. ramosa at 15°c, 20°c, and 25°c . no significant difference was detected between our two control treatments  for either fecundity  or lifespan , therefore we combined these into one 'control' treatment.

again, we measured the cost of resisting infection  as the reduction in either fecundity or survival in hosts that were exposed to parasites but did not develop infection, relative to unexposed controls. we found a significant main effect of temperature on fecundity  and lifespan , but no effect of dose nor a dose-by-temperature interaction for either trait . this suggests that while temperature affects the expression of these life-history traits, being exposed or not to p. ramosa had little or no effect, and this was the case at all temperatures.

additional datasets
we analysed two additional datasets for inducible costs of resistance where exposed but uninfected hosts could be compared with unexposed hosts.

experiment 4
in this experiment, we gathered data from a 38-day survey of survival and fecundity traits in d. magna genotype gg <dig> either exposed to two doses  of p. ramosa  or not-exposed. among the exposed individuals, we only considered those not infected . we compared them with unexposed controls  for several life history traits. we found no effect of exposure for the number of offspring  or the number of clutches . regarding lifespan ,  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> individuals were still alive at the end of the experiment respectively for not-exposed, low dose and high dose treatments). a coxph model with censorship indicated exposed individuals died significantly more than those not exposed  =  <dig> , p <  <dig> ).

experiment 5
we used data from daphnia exposed to one of two doses  of p. ramosa . we only included in the analysis replicate jars where none of the  <dig> individuals were infected . we found no significant effect of exposure for the mean clutch size . however, hosts exposed to  <dig>   <dig> spores died at a faster rate compared to those exposed to  <dig>   <dig> spores .

discussion
investing in immune defence is thought to bear fitness costs in the absence of infection, as investing in preventing or fighting infection should divert resources from other fitness-related traits . consequently, the fittest genotype should not necessarily be the most resistant; it will be the one with optimal investment in the various fitness traits in a given environment. two types of costs have been widely studied: constitutive costs  and inducible costs . table  <dig> presents a  survey of studies , which have looked for one or the other type of cost. although there may be a publishing bias toward studies demonstrating costs, table  <dig> indicates that costs of immunity are not uncommon:  <dig> studies out of  <dig> found evidence of a constitutive cost of resistance for at least one of the life history traits measured, and for inducible costs of immunity, eight studies of nine documented them.

to this list, we now add five additional experiments based on the d. magna-p. ramosa interaction. the first experiment investigated inducible costs of resistance with different p. ramosa strains and doses on  <dig> daphnia clones . there were no general fecundity or survival costs of being exposed to the parasite, except perhaps for one highly susceptible host clone  which showed delayed development, lower reproductive success and shorter lifespan when exposed to the highest dose of sp <dig> . a second experiment expanded this work by applying repeated exposures , while a third tested if costs might be more evident under temperature stress , but none of these experiments yielded measurable costs. finally, we analysed two additional datasets that were appropriate for testing for inducible costs. these experiments  both revealed that the individuals exposed to a higher parasite spore dose died faster than those exposed to lower quantity of parasite spores or not exposed . these last results are similar to a previously reported one  <cit>  where higher exposure doses also induced high mortality amongst host that fought off infection.

thus, while inducible costs of resistance are occasionally detectable, they clearly are not as pervasive in the daphnia-pasteuria interaction as they appear to be in other systems . similarly, constitutive costs have not been detected in daphnia, either towards p. ramosa  <cit>  or other parasites  <cit> . it would appear that both types of costs of resistance to parasitism in daphnia are at best elusive and condition-dependent, and might be of little evolutionary relevance.

it is difficult to say at present why costs are more prevalent in some systems, and it may simply be that the various host-parasite systems have different evolutionary histories; some of these lead to costs, others do not. however, we wish draw attention to three aspects related to experimental design. first, some studies documenting costs used lines that were artificially selected for resistance to a particular parasite or for a life-history trait modification , and there are a number of reasons why such studies could misrepresent the importance or pervasiveness of costs in natural settings. for example, deleterious mutations can hitchhike with resistance  <cit> , leading to an overestimation of the magnitude of costs. second, many studies of cost used artificial rather than natural host/parasite combinations , the evolutionary significance of such costs in natural conditions may be debateable  <cit> . the three main experiments presented here were carried out under relatively low food quantities, as a shortage of food is thought to be a stressor that can reveal costs  <cit> . in addition, experiment  <dig> included a temperature treatment of 25°c, a stressful temperature at which host physiology is suboptimal  <cit>  and background mortality in increased  <cit> , and yet costs of resistance remained undetectable.

costs can potentially contribute to the maintenance of resistance polymorphism in host-parasite interactions  <cit> , but depending on the nature of the genetic variation that underlies susceptibility, costs may not be needed to maintain polymorphism  <cit> . specifically, under a "gene-for-gene" model of genetic specificity, where a mutation in the host allows resistance to any genotype of the parasite, the resulting dynamic is asymmetrically frequency dependent , and costs are needed to prevent fixation of host resistance  <cit> . by contrast, under a "matching-allele" model  <cit>  of genetic specificity, resistance requires an allele that matches the parasite virulence allele. in this case, the host is resistant to that genotype of parasite, but remains susceptible to the others, which results in symmetrical frequency dependence, where resistance costs are not needed to maintain susceptibility genotypes  <cit> . the presence of strong genotype-by-genotype interactions in the d. magna-p. ramosa system, coupled with a lack of apparent costs, supports a "matching-allele" coevolution scenario in this system  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
moving beyond simple genetic models, complex immune systems may incorporate substantial redundancy  <cit>  to face the changing challenges and selection pressures in a dynamic environment  <cit> . thus, evaluating costs probably requires detailed mechanistic and genetic knowledge about resistance to actually measure the pleiotropic effects of a single modification, instead of a general phenotypic effect incorporating multiple effects that potentially compensate each other  <cit> . still, the now extensive work on the d. magna-p. ramosa does not appear to suggest a crucial role of immunity costs in their coevolution  <cit> . other studies have even documented advantages rather than costs linked with constitutive resistance in absence of parasite , suggesting a limited role for costs in coevolution, or that more complex processes are at work.

authors' contributions
pl designed, carried out and analyzed experiments  <dig> and  <dig>  and drafted the manuscript. pv designed, carried out and analyzed experiment  <dig>  and helped to draft the manuscript. tl participated in the design of the study, analyzed the data for experiments  <dig> and  <dig>  and helped to draft the manuscript. all authors read and approved the final manuscript.

supplementary material
additional file 1
experimental details and infection costs. a1: detailed experiments protocols. a2: analyses of infection costs. table a3: infection levels for the different host-parasite combinations. fig. a4: experiment  <dig> spore loads. fig. a5: experiment  <dig> spore loads.

click here for file

 acknowledgements
this work was funded by a wellcome trust senior research fellowship in basic biomedical sciences to tjl.
