BACKGROUND
visual perception begins with phototransduction, the process by which a light stimulus is converted into a neuronal signal. while the structures of phototransduction systems have diverged between metazoan phyla, the underlying principles remain the same: photons of light are absorbed by light-sensitive chromophores bound to opsin proteins present in photoreceptor cells. the opsins trigger a prototypical g-protein-coupled receptor-mediated signaling cascade that amplifies the opsin response and results in the hyperpolarization of the cell. this initiates a neuronal signal that is transmitted to the visual cortex in the brain for processing. the cell must then efficiently return to an inactive state through the deactivation of the opsin, the recycling of the chromophore in the canonical retinoid cycle and the re-opening of the cgmp-gated ion channel in order to be able to respond to further stimuli . the phototransduction system of mammals has been the focus of much research. the rod system, which is responsible for scotopic, or low-light vision, has been intensely studied in a wide range of species while the cone system, which is responsible for photopic, or high-light vision, is less well-understood. however recent years have seen a large advance in our knowledge of the specifics of cone phototransduction.

accurate visual perception of the environment carries clear evolutionary advantages. a well-known evolutionary development in mammalian phototransduction is in the evolution of the cone opsin repertoire. early mammals are thought to have gone through a nocturnal phase, during which genes from two families of opsins were lost, leaving them with only two remaining cone opsins and without color vision
 <cit> . subsequently, due to a gene duplication event during their divergence, old world monkeys acquired a third cone opsin gene and have regained color vision
 <cit> . in addition to the evolution of the cone opsin repertoire, the molecular evolution of individual opsin proteins has been well-characterized in mammals
 <cit> , as has their phylogenetic relationship to other extant opsin genes
 <cit> . further differences between mammalian species are known to exist in the spatial patterning of photoreceptor cells on the retina. for example, while the three cone types of humans are distributed in a stochastic mosaic pattern of varying concentrations throughout their retinas, the short-wave and medium-wave opsins of mice are expressed in opposing gradients along the superior  axis
 <cit> . finally, primates have developed the fovea, a highly concentrated region composed exclusively of cone cells in the center of the retina, which imparts very high acuity.

while much attention has been given to the evolution of opsin proteins, less has been afforded to the molecular evolution of the phototransduction system as a whole throughout mammalian divergence . it is clear that variation exists in the rates of characteristics of photoresponses measured in different mammalian species, such as in response activation or recovery time. some variability in response characteristics may be due to, for example, photoreceptor cell volume or protein expression levels . however, it is, at the same time, expected that molecular evolution of the proteins involved in phototransduction has contributed to this response variation. in fact, it is possible to recognize in extant gene regions the footprint of past selective events, be they purifying selection or positive  selection.

when considering the evolution of a trait such as the activation or recovery times of this signaling process, one must first recognize the traits as being of a complex nature: the time required for the cell to reach an activated state is not the result of the action of a single protein but depends instead upon many proteins and a complex set of interactions between them. a traditional evolutionary biology approach to studying the differences between species of this system might consider the phenotypic evolution of the system-level trait as a whole, while a molecular evolutionary approach might typically focus on how key individual proteins have evolved over species divergence. a more recent method is to encode the molecular interactions comprising the system as a network and to investigate how the evolutionary histories of the molecules relate to the topological characteristics of the system
 <cit> . a network representation of a system provides a convenient mathematical abstraction that captures some of the functional characteristics of the underlying molecules. typically, the proteins are represented as the nodes of the network and the edges connecting the nodes represent some form of interaction between the molecules, such as direct protein-protein interactions, shared metabolites or regulatory relationships. topological measurements of the nodes may then be measured, such as their centrality or their connectivity. these measurements may be interpreted to reflect the importance and the role of a protein in the system: a highly connected node, representing a protein with many interactions, may be a critical component of the system, for example.

many methods to estimate rates of molecular evolution during species divergence have been proposed. some of the most commonly used methods are those that are implemented in the phylogenetic analysis by maximum likelihood  software package
 <cit> , particularly the codon-based analyses of the program codeml. several models of codon evolution are implemented, with more complex and realistic models expanding upon the simpler ones, allowing tests by likelihood-ratio of hypotheses such as site-specific events of positive selection. when considering the evolution of a collection of genes, one must consider the sacrifice in model power made to gain sensitivity by adding more parameters; in order to accurately estimate evolutionary rates with such models, larger datasets, consisting of more species of larger divergence, are necessary. this is important when considering molecular evolution within a system: when deeper phylogenies are considered, the likelihood of fundamental structural differences in the system between species increases, due to gain or loss of genes or protein-protein interactions, impacting one’s ability to investigate system-level, evolutionary constraints acting on a molecule. indeed, at a deep enough phylogeny, we find very different phototransduction cascades altogether, resulting from relatively few ancient opsin mutations
 <cit> . for these reasons, while simpler models of codon evolution may have less realistic assumptions, their use on relatively shallow phylogenies provides more robust rate estimates for comparing the evolutionary histories of proteins interacting in a system.

the studies performed thus far investigating how pathway structure restrains molecular evolution have shown that there exists a clear correlation between pathway topology and evolutionary rates of the system’s proteins, however the specific relationship varies from pathway to pathway. in order to determine how the phototransduction system has evolved during mammalian divergence, we have performed a molecular evolutionary analysis of a comprehensive list of genes that encode proteins involved in the process across a range of mammalian species, following the strategy of montanucci et al. <cit> . these proteins belong to the phototransduction signaling cascade, the canonical retinoid cycle and the developmental process which commits a photoreceptor progenitor cell to its ultimate fate as a rod or a cone. in addition to testing for evidence of positive selection events, we also compared estimated rates of evolution of the genes encoding the proteins to infer relative strengths of purifying selection acting on them. we then ascertained the distribution of the selective pressures throughout the system, by working with two characterizations of it: a simple protein classification system and a network encoding of the proteins’ interactions. this approach has allowed us to determine that selection has been non-randomly distributed throughout this system, with some cases of positive selection and and with an uneven distribution of the strength of purifying selection, thus providing evidence for how natural selection on the system as a whole has shaped the evolution of the underlying proteins for its adaptation.

RESULTS
system-wide distribution of selective pressures
in total,  <dig> genes were identified as being directly relevant to the phototransduction system in mammals, including genes encoding proteins of the signaling cascade, the retinoid cycle, and key proteins involved in the final steps of photoreceptor cell-type  determination. of these, three were omitted from the analysis due to a lack of functional orthologs in some species: grk <dig> , guca1c  and opn1lw .

in this research, we have applied two methods of characterizing the phototransduction system in order to perform system-level analyses. in the first, we categorized the proteins involved in the process to determine if different groups of proteins evolved at significantly different rates than others. we chose three systems of categorization: photoreceptor cell-type specificity , process specificity , and a functional classification of each protein  . the second representation of the system which we chose to implement is that of a network of the protein-protein interactions which occur during the phototransduction signaling cascade . for this, all known interactions involved in the system were carefully curated from research literature to arrive at a network of high confidence . this is important, as there tend to be inaccuracies and omissions in many pathway representations found in public databases, which may introduce too many errors for non-interactome-scale analyses
 <cit> .

the strength of purifying selection that has acted on each gene was estimated according to the ratio, ω, of the rate of non-synonymous substitution  to the rate of synonymous substitution  over the entire length of the gene . single rates were calculated across the entire phylogenetic tree, which represented the relationships between nine mammalian species with high-quality genome data: human, chimpanzee, gorilla, orangutan, macaque, marmoset, rat, mouse and dog. as is usually expected, ω for every gene was less than one. since synonymous substitutions can generally be assumed to be of little adaptive significance compared to non-synonymous substitutions, the typical interpretation of ω values is of an inverse relationship with the strength of purifying selection, so that lower ω values indicate stronger purifying selection. however, rates of synonymous substitution may be weakly affected by translation-related processes, which may manifest, for example, in a relationship between evolutionary rates and protein length
 <cit> . we checked for such a relationship between ω and the length of the proteins encoded by the human genes but found none.

given the recent evolution of trichromacy in old world monkeys, one might hypothesize that the entire cone phototransduction system would have then experienced subsequent evolution, re-tuning to a newly available visual environment. this was found not to be the case. while the photoreceptor cell-type specificity of the proteins was found to affect rates of synonymous substitution , with cone-specific genes having lower rates, non-synonymous substitution rates and ω were unaffected . thus, there is no significant difference in selective pressures acting on the two phototransduction systems. the process to which proteins belong in this system  significantly affected the rates of non-synonymous substitution . the relationship between process and ω, however, was not strong enough to be considered significant .

the two previous classifications were used to investigate relationships between selective pressures experienced by closely related, but distinct, processes, namely the cone and rod phototransduction systems. clearly, these processes as wholes do not have a history of significantly different selective pressures. classifying the proteins according to their function, on the other hand, allows for patterns both between and within the processes to be probed. indeed, this classification scheme revealed a significant source of variation in rates of non-synonymous substitution  and ω . in this case, we see that the chaperon proteins of the retinoid cycle, the g proteins of the phototransduction signaling cascade and the transcriptional regulation proteins of the developmental process have all been highly constrained in their evolution. the enzymes of the retinoid cycle and the ion channels/exchangers of the phototransduction cascade, on the other hand, have experienced much more relaxed purifying selection, indicating that there has been relatively more evolution in these proteins over the diversification of mammals.

by taking a different approach and reducing the complexity of the problem by building a network representation of the phototransduction signaling process, we also found non-random patterns in the distribution of selective pressures within the system. a network representation of the system offers the advantage of encoding the topology of interactions between proteins, allowing for a sense of position and importance within the system. of the measurements of network importance we calculated, closeness centrality was found to have a significant negative correlation with rates of non-synonymous substitution and with ω values  as a result of a significant correlation with dn  and no relation with ds. this indicates that, indeed, the proteins which are most topologically central to the process of converting a light stimulus to a neuronal signal have been most constrained in their evolution, while those which are on the periphery of the system have experienced increased rates of evolution. interestingly, if we classify the proteins according to function as we did before and compare the closeness centrality measurements of these classes, we see significant differences. g proteins, for example, have much higher centrality while ion channels/exchangers have much lower centrality. from this we may conclude that both methods of abstraction that we used, functional classification and network representation, retained some of the same relevant information of the system. finally, we were able to detect a correlation in the selective pressures experienced by interacting proteins in the network, with a weak relationship between non-synonymous substitution rates of interacting genes . thus, while a protein’s relative position in the system affects the strength of selection acting on it, it is apparently not strongly affected by constraints acting on its direct interacting partners.

tests of positive selection
we found two cases of positive selection events in the system. the first significant signal of positive selection was detected in the short-wave  cone opsin  on the branch of the phylogenetic tree leading to the hominids . the branch-site test of positive selection has low power, typically only correctly identifying less than 20% of positive selection events
 <cit> . after stringent correction for multiple testing, with the assumption of correlated evolution of genes within and across branches, this was the only phototransduction-related gene with a resulting p-value less than one on this branch. thus, an adjusted p-value near to the critical value of  <dig>  can still be considered to point to an event of positive selection. furthermore, this gene previously has been found to be under positive selection in primates
 <cit> .

two possible sites of positive selection were indicated by posterior tests. the first, amino acid position  <dig> = <dig> ), shows a change from an alanine to a serine in the phylogenic branch leading to the hominids. this residue is in the seventh transmembrane helix of the protein, near to the retinylidene schiff’s base formation at position  <dig>  this site has been shown to have an effect on the spectral tuning of some opsin proteins. a replacement of an alanine by a serine at this position puts the chromophore’s schiff-base group in a more polar environment, which results in a blue shift of approximately 10nm in rh <dig> opsins  and 8nm in sws <dig> opsins
 <cit> . the reverse replacement leads to a red shift of approximately 8nm in rh <dig> opsins
 <cit>  and 18-28nm in m/lws opsins
 <cit> . it is somewhat surprising, then, that the human sws <dig> gene was shown to have no change in its peak-absorbance wavelength when this residue was experimentally changed from a serine to an alanine
 <cit> . if this position has indeed experienced positive selection in hominids, and it is confirmed that it has no effect on spectral tuning in hominids, then further experimentation must be done in order to determine the functional significance of this residue substitution.

the second possible location of positive selection in this protein was at amino acid position  <dig> = <dig> ), which shows a substitution of threonine for serine in the branch leading to the hominids. as this residue is located at the c-terminus of the protein, it is a probable site for phosphorylation by rhodopsin kinase  or by the cone-specific receptor kinase, grk <dig>  in the species which express it. however, as these are serine/threonine-specific kinases, a phosphorylation site was neither gained nor lost. it has been shown that, in rhodopsin, only the number and not the identity of phosphorylated sites influences the deactivation of the opsin . thus, even if there were differences in the kinases’ specificities for serine versus threonine, which does not seem to be the case , it is unlikely to be functionally relevant to the phosphorylation process’s influence on system deactivation. however, it should be noted that the corresponding amino acid residue in rhodopsin, position  <dig>  has been found to be one of two phosphorylation sites which are critical for the efficient binding of arrestin , and, due to the competitive nature of the binding of arrestin or transducin to activated rhodopsin, the site may also affect transducin binding. whether a substitution of a threonine at this site might influence the binding of these proteins to the activated opsin, and thus be subject to adaptation, merits further investigation.

evidence of positive selection was also detected in a second gene, the rod-specific na+/ ca2+, k+ ion exchanger  on the phylogenetic branch leading to the rodents . two amino acids which were potentially the targets of positive selection were at positions  <dig> = <dig> ) and  <dig> = <dig> ). both of these positions lie in an extracellular region of the protein near the n-terminus . thus, it is not clear whether these positions are functionally relevant nor why they may have been targeted for positive selection. however, with an ω value of  <dig> , a clear outlier among the other genes, there may have been much functional evolution throughout this protein.

recently, rod arrestin  was found to show evidence of positive selection
 <cit> . we also found a strong signal in this gene, however, upon closer inspection of the alignment it was determined that the region estimated by our tests to be under positive selection was very poorly aligned. both the chimpanzee and orangutan sequences at nucleotide positions  <dig> through  <dig> are identical to each other but are only 26% similar to the human and gorilla sequences. the macaque sequence was 30% similar to the human and gorilla sequences and 34% similar to the chimpanzee and orangutan sequences. this region corresponds to the entirety of exon  <dig>  in the human sequence. thus, we speculated that the orangutan and chimpanzee exons were improperly predicted. by performing a blat search using the entire human dna sequence of the gene, we recovered the proper exon sequences for both the chimpanzee and the orangutan. the proper exon sequence could not be recovered for the macaque, however, so the region was ultimately masked from the alignment. upon removing the region, no further signals of positive selection were detected in this gene. thus, the previously published result is likely due to sequencing or annotation inaccuracies.

CONCLUSIONS
we have provided evidence that, during the divergence of primates, natural selection has tuned the performance of the first steps of vision through non-random targeting of member proteins within the system. positive selection events were detected in the short-wave cone opsin  in hominids as well as in the rod-specific na+/ ca2+, k+ ion exchanger  in rodents. proteins which are topologically central in a network representation of the pathway, such as the g proteins, have been under strong purifying selection. meanwhile, the proteins at the periphery of the network, especially the cyclic nucleotide-gated ion channels and the na+/ ca2+, k+ ion exchangers, have experienced relaxed purifying selection. furthermore, we have found that the enzymes involved in the canonical retinoid cycle have also seen a relative relaxation in the strength of purifying selection. these relaxations in purifying selective pressure could be responsible for some of the species differences in phototransduction response times, via a progressive accumulation of amino acid changes in the proteins. the strong selective constraint imposed on transcriptional regulation proteins active in photoreceptor development indicates that evolved differences between species in retinal patterning of photoreceptor cells, on the other hand, must have largely arisen by other means such as by the evolution of regulatory target regions.

the difference in the potential scale of interactions, in terms of the number of interacting molecules during a response, between the central and peripheral proteins should be noted. in particular, the central proteins mainly correspond to the proteins involved in amplifying a light response, which may originate from as few as even a single rhodopsin molecule, while the peripheral proteins operate primarily at post-amplification quantities during signal transduction. in other words, these results indicate that the evolutionary constraint imposed on the topologically central proteins may derive not only from their higher number of interactions but also from the requirement that those interactions be reliable even at low levels of signal activation.

to date, several similar studies have been performed, relating molecular evolutionary histories with small-scale pathway structure . a correlation between topological measures and evolutionary rates was found in many cases even after the effect of other correlated factors, such as expression levels, had been ruled out. however, the specific pattern found varies between pathways. as many of these studies focused on metabolic pathways or signaling pathways with relatively linear structures, the results tend to focus on the relative evolutionary rates of upstream versus downstream proteins: in some pathways, the upstream proteins were found to be more constrained in their evolution
 <cit> , while in others it was the downstream proteins that were found to be under stronger constraint
 <cit> . still others have found branch points in the pathway to be an important location for adaptive evolution
 <cit> . the structure of the phototransduction pathway, with its interplay between signal activation and parallel recovery and feedback mechanisms, prevents the simple assignment of such terms as “upstream” and “downstream”. nevertheless, the results contained herein lend support to the body of evidence showing that a pathway’s topology influences the evolution of the proteins that comprise it, while a universal pattern of selective constraint imposed by the structure of a system is likely not to be found. due to factors such as the aforementioned possible constraint imposed by low activated-molecule counts during early signal amplification events in the phototransduction response, the influence of system topology on molecular evolution should be considered on a per-pathway basis, in order to properly evaluate other system-derived constraints. to that extent, we have identified that there have been system-level patterns of natural selection acting on the primate phototransduction system.

