BACKGROUND
the cultivated brassica species are the group of crops most closely related to arabidopsis thaliana. they are members of the brassicaceae  family  <cit> . the species typically termed the "diploid" brassica species, b. rapa , b. nigra  and b. oleracea  contain the a, b and c genomes, respectively. each pairwise combination has hybridized spontaneously to form the three allotetraploid species  <cit> , b. napus , b. juncea  and b. carinata . the genome of b. rapa is the smallest, at ca.  <dig> mb  <cit> , and a genome sequencing project is under way, with both sequences and sequence annotations in the public domain 

the lineages of b. rapa and b. oleracea diverged ca.  <dig>  mya  <cit>  and genetic mapping has confirmed that the overall organisation of their genomes is highly collinear  <cit> . their hybridisation to form b. napus probably occurred during human cultivation, i.e. less than  <dig>  years ago. comparative genetic mapping showed that the progenitor a and c genomes in b. napus have undergone little or no gross rearrangement during that time  <cit>  and also revealed extensive duplication within the brassica genomes  <cit> . recent cytogenetic studies have shown that a distinctive feature of the brassiceae tribe, of which the brassica species are members, is that they contain extensively triplicated genomes  <cit> .

even at the resolution of linkage maps, extensive collinearity can be identified between the genomes of brassica species and a. thaliana. for example, a landmark study using sequenced rflp markers demonstrated that  <dig> segments of the genome of a. thaliana, representing almost its entirety, could be replicated and rearranged to generate a structure approximating that of the b. napus genome  <cit> . a study across the brassicaceae subsequently identified  <dig> conserved chromosomal blocks, relating them to a proposed ancestral karyotype of n =  <dig>  <cit> . a number of genome analyses have been conducted in b. oleracea, b. rapa and b. napus using physical mapping techniques. the results have shown that the diploid brassica genomes contain extensive triplication, consistent with their having evolved from a hexaploid ancestor  <cit> . two sequence-level studies, one in b. oleracea  <cit>  and one in b. rapa  <cit>  have provided further support for the hypothesis of hexaploid ancestry for the brassica species. if this hypothesis were true, the duplicate genes we observe in the extant diploid genomes would formally be "paleo-homoeologues". however, here we will use the more general term paralogue, which is free of this assumption, to clearly delineate from the recognisable homoeologues in b. napus arising from the very recent hybridisation of the a and c genomes. the studies using physical mapping and sequencing approaches showed that, although sets of three related genome segments  will often be identifiable within the genome of the diploid brassica species, a proportion of the genes in these segments will have been lost.

brassica polyploids can be synthesised artificially. for example, b. napus can be resynthesised by hybridization of b. rapa and b. oleracea. however, it has been found that such lines display genome instability  <cit> , which can persist for many generations and is thought to involve homoeologous non-reciprocal translocations. they have been shown to be correlated with qualitative changes in the expression of specific genes and with phenotypic variation  <cit> .

microarrays have become a widely-used tool for transcriptome analysis in plants. essentially, they consist of an immobilised array of dna sequences  which are hybridized in situ using fluorescently-labelled sequences  derived by reverse transcription of polyadenylated transcripts. imaging of the hybridized array, followed by computational analysis of the signal intensity data, leads to a quantification of the transcript abundance, in the sampled tissue, of the genes represented by the probes in the array. there are numerous microarray platforms available and they have been applied to a wide range of studies in plant biology, reviewed by galbraith  <cit> .

as the brassica species diverged from a. thaliana only ca.  <dig> mya  <cit> , exon sequences show a high level of conservation, ca. 85% at the nucleotide level  <cit> . therefore some types of microarrays designed for use in a. thaliana can be used for the analysis in brassica of the related genes. however, an analysis of ca.  <dig>  brassica est sequences showed that ca. 9% showed no similarity with any gene in a. thaliana  <cit> . a. thaliana-based microarrays therefore would fail to measure the expression of a significant number of brassica genes. in addition, brassica genomes show extensive triplication, with the sub-genomes estimated to have diverged ca.  <dig> mya  <cit> . a. thaliana-based microarrays would lack the capability to resolve the contributions to the transcriptome of such families of paralogous genes. consequently, a number of groups have developed brassica cdna-based microarrays, but these have been based upon relatively modest est collections and none are available as community resources. we aimed to address this deficiency by developing a microarray based upon all public est data, validating its utility for transcriptome analysis across multiple brassica species, and placing it in the public domain. the validation experiment involved transcriptome analysis in two "resynthesised" b. napus lines and their b. rapa and b. oleracea progenitors. this experimental design enables the identification of both species-specific and genome-specific expression, whilst the long oligonucleotides used essentially eliminate the possible complications due to allelic variation .

RESULTS
assembly of brassica unigenes
all available brassica species ests were downloaded from genbank in september,  <dig>  these consisted of three principal sets: b. napus , b. rapa  and b. oleracea . a total of  <dig>  ests after cleaning and removal of low quality and short  sequences was reduced to  <dig>  reads. since the initial goal was to develop a widely useful brassica microarray, all available ests were assembled together using the tgicl software package  <cit>  with default settings . the statistics for this assembly are shown in table  <dig>  sequences were oriented either based on their alignment with a known protein or by the presence of a polya  tail. a total of  <dig>  sequences  could not be oriented and were thus represented in both orientations in the data set from which the array was designed, making  <dig>  sequences in all. the assemblies and singletons were annotated by searching against ncbi uniprot <dig> using a cut-off of 1e- <dig>  a total of  <dig>  sequences were annotated.

incorporation of assemblies into the brassica genome sequence annotation
as partners in a multinational consortium to sequence the gene space of the brassica rapa genome, we make available  fgenesh gene models predicted had est support arising from some overlap with these est alignments. of the  <dig>  unigenes comprising the assembly,  <dig>   appeared at least once within the annotation set, including  <dig> of the unigenes represented in both orientations. gene predictions around the latter may aid in their resolution.

design of the microarray
one of the primary requirements for the design of the microarray was that it should be applicable for transcriptome analysis across a range of brassica species. therefore, we required a platform based on "long oligonucleotide" probes in order to minimise susceptibility to snp variation across species, whilst retaining the capability of resolving the transcripts of significantly diverged gene families, such as those with paralogous relationships within the brassica genomes. to accommodate these design requirements, the agilent technologies microarray platform, which uses 60-mer oligonucleotide probes, was selected .

the assembled brassica sequences  were submitted to agilent technologies' earray web portal for gene expression probe design. for each 60-mer oligonucleotide probe that is designed using this tool, a base composition score is calculated to reflect the theoretical performance of the probe in standard hybridization conditions. probes with a base composition score greater than or equal to  <dig> were omitted from the final design. this resulted in a total of  <dig>  unique probes  that were included in the microarray design, of which  <dig>  were predicted to have cross-hybridization potential. to utilize the full capacity of the microarray,  <dig>  probes were randomly selected to be represented in duplicate in the final design, which also included agilent technologies' standard panel of quality control and spike-in probes. this design was then used to manufacture microarrays using agilent technologies' sureprint™ technology in the 2×  <dig> k format .

qualitative analysis of gene expression across genotypes
the experimental design used to test the performance of the microarray included four genotypes: two "resynthesized" b. napus lines and their progenitor b. rapa and b. oleracea lines. the nuclear genomes of the resynthesised b. napus lines should be identical but, as one  involved a cross of b. oleracea onto b. rapa, and the other  involved a cross of b rapa onto b. oleracea, they differ in cytoplasm, and hence contain different chloroplast and mitochondrial genomes. for each genotype, rna was isolated from four biological replicates making a total of sixteen independent samples. the gene expression profile for each sample was generated by labelling and hybridizing each sample to one of  <dig> separate microarrays. the data are available from the geo repository, accession number gse <dig> 

the parameters used for the assembly of the unigenes had been set such that transcribed sequences from orthologous genes, including homoeologues from the a and c genomes in b. napus, should co-assemble. in order to assess the number of probes that, nevertheless, report genome-specific expression, we used the presence or absence of significant signal  for each probe to classify the expression pattern of the corresponding unigene. the probes were considered to give no signal if no significant expression was detected in any of the  <dig> microarrays.  <dig>  of the  <dig>  non-control probes on the array fell into this class. of the probes for which significant expression was identified in at least one microarray, those that give only matching reports of either significant signal or no significant signal across every set of replicates  were considered to have produced consistent reports of qualitative expression. in total,  <dig>  probes produced consistent reports of qualitative expression and were used to classify qualitative expression patterns into  <dig> classes across the genotypes . the results, with duplicate probes removed in order to show the number of unigenes represented, are summarised in figure  <dig>   <dig>  of the  <dig>  unigenes represented are from the dual-orientated subset, of which  <dig> were reported in both orientations. significant qualitative expression can be detected across all genotypes for  <dig>  unigenes. genome-specific expression can be detected for  <dig>  unigenes;  <dig>  are expressed in b. rapa and b. napus, but not in b. oleracea and thus can be considered a genome-specific while by analogous criteria  <dig>  can be considered c genome-specific. significant expression was detected for  <dig> unigenes in b. rapa only and for  <dig> unigenes in b. oleracea only. no unigenes were expressed only in a diploid while  <dig> unigenes  were expressed only in a tetraploid. very few unigenes  were categorised into the remaining  <dig> classes of qualitative expression.

resolution of genotypes by principal component analysis
in order to visualize the significant sources of variation within the entire data set, a principal component analysis  was performed. the pca was performed using z-score transformed intensity measurements for all non-control probes on the microarray. the resulting scatterplot is depicted in figure  <dig>  with each colour representing a different genotype. the plot demonstrates that the biological replicates within each genotype cluster closely together. furthermore, the largest source of variation in the gene expression data is the different species as evidenced by the distinct groupings of each genotype along the x-axis . there was limited resolution of the resynthesised b. napus lines, which differed only by cytoplasm.

identification of differential gene expression in resynthesised b. napus
apart from heritable epigenetic differences, the nuclear genomes of the resynthesised b. napus lines should be identical, but their chloroplast and mitochondrial genomes differ. we investigated whether the microarray was capable of detecting any cytoplasm-specific differences in gene expression or any deviation from the expected additive contributions of the parental nuclear genomes to the transcriptome of the amphidiploid, typically termed transcriptome remodelling or non-additive gene expression. quantitative expression was compared between the resynthesised b. napus lines.  <dig> unigenes were identified that showed significant  expression differences between the two lines  for each of these unigenes, the genome of origin  was determined by using blast to identify similarity between the unigene sequence and annotated genes or other sequences in the public databases. the expression patterns were further classified, where possible, based upon significant differences between expression in other pairs of genotypes, i.e. involving the b. oleracea and b. rapa genotypes .

seventeen unigenes showed cytoplasm-specific expression profiles . of these,  <dig> unigenes are of chloroplast origin, two are of mitochondrial origin and three are of nuclear origin. these patterns are consistent with cytoplasmic inheritance  or epigenetic imprinting . non-additive expression could be identified for  <dig> unigenes,  <dig> of which are nuclear-encoded and two that are mitochondrial. the expression patterns of  <dig> unigenes  that showed significant differences in expression between the resynthesised b. napus lines could not be classified, as a result of lack of significance in expression levels between other combinations of genotypes. these results show that the expression data generated using the microarray are, with four biological replicates, of a sufficiently high quality to enable the classification of expression patterns for  <dig> of the  <dig> unigenes  showing significant differences in expression between the resynthesised b. napus lines, including the identification of many cytoplasm-specific expression patterns for genes encoded by chloroplasts or mitochondria.

characterization of sequences showing genome-specific expression
expression of  <dig>  unigenes was found in both b. napus lines and only one or other of the two diploids. of these,  <dig>  are from the a genome. blastn was used to scan the sequenced bacs for these probes and for the corresponding complete unigene sequences. of the aligned  unigenes, ten were randomly selected for further analysis. the entire unigene sequences were used to identify, using blast, homologous tair <dig> cds from a. thaliana and the position of the probe within the aligned sequences was used to assess whether the probe is likely to lie in coding or untranslated regions of the transcript. the results are summarised in table  <dig>  in most  cases, the unigene aligns to an a. thaliana cds and the position of the microarray probe can be inferred as being in a 3' utr. in two cases, the alignment to an a. thaliana cds suggests that the probe lies within the coding region.

twelve unigenes were identified that had cognate genes in sequenced b. rapa bac clones, but did not show homology to a. thaliana cds. the sequences of these unigenes were assessed, using blastn, for similarity with any a. thaliana genomic sequences or other sequences in the ncbi nucleotide collection  database. the results are summarised in table  <dig>  in two cases, the unigene contains some sequences with homology to short stretches of a. thaliana genomic sequences. however, in most cases , the unigenes appear to represent brassica-specific sequence, as no similarities were identified with genomic sequences from a. thaliana or any other organism. the majority of these  originate from positions in the b. rapa genome that lie between genes showing collinearity with the a. thaliana genome. the remaining two originate from positions within gene clusters .

* e-value threshold < 1e-10

** "collinear conserved genes" refers to genes of b. rapa and a. thaliana that show conserved synteny

discussion
we assembled unigenes using  <dig>  est sequences, mainly from three species: b. napus, b. rapa and b. oleracea. the assembly was conducted with the aim of co-assembling ests of orthologous genes , but resolving assemblies of paralogous genes . to do this, the assembly cut-off was set at 94% identity, based on our estimates of nucleotide conservation between paralogues of ~84%  <cit>  and between a and c genome orthologues of 94–97% . in total,  <dig>  unigenes, representing  <dig>  unique sequences were developed. an anticipated consequence of the close phylogenetic relationship between brassica and a. thaliana, for which a complete genome sequence is available and has been annotated to a high standard, the majority of the unigenes  could be annotated and orientated on the basis of sequence similarity to proteins in the uniprot <dig> database. the remaining  <dig>  unigenes are candidates for encoding brassica-specific proteins or non-coding rnas.

in the absence of genomic sequence data, the functional significance of the large number of brassica-specific unigenes is difficult to assess. as a first step, the assemblies were incorporated into the bac sequence annotation for the brassica rapa genome sequencing project, enabling the identification of cognate genomic sequences for a proportion of the assemblies and contributing to the annotation of the emerging b. rapa genome sequence.

a 60-mer oligo microarray was developed using the unigene sequences and its utility validated by conducting an experiment aimed at testing its ability to analyse the transcriptomes of multiple brassica species. gene expression was analysed in two resynthesised b. napus lines and the b. oleracea and b. rapa lines used to produce them. the b. napus lines represented progeny resulting from both b. oleracea crossed onto b. rapa  and b. rapa crossed onto b. oleracea . the 60-mer probe design enables an analysis of differential expression regardless of allelic variation due to snps or short indels which might interfere with transcript detection by the probes. the analysis showed that significant expression could consistently be detected in leaf tissue for  <dig>  unigenes. this proportion of the total number of  <dig>  unigenes  is consistent with our expectations as many of the ests in the original collection were derived from other tissues . our criteria for significant expression were stringent . expression was detected across all four genotypes for  <dig>  unigenes  and principal component analysis clearly resolved the individual microarray datasets for b. rapa, b. oleracea and resynthesised b. napus. quantitative differences in expression were observed between the resynthesised b. napus lines for  <dig> unigenes, most of which could be classified into non-additive expression patterns, including  <dig> that showed cytoplasm-specific patterns.

in the two diploids, genome-specific expression patterns were observed for  <dig>  unigenes . these may represent instances in which the probes were designed to sequences that differ between the a and c genome orthologues. however, the anticipated sequence polymorphism rate between coding regions of orthologous genes of ~ <dig> % would typically result in ~ <dig> differences per probe, which is unlikely to destabilize the hybridization sufficiently to abolish signal. we have, however, observed that sequences that are orthologous between the brassica a and c genomes also differ in insertion-deletions  , which could result in more extensive destabilization if overlapping the region to which the probe is designed. alternatively, these may be sequences that are present in only one of the brassica genomes, or their genome-specific expression may be tissue-dependent . to begin to understand the basis for this difference, we exploited the emerging b. rapa genome sequences in order to characterize the genome sequences cognate to some of the unigenes showing genome-specific patterns of expression, as reported by the microarray. this revealed that, in the majority of cases, the probes are positioned in 3' utr regions. however, ten of the aligned unigenes were found to be brassica-specific sequences, including two that originate from complex loci comprising gene clusters. therefore, we can hypothesise that a proportion of the unigenes showing genome-specific patterns of reported expression are likely to represent either brassica-specific genes or brassica-specific non-protein coding sequences. the observation of two instances of novel transcripts from clusters of genes that show evidence of recent duplication and rearrangements, and are reminiscent of some classes of disease resistance loci in plants, is particularly intriguing as it provides evidence for these loci producing novel genetic and transcriptional variation.

CONCLUSIONS
we successfully developed and validated a microarray resource for use by the brassica research community. the microarray enabled the detection of gene expression across all brassica species tested for > <dig>  unigenes. genome-specific expression was observed for more than  <dig> further unigenes. we anticipate that these will represent both species-specific transcripts and the consequences of variation of sequences within the regions of the unigenes represented by the array probes. our studies demonstrated that the datasets obtained from the arrays can be used for typical analyses, including pca and the analysis of differential expression. our analysis of unigenes showing genome-specific expression patterns confirmed the transcription of sequences not represented in a. thaliana. indeed, numerous transcripts were identified that represent brassica-specific sequences. these transcripts would not be detectable using arrays designed with a. thaliana sequences and may represent functional genes not represented in other species.

