BACKGROUND
to make the neuronal regeneration to eventual functional recovery after spinal cord injury , various treatments including surgical, pharmacological, and neurophysiologic approaches have been performed. especially, cell transplantation with hypotoxicity and high effectiveness could be a promising strategy for the treatment of sci.

as a special type of neuroglial cells derived from the olfactory bulb, olfactory ensheathing cells , are featured the permanent function of neural regeneration. compared with the schwann cells, the oec possess higher migration ability and higher ability of integration with nerve axons and other neuroglial cells  <cit> . reportedly, oecs can secrete various neurotrophins such as platelet derivation growth factor , brain-derived neurotrophic factor   <cit> , nerve growth factor   <cit>  and neurotrophin-4/ <dig>  <cit> . in an injured spinal cord, the transplanted oecs have a neuroprotective effect on descending cortical and brain stem neurons  <cit> , suggesting the effect of oecs on the improvement of motor function. however, it is still unknown whether the treatment of oec transplantation could work well on the sensory function.

in this experiment, the mechanical and thermal hyperalgesia behaviors of rats with hemisected spinal cord injury  were observed after oec transplantation. then we explored the underlying mechanism, which would be correlated with the phosphorylation of erk and the up-regulation of bdnf.

RESULTS
identification of oecs in vitro
after 24 h of culturing, the adherent cells were in rounded shape and uniform distribution. after 3 days of culture, the cell bodies were amplified obviously and most of them formed triangles with two or three processes. after 5–7 days of culture, the characteristics of oecs in vitro were shown, and the cell processes were elongated remarkably and they contact mutually to form a network . enzyme immunochemical staining of the cultured cells were positive for neurotrophin p <dig> surface receptor, identified as oecs. the purity of oecs is higher than 95%. these cells were brown as a dab reaction product was present in these cells . in addition, oecs derived from the gfp transgenic mice could emit green fluorescence . based on red fluorescent staining under incubation by p <dig> antibody, we also identified the cultured cells as oecs in vitro .

evaluation on nociceptive tests
in sham-operated rats, the paw withdrawal latency  and paw withdrawal thresholds  were recorded separately.

thermal stimuli
in the nociceptive evaluation of thermal stimuli, these asterisks indicate that the left pwl of the oec transplantation group  was significantly lower than those of hsci group   and the sham group  . there was no significant difference in left pwl between the sham group and the hsci group. the quantitative analysis is shown in figure 2a.

mechanical stimuli
by using the pressure stimuli expressed by grams to the injury-side hind paws of rats in each group, we found that the pwts of sham group  were significantly higher than those of the hsci group  , and the oec treatment group  exhibited the lowest level . the quantitative analysis is shown in figure 2b.

survival and migrating of oecs in vivo
to confirm the survival of oecs with spinal cord injury, gfp -positive oecs were observed. as shown in figure 3a and c, gfp-labeled oecs with fluorescence were seen in the spinal cord. the results confirmed that the implanted oecs were capable of surviving and migration in the spinal cord till one month after injury, compared with the situation of the hsci group without cells transplantation .

bdnf co-expression in engrafted oecs and host neurons
in order to determine the change of bdnf-positive cells, we performed the immunofluorescent staining by using bdnf antibodies. the secondary antibodies were conjugated to the fluorescent marker cy- <dig>  which emits red fluorescence to be observed by fluorescent microscope. compared with the sham group  and the hsci group , the number of bdnf-positive cells was increased in the oecs transplantation group . the quantitative analysis on the comparison of the numbers of bdnf-positive cells is shown in figure 3g, which shows significant difference between the oecs transplantation group and the hsci group .

the images indicated bdnf-positive cells were present not only in oecs engrafted with gfp fluorescence , but also in neurons in the superficial layer of dorsal horn surrounding the spinal cord injury.

bdnf co-expression in engrafted oecs and host neurons
to identify the co-localization of bdnf in host neurons and engrafted oecs, the immunofluorecent double-label staining was performed by using anti-bdnf, anti-neun , and anti-trkb separately. double-label staining showed that the engrafted oecs can express bdnf after transplantation . bdnf-positive cells were labeled simultaneously by anti-neun. this confirmed that the cells labeled by bdnf staining are neurons in the host spinal cord . in addition, the neurons labeled by bdnf were also found to express trkb, the functional receptor of bdnf .

the mrna changes of bdnf in rt-pcr
the mrna expressions for bdnf were detected in the sham group, the hsci group and the oecs transplantation rats. significant difference between the hsci group and the oec transplantation group was detected on the 21st day , but not at other time points. therefore, oec transplantation could significantly upregulate the bdnf expression in the spinal cord after injury .

changes of erk and p-erk expressions detected by western blot
erk activation was determined by western blotting. compared with the sham group, there were no changes on the expressions of erk following sci figure 6a. however, the oec administration resulted in a significant increase on the level of p-erk in the spinal cord both on the 14th day and the 21st day  .

discussion
the results show that the oecs from olfactory bulb may induce hyperalgesia when they were transplanted into the hemisected spinal cord in rats. and this phenomenon seemed to be associated with the activation of erk and the increase of bdnf level, indicated by rt-pcr and western blot.

currently, cell transplantation is one novel therapeutic strategy for the treatment of sci. as one type of glial cells ensheathed in the olfactory axons, oecs are featured by the function of promoting the axonal regeneration. several studies emphasized the optimal role of oecs in the treatment of sci, which may induce function repair for improving locomotor level  <cit>  and promoting axonal regeneration  <cit> , in the paraplegic  <cit> , transected  <cit> , contused  <cit>  sci models and multiple lumbar rhizotomy  <cit> . moreover, the introduction of oecs can remyelinate the demyelinated axons in the lesions of the animal spinal cord  <cit> . unfortunately, however, there is no evidence to reveal how this transplantation affects the sensory function. therefore, we aim to test whether the treatment of oec transplantation in rat hsci model may affect the regulation of sensory function as the motor function.

the innocuous mechanical and thermal stimuli test showed that the oecs treatment group had lower pwl than the untreated group. this result suggests that the oec transplantation into spinal cord injured rats may induce obvious hyperalgesic responses. for this reason, the analgesic approach should be developed when we consider the oec transplantation therapy.

to investigate the underlying mechanism of the allodynia following oec implantation, we determined the expressions of bdnf and erk. consequently, bdnf expression in injured spinal cord was greatly increased in oec-transplanted rats on 21st day and bdnf was located in neurons of the superficial layer in the dorsal horn. it is known that the productions of growth factors  and the expressions of corresponding receptors may contribute to axonal regeneration following oec transplantation  <cit> . bdnf as one type of the neurotrophin family of growth factors can not only support the survival of the existing neurons and promote the growth and differentiation of new neurons and synapses  <cit> , but also trigger the pain in sciatic nerve separation model  <cit>  and ligation model  <cit> . in our experiments, immunofluorescent staining was performed to observe the expression of bdnf at the injured segment, and the red fluorescence which symbolized “bdnf positive” was found in the superficial layer of dorsal horn. simultaneously, the upregulation of bdnf expression was also confirmed. these results indicated that oec transplantation could increase bdnf expression in sensory neurons of the dorsal horn, which may contribute to the observed phenomena like hyperalgesia.

more importantly, we also found the p-erk  level was increased in the injured spinal cord after oec transplantation. the potential correlation of the activation of erk following spinal neuron injury with the pain hypersensitivity and central sensitization was well documented  <cit> . within a minute after a noxious stimulus, many p- erk-positive neurons were observed, predominantly in laminas i and ii of the ipsilateral dorsal horn  <cit> , and the phosphorylation of erk occurring in the nociceptive neurons may contribute to persistent inflammatory and neuropathic pains  <cit> . in present study, we observed the activation of erk following oec transplantation, which may be related to hyperalgesia. in this observation, several events including behavior and molecule have occurred at different time points. reportedly, the erk phosphorylation may be a reason for the increase of bdnf  <cit> . therefore, the increase of erk phosphorylation on the 14th day may induce the increase of bdnf level on the 21st day. as the behavioral changes were generally resulting from the cellular and molecular changes, hyperalgesia was found after 1 month. together, the phosphorylation of erk results in the upregulation of bdnf, and eventually gives rise to the behavioral hyperalgesia.

we also found that bdnf was expressed both in oecs and in host neurons. as the neurons with bdnf staining are expressing trkb simultaneously, probably the bdnf released from oecs could be enrolled into neurons by trkb receptor. these could underline some linkage by bdnf for the consequent hyperalgesia between transplanted oecs and host neurons.

in summary, these findings may provide novel insight into the hyperalgesia responses following oec transplantation. in using oec transplantation for the treatment of sci, it is useful to consider the inhibition of erk phosphorylation and bdnf blockage to relieve the nociceptive behaviors.

CONCLUSIONS
the transplantation of oecs which can promote axonal regeneration and functional recovery in previous studies may induce noticeable pain hypersensitivity following hsci. this could be associated with the overexpression of bdnf in the injured spinal cord and the phosphorylation of erk. the current findings may indicate some therapeutic strategies involving the inhibition of erk activation or bdnf blockage to treat sci more correctly and efficaciously in future clinical practice.

