BACKGROUND
microarray technology allows for the simultaneous detection of expression levels of thousands of genes. by means of gene expression microarrays it is possible to generate a matrix of expression data, where the rows index the genes and the columns the study samples. numbers in the matrix represent gene expression values in the study samples. many statistical methods have been proposed for the selection of candidate genes that potentially play an important role in the mechanisms governing the biological system  <cit> .

unfortunately, the main difficulty in choosing which statistical approach to use is that most methods are not directly related with a sound biological interpretation. for example, statistical testing  <cit>  for gene selection aims at finding genes which are 'strongly' differentially expressed between two conditions, where for condition we mean whatever state of the biological samples that is conjectured to affect gene expression . following this approach, genes are usually ranked according to their p-values, being genes with the smallest p-values the most differentially expressed. since no biological meaning is necessarily associated to the notion of p-value, the interpretation of single p-values within complex biological systems where several genes are known to interact is problematic. for instance, a crucial issue to address is whether a subset of genes identified as being individually differentially expressed in the study samples is more or less efficient in characterizing samples than a subset of genes which show different levels of interaction between the two conditions.

a method for gene expression analysis based on game theory was proposed in  <cit>  and is further explored in this paper. the main advantage of the game theory approach is the possibility to compute a numerical index, i.e. a relevance index, which represents the relevance of each gene under a certain condition taking into account the expression behaviors of the other genes under the same condition. an additional feature of the game theory approach developed in  <cit>  is that it is provided a novel property driven characterization of the shapley value in order to contextualize and justify the use of the shapley value as relevance index for genes. five simple properties with a biological interpretation are introduced in  <cit>  and it is proved that they characterize the shapley value. one simple property is that a relevance index should attribute null relevance to genes that are never up- or down- regulated under a certain condition. this idea is captured by the null gene  property. in addition, if one is interested to bring smaller gene pathways into prominence, then another reasonable property is that if two disjoint sets of genes are up- or down-regulated in a same rate of samples, then genes in the smaller set should receive a higher relevance index than genes in the bigger one ). the partnership rationality  property and the partnership feasibility  property determine, respectively, a lower and an upper bound of the power of certain pathways of genes in determining the onset of the tumor. lastly, it is used a special version of additivity, namely the equal splitting  property, which has the natural interpretation of giving the same reliability to different microarray experiments. it is proved in  <cit>  that the shapley value is the unique relevance index which satisfies the properties pr, pf, pm, es and ng on the class of microarray games. we refer to  <cit>  for a more detailed description and discussion of such properties.

according to the game theory approach, the frequency of associations  of all of the subsets of genes with a condition of interest is described by means of a microarray game. the definition of relevance index for genes is provided in terms of the shapley value  <cit> , which is the unique relevance index for microarray games satisfying the set of properties introduced in  <cit> . the higher the number attributed by the shapley value to a certain gene in a given microarray game, the higher the relevance of that gene for the mechanisms governing the genomic effects of the condition under study.

since gene expression is a stochastic, or 'noisy', process  <cit>  and a microarray game is defined on a gene expression data-set, a microarray game itself follows a stochastic law, significantly affecting the stability of a relevance index. this fact must be considered in comparing the relevance index of genes under different conditions, e.g. different environmental exposures.

the purpose of this work is to introduce a new method to analyze gene expression data, which combines the game theory notion of relevance index  <cit>  with the notion of statistical significance. a bootstrap based algorithm applied to the sample statistics of the shapley value is introduced in this paper and is used to perform a comparative analysis of shapley value . cash is used to select those genes whose relevance index results stable against noise in gene expression, meaning that the index has the tendency to be weakly affected when a few observations are removed. the basic idea of bootstrap  <cit>  is to use re-sampling techniques to collect information about the shape, center, and spread of the sampling distribution of the statistic of interest. this idea is particularly valuable when it is not possible to assume a given model describing the distributions in the population and to calculate the parameters of the corresponding sampling distribution.

to illustrate the framework's utility of the method, we applied cash to gene expression data published in  <cit> . in  <cit>  genome-wide oligonucleotide microarray analysis was applied in peripheral blood cells of children from teplice  area , and compared with children from the rural control area of prachatice   in the czech republic. the tp area is a mining district characterized by high levels of airborne pollutants including carcinogens  <cit> . the results provided by cash in this application are compared with the results provided by a parametric statistical analysis for the selection of differentially expressed genes between the two areas.

other approaches using game theory for gene expression analysis have been proposed in literature. an approach explored in  <cit>  is based on the framework of minimum cost spanning trees , that is used to represent the interactions between all possible pairs of genes and is extended to implement the notion of association for coalitions of genes. basically, this approach is rooted on two main steps: first, a method based on the mcst problem is introduced to represent the interactions between the involved genes; second, the mcst representation of a gene expression dataset is used to analyze a related game theoretical problem for the determination of the relevance of genes. another application introduced in  <cit>  is related to the problems of making good prediction of sample conditions. classification games are defined and used to analyze the power of groups of genes to classify samples into the right study conditions. classification games turn out to be closely related to microarray games and, on some numerical examples, the shapley value is studied as a method for selection of genes with high performance in sample classification. recently, in  <cit> , a set of genes selected according to the shapley value is studied in connection with the pathogenesis of neuroblastic tumors.

another approach to computational biology using game theory is the multi-perturbation shapley value analysis   <cit> , that is a method for causal function localization which addresses the challenge of defining and calculating the contributions of network elements from a data set of multiple lesions or other type of perturbations and their corresponding performance scores. in this framework, a set of multiple lesion experiments is represented as a coalitional game. specifically, msa defines the set of contributions to be the shapley value, which stands for the unique fair division of the game's worth  among the different players . the contribution of an element to a function measures its importance, that is, the part it causally plays in the successful performance of that function. msa has recently been used in analysis of data from genetic experiments in a work by  <cit> . the aim of the work by  <cit>  was to identify the importance in terms of causal responsibility of some genes in performing a certain function in yeast cells. in their approach,  <cit>  evaluate the value of each coalition as a measure of the biological system's performance for a certain function .

RESULTS
model application
we applied cash to the analysis of gene expression data published in  <cit>  of  <dig> children from the polluted area of teplice  and  <dig> children from the rural control area of prachatice , in the czech republic. we addressed the problem of quantifying the relevance of genes in the tp area using the information provided by the microarray game defined when up-regulated genes are considered  and the microarray game defined when down-regulated genes are considered . the relevance of genes was computed as the shapley values of games v¯tp+ and game v¯tp− . the plot of the shapley value distributions of genes in games v¯tp+ and v¯tp− is shown in figure  <dig> .

algorithm  <dig> was applied to compare the shapley value ϕ of games v¯tp+ and v¯tp− with the shapley value computed on the microarray game defined when up-regulated genes in pr area are considered  and the shapley value computed on the microarray game defined when down-regulated genes in pr area are considered , respectively. more precisely, algorithm  <dig> was applied twice: first, to test the null hypothesis |ϕi - ϕi| =  <dig> against the alternative hypothesis |ϕi - ϕi|≠ 0; second, to test the null hypothesis |ϕi - ϕi| =  <dig> against the alternative hypothesis |ϕi - ϕ| ≠  <dig> 

selection of significantly modified gene expressions in exposed versus non-exposed children
genes were selected according to the double criterium of small p-value from cash and large shapley value in microarray games defined on tp data. more precisely, genes with an un-adjusted p-value, provided by algorithm  <dig>  lower than a predefined cut-off and shapley value greater than the mean plus the standard deviation in v¯tp+  or v¯tp− , were selected . the shapley value in games defined on tp data represents a measure of the relevance of genes for the mechanisms governing the genomic effects of pollution in tp, whereas the shapley value of microarray games defined on pr data is taken as a reference value. the latter is used in cash to remove the effects of stochastic noise from the shapley value of games defined on tp data. in methods: data processing for cash, the procedure adopted to define all microarray games on the basis of the reference gene expression levels observed in pr is described.


overview of the number of genes with p-values lower than predefined cutoffs . columns 'genes' show the total number of genes selected by cash and t-test, respectively; column 'v¯tp+' shows the number of genes with shapley value significantly different in microarray game v¯tp+ as compared to v¯pr+; column 'v¯tp−' shows the number of genes with shapley value significantly different in microarray game v¯tp− as compared to v¯pr−; column 'tp up' shows the number of genes up-regulated in children from tp as compared to children from pr; column 'tp down' shows the number of genes up-regulated in children from tp as compared to children from pr; column 'intersection' shows the number of genes selected by both t-test and cash at different levels of p-value.

note that for each predefined value of p in table  <dig>  the number of genes selected in the microarray game v¯tp+ is larger than that selected in the microarray game v¯tp−. figure  <dig> shows the scatterplots of the p-values versus the absolute differences in shapley values. these plots indicates that the  <dig> genes selected in v¯tp+ and the  <dig> genes selected in v¯tp− are closed to the respective pareto optimal frontiers.

the numbers of genes selected by cash and t-test for different levels of p are presented in table  <dig>  together with the number of genes which are selected by both methods. table  <dig> shows the expression differences between individuals of the two regions of the  <dig> genes selected by cash or t-test at p <  <dig> . seven genes are selected by both methods.

expression changes of the  <dig> genes that were selected by t-test or cash at p-value<  <dig> . 'effect' column shows the difference between the average expression ratio in tp minus the average expression ratio in pr. in the last column, the method used for each gene selection is shown: t-test or cash or both.

the overlap between cash and t-test in terms of the number of selected genes when ranked according to their p-values  in both cash and t-test is represented in figure  <dig> . figure  <dig> also shows other three curves: the green line represents the overlap between a list of genes generated with the criterium of highest fold-change of average expression between tp and pr and a list of genes generated with the criterium of highest differential shapley value between games on tp and pr; the blue line represents the overlap between a list of genes ranked according to their p-value  in the t-test and a list of genes generated with the criterium of highest differential shapley value between games on tp and pr; the orange line represents the overlap between a list of genes ranked according to their p-value  in cash and a list of genes generated with the criterium of highest differential shapley value between games on tp and pr. the overlap between cash p-values and t-test  or between differential shapley values and t-test  is remarkable higher than the overlap between fold-changes and differential shapley values . using cash instead of differential shapley value does not determine any significant differences in terms of overlap with the t-test list.

the hierarchical clustering ) based on the set of  <dig> genes with highest shapley value and unadjusted p-value <  <dig>  returned a distinct separation of  <dig>  exposed subjects and  <dig>  non-exposed subjects . the hierarchical clustering ) based on the set of all of the  <dig> genes differentially expressed at p <  <dig>  in the t-test returned a distinct separation of  <dig>  exposed and  <dig>  non-exposed subjects . the red/green bar on the top of the heat-maps is used to label the subjects of the two clusters provided by k-means clustering with k =  <dig>  k-means clustering shows an accuracy of  <dig> % for the list of genes selected by cash and  <dig> % for the list of genes selected by t-test.

to compare the classification success of the lists of genes selected by cash and t-test, we performed hierarchical clustering for equal numbers of genes . table  <dig> shows a similar high level of classification accuracy for lists of genes by cash and t-test, with a small increment in accuracy  for t-test lists with  <dig> and  <dig> genes.

classification acuracy based on clusters provided by hierarchical clustering performed on lists of genes selected by cash and t-test with equal number of genes. gene lists size is given by the number of genes selected by cash at p smaller than  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig> , respectively.

over-representation of biological themes obtained by the pathway-finding tool david  <cit>  using the list of  <dig> genes with unadjusted p-values <  <dig>  from cash is presented in table  <dig>  since the game theory method yielded  <dig> genes with p <  <dig>  whereas the t-test yielded much more genes for the same level of p , we selected the same number of genes  from the t-test, to have equally sized gene lists for david. the over-represented biological themes on the cash list are compared with the over-represented biological themes in the list of  <dig> genes with smallest p-value in the t-test .

overview of significant over-represented functional themes and pathways within the lists of most significant  <dig> genes selected by cash. only functional terms and pathways with p-value smaller than  <dig>  are listed. the enrichment fold change  is shown in the third column. terms which are significantly over-represented also in genes from t-test  are marked by *.

overview of significant over-represented functional themes and pathways within the lists of most significant  <dig> genes selected by t-test. only functional terms and pathways with p-value smaller than  <dig>  are listed.

upon t-test analysis david returned more modified pathways  than after cash selection . cash-based pathway identification shares  <dig> annotation terms with t-test analysis-based pathway selection.

simulation study
in microarray studies, the detection of differential gene expression under two different conditions is very important. on the other hand, also the detection of differential gene expression variance may allow to identify experimental variables that affect different biological processes and accuracy of dna microarray measurements. so, in this simulation we compare the performance of cash and t-test in selecting genes which differ between two conditions in terms of average expression or expression variance.

to assess the statistical power of cash as a function of the sample size, we conducted a simulation study. we compared the performance of cash against t-test on a simulated gene expression data-set of n =  <dig> genes obtained by random samples from normal distributions under two simulated conditions: 90% of genes were sampled from the same distribution under the two conditions; the remaining 10% of genes was split in two groups of equal size: one group of genes 2-fold different in average expression between the two conditions and another group characterized by different variability across measures under the two conditions. both cash and t-test were applied on the simulated data-set, and genes with p-value smaller than predefined cutoffs, used to control the false positive rate at  <dig>  in both methods, were selected. figure  <dig> shows that the power of the t-test converges to  <dig>  as expected, since half of the genes sampled from different distributions have a fold change not equal to  <dig>  differently, cash converges to  <dig> 

discussion
the purpose of our study is to introduce a new method  to analyze gene expression data, which combines the game theory notion of relevance index  <cit>  with the notion of statistical significance. we illustrate the framework's utility by applying it to a published data-set  <cit>  and the results of this application are discussed and compared with the output of a classical analysis for differential expression detection. a more detailed discussion on the statistical issues related to p-value generation in cash is provided in additional files .

looking at the intersections of the set of genes selected by cash with the set of genes selected by t-test, for each level of p in table  <dig>  we have that about 50% of genes selected by cash are also selected by t-test. the different results obtained by cash and t-test, are not very surprising. in fact, as further explained in methods, the two approaches select relevant genes using different criteria. the t-test selects genes according to their individual differential expression between the two study conditions. using the t-test, genes are considered significant on the basis of the difference of their expression profile between two conditions: gene i is called significant when its p-value is sufficiently small. the cash method keeps into account the expression of each gene under two conditions, but the added value of the shapley value is the ability to highlight the contribution of those genes which consistently interact with other genes. the cash method calculates the relevance of genes as their average marginal contribution over all possible permutations of genes. therefore, genes with the highest relevance are those that likely explain the difference between the two conditions, because they play an important role  over all possible permutations, not only with respect to their individual differential expression.

overlap rate of lists of genes generated according to different methods is shown in figure  <dig>  cash method and differential shapley value show a bigger overlap with the list provided by t-test than the list provided by fold-change. as far as we know, this is the first time that this result is reported on a real microarray data-set. lists of genes selected from cash and differential shapley value show a large overlap, that for more then  <dig> selected genes varies between 70% and 80%.

the structure of the main representative groups provided by hierarchical clustering and k-means clustering based on the set of genes with differential expression and genes selected by cash at <  <dig>  shows gene expression profiles discriminating between the two areas.

in addition, hierarchical clustering and k-means clustering based on the set of genes selected by cash, highlight a group of non-exposed subjects with homogenous levels of expression closer to another homogenous group of exposed subjects. to assess the reliability of this third cluster, we applied k-means clustering with k =  <dig> instead of k =  <dig>  and we used the notion of mutual information in the framework of information theory  <cit> . specifically, cluster-wise mutual information  relates the distributions of two random variables to each other providing a score which represents the amount of information that the distribution of one variable encodes about the other variable. cmi scores show that the reliability of the third cluster is very low in comparison with the two major clusters, suggesting that both lists of genes identified by cash and t-test best classify subjects in only two groups .

cluster-wise mutual information  scores computed on clusters of subjects as provided by k-means with k =  <dig> .

the same classification performance in terms of accuracy of clusters shown in figures  <dig> and  <dig> suggests that genes with smallest p-value from cash are the most informative among those with highest differential shapley value. this fact may be explained by the ability of cash method to provide genes with more stable shapley value when small p-values are considered.

we also compared the medians of the sample statistics of the shapley value of two genes, mfd <dig> and nfkbia, with the same differential shapley value but very different p-values from cash. while the difference between tp and pr of the medians of shapley value statistics for gene mfsd <dig>  is zero, the corresponding difference of medians for the gene nfkbia  is larger than the differential shapley value. on this particular instance, this result is consistent with the claimed ability of cash to select genes with stable shapley value. note also that nfkbia may be involved in diverse biological processes such as cell proliferation, differentiation, apoptosis and metastasis  <cit> .

among the genes selected by cash only at p <  <dig>  , oligodendrocyte transcription factor  <dig>  was recently described in  <cit>  as a prognostic marker for non-small cell lung cancer . hormone-sensitive lipase  is known to catalyze both the release of fatty acids from storage triglycerides in adipocytes and the liberation of cholesterol from cholesterol esters in steroidogenic tissues playing a key role in energy metabolism  <cit> . tmepai, an androgen induced gene, was found up-regulated in a time- and concentration-specific manner in prostate cancer cells   <cit> .

srcrb4d contains  <dig> group b scavenger receptor cysteine-rich  domains, a group of proteins known to be involved in the development of the immune system and the regulation of both innate and adaptive immune responses  <cit> . the sequence of human rbm <dig> is identical to def- <dig>  that was found as differentially expressed during myelopoiesis  <cit> , and of the lung cancer antigen ny-lu- <dig>  <cit> .

for the seven genes selected by both cash and t-test  it is not clear at this moment exactly how they biologically relate to exposure to air pollution. we simply remark that dusp <dig> encodes a protein that belongs to the protein-tyrosine phosphatase family, having both protein-tyrosine phosphatase activity and serine/threonine-specific phosphatase activity.

given the properties of air pollutants in the tp region, one would hypothetically expect modifications of pathways related to cancerous events and immune disorders. cash-based pathway identification shares  <dig> common annotation terms with t-test analysis-based pathway selection ; none of these however show any known biological annotation referring to carcinogenis or immunotoxicity. of more interest are the differences between these two selections: t-test-based analysis demonstrates pathways related to nucleosome function and microtubule structure and function which may be associated with observed differences in genotoxic damage between children from tp and from pr  <cit> , while cash retrieves affected mapk-signaling pathways which may refer to deregulation of cellular growth predisposing to tumorigenesis  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
in this paper, a new method to analyze the relevance of genes under a given condition is studied. cash integrates the game theory model introduced in  <cit>  with a novel boostrap-based test procedure that allows to compare a gene relevance index computed within game theory, i.e., the shapley value, which reflects the joint expression behavior of genes. we argued that the added value of cash with respect to the approach in  <cit>  is to perform statistical inference based on the distributions of the sample statistics of microarray games and the corresponding statistics of shapley values.

on simulated data where differential expression and differential variability of genes characterize two conditions, we showed that cash affords more power than the t-test at the same false positive rate. cash and t-test were applied to data published in  <cit> , concerning the gene expression measured in children from the czech republic differentially exposed to air pollution. a group of children lived in the area of tp, which is characterized by relatively high levels of air pollution and the other in the less polluted area of pr. hierarchical clustering and k-means clustering are used to group together individuals on the basis of the expression patterns of genes selected by cash and t-test, and to compare the performance of the two methods in selecting genes that jointly act in characterizing samples from the polluted and the non-polluted areas. clustering methods show that the lists of genes provided by cash and t-test are informative enough to discriminate between tp subjects and pr subjects on the basis of their gene expression profiles.

most of genes selected by cash at p <  <dig>  are involved in important processes related to the mechanism of carcinogenesis. while most of the gene categories shown in tables  <dig> and  <dig> cannot yet be toxicologically interpreted, it is demonstrated that t-test analysis generates presumably relevant pathways, e.g. related to nucleosome and microtubuli function, but also misses a few, e.g. related to cell signaling and growth regulation, which are retrieved by cash. at the level of identified pathways as affected by exposure to air pollution in teplice children, it is the combination of both methods that yields most of the relevant information regarding genes with a potential impact in regulation of complex pathways predisposing to tumorigenesis. it is therefore recommended to apply cash and parametric tests for differential expression in combination.

