BACKGROUND
antimicrobial peptides are widely distributed in nature and play a critical role in the innate immunity of host defense systems. they act with broad spectrum and, hence, are promising candidates for therapeutic and industrial application  <cit> . for research studies and clinical trials, large quantities of these peptides are needed  <cit> . the number of described amps has increased over recent decades  <cit> ; however, the recent generation of huge amounts of genomic, proteomic and est  data enables novel strategies for the discovery of new candidate amps  <cit> . in silico methods based on bioinformatic analyses, combined with experimental screening techniques have been developed to screen and identify new amp genes from huge "-omics" data sets  <cit> . belarmino et al. screened  <dig>  ests of sugarcane using a computational approach and successfully identified  <dig> new defensin isoforms  <cit> . following in silico prediction, however, there is a requirement for a high throughput genome-scale dna cloning and expression system to enable the antimicrobial activities of putative amps to be characterized  <cit> .

expression of fusion proteins that form inclusion bodies has several advantages that can overcome major barriers of amp expression in e. coli: high rates of expression, easy collection by centrifugation, protection from proteolysis and the avoidance of intrinsic amp antimicrobial activity against host cells  <cit> . however, recombinant amps expressed in e. coli often include 1- <dig> non-native amino acid residuals at the n terminus of the target protein due to a specific linker sequence recognized by endoproteases or chemical agents, typically located between the native protein sequence and the tag  <cit> . these non-authentic n termini of amps often alter their characteristics. it is, therefore, very important to develop a new strategy for authentic recombinant amp expression. the n-terminal autoprotease, npro, of classical swine fever virus  cleaves itself between the c-terminal cys <dig> and position  <dig>  <cit> , which represent the authentic n-terminal amino acid of the target protein. it is also a relatively hydrophobic protein that tends to form insoluble aggregates on refolding, preventing autoproteolysis  <cit> . in this approach, the target protein is fused to the c-terminus of npro and is expressed in inclusion bodies. after inclusion bodies are isolated, an in vitro refolding step is necessary to induce autoproteolysis, and render the amps biologically active  <cit> . importantly, cleavage does not need to be initiated by the use of reducing agents or by temperature and ph shifts. eddie, a mutant of npro, shows improved solubility and faster refolding and cleavage than wild-type npro  <cit> . in our previous work, the fusion protein eddie-cad was successfully expressed in e. coli after codon optimization and the purified recombinant mature cecropin ad  was fully bioactive  <cit> .

the in vitro cloning of dna molecules traditionally uses pcr or site-specific restriction endonucleases to generate linear dna inserts with defined termini and requires dna ligase to covalently join these inserts to vectors with the corresponding ends  <cit> . however, restriction endonuclease sites often introduce a few amino acids to the n-terminus of mature peptides, and it is very difficult to analyze recombinant clones when the insert dna fragment is very short. for high throughput subcloning of short peptide genes, we constructed the vector, pet30a/his-eddie-gfp , and used a seamless enzyme-free cloning method for high level expression of amps in e. coli, this method allows one-step assembly of dna fragments in vivo via homologous recombination in e. coli  <cit> . for high level expression, codon usages of synthesized amp genes were optimized according to the host strains. for efficient analysis of short insert dna fragments, the recombinants were easily screened by gfp green/white colony selection. in this article, our approach was validated using  <dig> target amps of variable length.

RESULTS
construction of his-eddie-gfp fusion expression plasmid
the construction of the pet30a/his-eddie-gfp vector was based on pet30a/his- eddie-cad. after pcr amplification, the gfp fragment was successfully subcloned into pet30a/his-eddie-cad. colonies showing green fluorescence were picked and pcr amplification of the gfp gene followed by gel electrophoresis showed that the gfp fragment had been successfully inserted into the expression vector . dna sequencing validated that the gfp gene was inserted downstream of the eddie gene.

construction of the his-eddie-amp fusion expression plasmid
to clone amp genes in a high-throughput manner, we performed a green/white colony screen using the gfp in pet30a/his-eddie-gfp. after a target gene is cloned into the vector by a one-step pcr technique, the gfp gene is destroyed; therefore, green fluorescence indicates non-linearized parental vector. four amp genes, temporin g, hexapeptide, combi- <dig> and histatin  <dig> were amplified and cloned downstream of eddie using a one-step pcr process, and then transformed into e. coli cells . blp- <dig> and histatin  <dig> genes were assembled using four primers in one pcr reaction, respectively . pet30a/his-eddie-gfp was replicated at the same time. the two pcr products were then transformed into e. coli cells together. the transformants were screened under ultraviolet light, and the white colonies were further screened by pcr verification and sequencing. the recombinant pet30a/his-eddie-amp plasmid is smaller than the parental pet30a/his-eddie-gfp plasmid, which makes it very easy to distinguish the two plasmids by agarose gel electrophoresis .

expression and purification of fusion proteins
e. coli bl <dig>  cells harboring pet30a/his-eddie-amp were induced by iptg, and the expression of his-eddie-amp proteins was analyzed by sds-page . fusion proteins of  <dig> kda represented the majority of the insoluble components in cell lysates. the recombinant his-eddie-amps were estimated to constitute about 40% of the total protein present in cells. the yield of inclusion bodies was quite high due to the properties of the fusion partner .

refolding and activity analysis
purified his-eddie-amp inclusion bodies were diluted in optimized refolding buffer and incubated to enable self-cleavage to occur. to examine the antimicrobial activity of six recombinant amps, the purified supernatants were assayed using a radial diffusion assay. as shown in figure  <dig>  there were large halos around the six amps, indicating that all six amps had specific bactericidal activities against e. coli atcc <dig>  m. luteus or s. cerevisiae. no inhibition zones were seen around the negative control spots. the recombinant amps were clearly bioactive and very effective in killing these sensitive strains.

discussion
we have described a new method for cloning and expressing amp genes. the desired amps are amplified using orf-specific primers with flanking sequences identical to the two ends of a linearized vector. the pcr product and the linearized vector are then cotransformed into e. coli cells, where the orf is incorporated into the vector in vivo. short amps can even directly incorporate into the linearized vector through self-ligation. unlike conventional methods that use restriction enzymes or site-specific recombinases, pcr products could be seamlessly assembled without the need for specific sequences for ligation or site-specific recombination  <cit> . this system is more efficient than cloning methods requiring ligase  <cit>  and will be useful for standard dna cloning and for constructing genome-scale clone resources that facilitate functional analysis  <cit> .

most amp genes are very small  and it is difficult to identify recombinant plasmids containing these genes. we, therefore, incorporated the gfp reporter gene into the expression vector to enable convenient recombinant colony picking.

amps expressed as npro fusions are deposited as insoluble proteins in inclusion bodies. this greatly increases yield due to resistance to proteolytic degradation. during refolding in vitro, eddie self-cleaved at the specific site and the six target peptides were released. our construct also encodes the  <dig> affinity tag, preceding the coding regions of eddie, to enable fast and straightforward purification using ni2+-chelating affinity chromatography after refolding. the target peptides could be easily purified to homogeneity.

these results validated this high throughput amp subcloning method. using this method, we successfully cloned  <dig> peptides into the expression vector and identified about  <dig> new amps from brassica napus cdna libraries that showed antimicrobial activities . this approach, combined with bioinformatic analyses of genome and est sequence data, will be useful in screening for new amps.

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, this is a simple, reliable, automated, robust, flexible and low-cost expression cloning approach in which pcr fragments are fused into an expression vector without unwanted amino acids. this strategy advances the methodologies available for amp prokaryote expression. the main barriers to amp expression, such as, codon preference, the intrinsic antimicrobial activity of amps to host cells, and inefficient production of amps owing to proteolytic degradation, are overcome by this expression system.

