BACKGROUND
eukaryotes are natural hosts of multiple pathogens. consequently, host immune systems have evolved efficient responses to threats of a different nature, such as viruses, bacteria or eukaryotic parasites. in vertebrates, adaptive immune mechanisms and antibody-mediated defences confer pathogen-specific responses  <cit> . conversely, invertebrates lack these adaptive immune defences and rely primarily on innate immunity; they therefore have long been considered rather non-specific in their immune response. however, as insect immunological research has progressed, the specificity of insect antimicrobial action has become well established  <cit> , with evidence of immune memory  <cit>  and pathogen-genotype to host-genotype interactions demonstrated in insect models  <cit> .

eusocial insects, including honey bees , establish large colonies comprised of thousands of related individuals, living at high density, sharing food in extended interactions and very high nest homeostasis; this lifestyle provides advantages in terms of social immunity  <cit>  but also facilitates microbe transmission within the colony and promotes multiple infections  <cit> . additionally, comparative genomics has revealed a loss of canonical immune genes in bees of social and solitary lifestyle compared to other insects such as flies, nasonia vitripennis and tribolium castaneum, that questioned the ability of bees’ immune system to respond specifically and efficiently to diverse, emerging pathogens  <cit> . indeed, parasites and pathogens are considered one of the major factors driving global losses of honey bee colonies , which in turn threaten plant pollination, which is an important ecosystem service carried out by both managed and wild bees  <cit> . key eukaryotic honey bee pathogens include two microsporidian gut parasites: nosema apis, which primarily infects the western honey bee a. mellifera, and nosema ceranae, which was first described as a pathogen of the eastern honey bee apis cerana and more recently has become the predominant microsporidial pathogen infecting a. mellifera  <cit> . single-stranded rna viruses represent another key group of honey bee pathogens  <cit> . several of these viruses are transmitted by varroa destructor, an invasive ectoparasitic mite that switched host from a. cerana to a. mellifera in the past half century  <cit> . the ensuing shift of viruses from oral to vectored transmission by varroa has modified the epidemiology and potentially increased the virulence of viral diseases such as deformed wing virus, thereby producing a significant threat to honey bee populations . importantly, multiple pathogens and parasites may interact while co-infecting honey bees to modify the dynamic of their infection  <cit> , and potentially increasing host mortality  <cit> .

understanding the molecular interactions between the honey bee and its pathogens is crucial in revealing their role in host health and, ultimately, colony losses  <cit> . recent advances in genome sequencing technologies and improvements in genome annotation of the honey bee have facilitated fine scale mapping of bee immune responses against multiple pathogens and parasites at the genomic level  <cit> . several studies examining the transcriptional response of honey bees to their primary pathogens, namely nosema, varroa and viruses, have already provided considerable insight into the molecular mechanisms mediating host-parasite interactions , yet these studies have also revealed idiosyncrasies across datasets.

analysis of multiple transcriptome datasets provides not only the opportunity to detect subtle changes in gene expression, but also to highlight commonalities in host responses. recent studies in mosquitoes and humans have demonstrated the power of meta-analyses to reveal key host responses to multiple pathogen infections . to comprehensively characterize the interactions between honey bees and their major pathogens and pests, we performed a meta-analysis of the transcriptional responses to nosema, varroa and viruses. we collected the gene expression profiles of  <dig>  genes across  <dig> published and new transcriptome datasets of experimentally infected or parasitized honey bees, and utilized statistical and bioinformatics analyses that we newly developed  to perform a synthesis of gene expression patterns from multiple studies and platforms. this resulted in a robust analysis that,  identified common genes and pathways regulated in response to different pathogens,  identified genes and pathways uniquely regulated in response to one pathogen in a particular body part or tissue, and  enabled building a gene co-expression network to identify regulatory genes and new gene interactions within the honey bee transcriptome. our analysis provides new insights into the molecular and physiological mechanisms that underpin the interactions between honey bees and their major pathogens.

RESULTS
multivariate analysis
we performed a multidimensional scaling analysis to visualize the spread of the  <dig> transcriptome datasets. this showed that gene expression levels vary less within a study than between studies and suggests that gene expression profiles are markedly influenced by experimental design . thus, comparisons across studies to find commonly and consistently regulated gene expression patterns are undoubtedly hindered by this large amount of variation, highlighting the importance of performing a meta-analysis with appropriate bioinformatics approaches to obtain robust and reproducible results.

rank product analysis
previous comparative analyses of honey bee immune responses across transcriptome datasets simply involved determining if there was a significant overlap in the differentially expressed gene lists from different studies  <cit> . however, the significant variation in expression levels between studies  undoubtedly reduces the power of such comparisons. thus, we employed a rank product analysis to identify sets of genes that are significantly differentially expressed across the  <dig> transcriptomes datasets we collected. the rank product analysis is a non-parametric statistic that identifies genes that are consistently highly ranked in a number of datasets, based on the gene expression fold changes.

in total, we found  <dig> genes with significant differential expression across datasets, categorized by   <dig> genes with significant increased expression  across datasets,   <dig> with significant decreased expression  across datasets and   <dig> genes with significant differential expression , up-regulated in some studies, down in others . note that using this rank product analysis, a gene may be statistically significantly up-regulated across all  <dig> datasets but still be down-regulated in one or more datasets . in fact, subsets of up-regulated genes  and down-regulated genes  were also categorized as differentially-regulated . notably, one gene, encoding the antimicrobial peptide  hymenoptaecin, was present in all three categories due to its extreme differential expression  across all datasets .fig.  <dig> heat maps illustrating the expression levels  of the  <dig> significantly regulated genes across the  <dig> transcriptome datasets. genes are categorized as  <dig> up-regulated genes ,  <dig> down-regulated genes , and  <dig> differentially regulated  genes . orange shows increased expression and blue decreased expression after pathogen infection. top classification is n for nosema infection, n/v for nosema and rna virus co-infection, v for virus, and m for varroa mite . numbers at the bottom correspond to dataset numbers in table  <dig>  each row represents the differential expression of the same gene across all  <dig> datasets. in each category, genes are ordered following the arithmetic means of their ranks displayed in the right column of the heat map. note the presence of genes showing decreased expression in some datasets although found as statistically up-regulated across datasets, and vice-versa




gene evolutionary rate
we compared the evolutionary rate, obtained from the database orthodb and measured as the average of protein sequence identities from pairwise alignments across  <dig> bee genomes  <cit> , of genes that were significantly differentially expressed across the transcriptome datasets and genes that were not differentially expressed. genes showing significant differential expression across the transcriptome datasets exhibited a higher evolutionary rate than non-differentially expressed genes , suggesting rapid evolution of genes responding to pathogen infection. all three categories of differentially expressed genes showed significantly higher evolutionary rates than non-differentially expressed genes , while no difference was observed between the different categories of regulated genes. note that an analysis of the dn/ds ratios may have provided more insights into the type of selection  but this was beyond the scope of this manuscript.fig.  <dig> comparison of the evolutionary rate between genes showing significant differential expression and genes without significant differential expression across the  <dig> datasets. relative evolutionary rates on the y-axis are quantified from pairwise alignments of the protein sequences, and represent the average of inter-species protein sequence identities normalized to the average identity of all inter-species orthologs from orthodb  <cit> . the vertical black lines along the median and mean values of each category represent the standard deviation  and the 95% confidence intervals . horizontally, the width of each violin box represents the density of the data values, i.e. the distribution of the data along the y axes, for each category




specific host responses
we explored the specific response of honey bees to pathogens using our newly developed directed rank product analysis. by this method, we adjusted the rank product analysis approach to identifying genes whose expression followed a specific pattern. this new method consists in defining a theoretical gene expression profile corresponding to selected parameters , and identifies genes exhibiting a similar expression profile. here, we identified genes differentially expressed in bees infected by one pathogen type but non-differentially expressed in bees infected by other pathogens.

we first identified genes specifically involved in the response to nosema infection in abdominal tissues: midgut, fat body, or complete abdomen . the functional analysis of  <dig> genes with increased expression upon nosema infection revealed overrepresentation of genes encoding enzymes and proteins involved in metabolic processes, catalytic activities, and transporter activity , while genes related to cell components were overrepresented among  <dig> down-regulated genes after nosema infection .

to explore the specific response of honey bees to viruses, we examined the transcriptome datasets of honey bees experimentally infected by rna viruses or parasitized by varroa mites and, thus, by viruses. we justify merging varroa and virus datasets with the idea that the impact of varroa may stem largely from damage to the cuticle during feeding as well as from transmitted viruses, thus suggesting little immediate impact of sole varroa parasitism on immune gene expression of the host  <cit> . we identified  <dig> genes differentially expressed specifically in response to varroa/virus treatments . the functional analysis of genes regulated after parasitism by varroa and infection by viruses did not show any significantly overrepresented go terms for up-regulated genes, but the overrepresentation of nutrient reservoir activity for down-regulated genes .

gene co-expression network
our directed rank product method enabled us to detect genes with similar and opposite expression profiles across the  <dig> transcriptome datasets and to build a gene co-expression network. we found a total of  <dig>  significant inter-gene connections, with nearly half of the  <dig>  genes  interconnected within one major module, while  <dig>  genes remained unconnected and  <dig> genes were placed within small modules of  <dig> to  <dig> genes. the majority  of inter-gene connections were observed within the major module, with  <dig>  positive  and  <dig>  negative  inter-gene connections . notably,  <dig> out of the  <dig> significantly differentially expressed genes from the rank product analysis were identified within the major module, illustrating the tight interconnectivity of the expression regulation of these genes.fig.  <dig> gene co-expression network. a main module of the gene co-expression network, representing  <dig>  interconnected genes. red nodes show genes significantly regulated across the  <dig> transcriptome datasets, and black nodes show non-significantly regulated genes. square nodes show the most connected  genes. grey edges illustrate positive correlation between two gene expression profiles while blue edges show negative correlations. a file available at https://idata.idiv.de/ddm/data/showdata/ <dig> provides the possibility of navigating within the network. b scatter plot representing the total number of connections  over the number of connections to significantly regulated genes across the  <dig> transcriptome datasets for the most  connected genes . red triangles show significantly regulated hub genes, while black dots show non-significantly regulated hub genes. two hub genes with high connectivity to significantly regulated genes are shown: a kynurenine/alpha-aminoadipate aminotransferase , and a l-lactate dehydrogenase . c main module from the co-expression network of the immune genes of the honey bee. coloured nodes represent immune genes from the toll , jak/stat , apoptosis , rnai  and imd  pathways . oval nodes show genes with low connectivity, squares show genes with high connectivity . genes significantly regulated across the  <dig> transcriptome datasets have a red outline. black edges represent positive co-expression and blue edges are negative co-expression. in insets, the expression profiles across the  <dig> transcriptome datasets  of the four immune hub genes , accompanied by expression profiles of genes with which they are connected. orange profiles display similar profiles  and blue reflect opposite profiles . the y-axis displays the relative ranks of differential expression level, from up-regulated  to down-regulated 




we identified the top 5% most interconnected genes from all  <dig>  genes of this study, which represents  <dig> hub genes with at least  <dig> connections to other genes . notably,  <dig> hub genes were significantly differentially expressed across the  <dig> transcriptome datasets , and differentially expressed genes were significantly more connected than non-differentially expressed genes .

to identify novel candidate genes involved in immune regulation, we collected all interactions involving canonical immune genes and generated an immune network composed of  <dig> modules containing at least  <dig> interconnected genes. the major module of this immune network contained  <dig> genes, including  <dig> immune genes from all immune pathways . a total of  <dig> significantly regulated genes from the rank product analysis were present in this immune network, with only one remaining outside the major module.

discussion
similar to other eukaryotes, the honey bee is host to many different types of pathogens and harbours in its genome an immune repertoire to provide a specific immune response to this diversity of pathogens  <cit> . our meta-analysis of honey bee transcriptional responses to a diverse set of pathogens identified a core set of genes that is common to honey bee anti-pathogen responses, as well as suites of genes that respond specifically to different pathogens and parasites .fig.  <dig> diagram of the canonical innate immune response of the honey bee. gene names in colour-filled boxes show evidence of significant regulation after infection by nosema , or infection by rna viruses and/or infestation by varroa mites  or all pathogens . orange lines surrounding a box show increased expression and blue surrounding lines indicate decreased expression after pathogen infection –mixed orange and blue lines show genes found differentially-regulated, either up- or down-regulated across the datasets. notably, the amp defensin- <dig> exhibited increased expression in most of the datasets, but a decreased expression in the abdominal tissues of honey bees infected by nosema. therefore, a mixed background and outline colour are displayed. green surrounding lines show genes found non-significantly regulated in this analysis. solid lines with arrows show gene interactions reported in the literature, and dotted arrows indicates new potential interactions inferred from our gene co-expression network analysis




general expression patterns
multivariate analysis indicated that there was a wide between-study variation, likely due to a combination of factors, including variation in technology, experimental approach , tissues examined, method of analysis, and host and pathogen genotypes. these substantial differences may explain the limited overlap observed previously between differentially expressed gene lists from different studies  <cit> . this underscores the importance of our approach, which aims to provide a general methodological and statistical synthesis of studies in order to reveal commonalities in host response to pathogen invasion. it is also a cautionary note for the interpretation of gene expression patterns from single experimental studies, which may in part be due to the idiosyncrasies of a specific experimental paradigm.

common host response
the common response to multiple pathogens identified in our meta-analysis is characterized by the increased expression of several immune genes, including all canonical amps, genes encoding cuticular proteins , which likely respond to tissue damage by pathogens, and heat-shock related proteins , which may serve as markers of stress during infection response  <cit> . however, substantially more genes showed decreased expression across transcriptome datasets in response to pathogen infections. among them we found genes encoding enzymes involved in carbohydrate metabolism, four cytochrome oxidase p450s, the egg yolk protein precursor vitellogenin , the major royal jelly proteins mrjp <dig> and mrjp <dig> and two transcriptional repressors hairy and knirps. this reduced expression of genes involved in catalytic and metabolic activities may illustrate the cost of the infection, i.e. a dysregulation as a consequence of pathogen insult as opposed to host adaptive response, or a manipulative response of the host by the pathogen to enhance its own replication. however, several genes regularly reported as responding to pathogen assault were also down-regulated; these genes encode serine proteases, gmc oxidoreductases, toll-like receptor  <dig>  the putative antimicrobial peptide irp <dig>  and glucose oxidase, an enzyme involved in colony food sterilisation and a major component of social immunity in honey bees  <cit> . down-regulation of immune genes might represent an adaptive manipulation of the host by infecting pathogens, although this remains to be demonstrated.

an additional  <dig> genes showed significant differential expression but were inconsistently up- and down-regulated across the  <dig> transcriptome datasets. among them we found many cytochrome oxidase p450s and immune genes, including the recognition receptors pgrp-s <dig>  pgrp-s <dig>  b-gluc <dig>  sp <dig> and serpin- <dig>  and the antimicrobial lys- <dig>  the gene encoding caspase-like, involved in apoptosis, and ninjurin-1-like, a transmembrane protein induced by the toll immune pathway and involved in non-apoptotic cell death in drosophila  <cit> . other genes with potential immune activity also showed significantly variable regulation, such as the gmc oxidoreductases  <dig> and  <dig>  the apidermins apd- <dig> and apd- <dig> and the hemolymph apolipophorin-iii-like protein.

functional analysis of the  <dig> significantly regulated genes showed an overrepresentation of genes associated with extracellular regions and response to biotic stimulus , metabolic processes, and nucleotide binding activity . strikingly, breaking down the functional analysis into genes with increased expression and genes with decreased expression, we found no significant go terms linked to genes with increased expression, while immune, metabolic and regulatory functions were significantly overrepresented in down-regulated genes. whether this is an adaptive response of the host or a face of immune suppression driven by pathogens is currently not possible to determine.table  <dig> functional analysis of significantly regulated genes across transcriptome datasets

no significant terms
this table shows the overrepresented goslim terms for all regulated genes  and the categories; up-regulated, down-regulated and differentially-regulated. note that no overrepresented go term was obtained for up-regulated genes. gene lists corresponding to these go terms are available in additional file 2: tables st1-st3




interestingly, the common use of immune genes against different types of pathogens may be a consequence of the reduced set of canonical immune genes observed in bees relative to other insect taxa  <cit> , and may reflect a need for a more general rather than specific response against multiple pathogens. however, common host responses have also been described in other models, such as in mosquitoes and humans . in humans, this general response to pathogens has been suggested to constitute an ‘alarm signal’, which may be triggered by different cell types, to maximize the detection and the response of infection  <cit> . the role of the common host response in honey bees remains to be determined.

genes involved in this common host response  showed higher evolutionary rate among bees than genes which did not show significant expression differences across the transcriptome datasets. notably, b-gluc <dig> has recently been shown to be evolving under positive selection in the honey bee  <cit> . recent analysis suggested that sociality and the increased pathogen pressure in colonies densely packed with worker bees may be a cause of such rapid evolution in bumble bee immune genes  <cit> . however, rapid evolution of immune genes may not only arise as a consequence of positive evolution, but also from relaxed selection  <cit> . indeed, honey bees do not rely exclusively on canonical immune genes to fight pathogen infections, but can also employ other mechanisms, such as social immunity  <cit> .

specific response to pathogens
to characterize the specific response of the honey bee to its major pathogens, we identified genes whose expression profile across transcriptome datasets is most similar to a theoretical expression profile, i.e. genes that are up or down-regulated in response to a pathogen type, microsporidia or varroa/virus. this method, named here ‘directed rank product analysis’, combines the identification of genes following a specific expression pattern by subtraction of a gene’s differential expression scores , within the statistical framework of the rank product analysis. this method takes advantage of the rank product analysis so that it can detect biologically relevant gene expression changes from heterogeneous datasets obtained from different platforms, microarrays and sequencing  <cit> .

despite the common gene expression response identified above, we found important differences in the transcription responses of honey bees to nosema and varroa/virus infections. the specific response to nosema includes increased expression of several genes involved in the regulation of cell death by autophagy or apoptosis, such as atg <dig>  loc <dig>  metap <dig> and the apoptosis inhibitor dnr <dig>  which confirms the importance of these mechanisms in mediating the interaction between the honey bee and microsporidia  <cit> . other immune genes were up-regulated upon nosema infection, including: the transcriptional co-factor akirin and lys- <dig>  involved in the imd pathway, laccase- <dig>  important for melanisation  <cit>  and the venom proteins melittin and secapin, known for their antimicrobial activities  <cit> . conversely, the expression of amp def- <dig> and the serine protease sp <dig> were reduced in nosema infected honey bees. two chitin-binding genes showed contrasting response to nosema infection: while chitinase  <dig>  exhibited increased expression, the cuticular protein chitotriosidase- <dig> exhibited reduced expression. this may reflect either a direct effect against nosema or a response to tissue damage induced by the pathogen.

the specific transcriptional-level response against varroa/virus treatments was characterized by the differential expression of genes from the imd  and toll pathways . although historically described as anti-bacterial and anti-fungal  <cit> , these pathways were recently shown to exhibit differential expression upon viral infection, and potentially playing active roles in the antiviral defence of insects  <cit> , including in honey bees  <cit> . particularly, the toll pathway nf-κb homolog dorsal-1a was shown to be transcriptionally induced in worker honey bees parasitized by varroa mites, suggesting that dorsal-1a is involved in the control of dwv infections  <cit> . while activation of the imd and toll pathways induces higher expression of amps, the antiviral roles of amps are not well characterized  <cit> . alternatively, these pathways may possibly control the proliferation of haemocytes, which are important for phagocytosis in the insect cellular immune response, and potentially play a role in the antiviral response  <cit> . changes in expression levels of amps after virus infection may be a consequence of activation of the toll and imd pathways, without having a direct functional role against viruses.

importantly, we did not observe increased expression of genes associated with the rnai pathway , though this is an important component of the antiviral response in insects  <cit>  and observed in two studies included in this meta-analysis  <cit> . the action of the rnai pathway may be transient, and thus not always captured by transcriptome analysis. up-regulation of these genes may be detectable only during the early stages of viral infection, which would explain an inconsistent effect in our dataset, since host transcriptomes were measured at different times post-infection. we also found the increased expression of genes encoding a transcription factor , translation factors  and post-transcriptional modification proteins , which may illustrate a general transcriptome dysregulation following infection by viruses  <cit> . finally, we found the gene encoding vg to be down-regulated following viral infection, which may reflect a lack of regulation of nutrients and/or an impaired physiology of the host  <cit> . vg is also known to mediate the immune response in honey bees  <cit> . importantly, lower expression of vg and increased expression of malvolio  –also observed in response to varroa/virus– are associated with accelerated behavioural maturation and foraging activity in worker honey bees  <cit> . the altered expression levels of these regulators in infected individuals, and subsequent induction of precocious foraging, is likely an adaptive response against pathogen transmission within the colony  <cit> , one of many potentially adaptive behavioural responses against pathogens  <cit> .

gene co-expression network
in addition to identifying shared and unique responses to pathogens, our large dataset enabled the exploration of gene co-expression and the identification of new regulatory genes. among the most interconnected  genes, we found several genes encoding ribosomal proteins and nadh dehydrogenase enzymes. but most importantly, we identified two genes with many inter-gene connections with other differentially expressed genes: a kynurenine/alpha-aminoadipate aminotransferase gene  and an l-lactate dehydrogenase gene , exhibiting  <dig> and  <dig> connections, respectively. the expression of both genes were significantly increased in most transcriptome datasets, and connected to a large proportion of genes that exhibited reduced expression . we hypothesize that they exert considerable influence on the overall transcriptional response to pathogen infection and thus may be important mediators of the common host response against diverse pathogens. interestingly, the aminotransferase loc <dig> was recently shown to be involved in trans-generational immune priming in the bumblebee b. terrestris  <cit> , also suggesting a putative immune regulation function in this species.

more specifically, our immune gene co-expression network highlights the interconnection of all immune pathways. we observed the tight co-expression of the genes encoding canonical amps, together with other genes with antimicrobial properties , suggesting a concomitant action after pathogen invasion and/or an identical regulatory mechanism. expression of these amps was positively correlated with expression of the genes encoding the recognition protein pgrp-s <dig> and the serine protease sp <dig>  both of which are involved in signalling within the toll pathway  <cit> . importantly, new immune genes were identified, including the ortholog of the drosophila gene pirk , a negative regulator of the immune imd pathway  <cit> , co-expressed here with pgrp-s <dig> 

four immune genes are amongst the most connected genes: pgrp-s <dig>  serpin- <dig>  socs- <dig> and drk. pgrp-s <dig> and the serine protease inhibitor serpin- <dig>  involved in the toll pathway, are known for their immune regulatory activities  <cit> . in the immune network generated by our meta-analysis, this activity is illustrated by their numerous negative correlations with the expression profiles of other genes. the suppressor of cytokine signalling, socs- <dig>  is also known to have a negative feedback effect on the jak/stat pathway  <cit> . however any putative immune regulation by drk, which is important for the activation of mapk signalling in drosophila  <cit> , remains unclear. the mechanisms and possible applications behind these large regulatory effects within the honey bee immune system remain to be investigated.

CONCLUSIONS
the accumulation of genome-wide studies has provided the opportunity for the analysis of the commonalities and idiosyncrasies in gene expression in host response to pathogen attack. here, we synthesised  <dig> transcriptome datasets from experimentally infected honey bees and developed a new bioinformatics method, the directed rank product, to analyse gene expression profiles in order to identify the host specific responses to a diverse set of pathogens, and build a robust co-expression network. although this method does not account for the amplitude of gene expression changes, using a rank product-based analysis has the advantage of enabling use of data from different platforms  in a single statistical analysis.

importantly, our analyses revealed a core set of genes involved in a common host response to phylogenetically distinct pathogens, yet also enabled identification of genes involved in pathogen specific host immune responses. for instance, we showed that conserved pathways are involved in response to multiple pathogens, with the cellular immune response playing a key role in interactions with nosema in abdominal tissues, while humoral immune pathways seem to have important antiviral activities. this analysis also broadens the definition of honey bee immune response by identifying genes encoding proteins, such as melittin and secapin, which have not been considered part of the canonical immune response. using a gene co-expression analysis, we also identified potentially important mediators and regulators of anti-pathogen responses, including the toll-pathway genes serpin- <dig> and pgrp-s <dig>  the jak/stat modulators drk and socs <dig>  and the newly characterized kynurenine/alpha-aminoadipate aminotransferase  and an l-lactate dehydrogenase . overall, our synthesis helps to pinpoint key host genes and pathways that respond to phylogenetically diverse pathogens. this gene list will likely be an important source for future functional studies and potentially for selecting more resilient honey bee stocks  <cit> . more generally, the statistical and bioinformatics approaches developed in this study can be broadly applied to synthesize information across transcriptomic datasets to address a wide array of biological questions.

