BACKGROUND
the uterine cervical epithelium protects the upper reproductive tract from insults providing a physical barrier, secretions containing bactericidal and virucidal agents and a pathogen-dependent direct immunomodulation  <cit> . during estrous, it takes part in direct sperm-epithelium interaction  <cit>  as well as in the signal reception from seminal fluid  <cit> .

to elucidate cell type-specific actions of hormones and cytokines, signal transduction pathways, cell-cell interactions, and gene expression in these highly specialized cells, model systems resembling the original tissue need to be developed.

cervical cell cultures of a variety of species are already applied in various fields of science. they serve as in vitro systems for basic research  <cit> , in oncological and microbiological studies  <cit>  as well as for assessment of product-and pharmaco-toxicity  <cit> .

the cells used in these studies are mainly derived from human ectocervical tissue, which in vivo is covered by a polarized, multilayered epithelium. however, the cells  are cultured as monolayers and therefore lost these tissue specific characteristics. maintenance of multilayered growth and polarity is pivotal for the in vivo-like functionality of the ectocervical epithelium in vitro, as apical polarity forms physical paracellular and functional barriers based on cell-cell contacts  <cit> .

cell culture models used in basic research as well as in toxicology ideally should meet two requirements at the same time: to a) be easily and continuously available and b) resemble the in vivo properties of the specific cell type. therefore, we investigated, if porcine material from the slaughterhouse could provide to establish a suitable and differentiated cell culture model of the uterine cervical epithelium. pigs for slaughter are usually healthy and roughly of the same age. during the last decades the pig also became one of the favoured models for humans, since anatomy, physiology and genetics are highly comparable  <cit> . the mean length of estrous cycle and hormone profiles as well as cervical mucus production also resemble the human characteristics  <cit> .

in order to provide a practical tool to analyze the complex pathways within the cervical epithelium, the aim of this study was to establish an accessible model of the porcine ectocervical epithelium based on tissue derived from slaughterhouse. cell isolation and culture conditions were optimized in order to support proliferation and differentiation in vitro. the culture was characterized by specific markers to describe the cell type, state of differentiation and functionality in comparison to the native tissue.

RESULTS
cell transport and isolation
transport conditions from the slaughterhouse to the laboratory  turned out to be a crucial factor for cell viability. tissue that was transported in growth medium at room temperature showed best survival of the epithelial cells.

pure epithelial cervical cells could reproducibly be isolated only by outgrowth from tissue explants  as other previously described cell isolation methods did not lead to a pure and viable primary cell population in our hands.

primary cells can be passaged and cryopreserved using standard protocols.

after passaging the cervical cells up to five times, the cultured cells were still viable and showed some epithelial characteristics . however, the epithelial morphology was completely lost in passage  <dig> . already in passage one morphological alterations can be found in some parts of the monolayer .

initial media testing
growth media were evaluated using a simple morphology score. the growth medium ham's f- <dig> containing 10% fcs, antibiotics, antimycotics and antioxidants gained the highest score of  <dig> points concerning proliferation, the absence of vacuoles and epitheloid phenotype of the grown-out primary cells and cells in passage one .

the highest score achievable was  <dig> points per growth medium 

test of media conditioning and media additives by wst- <dig> assay
conditioning of the growth medium and the addition of media supplements were investigated using cervical cells of passage one. cells cultured in conditioned ham's f- <dig> showed an increase in mitochondrial turnover of wst- <dig> of 12% after  <dig> h and 44% after  <dig> h relative to the unconditioned growth medium. supplementation of egf and porcine insulin to the conditioned ham's f- <dig> led to a two-fold higher mitochondrial activity after  <dig> h and  <dig> h compared to the conditioned growth medium without any hormone substitution . other additives or other additive combinations led to a less pronounced increase  or stagnation  of mitochondrial activity.

differentiated, multilayered cell culture of cervical cells
primary cervical cells and cells of passage one were cultured on millicell inserts either with access to growth medium from both basolateral and apical or in air-liquid interface with access to growth medium only from basolateral. we analyzed the respective setups histologically after three weeks considering in vivo-like morphology.

a differentiated phenotype was established when culturing primary cells in an air-liquid interface  for three weeks. the cells showed a reproducible discontinuously stratified phenotype with up to six layers. when cultured conventionally with access to growth medium from both basolateral and apical the epithelial cells were mainly columnar and also showed partially multilayered growth. however, height of the multilayer was increased by growth in air liquid interface . after passaging, the epithelial cells grew as single-layer consisting of non-polarized cells. passaged cells showed multilayered growth only in very few areas of the membranes .

characterization of the in vivo-like cell culture
purity of the epithelial cell culture and differentiation was shown by immunohistochemistry using antibodies against keratin, as epithelial marker, and beta catenin, as part of adherens junctions. cervical epithelial cells cultured on membranes in air-liquid interface for three weeks showed keratin-expression in the cytoplasm comparable to the ex vivo-epithelium . likewise, beta catenin could be visualized near the cellular membrane on cell culture and tissue sections . in the tissue samples beta catenin expression is detectable in all layers of the porcine cervical epithelium, but the intensity of the immunostaining is lower in the superficial cell layer. this difference could not be detected in the in vitro-model.

to show cervix specific function mucopolysaccharides were visualised. the multilayered cell cultures showed a blue signal in the apical layers after alcian blue staining comparable to the in vivo situation .

discussion
epithelial cells of different tissues or species diverge substantially in their culture requirements. thus, in vivo-like culture of epithelial cells necessitates optimization of the entire culturing process including transport, isolation, medium composition and culture conditions. in the present study we established a new protocol for a differentiated cell culture system of the porcine cervical epithelium, based on easily accessible slaughterhouse material. the morphology and tested functional markers of our culture system are comparable to the native tissue as shown by histology, immunohistochemistry and alcian blue staining. the use of fibroblast-conditioned medium supported proliferation of cervical epithelial monolayers suggesting that stromal growth factors or cytokines released into the medium are required for cell growth in these epithelia. the supplementation of the conditioned medium with egf further optimized proliferation and mitochondrial activity of the cervical epithelial cells. insulin intensified the proliferative effect of egf, as cellular metabolic effects of egf  also include stimulation of glucose metabolism  <cit> . providing an air-liquid interface to the primary cells promoted the formation of multilayers. in contrast to reports on cervical epithelial cells from other species  <cit>  passaging the primary cells, however, caused disadvantageous effects. already in passage one cells showed a decreased potential to form multilayers and extended passaging led to the loss of epitheloid cell character.

cervical epithelial cells play a relevant role in nowadays research as cell cultures derived from this tissue are frequently used as in vitro models. the level of differentiation, however, varies widely between different culturing systems.

cervical epithelial cells cultured as monolayers on solid support dedifferentiate  <cit>  and are more susceptible to certain toxic agents than ex vivo tissue cultures or animal models  <cit> . therefore, a fully differentiated three-dimensional in vitro system of the human cervicovaginal epithelium was recently established for toxicological studies  <cit> . this homologous system is surely ideal for human research, but the general availability and the resulting small number of possible biological replicates are limiting factors for its usability. advanced cell culture technologies like the rotating wall vessel bioreactor showed to provide differentiated vaginal epithelial cells from immortalized cells  <cit> . however, special equipment is needed to conduct this technique.

the porcine cells used for our model of the cervical epithelium are unlimitedly accessible and maintenance as well as handling of the cells can be carried out in a standard cell culture lab. the differentiated cell culture resembles physiological properties of the native tissue and can, therefore, be called in vivo-like model.

however, with regard to the different scientific questions addressable with this model system  we did not carry out a functional characterization of the cell culture. it is now essential to describe and validate its specific functional properties by focusing directly on the particular processes under investigation.

CONCLUSIONS
we developed an in vitro system modelling the mammalian cervical epithelium that is cost-effective and easily available as it is based on slaughterhouse by-products. it is a practical tool in veterinary science and might also promote human reproductive research.

