BACKGROUND
public health surveillance is the continuous, systematic collection, analysis and interpretation of health-related data for planning, implementing and evaluating public health practice. it can serve as an effective vehicle for monitoring epidemiology of various health problems, including infectious  and chronic  health conditions, documenting the impact of interventions and/or tracking progress of specific health goals, and serve as an early warning system for impending public health emergencies  <cit> . as emerging and re-emerging pathogens, such as the recent ebola virus outbreaks in west africa  <cit>  and the middle eastern respiratory syndrome  outbreaks  <cit> , become more prevalent, developing effective public health surveillance systems is a priority for ensuring national security. additionally, with the continued increase in the number of asthma, diabetes and other chronic disease conditions, there is an immediate need to develop tools that can aid decision makers  with critical information that can eventually translate into effective health policies. with an estimated 50- <dig> million patients diagnosed every year and continued growth of medical expenses-related to these conditions, the combined effect of these diseases is an extraordinary socioeconomic burden, which can only be overcome by developing effective public health surveillance systems.

public health surveillance is a big data problem
at the core of public health surveillance is the availability of health-related data, which can be broadly classified into two classes:  direct sources, which include health records such as data from clinical and emergency visits, poison control centers, laboratory results, hospitals, etc. and  indirect sources, which include health relevant information from school attendance/closure reports, sales data , news feeds and social media. taken together, these different datasets can exceed several petabytes of data that have to be integrated and analyzed to obtain even basic insights into how diseases spread within geographically separated populations.

with the digitization of health-related information and web-based platforms that promote self-reporting , there has been an exponential growth of data available for public health surveillance. current platforms for biosurveillance make use of event-based, unstructured data such as news feed aggregators and other publicly available data to monitor for emerging infectious disease spread within geographically distributed populations. examples of such systems include the biosense  <dig>  program  <cit> , gphin   <cit> , phin   <cit> , promed-mail  <cit> , healthmap  <cit> , google flu trends, bio-caster, epispider  <cit> , ears , bcon , phess , lahva , essence   <cit> , rods   <cit> , and geis   <cit> . a detailed overview of these systems and their applications is further described in shmueli and burkhom  <cit> . these systems include tools for natural language processing  for parsing unstructured textual data, basic statistical analyses tools, time-series counts/ratios as well as geographic information system  based visualization that can summarize to the end-user the nature or urgency of an emerging infectious disease. it must be noted that most tools developed are specific to infectious diseases; although the tools can be used to analyze other non-infectious diseases, they are very rarely utilized for monitoring such conditions.

other public health monitoring systems such as google flu trends  <cit>  utilize internet search patterns of users to predict the incidence of flu at local, regional  and national levels. while initial studies have shown that tools that make use of "proxy" datasets can serve as useful monitors for emerging diseases  <cit> , recent studies have demonstrated that the estimates from internet search patterns can over-estimate the severity of the outbreak  <cit> . self-reporting tools such as micro-blogging and social media are also becoming effective proxies for public health surveillance  <cit> , although such datasets also have relatively higher noise and teasing out relevant information for specific disease conditions can be quite challenging  <cit> .

in recent years, the availability of electronic health records   <cit>  and electronic healthcare reimbursement claims   <cit>  have proven to be valuable resources for collecting, monitoring and analyzing public health-related questions. while ehrs refer to an individual patient's medical history collected and processed at individual medical facilities , claims refer to electronic records of claim transactions processed by retail pharmacies . ehr and claims provide rich and timely information regarding prevailing medical conditions in any given geographic area; however, the use of ehr and claims for public health surveillance is still in its early stages. privacy and security-related concerns, data disparity across diverse/individual clinics/hospitals, as well the sheer complexity involved in aggregating and processing such large-scale structured datasets can pose significant data analytic challenges for even simple public health surveillance tasks  <cit> .

thus, within the context of public health surveillance, the availability of these diverse datasets pose two immediate 'big data' challenges:  scalable, seamless and uniform access to diverse datasets and  scalable data analytic techniques that can provide rich feedback to the end-user regarding emerging public health emergencies  <cit> . while there is significant agreement within the public health community regarding the use of data analytics and informatics techniques as being central to the success of any biosurveillance program, the development of machine learning and data analytic techniques specifically designed to handle heterogeneous datasets at massive scales has been especially challenging. these challenges can be attributed to the lack of standards and tools that facilitate data/information exchange and secondly, to the lack of available data analytic frameworks that can automatically integrate heterogeneous datasets and analyze them in near real-time to provide insights into emerging public health problems. additionally, the complex etiologies of diseases pose special challenges in developing analytic tools to monitor them. for example, the symptoms of the common flu and a serious outbreak such as west nile virus can be very similar, but teasing out these symptoms from a context specific search of twitter and other social media data can be quite challenging. therefore, there is a need to develop novel machine learning tools that can not only handle large datasets, but can also simultaneously examine heterogeneous data sets to identify emerging patterns of disease spread across geographically distributed regions.

oak ridge biosurveillance toolkit for public health surveillance and dynamics
in this paper, we outline our recent efforts in developing novel machine learning tools for public health surveillance addressing the aforementioned big data challenges  <cit> . the oak ridge biosurveillance toolkit  is being developed as a machine learning platform that processes both direct and indirect data sources by integrating insights from heterogeneous datasets for answering public health surveillance-related queries. in contrast to existing systems where the primary emphasis is on data collection, archival and visualization of specific datasets, orbit is being developed as a distributed, component based platform for novel statistical and machine learning tools that can provide insights into spatial and temporal patterns of public health emergencies. by tightly integrating the machine learning tools with visual analytics interfaces in a web-based framework, orbit allows analysts and other end-users to explore heterogeneous datasets to detect patterns/correlations across different data streams, identify emerging disease outbreaks and forecast outbreaks and monitor control strategies.

we illustrate the applicability of orbit to identify, quantify and describe spatial and temporal patterns of the 2009- <dig> pandemic h1n <dig> flu within the united states  from an infectious disease surveillance perspective. we illustrate how the integration of heterogeneous data sources, including publicly accessible data from the us centers for disease control , openly accessible data from google flu trends and claims obtained from a private organization that consolidates diagnostic and prescription electronic transactions can provide timely and novel information regarding how the 2009- <dig> influenza pandemic affected the entire us. our analysis of these datasets shows that a small number of distinct temporal patterns govern how the pandemic spread throughout the country. additionally, we extract intrinsic multi-scale patterns from the claims data, moving successively from local to regional to national patterns. these patterns depict the process by which the h1n <dig> flu spread across the entire country in distinct waves, each with its own unique temporal and spatial signatures. although this study is a retrospective analysis of the 2009- <dig> flu season, we show that the patterns can also translate into meaningful insights for future years, especially to interpret baselines. taken together, our study provides a summary of orbit capabilities and how it can be used as a scalable platform for public health surveillance.

methods
in this section, we outline how orbit can incorporate claims data to discover spatial and temporal patterns from the 2009- <dig> pandemic h1n <dig> flu season. the description of the orbit framework is provided elsewhere  <cit> . in this paper, we describe the claims data and the use of non-negative matrix factorization  as a novel technique to analyze claims data to automatically discover spatial and temporal patterns.

dataset description
electronic healthcare claims reimbursement data from ims health
ims health is a leading consolidator of claims within the us, collecting over 55- <dig> million claims every week. this proprietary dataset therefore constitutes a unique resource for public health surveillance. two types of claims are collected by ims health:  diagnostic data  which processes claims from over a million medical practitioners/physicians every year received from all parts of the us, including urban and rural areas;  prescription data , which processes prescription claims from retail pharmacies within the us. the claims data consists of over  <dig> billion claims collected annually and represents over  <dig> million unique patients. the rx data consists of over  <dig> billion claims collected annually and provides for a rich resource to monitor and track drug delivery and efficacy across the entire country. ims health uses proprietary technology to protect patient privacy and all of the data available/used for analysis are hipaa-compliant.

for this study, we analyzed the ims health claims data from apr  <dig>   <dig> - mar  <dig>   <dig>  with a total of nearly one billion records. the claims data was processed for flu-related records using the definition shown below:

• flu case definition: include only hospital diagnosed cases of the flu, namely icd <dig> codes 486xx and 488xx.

the definition of the flu corresponds to hospital diagnosed cases of the flu, which provides a specific count in terms of the number of flu cases recorded within any zip code. the reason we focus on this stricter definition is to count only cases that we know would have been diagnosed with the flu and exclude other symptoms that perhaps can bias the observations based on generic symptoms such as sore-throat, cough and fever. for organizing the data based on a specific geographic location, we used the provider's primary five digit zip code that was directly accessible from the claims data. note that this assumption is reasonable, given that the patient's service provider/pharmacy is most likely to be co-located unless the patient remotely consults with his/her provider. in the current study, only  <dig> % of the total records showed different  <dig> digit zip codes for the patient and their service provider.

the claims data is usually reported every day with claims coming into the data warehouse continuously. however, due to claims submission delays by healthcare providers and internal data-processing and cleaning, there is a lag between the service date  versus the date on which the data was actually loaded/processed with the ims health data warehouses. since the spatial resolution of the claims data is at the zip-code level, we defined local metropolitan areas  and the different geographic regions  based on an aggregation of data from these individual zip codes, thus maintaining consistency between the definitions of individual zip codes all the way to the entire nation.

cdc influenza like illnesses network  data
the us cdc maintains information on patient visits to health care providers for influenza like illnesses , which consists of more than  <dig>  outpatient healthcare providers with the ability to track more than  <dig> million patient visits every year  <cit> . the data reported every week consists of the total number of patient visits as well as the total number of patients with ili-like symptoms organized by age groups. ili cases are defined based on observing fever  and a cough/sore throat without a known cause other than influenza. the cdc then baselines these reports based on the state population and defines several metrics for individual geographic regions. these regions, known as the health and human services  regions are summarized in table  <dig>  although there are different forms of ili surveillance including influenza-associated pediatric mortality surveillance and influenza hospitalization network , for this current study, we used the publicly available ilinet data  <cit> .

gis
claims
google flu trends data
the google flu trends  project  <cit>  builds an automated method for discovering influenza-related search queries by aggregating historical logs of online web search queries and developing a log-linear model that estimates the probability that a query is related to ili. this model was validated across cdc-observed ili percentages and made available for the public from http://www.google.org/flutrends/us/#us. we downloaded the weekly information available for the same period covered by the ims health claims data .

using non-negative matrix factorization  to extract spatial and temporal patterns from claims data
one of the many advantages of using claims data for public health surveillance is that it provides information about ili-incidence at individual zip code level resolution. unlike the ilinet data, which statistically aggregates total counts of ili-symptoms over the entire us from vast geographic regions, the claims data can be used to obtain fine-grained details about specific regional variations and how that may have impacted the quick spread of the 2009- <dig> pandemic flu throughout the us. to explore the further use of claims data and to perform a retrospective analysis of the 2009- <dig> pandemic flu within the us, we organized the ili-related data from claims into a matrix a, that has the overall dimensions of nz × nt, where nz represents the total number of zip codes and nt represents the total number of time points .

based on the comparison of the ilinet and gft data presented above, we hypothesize that the flu incidence patterns are categorical in space and time. this is reasonable, especially given the geographic vastness of the us, the spatial  and temporal  resolution of the claims data. given prior knowledge that there are at least three distinct 'peaks' associated with the 2009- <dig> pandemic  <cit> , we want to extract low-dimensional representations for this claims data. further, the flu incidence matrices have non-negative entries . hence, we used non-negative matrix factorization  as a technique to extract low-rank approximations from the claims data.

given a data matrix a with non-negative values, with dimensions nz × nt, nmf finds low-rank approximation  of the form a = wh, where w  captures spatial patterns and h  describes temporal patterns within the data. using the alternate least squares algorithm proposed by paatero, available as part of matlab, we ran nmf for  <dig>  iterations. to identify an appropriate low-rank subspace , we iterated over s =  <dig> . . .  <dig>  dividing the original data into training and testing data. we tracked the residual errors using the frobenius norm for both training and testing data. for each choice of s, we performed a total of  <dig> iterations. once the optimal s was selected, we report the most stable version of the basis matrices  by computing the kl divergence between every pair of the  <dig> instances of w from the training set and picking w with the lowest kl divergence value.

RESULTS
influenza like illnesses -related claims data provide higher spatial and temporal resolution into ili-case counts within the us
one of the primary goals for our study was to quantitatively assess the timeliness and coverage  of the ims health claims data. as part of this exploratory study, we extracted the data as described in the methods section and compared this data with cdc ilinet and gft datasets. note that both cdc ilinet and gft data are known to be correlated  <cit> , however both datasets correspond to different modalities. while the cdc ilinet data is primarily focused on out-patient visits, gft uses search patterns of users to identify patterns of influenza occurrence. in spite of the differences in data collection and curation, we hypothesize that the ims health claims data, based on the case definition used in this current study will closely match the temporal trends observed from the cdc ilinet and gft data.

ili-incidence in claims are consistent with ilinet and gft data across hhs regions
we compared the ili-incidence data at two spatial scales:  the overall country  and the ten hhs regions . to ensure that we were comparing similar quantities, we converted the counts from the ili-incidence rates from claims data into percentages, in a similar way outlined in previous papers. not surprisingly, the overall us ili-incidence rates over time reflects a similar behavior across both the claims and gft data. the average agreement  between the gft and claims data is about  <dig>  , even within individual hhs regions. however, the similarity is less pronounced with respect to the agreement between the cdc ilinet data and ims health claims data; we speculate that the publicly available information from ilinet has several incomplete entries for the same time period. therefore, when we compare the data in a similar way to the gft approach by removing the missing entries and extracting time segments which have reported data available, the agreement increases to about  <dig>  .

within the entire nation, the flu incidence peaked around the time of oct-nov  <dig>  which is reflected in all the three data streams examined. the percentage ili-incidence is significantly less within cdc ilinet and gft. we believe that this may be a consequence of the nature of data collection techniques used in each case. gft data relies on a statistical model to identify search queries related to influenza. the ilinet data is primarily collected from outpatient visits and covers a small portion of the primary care facilities within the entire country. the claims data is, however, dependent on the primary care physician's reporting of transactions, which can vary across the nation . furthermore, the reported number of cases within the claims data can be regarded as upper-bound estimates of the true infection .

even across different hhs regions, we observe that the claims data consistently presents higher number of ili cases compared to the cdc ilinet and gft. in particular, we note that except for hhs-i and hhs-ii, which show the presence of two distinct peaks in ili- incidence , all the other regions consistently show that the peak of the pandemic occurred around the oct-nov  <dig> time-frame. as is well documented from previous studies  <cit> , hhs-i and ii correspond to the northeast  that exhibited a distinct early onset of the flu pandemic followed by the peak observed in oct-nov  <dig>  although we observe that the ilinet data shows the presence of early onset within hhs-iii as well as hhs- v, both claims and gft do not show such a pronounced outbreak in these regions. the data from ilinet does not fully cover the time-span examined, especially since there are a number of weeks with missing data. excluding those missing time-segments across the entire nation, the overall pearson correlation between ilinet and claims data is about  <dig>   indicating that there is significant similarity between the two datasets.

the coverage of the claims data is not uniform throughout the country. although within the different hhs regions the total ili-incidence rates are higher on average within the claims data, the coverage of ili incidence within individual hhs regions can vary. as summarized in table  <dig> the total number of zip codes within each hhs region for which claims data is available varies from a minimum of  <dig> % to a maximum of  <dig> %. the reporting from the claims data is fairly consistent across these regions for any given year, as reflected by the total number of diagnostic records available at these regions. through these observations, we can conclude that the claims data provides similar insights into public health surveillance as traditional sources such as cdc ilinet.

non-negative matrix factorization  identifies distinct spatial and temporal patterns from the 2009- <dig> pandemic h1n <dig> flu season
we defined a zip code as having statistically significant data if it reported at least  <dig> cases of the flu in any given week of the year. this simple threshold based filtering allowed us to remove any zip codes that had very few cases reported throughout the year. based on this simple filtering, the total number of zip codes with reported flu cases  was  <dig>  and we used nt to be  <dig> days. instead of examining weekly reports as discussed above, we used a daily resolution to fully leverage the claims data. further, we also wanted to test the hypothesis that a daily resolution of the pandemic flu season will provide fine-grained insights into distinct patterns of how the flu spread. as summarized in figure  <dig>  only a small number of dimensions are sufficient to describe the pandemic flu outbreak throughout the us. to select the number of dimensions, we plotted the reconstruction error  versus the subspace for the  <dig> repetitions of nmf , and compared this with the reconstruction error obtained with pca performed on the original data  and the scrambled data . as observed, the slope of pcascram is quite small and relatively constant for increasing subspace sizes. this provides a means to estimate the subspace size beyond which a given model is explaining noise rather than correlations in the data  <cit> . to visualize this cut-off, in figure 2c we plot the change in variance for each added dimension . the reconstruction error rates of both pcaorig with pcascram at subspace around s =  <dig>  although it is possible to choose s =  <dig> and describe the spatial and temporal patterns, we use a smaller subspace  to describe the  <dig> h1n <dig> pan- demic. this is mainly due to the fact that we wanted a simpler representation of this high dimensional space and traded the interpretability of a lower dimensional representation for the complexity of patterns when s =  <dig>  further, lower number of dimensions  do not provide a clear separation of the temporal/spatial patterns and hence we have chosen to detail our analysis with a subspace size of  <dig> 

nmf identifies multi-scale ili-breakout patterns within the us
a summary of the five temporal patterns as extracted from nmf using h is depicted in figure  <dig>  there are distinct peaks for each of the five patterns, indicating a unique phase for the 2009- <dig> pandemic flu. interestingly, the peak of ili-incidence across each of the temporal patterns is left shifted - indicating a lag period in the ili incidence rates observed across the different geographic regions . notably, h <dig> shows a peak in ili incidence around day 206- <dig>  corresponding to a time period of oct  <dig>  2009; h <dig> shows peak about a week earlier  followed by h <dig> peaking around sep  <dig>   <dig> and h <dig> showing a peak of aug  <dig>   <dig>  h <dig> corresponds to an early flu outbreak observed in the early-middle spring time , which was distinctly observed across the north east hhs regions in figure  <dig>  another notable aspect of h <dig> is that the early peak of the ili-incidence is followed by a secondary peak in and around the same time of h <dig>  indicating that the likely presence of an early flu season  also influenced the late peaks observed in the fall season . thus, these ili-breakout patterns provide a succinct summary of how the 2009- <dig> flu season affected the entire country.

as shown in figure  <dig>  each of the wi vectors provides a specific spatial  pattern during the 2009- <dig> pandemic flu season. the advantage of this representation is that nmf allows us to interpret and visualize the pandemic flu season as a multi-scale spatial model that captures nation-wide, state-wide and zip code specific behaviors observed during the pandemic flu season. specifically, each wi depicts how the flu encompassed the entire nation. the matrix representation of w provides a succinct summary of the flu prevalence across the individual zip codes, which can be visualized on a geographic map of the us shown in figure  <dig> . in this map, darker colors of red correspond to a higher flu prevalence in the region, whereas lighter colors  represent a lower flu prevalence pertaining to a specific spatial pattern.

one of the notable observations from our analysis is that the flu prevalence patterns reveal distinct areas were affected by each wi. for example, while w <dig> occurs throughout the us encompassing both the northeast and northwest regions of the country, w <dig> is primarily observed in the southeast and western regions  of the country. the pattern w <dig> is exclusively observed within larger metropolitan areas . it is also interesting to point out that all the five patterns are observed within metropolitan areas, perhaps reflecting the dynamics of people moving between these large cities. 

at the state level, we can describe how the flu patterns uniquely affected different counties/regions, as shown in figure  <dig> . here we have highlighted the state of tennessee . as a south-eastern state, tn was widely affected by the h1n <dig> pandemic. while the major cities of tn including memphis, nashville, knoxville and chattanooga - all exhibit the five patterns, the individual county areas around the major cities have unique spatial patterns within each wi, depicting that the flu prevalence pattern was indeed unique to different areas within the state . such an argument can also be extended to the city/zip code resolution , whereby each pattern captures how neighborhoods or suburb regions show unique prevalence patterns as one navigates the different spatial patterns from w <dig> to w <dig> 

identifying "bridge regions" within break-out patterns in the us
it is interesting to note that between the different wi a small subset of the zip codes act as bridge regions. we define these bridge regions to be zip codes that exhibit more than one wi at the same time-period. these zip codes, not surprisingly, are concentrated towards the different suburb regions of the different metropolitan cities in the state. for example, in the city of memphis, there are distinct bridge regions where we observe that a cluster of three zip codes in the area corresponding to bartlett  that exhibit w <dig>  w <dig> and w <dig> patterns. notably, this region showed very little flu during the early half of the season. another example of a bridge region is highlighted by a purple circle in figure  <dig> where w <dig>  w <dig> and w <dig> patterns dominated in the suburbs of east memphis. only the area of bartlett and collierville show the presence of the early and late fly patterns .

based on this initial analysis, we can identify bridge regions at the state-and national-level by aggregating the spatial patterns to the respective scales. instead of examining specific spatial patterns, we examine the most dominant spatial pattern  in a given state or hhs region. a dominant pattern is defined as a spatial pattern that is prevalent in a specific zip code based on the maximum wi value within the zip codes that constitute the state . for this study, we decided to use a simple threshold of 50% to determine if a spatial pattern was dominant in that state/region. as summarized in figure  <dig>  the individual pie charts within each state captures the percentage contribution of each wi that was dominant in that region, which provides an intuitive visual analysis of the regions impacted by the  <dig> h1n <dig> pandemic.

for the different states, one can identify the most dominant pattern just by examining how prevalent these flu patterns were across the different zip codes across a particular state. while states like wyoming, north dakota, pennsylvania and others show a dominant, single spatial pattern, states such as georgia, california, nevada and tennessee exhibit typically two patterns that dominate these regions. thus, states such as kentucky and tennessee act as bridge regions in the spread of the pandemic.

extending this analysis further for each of the hhs regions, we observe that hhs-iv and hhs-viii are dominated by two patterns , where as other hhs regions including hhs-i-iii and hhs-v-vii have a single dominant spatial pattern that is prevalent in at least 50% of the zip codes in these regions. interestingly, the entire southeast acts as a bridge region showing the presence of two or more patterns simultaneously occurring within 50% of the zip codes. similar observations can be made also within hhs-ix and hhs-x, where w <dig> and w <dig> dominate. we also observe that the northeast part of the country exhibits only w <dig> and w <dig>  confirming further that the early flu peaks were prevalent only in these regions . it is also interesting to note that the very same regions that show w <dig> also exhibit a temporal coupling between the early and late part of the flu. these regions, especially in the northeast  were affected by an early peak of the h1n <dig> pandemic followed by a sustained incidence of the flu even after the entire nation had more or less recovered from the major outbreaks.

discussion and 
CONCLUSIONS
in this paper, we examined the use of the diagnostic data to reveal spatial and temporal patterns of how the  <dig> h1n <dig> pandemic affected the entire country. to our knowledge, the use of nmf in the context of extracting spatio-temporal patterns of disease spread is novel and the break out patterns extracted from the claims data provide specific insights into the  <dig> pandemic. the break out patterns show how different parts of the us were vulnerable and highlight regions that may have needed additional attention as the pandemic was spreading through the nation. the patterns also describe the multi-scale nature of flu outbreaks beginning with the individual zip code resolution all the way to the entire nation, capturing the complex dependencies that may have had an impact in spreading the pandemic. our analysis also reveals specific features of the flu outbreak patterns that highlight the differences between both urban  and rural areas. the patterns extracted are categorical in that they describe the overall dynamics of the pandemic in distinct phases through out the nation. while the patterns have intuitive interpretative power, more quantitative measures of the distinct spatial and temporal coupling patterns are required.

at this time, because we have not integrated socio-economic/census data into our analysis, it is difficult for us to speculate whether particular demographic factors , population density or other environmental and climatic factors within these regions lead to the observed patterns. we also note the relatively sparse coverage of the claims data across the country and these regions also constitute large parts of the us where the population density is quite low. a more systematic analysis of the variation in population of these regions, followed by a statistical comparison with the flu diagnostic data would be necessary to draw additional conclusions regarding the epidemiological significance of these spatial and temporal patterns.

although in this paper, we do not describe the many confounding factors  that may play a role in the co-occurrence of asthma and flu, the ability to discover such complex associations from claims provides an added capability for public health surveillance systems to monitor and quickly identify vulnerable geographic areas/population for preemptive intervention. we must note here that a more detailed analysis of the spatio-temporal patterns is required. additionally, within the scope of this paper, we have not examined whether these patterns correspond to other well known algorithms such as google flu. finally, we must also note that the predictive aspects of our algorithm have also not been fully explored for two reasons:  the data available to us is only from the 2009- <dig> flu season and  it is difficult to obtain a baseline behavior based on a year that showed highly anomalous behavior in terms of the overall flu incidence across the entire country. we will explore these questions in greater detail in a following publication.

while diagnostic information  can be helpful for public health surveillance, additional analyses of the prescription datasets  from ims health is necessary to obtain precise insights regarding the pandemic spread. the prescription transactions, in addition to providing counts of patients that were prescribed anti-viral medications, also record the dosage of these drugs and hence can provide tighter bounds on the number of estimated people infected and measure the intensity of spread. such a collective integration of claims and rx datasets can provide novel insights not only in the context of understanding the flu, but can have a wide impact in general for more complex disease etiologies and chronic disease conditions.

incorporating h1n <dig> molecular evolutionary information into orbit
the spatial and temporal patterns discovered from the claims data and nmf can be considered as approximate representations of epidemiological curves obtained from traditional disease spread  models. the temporal patterns shown in figure  <dig> indicate different phases of the h1n <dig> flu epidemic. the multi-scale representation of the h1n <dig> epidemiological spread can be used as starting points for other complex types of analysis. for example, one extension would be to include evolutionary history of different h1n <dig> viral strains. the recent availability of large-scale sequence databases such as gisaid  <cit>  can provide insights into specific viral strains that are prevalent within a geographic region. tracing the phylogenetic relationship between different strains of the virus, we can then estimate parameters for disease spread models  <cit> . we can also incorporate the evolutionary information into statistical models  <cit>  to understand the how viral evolution affects the disease spread process. further, these patterns can be examined to identify regions that are vulnerable to specific strains and target them for early intervention. such enhancements will be evaluated in forthcoming publications from our group.

other capabilities within orbit
orbit is designed as a toolbox for developing machine learning tools that can aid public health surveillance. within the scope of this paper, we have demonstrated the use of novel diagnostic  datasets to discover a small set of spatial and temporal patterns that characterize the 2009- <dig> pandemic h1n <dig> flu. however, we have not described all the capabilities within orbit. apart from supporting machine learning algorithms from direct sources for public health surveillance, orbit can be used in other contexts including  extracting and analyzing emerging, indirect datasets for public health surveillance, e.g., twitter  <cit> ; and  integrating datasets such as claims to estimate parameters for disease spread models so that one can turn the analytical power from the aforementioned application into predictive models that can aid decision makers with more accurate insights  <cit> . we hope to examine these applications in greater detail in future studies.

competing interests
the authors declare that they have no competing interests.

authors' contributions
ar and lp conceived and designed the study. sv provided the data. th and lp processed and stored the ehrc datasets for analysis. ar, lp, sq, and cc developed the analysis techniques. th and cas developed the user interface components for visualizing the results. ar, cc, sq, and th analyzed the data. ar, lp, th, cas, sq, sv, and cc wrote the paper.

declarations
publication of this article was funded by ornl seed funding to lp.

oak ridge national laboratory  is operated by ut-battelle, llc, for the u.s. department of energy under contract de-ac05-00or <dig>  the united states government retains and the publisher, by accepting the article for publication, acknowledges that the united states government retains a non-exclusive, paid-up, irrevocable, world-wide license to publish or reproduce the published form of this manuscript, or allow others to do so, for united states government purposes.

this article has been published as part of bmc bioinformatics volume  <dig> supplement  <dig>  2015: selected articles from the fourth ieee international conference on computational advances in bio and medical sciences : bioinformatics. the full contents of the supplement are available online at http://www.biomedcentral.com/bmcbioinformatics/supplements/16/s <dig> 
