BACKGROUND
since its introduction as a model metazoan animal  <cit>  the experimental convenience, simple anatomy, which includes most differentiated tissues including a nervous system, and, in particular, genetic tractability has made the nematode caenorhabditis elegans a popular research platform for many biologists and geneticists  <cit> . sequence analysis of the c. elegans genome, completed in  <dig>  <cit> , has revealed the presence of approximately twenty thousand protein-coding genes. although many of these have human homologues many are yet to have a function assigned. a number of complementary methodological approaches are available to functionally analyze c. elegans genes amongst which the determination of the spatial-temporal pattern of gene expression is particularly informative. while such patterns can be investigated at the level of transcription or translation, via approaches such as, respectively, in situ hybridization or immunohistochemistry, it is more common to employ reporter technology and analyze, in transgenic animals, the expression pattern of the surrogate reporter.

in its simplest guise, reporter technology involves cloning either the known promoter region or, if this sequence has not been precisely defined, as is often the case, then all or part of the 5′ intergenic sequence upstream of a reporter gene, such as gfp, in an appropriate base plasmid  to generate a so-called transcriptional reporter. because the cloned sequence may not contain all necessary regulatory elements resulting expression patterns should be interpreted cautiously as they may not fully reflect that of the gene under study. if, on the other hand, a more complex translational reporter, in which the reporter is fused in-frame to the protein-coding sequence of the gene of interest, is constructed then, in addition to deriving information about promoter activity, potentially other related aspects of gene expression, such as the sub-cellular localization of the corresponding gene product, can also be derived. in order to include distantly located regulatory elements, and thus generate a construct more likely to recapitulate the expression pattern of the endogenous gene, such a reporter would, ideally, contain not only the genomic locus under study but also significant stretches of the 5′ and 3′ flanking sequence. because c. elegans genes are relatively compact  and the fosmid-based genomic clone insert is typically 35– <dig> kb, a translational reporter based upon such a fosmid would, when the locus under study is located within the central region of the insert, provide that broad genomic dna environment. fosmid-based c. elegans genomic clones are thus ideal foundations for translational reporter construction  <cit> .

to facilitate the generation of such reporter constructs from c. elegans fosmid clones we  <cit> , and others  <cit> , have developed tools and techniques designed to leverage the power of recombineering. recombineering is a homologous recombination -based genetic engineering system mediated by transient expression of λ-encoded recombinases within an e. coli host . we reported previously  <cit>  on the use of a rpsl-tet positive/negative-selection cassette   <cit>  in a two-step counter-selection recombineering approach that enables the seamless creation of fosmid-based reporters devoid of undesired, extraneous sequence changes. although some groups  <cit>  have reported poor recombineering efficiencies using the rt-cassette as a selectable marker others  <cit>  have, like us, employed it successfully to generate highly informative reporter fusions.

although the various strategies and associated resources provide c. elegans researchers with a range of powerful recombineering tools the methodology is perhaps not as commonly practiced as it might be. to both further encourage its uptake and to facilitate an ongoing project designed to interrogate putative internal promoter elements within operons we generated two sets of constructs designed to provide tools to simplify the rt-cassette-based counter-selection recombineering approach employed in our laboratories. the first set contained coding sequences  encoding potentially useful fluorescent protein  reporters intended to expand the fp palette currently in common use by c. elegans researchers. in order to maximise the utility of the final resource, n- and c-terminal tap-  tag  <cit>  sequences were also included. the fp-encoding sequences were both extracted from the previously described vectors ppd <dig> , ppd <dig>   <cit>  and paa <dig>  <cit>  that encode, respectively, cfp, yfp and the red-shifted mcherry  <cit> , and synthesized de novo to encode the less frequently used mcerulean  <cit> , mtfp <dig>   <cit>  and mcitrine  <cit> . a set of these inserts was subsequently introduced into the single-copy fosmid vector pcc1fos generating the second set of constructs that provide the tools to faciliate rt-cassette-based recombineering. the resulting method requires only a single pcr, to generate the initial rt-cassette, and generates final products of high fidelity. we report here on the generation of these constructs and illustrate their utility by building reporter fusion constructs designed to examine the expression patterns of three c. elegans genes. these genes were all located on a single fosmid and a series of reporter constructs were built, via iterative rounds of counter-selection recombineering, in which one, two or all three genes were tagged with a different fp reporter. fluorescence microscopy of lines transgenic for a subset of these constructs revealed expression patterns that either confirmed those previously reported or, in the case of one gene, indicated an unexpected aggregation of the fusion gene product. unexpectedly, and somewhat disappointingly, mcerulean, mcitrine and mcherry, each encoded by a codon-optimized cds, exhibited either rather fast bleaching or were not as bright as had been envisaged particularly when expressed as fusion proteins. as these characteristics make their corresponding constructs less useful than hoped only those constructs that provided useful recombineering tools are being made available via the plasmid depository addgene. by selecting constructs from this resource appropriate to their aims c. elegans researchers will be able to recombineer fosmid-based reporter constructs in a simplified, streamlined manner.

RESULTS
approximately 15% of all c. elegans genes are clustered together into polycistronic transcriptional units termed operons  <cit> . we have begun to investigate the extent that downstream operon genes may be transcriptionally regulated via internal cis-acting sequence elements . operons containing such internal promoter elements, so-called hybrid operons, have been identified using transcriptional reporters designed to interrogate, in isolation, the intergenic regions between neighbouring operon genes  <cit> . in contrast, we are employing fosmid-based reporters to enable us to both manipulate precisely such putative internal regulatory elements and, at the same time, tag multiple operon genes with different fps, without, in either case, otherwise disturbing the gross operon structure. to facilitate the recombineering of these reporter constructs we designed and built a resource consisting of two complementary sets of plasmids. the first of these comprises a modular set of fp cdss including versions augmented by addition of n- and c-terminal tap-tags or a nuclear-localization signal. the rationale for this set of plasmids was our initial aim to tag, with different fp reporters, up to four genes within any one operon. spectral discrimination between each fp would be achieved by a combination of careful choice of fp with associated filter set and combining this, if necessary, with post-acquisition spectral unmixing. however, as discussed below, ultimately only three different fps were combined within a single fosmid-based reporter enabling us to discriminate readily between their respective spectral signals simply using appropriate filter sets. the second set of plasmids, built using inserts from the first, was designed to both simplify and speed up the recombineering procedure and generate high fidelity fp fusion gene reporter products.

sequences encoding fluorescent protein reporters
to identify fps with sufficient spectral separation to allow multiple tagging and, at the same time, minimize the requirement for computational separation of the resulting fluorescent signals we considered the relative biophysical and spectral properties of the fps available  <cit> . monomeric fps with reported high photostability and brightness were selected from the cyan, green, yellow and red regions of the visible light spectrum and led to the choice of the cyan mcerulean  <cit> , the cyan/green mtfp <dig>  <cit> , the yellow mcitrine  <cit>  and the red mcherry  <cit> . although dna sequences encoding each of the fps were available we decided to design, and have commercially synthesized, novel cdss as this would not only permit codon optimization but also, by careful choice and placement of restriction enzyme  sites, enable us to simplify all envisaged downstream sub-cloning events. in addition, because introns have been demonstrated to generally increase levels of heterologous gene expression  <cit> , and are routinely inserted into sequences encoding reporter proteins in c. elegans, we also designed and included silent, blunt-cutting internal re sites to enable facile insertion of up to two artificial introns per cds .

we expanded the overall utility of this first set of constructs by including additional sequences encoding n- and c-terminal tap-tags  to enable combined gene expression analysis and tap-based protein purification  <cit> . we chose, as the terminal epitope, the s-tag sequence due to its strong retention on s-protein resins  <cit>  followed by, as the protease site, the recognition sequence for human rhinovirus 3c protease. for the internal tag we decided upon streptag ii  <cit>  because of its highly specific interaction with strep-tactin resins and the ability to subsequently elute bound protein under gentle conditions. although not yet experimentally tested these tap-tags can be excised from constructs available from addgene . the modular design of the synthesized sequences and their provision in a vector, pgov <dig>  stripped of common restriction sites enabled us to build quickly a range of sub-clones encompassing the more useful potential module combinations .

a all constructs are in e. coli dh5α and are available from addgene b lacks intact open-reading frame; c mtfp <dig> sequence lacks n-terminal met-val and c-terminal lys residues present in native sequence; d n-terminal met-val residues and c-terminal lys residue, present in native coding sequence, replaced, respectively, with met-ala-ala and val-ser-ala; e see additional file 1: table s <dig> 

prior to their incorporation into fosmid-based reporters the spectral and biophysical properties of the fps were briefly investigated via in vitro and in vivo approaches. first, each fp was expressed in vitro from a dna template and the resulting protein immunocaptured to agarose beads via an appropriate anti-fp antibody. fluorescence microscopy revealed discrete, concentrated fluorescence of the intended colour  confirming that each fp had been successfully generated from its respective cds and each exhibited the expected spectral profile. second, we observed fluorescence expression patterns in transgenic c. elegans strains transformed with constructs built from the myo-3prom-containing vector ppd <dig>   <cit>  that encoded either an unembellished fp, with a contiguous or two intron-containing  cds, or with a c-terminal nuclear localization signal . control strains were also generated by transformation with dna of equivalent ppd <dig> -based sub-clones that contained cdss encoding cfp, yfp and mcherry excised, respectively, from ppd <dig> , ppd <dig>   <cit>  and paa <dig>  <cit> . to distinguish these fps from those encoded by cdss designed as part of this work the prior versions of cfp and yfp are prefixed with f  and mcherry with mc . all strains revealed the expected body muscle expression pattern  with clear nuclear localization for the fps equipped with a nls . although these results indicated that the fps possessed the anticipated spectral properties, both in vitro and in vivo, two additional observations were made. first, rapid photobleaching was exhibited by mcerulean, particularly when expressed in vivo within transgenic worms, using the same illumination intensity and exposure time parameters employed to visualize the other fps including f-cfp. as the fp had effectively completely bleached in the time it took to focus on the fine detail of a specimen it was concluded that mcerulean would be impractical as a fp partner in multiple in vivo gene tagging strategies and that the three fp combination mtfp1/mcitrine/mcherry would be used in future constructs. the reasons for the rapid in vivo fluorescence decay of mcerulean, especially in comparison to that observed with the ancestral enhanced cfp  , is not clear as the amino acid sequence is the same as that of the original mcerulean  <cit> . interestingly, recent crystallographic data  <cit>  has suggested that the additional y145a change present in mcerulean might exacerbate the likelihood of fluorescence quenching in comparison to cfp. whatever the underlying cause, further improved versions of cyan-shifted fps have been developed, e.g. mcerulean <dig>  <cit>  and mturquoise <dig>  <cit> , which would be less likely to suffer from such fluorescence instability.

the second observation was the apparent lack of improvement, in terms of relative brightness, exhibited by mcitrine and mcherry when compared, respectively, to f-yfp and mc-mcherry despite the codon optimization undertaken specifically to maximize expression in vivo. both latter fps are encoded by cdss containing three short, equally spaced artificial introns. as expected, the introduction of two similar sized artificial introns, albeit not spaced equally, into the cdss encoding mcitrine and mcherry improved, as judged by eye, protein expression levels in transgenic worms over the equivalent non-intron-containing cdss . however, longer exposure times were still required to achieve fluorescence emissions equivalent to worms transformed with corresponding f-yfp- and mc-mcherry-encoding constructs. in contrast, mtfp <dig> proved to be consistently bright and photostable requiring only rather short  exposure times when encoded by the two intron-containing cds. many factors are involved in determining the overall brightness of the fp reporter including the efficiency of transcription/translation of the encoding sequence as well as the intrinsic spectral properties of the resulting fluorophore. with respect to the latter, we expected mcitrine, especially when encoded by the two-intron-containing cds, to be at least as bright as f-yfp, when illuminated under equivalent exposure conditions, as this fp is considered superior to standard yfp in both brightness and stability  <cit> . although strains transformed with myo-3prom-driven mc-mcherry reproducibly exhibited brighter images than equivalent strains transformed with mcherry the two fps had identical amino acid sequences and differed only by being encoded by different, “codon-optimized” cdss that were globally 77% identical . the differences in brightness observed between the respective yellow and red fp pairs are more likely due to differences in the efficiency with which each cds is transcribed and/or the resulting mrna translated into protein resulting in reduced fp abundance than any significant differences between the spectral properties of the fluors. although we attempted to ensure, by designing sequences from scratch, that the cdss encoding mcitrine and mcherry would promote efficient transcription and translation it is clear that simple assumptions concerning, for example, adjusting codon choice to reflect usage in highly expressed endogenous genes, does not necessarily guarantee optimized protein expression  <cit> .

pcc1fos-based constructs
the second set of plasmids, built with inserts derived from the first, was designed to enable the recombineering procedure to be simplified, take less time and generate final fp fusion gene reporter constructs of high fidelity. as a subset of the plasmids were to contain the rt-cassette which, we had found, confers instability when present in a standard high-copy number vector , it was decided to base them all in pcc1fos. as well as maintaining clones as single copies for stable, routine propagation pcc1fos-based constructs can, when hosted in a suitable strain such as epi <dig> or mw <dig>  <cit> , also be transiently induced to approximately  <dig> copies per bacterial cell thus improving dna isolation yield and purity. these plasmids were designed as pairs the first member of which provides the template for pcr-amplification of the rt-cassette, used in the first, positive selection recombineering step, while the second provides the desired replacement sequence, excised as a restriction fragment, for use in the subsequent counter selection step. generation of this pcc1fos-based construct set greatly simplifies the rt-cassette-mediated counter-selection recombineering protocol as only one pcr needs to be performed and a restriction fragment is used to replace the inserted rt-cassette in the second recombineering step. the first step involves pcr-amplification of an rt-cassette from a template sequence excised by restriction enzyme digestion from the appropriate construct. the product is flanked by approximately  <dig> bp, derived from the template, matching the 5′ and 3′ ends of the chosen fp cds and  <dig> bp terminal homology arms, derived from the primers, designed to direct insertion into the chosen site within the target gene. replacement of the inserted rt-cassette is achieved by recombineeering transformation with a noti restriction fragment, excised from a second plasmid, containing the desired fp cds. the inclusion of the extended regions of flanking fp cds homology with the rt-cassette ensures this negative selection replacement step is highly efficient with far fewer false positives, e.g. from when the rt-cassette is deleted rather than being replaced. in our hands, for clones selected under negative selection with chloramphenicol and streptomycin, successful replacement of the rt-cassette with the desired sequence is essentially 100% . this improvement in hr brings a number of additional methodological benefits including smaller amounts of linear replacement dna  being required and, as far fewer bacterial cells need be to electroporated, reduced cell culture volumes and shorter incubation times. furthermore, use of a restriction fragment ensures final recombineered products are essentially free of sequence artefacts introduced by pcr requiring only re analysis to confirm construction fidelity. lists of paired constructs designed to provide template for pcr-amplification of the rt-cassette donor and the subsequent replacement fragment are provided in table  <dig> and additional file 1: table s <dig>  additional methodological details are provided in the supplemental data.

a sequence to be seamlessly inserted into target; b the counter-selection rt-cassette should be pcr-amplified from this construct using, as template, the rt-cassette-containing noti-noti fragment; c the desired replacement cassette can be excised, as a noti-noti fragment, from either the pcc1fos-  or parental pgov5-based  constructs; d size of the isolated noti-fragment  to be used as pcr template; e suggested 3′ sequences of ‘recombineering’ odns designed to pcr-amplify fp-flanked, rt-cassette-containing sequence. reverse odn sequence lacks a 5′ stop triplet ; f size of the isolated noti-fragment to be used to replace the inserted fp-flanked, rt-cassette-containing sequence. all constructs are available from addgene and are in e. coli epi <dig> apart from those built in pgov <dig> which are in e. coli dh5α.

gene expression analysis
having generated this pcc1fos-based resource set we utilized some of its components to build, by iterative rounds of counter-selection recombineering, a series of translational reporter constructs from a single fosmid clone. although we are using this resource to investigate the transcriptional complexity of operon gene regulation we chose, for the sake of simplicity, to confirm its utility here by tagging genes present on the same fosmid clone but not located within a single operon. a list of fosmid clones each containing three or more such genes with published expression patterns was scanned by eye and clone wrm069dd <dig>  containing three such genes located approximately centrally within the insert, was identified. wrm069dd <dig> contains the genes f09e <dig> , f09e <dig>   and eeed <dig>   that encode, respectively, a putative deoxyribose-phosphate aldolase , a peroxiredoxin and a metallocarboxypeptidase . the iterative recombineering workflow generated single, double and triple-tagged constructs for both the mtfp1/mcitrine/mcherry and f-cfp/f-yfp/mc-mcherry fp combinations . transgenic lines were generated for the single- and triple-tagged variants and resulting expression patterns investigated . microscopic examination of the lines revealed that, as noted previously for the myo-3prom-driven transcriptional constructs, the mcitrine and mcherry fusion proteins, even when encoded by cdss with  <dig> introns, were, as determined by eye, visibly less bright that the respective f-yfp and mc-mcherry equivalents. whatever the cause the low signal levels made discerning clear expression patterns for the two fusion genes, f09e <dig> ::mcitrine and eeed <dig> ::mcherry, difficult and further examination of the corresponding lines was not pursued. interestingly, mtfp1-expressing worms were, consistently, as bright as the otherwise equivalent f-cfp-expressing strains confirming that mtfp <dig>  as encoded by the cds designed here, is a useful addition to the fp palette for reporter analysis in c. elegans . all lines transformed with a reporter construct built with one or more of the f-cfp/f-yfp/mc-mcherry fp set exhibited relatively bright and easily interpretable expression patterns .

subsequent investigation of expression patterns proceeded by examination of lines transformed with the f-cfp/f-yfp/mc-mcherry-tagged constructs. f09e <dig>  encodes a dera homolog that shares 72% similarity and 54% identity with human dera . dera, as part of the pentose phosphate shunt, catalyzes the reversible reaction of 2-deoxy-d-ribose 5-phosphate to d-glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate and acetaldehyde  <cit>  and, as such, might be expected to exhibit widespread expression consistent with an enzyme involved in intermediate metabolism. indeed, examination of strains ctd <dig> and ctd <dig> , that were transformed, respectively, with the f09e <dig> ::f-cfp  and the triple gene-tagged construct , revealed diffuse f-cfp expression throughout the hypodermis, intestine and pharynx . similarly, strain ctd <dig> , transformed with the corresponding f09e <dig> ::mtfp <dig> construct fnh <dig>  exhibited an essentially equivalent expression pattern . this generalized pattern of expression was in agreement with that previously published for strain bc <dig> that had been generated by transformation with a corresponding f09e <dig> prom transcriptional style reporter construct   <cit> .

f09e <dig>   encodes one of the two 2-cys peroxiredoxins expressed in c. elegans. these conserved thioredoxin-coupled peroxidases, via their capacity for h2o <dig> reduction, are important components of the overall oxidative-stress response employed by multicellular organisms. however, there is also increasing evidence that they have additional, complex functions including important roles as regulators of h2o2-mediated redox signaling  <cit> . while the generalized anti-oxidant role might suggest a relatively widespread distribution for prdx- <dig> in c. elegans the previously reported expression patterns indicated a more tissue-, even cell-specific localization suggesting that prdx- <dig> may play one of these more discrete, specialized functional role. for example, using a f09e <dig> prom transcriptional reporter , isermann et al.  ref.  <cit>  reported that prdx- <dig> expression was restricted to the pharyngeal interneurons i <dig> and i <dig>  a more distributed prdx- <dig> expression pattern, including head and tail neurons and intestine, was reported in strain bc <dig> transformed with a similar transcriptional reporter   <cit> . olahova et al.  ref.  <cit>  demonstrated subsequently, via an immunohistochemical approach, that prdx- <dig> was also expressed in gonad and intestine. however, examination of strain ctd <dig> , transformed with the single f09e <dig> ::f-yfp construct , demonstrated a highly unusual expression pattern that did not conform with either of these previous reports . f-yfp expression was observed as intense punctate foci distributed, apparently randomly, throughout the body and that did not co-localize with any specific tissue or cell type. equivalent patterns were observed in other lines transformed with fnh <dig> as well as those generated from the triple-tagged construct . this pattern of concentrated fluorescent foci is difficult to interpret in the context of prdx- <dig> function. it might reflect some uncharacterized role but, and possibly most likely, may also result from unexpected, artifactual aggregation of the fusion protein perhaps initiated and promoted by the presence of the c-terminal f-yfp sequence. whilst this is entirely possible, one of us , with considerable experience in interpreting gene expression patterns in c. elegans, has not previously observed such aggregations suggesting that if they do occur with reporter gene fusions it is a rare event. we were subsequently made aware  that very similar punctate expression was observed with a prdx-2::gfp translational reporter fusion but not when an n-terminal gfp::prdx- <dig> construct was used. taken together these results indicate that the punctate expression pattern, most likely artifactual aggregation, is due to the c-terminal extension and appears not to be fp-specific.

eeed <dig>  , the third gene to be tagged within fosmid wrm069dd <dig>  and ccpp- <dig> each encode one of two c. elegans cytosolic carboxypeptidases. ccpp- <dig> has been identified  <cit>  as a deglutamylase that, in conjunction with tubulin tyrosine ligase-like  glutamylases, mediate the respective deglutamylation and glutamylation of tubulin thereby regulating the microtubular network present in the c. elegans neuronal sensory cilia. a ccpp-1::gfp transcriptional reporter revealed ccpp- <dig> expression in head neurons, specifically amphids, which were also demonstrated to exhibit ttll-dependent tubulin glutamylation activity  <cit> . interestingly, a ccpp-6::gfp transcriptional reporter suggested labial neuron expression for ccpp- <dig> whereas, in contrast, a translational version indicated expression in putative amphid cell bodies  <cit> . this discrepancy was attributed to the inclusion of a possible enhancer in the latter construct. examination of strain ctd <dig> , transformed with the single eeed <dig> ::mc-mcherry construct , demonstrated clear, distinct reporter expression in head neuron cell bodies and anterior dendritic extensions. careful examination of the relative location of the cell bodies  identified these as likely to be the mechanosensitive cep cephalic neurons. this interpretation was confirmed by additional confocal microscopy . localized cep neuron expression was observed in other lines transformed with eeed <dig> ::mc-mcherry  and the triple-tagged construct . lines transformed with the latter construct exhibited unrelated punctate fluorescence in the red channel due to bleed-through from excitation of the concentrated foci of f09e <dig> ::f-yfp. the clear cep expression observed here for eeed <dig>  agreed with previously published expression data for strain bc <dig> generated by transformation with a corresponding eeed <dig> prom transcriptional style reporter   <cit> . thus, interestingly, it would appear that ccpp- <dig> is expressed predominantly in the cells of the cephalic sensilla, whereas ccpp- <dig>  that lacks detectable deglutamylase activity but co-localizes with ttll-mediated glutamylation  <cit>  is, in contrast, expressed in the amphid neurons.

the use of recombineering to build, directly from a genomic clone, a translational-style c. elegans reporter fusion construct is gaining in popularity and a number of related methodologies have been described  <cit> . all these different approaches represent variations on a common methodological theme and, although all are welcomed as attempts to make the procedure easier and more robust, they will, as discussed  <cit> , have relative strengths and weaknesses. as is often the case, the choice of which to use will depend upon application and personal preference. we have generated a construct resource that further simplifies the approach used by us enabling the rapid construction of fosmid-based reporter fusion constructs seamlessly tagged, if desired, with multiple fp reporters. from this resource we are making available, through the plasmid depository addgene, those constructs required to generate fosmid reporters tagged with either mtfp <dig>  f-cfp, f-yfp or mc-mcherry as these will be of immediate use to others . constructs containing sequences encoding mcerulean, mcitrine and mcherry, encoded by the codon-optimized sequences designed by us, are available from ctd.

CONCLUSIONS
we have described the generation and utility of construct collections designed to simplify and facilitate the building of fosmid-based fp reporter constructs via counter-selection recombineering. use of the resource generates final recombineered products that are invariably free of unwanted sequence artefacts and, as such, can be used directly to create transgenic animals with the need for only minimal fidelity checking. although some of the fps encoded displayed undesirable characteristics, such as rapid bleaching and poor brightness, the remaining constructs represent a valuable resource that both simplifies the overall procedure and increases significantly recombineering efficiency.

