BACKGROUND
infection of a single host by multiple strains of a pathogen may result in competition for host resources  <cit> . such intra-host competition is predicted to shape a variety of pathogen traits such as virulence, transmissibility, and resource partitioning, that could affect epidemiology and virus population dynamics  <cit> . however, empirical data demonstrating the action of intra-host competition among pathogens have been scarce, particularly for medically-relevant organisms  <cit> . among viruses, the magnitude of competition is sensitive to the order and interval of infection by different strains. for example, when two strains of cydia pomonella granulomavirus infect a codling moth host at the same time  replication of both strains is decreased  <cit> , yet coinfection of disparate strains of vaccinia virus in cultured monkey cells does not result in decreased replication  <cit> . however, in the vaccinia system, when one strain infects four hours after the other , replication of the second strain is suppressed, and with a ten-hour lag time between infections, the second strain is unable to replicate at all . similar patterns, albeit over different timescales, have been observed in vivo for borna disease virus infection of rats  <cit> , lacrosse virus infection of mosquitoes  <cit> , and bluetongue virus infection of midges  <cit> . notably, competitive suppression is not an inevitable outcome of mixed-strain infection. avirulent strains of murine cytomegalovirus and herpes simplex virus may experience enhanced replication and virulence in mixed-genotype relative to single-genotype infections  <cit> . thus, while inter-strain interactions appear to significantly impact the population dynamics of viruses, their outcome varies across biological systems. in order to understand and predict the evolutionary epidemiology of medically important viruses that exist as mixed-strain assemblages, it is important to study the interactions within those particular systems.

dengue viruses , the mosquito-borne human pathogens that cause dengue fever, have increased in geographic range, prevalence, and disease severity in recent decades. denv is currently considered the most significant emerging threat to global public health of any vector-borne virus  <cit> . genetic variation within this diverse group of rna viruses has been categorized as follows: antigenically and genetically distinctserotypes  are each comprised of numerous distinct genotypes, which are in turn subdivided into multiple sub-groups or types  <cit> . genome sequence data and phylogenetic analyses suggest that strain replacement, apparently mediated by competitive displacement, is widespread in denv epidemiology  <cit> . most prominently, the southeast asian genotype  of denv <dig> invaded the americas in the late twentieth century and has subsequently displaced the endemic american  denv <dig> genotype across much of the new world  <cit> . this displacement has had substantial impacts on the epidemiology of denv because the sa genotype is associated with the most severe manifestations of denv disease, dengue hemorrhagic fever and dengue shock syndrome, whereas the am genotype is not  <cit> . at present, there are no licensed vaccines or antiviral therapies available to control denv, and vector control has proved ineffective at limiting the global spread of the virus  <cit> . in order to develop new control strategies and effectively deploy existing ones, it will be necessary to gain a better understanding of the factors that shape the ecology and evolution of this virus.

for within-host competition among pathogen strains to happen, multiple strains must occur in the same geographic location, infect the same host, and target the same cells within that host. denv meets all three of these criteria. the four denv serotypes co-circulate across most of the geographic range of the virus  <cit>  and co-infection of individual humans and vectors by multiple denv strains occurs in nature  <cit> , and even appears to be common in some outbreaks  <cit> . in the mosquito vector, all four dengue serotypes use the same putative receptor in the mosquito midgut, the initial site of denv replication  <cit> , and initial infection of the mosquito midgut appears to involve only a few individual cells  <cit> . the same may be true in human hosts, but the initial stages of denv infection in humans have proven difficult to characterize. one significant difference between vector and human infection is that the former persists for life whereas the latter is transient because it is cleared by the host immune response. this may expand the opportunities for competition in vectors relative to humans.

to date only one study has explicitly considered the role of competition within the vector on the epidemiological dynamics of wild type denv strains: among aedes aegypti mosquitoes fed on bloodmeals containing equal quantities of the am and sa genotype of denv <dig>  more mosquitoes were infected with the sa genotype  <cit> . however this study did not include single genotype infections for comparison. since the am genotype also has lower infectivity in single infections  <cit> , it is unclear whether the differences in the coinfection study are due to competition within the vector or whether they are simply inherent differences among the genotypes that act independently in mixed infections. while variation between the am and sa genotypes in their intrinsic ability to infect mosquitoes does appear to contribute to the competitive displacement of the former  <cit> , coinfection studies conducted with the appropriate single infection controls are needed to characterize the role of direct competition among denv strains infecting a single host.

data from vaccine research provides the only other experimental evidence suggesting that heterologous denv strains can interfere with each other's replication during coinfection; studies of the replication of live-attenuated tetravalent vaccine formulations  in humans have shown that the replication of individual serotypes appears to be sensitive to the identity and concentration of coinfecting serotypes  <cit> . although these data suggest that interference between serotypes can cause decreased replication, it is unclear whether these effects are due to direct competition or whether they are mediated indirectly through the immune system.

to test the hypothesis that competition between dengue virus strains occurs within the mosquito vector, we compared replication of two dengue serotypes  in single relative to mixed infections in cultured aedes albopictus mosquito cells , a model for replication in one of the primary denv vectors. serotypes infected alone , or together  by either coinfection, where both serotypes were added simultaneously, or by superinfection, where the second serotype was infected either one or six hours after the first. viral progeny output was measured at three designated time points. single infections served as controls for interpreting effects of mixed infections. we predicted that if competition occurs:  a given serotype would replicate to higher titers in single infections relative to mixed infections,  the serotypes, which have similar replication rates in single infections, would be suppressed similarly in mixed infections, and  superinfection would affect the degree of competitive suppression such that the longer the interval between the introduction of two serotypes, the more disproportionate the suppression of the serotype infecting second. while predictions  <dig> and  <dig> were borne out by our results, we detected intriguing asymmetries in the response of the two serotypes to competition. our results highlight that intra-host competition could affect transmission of different denv serotypes and that the degree of suppression depends on time interval between infection of the two serotypes as well as their identity.

RESULTS
the experimental design is described in table  <dig>  to test whether the replication of a single serotype infecting at a multiplicity of infection  of  <dig> was suppressed by an equal dose of the same serotype , we compared the replication of each serotype in a single infection  with its replication after superinfection by the same serotype  <dig> or  <dig> hours following the initial infection . for example, for denv <dig>  titers in treatments  <dig> and  <dig>  were compared with titers in treatments  <dig> and  <dig>  each serotype reached significantly higher titers on average at each timepoint when superinfected by the same serotype , suggesting that single infections at moi  <dig> have not exhausted the potential for host cells to support virus replication, and that serotypes in mixed infections  had the potential to grow to titers as high as those in their respective single infections of moi  <dig> .

a treatments are numbered; these numbers are referenced throughout the manuscript.

b numbers refer to the denv serotypes in the treatment; and = the two serotypes were added simultaneously, then = there was a time lag between the addition of each serotype.

c treatments used in figure 3: single-strain infections =  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig>  coinfections =  <dig> and  <dig>  and superinfections =  <dig> and  <dig> 

ti = time, tr = treatment, subj = subject, grp = group.

to test the prediction that denv serotypes in mixed infections would replicate to lower titers than denv serotypes in single infections, titers for each serotype in single infection treatments were compared to those in mixed infection treatments . denv <dig> showed decreased titers in mixed versus single infections, and the magnitude of this effect increased with time . interestingly, competition did not appear to affect replication rate during most of the exponential growth phase . denv <dig>  in contrast, showed no significant difference in replication in single versus mixed-strain infections . however, a separate analysis of the effect of each individual mixed-serotype treatment showed that treatment-type explained a significant amount of variation in denv <dig> titers .

to test the prediction that the magnitude of competitive suppression depends on superinfection interval, the titers at  <dig> hrs post-superinfection for each serotype in mixed infection treatments were regressed on the time that the serotype was infected relative to its competitor. we also included serotype as an effect in this analysis to test the prediction that suppression would be similar for both serotypes. in agreement with prediction, titers for each serotype in mixed infections showed a significant negative relationship with the length of time between their infection and infection by the competitor . that is, the magnitude of competitive suppression for a serotype was stronger, the later that the serotype was added after the other serotype, and this pattern was consistent for both serotypes. the analysis also showed that the intercept of the relationship was higher for denv <dig> relative to denv <dig>  indicating that denv <dig> titers were more adversely affected by competition than denv <dig> 

trc = time in hours that serotype was added relative to its competitor; denv = denv serotype 

to examine effects of mixed-strain infection on total virus production , total titers for coinfection  and superinfection  treatments were each compared to the grand mean of single-strain infection treatments. the single-strain infection category included data for both denv <dig> and denv <dig> strains, but only the treatments where the total amount of virus added was equivalent to a moi of  <dig>  since the total moi in the mixed-strain infection categories was also  <dig>  if mixed infections do not affect total titers, than the average titer of denv <dig> and  <dig> in single-strain infections should equal the sum of denv <dig> and  <dig> in mixed-strain infections, when both treatments are initiated with the same dose of total virus. in coinfections, total titers were similar to those in single-strain infections , but in superinfections they were in fact lower than in single-strain infections , indicating that superinfection decreased total viral replication.

discussion
to examine whether competition between denv serotypes can occur, we tested whether high dose infections with two serotypes in cultured mosquito cells affected progeny output for either serotype relative to its output in single-serotype infections. aedes albopictus is one of the major vectors of dengue worldwide  <cit> , and while cultured cells are not a perfect model for infection in vivo they offer a tractable system for assessing the potential effects of mixed-serotype infections. we found that replication can indeed be suppressed during mixed infections with two serotypes, and that the magnitude of suppression of a given serotypeis stronger for serotypes infecting cells that already have established infections with a different serotype. this is the first study that quantitatively demonstrates competitive suppression between dengue serotypes. since denv isolation studies have suggested that mixed-serotype infections in both hosts and vectors occur, and may even be common in some circumstances, our data indicate that further investigation of the interactions between dengue serotypes is important for understanding dengue epidemiology.

although competition affected final titers, population growth rate during most of the exponential phase was similar between single infection and mixed infection treatments. thus, competitive suppression occurred late in infection, once virus populations had approached a plateau in concentration. a similar late-acting effect was observed when a wild type strain of foot-and-mouth disease virus  was co-infected with engineered strains carrying 1– <dig> point mutations in either the capsid, a structural protein, or the polymerase, a non-structural protein responsible for replication of the genome  <cit> . wild type virus replication was not suppressed within the first 3– <dig> hours after introduction to cells, but at later sampling time points the wild type had produced significantly fewer infectious progeny relative to single infection controls. furthermore, in fmdv suppression of wild type virus replication was not always observed, but rather the outcome depended on the particular mutations carried by the competitor. replication ability of the competitor mutants was characterized in separate treatments , which showed that while some mutants were incapable of producing infectious progeny, others were almost as fit as the wild type. of the three competitors carrying mutations in the polymerase, only the mutant that produced high levels of polymerase and infectious progeny caused suppression of the wild type. interestingly, some of the competitors carrying capsid mutations produced large quantities of capsid protein early in infection and actually enhanced the production of infectious particles of wild type early in infection. taken together, the results suggest that competitive success may depend upon a strain's ability to monopolize its own replication machinery and structural proteins and to acquire those of its competitors late in infection. our finding that denv serotypes are suppressed later in infection is consistent with the idea that competition is mediated by the intracellular density of virus genome templates and copies of virus proteins, perhaps through competition for polymerase or capsid proteins  <cit> . under this hypothesis, a virus strain that experienced high levels of coinfection with other strains, such as a new strain invading an area with an endemic virus population, would benefit from a rapid escalation of rna replication early in infection. our results support this notion by the finding that the magnitude of suppression depended upon the superinfection interval. serotypes that infected earlier had an advantage, whereas those that infected later had the most extreme disadvantage.

the two serotypes of denv used in this study, which showed similar rates of replication in isolation, nonetheless showed significant variation in competitive ability, suggesting that similar variation may occur in nature. a second implication of this asymmetry is that traits conferring competitive ability in mixed infection may be de-coupled from those that enable high replication rates in single infections. for example, a virus strain may replicate rapidly when it has sole access to homologous viral polymerase but poorly in a mixed population of genomes competing for heterologous polymerases. importantly, these results underscore that the outcome of within-host competition is not predictable from replication rates in single infections. this finding could also be relevant in the design and development of a tetravalent vaccine, which must contain all four serotypes. if one serotype is better able to usurp polymerase in a coinfected cell, then the production of neutralizing antibodies may be unbalanced, resulting in an ineffective vaccine. in this context, however, the total dose of virus is low enough that opportunity for inter-serotype interference within cells may be limited to peripheral cells co-infected at the injection site.

the fact that total titers were significantly lower in superinfections when compared to single infections of the same moi shows that interspecific competition was stronger than intraspecific competition, further suggesting that competition-related traits are available to selection in this system. thus, under the hypothesis that competition for viral proteins mediates suppression, we predict that strains isolated from regions where serotypes frequently coinfect mosquitoes should have the strongest ability to utilize and compete for genetically different polymerase or capsid proteins . however, with regard to differences in total titers in single versus mixed infections, there is a slight inconsistency; total titers in coinfections were not significantly lower than single infections while those in superinfections were. theoretically, in the two treatments the frequencies of cells infected with particular numbers of each serotype would have been similar. the difference is that viruses that superinfect could be at a numerical disadvantage since those that infect first have already begun progeny production and thus could outnumber the second serotype once resources become limiting. our result that superinfection decreases overall virus production significantly more that coinfection, indicates that competition resulted in disproportionately more severe effects on the total population when one of the strains had a headstart in the infection. this is consistent with our suspicion that the mechanism of competition may be density-dependent . experiments to test this prediction are ongoing.

CONCLUSIONS
our results demonstrate that competition between serotypes can affect virus titers in mixed infections in mosquito cells, suggesting that competitive suppression could act to decrease transmission. to better understand the role of inter-serotype competition in emergence of dengue, future research should aim to identify predictor variables of suppression, to examine the effects of mixed-serotype infections on replication throughout both stages of the virus life cycle , and to quantify these effects in an epidemiological framework. it would also be useful to examine these effects in live mosquitoes. recent studies of single strain infections in aedes aegypti have highlighted that viruses must replicate in, and disseminate to, several different vector tissues before infecting the salivary glands and disseminating to the saliva for transmission  <cit> . the nature of this pathway and our finding that competitive abilities were uncoupled from performance in single infections highlight that there is potential for interaction effects between serotypes at several stages during vector infection, which could complicate prediction of the effects of mixed serotype infection. lastly, our results underscore that within-host competition in the mosquito vector may have dramatic effects on both emergence and long-term virus persistence, and these potential effects should be explored in the context of other important factors of dengue virulence such as the host immune system.

