BACKGROUND
experimental administration of oleoyl-estrone  induces the selective loss of body fat, without concurrent loss of body protein  <cit> . since oe is synthesized from estrone by adipose cells  <cit>  and released into the bloodstream, where its concentrations correlates with body fat mass  <cit> , oe has been postulated as a lipostatic signal regulating body fat mass. the short-term effects of oe treatment in rats, involve the decrease in food intake, a decrease in body weight and an impressive decrease of cholesterol levels, mainly due to the sharp decrease of hdl-cholesterol that results in an increased cholesterol turnover rate  <cit> . this pattern has been reproduced also in obese humans  <cit> . the selective fall in total fat content is a direct consequence of the generalized decrease of adipose tissue mass in several locations  <cit> .

the intra-venous administration of pharmacological doses of oleoyl-estrone causes mild estrogenic effects, and results in high circulating levels of estrone  <cit> . oral administration of the estrone ester, however, prevents these effects by maintaining low plasma levels of both estrone and estradiol. furthermore, oral oe treatment does not increase the total body estrogen content of the rat  <cit> . the lack of noticeable estrogenic effects has been confirmed when an obese man used oe treatment for lose weight without secondary effects  <cit> . at the moment, the mechanism underlying oleoyl-estrone action remains unknown. in this respect, the involvement of receptors different from classic estrogen receptors has been proposed  <cit> , although it seems that the mechanism involves pathways other than those activated by forced food restriction, as pair-fed models  <cit> .

it seems evident, however, that the oe action must be related with the ability of white adipose tissue to manage lipidic compounds. for this reason, the objective of the present work was to determine if a short-term oe treatment, in spite of its effects on food intake, caused significant changes in the expression of genes that regulate lipid metabolism in white adipose tissue.

RESULTS
wistar rats were subjected to an oral treatment with oleoyl-estrone. after  <dig> hours, their body weight and food intake were determined as well as the levels of different metabolites in serum . treated animals showed significant lower percentages of body weight variation than controls, together with a noticeable decrease in food intake. plasmatic levels of metabolites did not present important changes in treated animals, except for cholesterol and hdl-cholesterol that showed significant decreases compared to the controls.

the data are the mean ± sem of data from six animals per group. statistical comparison between groups was determined using the student's t test. * = p <  <dig> 

the expression profile of the  <dig> genes included in the specific atlas rat array  <dig>   was analyzed in the mesenteric white adipose tissue from control animals and treated with oleoyl-estrone. treatment with oe decreased the expression of  <dig> genes and up-regulated  <dig> other genes in mesenteric white adipose tissue. table  <dig> shows  <dig> down-regulated and  <dig> up-regulated selected genes that expressed a ratio lower than  <dig>  or higher than  <dig>  when compared with control group in mesenteric white adipose tissue. fas, acc, fabp <dig>  lpl, cpt1b, hsl and fatp <dig> showed ratios lower than  <dig> . the differentially expressed genes were classified according to their function in several categories and their role in the intermediate metabolism, as complex lipid metabolism, simple lipid metabolism, other traffiking & targeting proteins, etc. these data are deposited in gene expression omnibus .

the expression of each gene is reported as the ratio of the value obtained after each treatment relative to control after normalization of the data.

next, we proceeded to validate the differential expression of specific outlier genes to verify the changes in mrna levels. real-time pcr offers a non hybridization-based detection and was chosen as complementary to arrays. the selected genes were analyzed by real-time pcr under the same experimental conditions as for the array analyses.

in mesenteric white adipose tissue , it was determined that mrna levels for hsl were decreased by 32%, whereas those of fas, acc and cpt1b were decreased by a 95%, 92% and 45% respectively upon treatment with oe. in the figure  <dig> can be seen that treatment with oe decreases mrna expression of fatp <dig> by 52%, fabp <dig> by 49% and lpl by 52%. conversely, tnfα showed overexpression  as a consequence of oe-treatment. all these changes were statistically significant , except for hsl and tnfα. these results confirmed the rna data obtained in the screening performed using the cdna arrays.

discussion
the application of genomic technologies to study different metabolic profiles has been widely used  <cit> , especially in the case of adipose tissue or obesity. the application of this miniaturized hybridization technology allows the simultaneous analysis of the expression of hundreds of genes and pride the opportunity to discover abnormalities in the expression of many genes. in this case, the experience has been positive, since we have detected many genes underexpressed, and a more reduced amount of overexpressed genes, as a consequence of oe treatment. a minimal part of this abundant information has been shown in the table  <dig>  and we have only used which referred to lipid metabolism.

the short-term treatment with oe reproduced the pattern previously described  <cit> , where the decrease caused in body weight, food intake and in hdl-cholesterol levels were the main traits. under these standard conditions, we were able to determine the gene expression profile in tissue samples extracted from oe-treated animals and confirm by real-time pcr the changes in the expression of some specific genes. in the mesenteric white adipose tissue were selected different enzymes implied either in storage or in the mobilization of lipids; lpl as a main inductor of fatty acid uptake from lipoproteins; fatp <dig> and fabp <dig> implied in fatty acid transport across the membrane and citosol respectively; acc and fas as regulatory enzymes in the synthesis of fatty acids; hsl as main responsible for triacylglycerol mobilization and cpt1b as a regulatory pathway for beta-oxidation. furthermore, tnfα, a regulatory peptide that exerts an important control on tissue proliferation and the uptake and storage of metabolites was also selected.

lipoprotein lipase  is the key enzyme for the hydrolysis of circulating triglycerides  into free fatty acids and glycerol and plays a major role in adipocyte lipid storage and hence the regulation of obesity  <cit> . lpl is thought to act as a "gate keeper" for fatty acid uptake into organs  <cit> , in spite that other pathways must be implied, because both humans and mice without adipose tissue lpl, still have some essential fatty acids in adipose tissue  <cit> . the under expression of lpl by oe-treatment is consistent with the previously described loss of weight, that is a consequence of decrease in adipose tissue weight  <cit> . thus, if adipose tissue has lost some capacity to extract lipid from circulating lipoproteins, a decrease in the accumulation of lipids will be the immediate consequence. an inhibitory action of estrogens on lipoprotein lipase has been described to explain the inhibition of obesity development by estrogen replacement therapy in rats  <cit> ; however, we do not have any evidence that support a similar action for the inhibitory effect of oe treatment. furthermore, the underexpression of lpl could be also influenced by tnfα overexpression  <cit> , due to its inhibitory action on lpl expression.

the decreased expression of fatty acid transport proteins  confirms the previous statement, and then a low capacity to release fatty acids from lipoproteins is completed with a decreased transport into the cell , that is accordance with the strength of their expression and the appearance of obesity  <cit> . furthermore, the decrease in fabp <dig> expression is in accordance with a decrease in fatty acid utilization, and may be a consequence of the decreased food intake, as fabp <dig> seems to be up regulated by diet  <cit> .

lipogenesis implies the synthesis of fatty acids from non lipid substrates and is played in liver and adipose tissue and is under control of hormones and metabolites from dietary origin. thus, insulin and glucose activate the lipogenic pathway, and conversely, glucagon and poly-unsaturated fatty acids inhibits this process  <cit> . these regulatory actions may imply the action of different transcription factors and nuclear receptors, in spite of the noticeable differences between human and rodent adipose tissues  <cit> . fatty acid synthase activity and their mrna expression are usually taken as markers of lipogenesis  <cit> , since the alterations in activity are due primarily to alterations in the transcription rate. a sharp decrease in the expression of fas, as in oe-treated rats, will imply an important decrease in its activity, and then a decrease in the synthesis de novo of fatty acids in adipose tissue. moreover, the decrease in the expression of acc may act reinforcing the slowing of fatty acid synthesis pathway. however, it must be taken into account the dual action of acc, since the increase of their activity can act as a precursor of malonyl coa as an inhibitor of mitochondrial translocation of fatty acids to beta-oxidation  <cit> .

the decreased capacity to catabolize fatty acid can be a consequence both of a decrease in adipose tissue ability to degrade triacylglycerols and a decrease in the beta-oxidation pathway. thus, a clear tendency to decrease in the expression of hsl, as hsl activity regulates lipolytic pathway  <cit> , must be interpreted as adipose tissue reduces the hormone-dependent triacylglycerol degrading capacity. furthermore, the passage of fatty acids to mitochondria is compromised as the expression of carnitine palmitoyltransferase 1b  shows a low expression level. since cpt1b is the isoform present in adipose tissue  <cit> , regulates the entrance to oxidation pathway, in spite of the low activity attributed to white adipose tissue  <cit> , its low expression levels emphasizes the general trend to show low fatty acid oxidation rates as a consequence of oe-treatment. moreover, this low pace activity can be reinforced by the inhibition caused by malonyl-coa, that could be accumulated as a consequence of decreased fas expression, since its decrease is faster than that of acc .

tumour necrosis factor-α  can act both as autocrine or a paracrine factor, playing a central role in the control of production of several cytokines or acute phase proteins  <cit> . tnfα synthesis in adipose tissue occurs in stromal vascular and matrix fraction including macrophages. tnfα plays a main role in the inflammatory state that is characteristic of obesity, and the increase in its levels may be related with the inhibitory effect on insulin receptor signalling pathway, the diminishing triacylglycerol depots in adipose tissue or in the development of apoptosis  <cit> . thus the tendency to increase the expression of tnfα could strengthen different mechanisms that will achieve with the decrease of lipidic depots in white adipose tissue, inhibiting the action of insulin and promoting the apoptosis, in spite of their inability to promote an increased hsl response. the different sensitivity to oe treatment in different adipose tissue sites  <cit> , and the selectively different response of oe treatment in front of a single food deprivation  <cit> , must be taken into account to infer that this treatment induces a tendency to increase the tnfα expression that can collaborate with the global process of lipid mobilization, probably through the stimulation apoptotic pathways, since a generalized increase in apoptosis markers has been described as a consequence of oe-treatment  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
short-term treatment with oe affects the capacity of adipose tissue to extract fatty acids from lipoproteins , to transport fatty acids , to generate fatty acids from precursors  and to catabolize their fatty acids , where the global process is controlled by regulator factors such as tnfα. this impaired ability to obtain metabolites from food, and the restricted ability to store them in adipose tissue are key observations of the initial tracks to establish the mechanism of action of oe.

