BACKGROUND
diplomonads and their close relatives – enteromonads, retortamonads and carpediemonas membranifera – are small flagellates that tend to be found in low-oxygen habitats. recently they were classified within fornicata   <cit> . very recently an additional member of fornicata, dysnectes brevis, was described  <cit> . most diplomonads, all described enteromonads, and all described retortamonads except one are endobionts or parasites of animals, with several causing serious and highly prevalent diseases in fish, domestic animals and man  <cit> .

diplomonads and their relatives have been interesting for students of the evolution of the eukaryotic cell for several reasons. firstly, they lack classical mitochondria. secondly, diplomonads and their relatives branch at the base of the eukaryotic tree in the majority of phylogenies in which eukaryotes are rooted using prokaryotic outgroups  <cit> . thirdly, diplomonads, but not their relatives, possess a double karyomastigont, in other words, they have two similar or identical nuclei and two flagellar apparatuses per cell  <cit> . in the late 1980s and early 1990s it was widely supposed that the last common ancestor of most or all living eukaryotes was a 'fornicate-like' amitochondriate organism  <cit> , and some models even proposed that almost all living eukaryotes were descended from ancestors with a double karyomastigont  <cit> . the best-studied diplomonad – giardia intestinalis  was looked to as a model for understanding early eukaryotic cells.

recent studies, however, have shown that fornicata are secondarily amitochondriate  <cit> , and that many, perhaps all, retain mitochondrion-related organelles. small double membrane-bounded organelles called 'mitosomes' were identified in the diplomonad giardia intestinalis using antibodies against iscs and iscu  and the function of this organelle in iron-sulfur cluster synthesis was demonstrated in vitro  <cit> . using electron microscopy, a hydrogenosome-like double membrane-bounded organelle was observed superficially in carpediemonas membranifera  <cit> . furthermore, the position of fornicata at the base of rooted eukaryotic trees is now thought by many to be caused by long-branch attraction  <cit> . some authors, however, have argued that this basal position might nonetheless still be correct  <cit> .

diplomonads and enteromonads deserve special attention within fornicata. these two groups were considered as closely related on the basis of ultrastructural studies  <cit>  and their close affinity was confirmed recently by molecular phylogenetic methods  <cit> . the morphology of diplomonads is extremely similar to the morphology of enteromonads – the main character distinguishing these two groups is the doubled karyomastigont of diplomonads  <cit> . in a very simplified way, the cell of diplomonads could be described as two enteromonad cells joined together . the most straightforward scenario explaining the evolution of the doubled karyomastigont is that diplomonads arose from enteromonads in a single evolutionary event. siddall, hong and desser  <cit>  proposed a mechanism of double karyomastigont formation from a single karyomastigont ancestor by secondary karyokinesis  and mastigont duplication after delay or arrest of cytokinesis , resulting in a cell with four karyomastigonts. this cell could then have divided into two cells, each with a doubled karyomastigont. however, some other authors consider as plausible the opposite scenario – secondary simplification from the double karyomastigont morphology of diplomonads to the single karyomastigont morphology of enteromonads  <cit> .

our understanding of the internal phylogeny of fornicata is based to a large extent on molecular phylogenetic studies, especially with the relatively recent addition of several important taxa to the small subunit ribosomal rna gene database, namely retortamonads  <cit> , carpediemonas membranifera  <cit> , dysnectes brevis one clade of enteromonads  <cit> , the diplomonad octomitus sp.  <cit>  and several new species from the diplomonad genera spironucleus and hexamita  <cit> . the monophyly of fornicata is very strongly supported by molecular phylogenetic studies and there is strong support for a position of carpediemonas membranifera and dysnectes brevis at the base of the fornicata clade  <cit> . meanwhile molecular phylogenies almost invariably divide diplomonads into two major clades, hexamitinae and giardiinae, that were already recognized on morphological grounds by kulda and nohýnková  <cit> , with the former also identified by the synapomorphy of a non-canonical genetic code  <cit> . recently the diplomonad octomitus sp. was confirmed as a sister branch of giardia within giardiinae  <cit> , and at least one enteromonad group was surprisingly shown to fall within hexamitinae  <cit> . nonetheless, our understanding of the relationships amongst fornicata is incomplete. for example, different analyses of ssu rrna gene data place retortamonads either as a sister group of the diplomonad-enteromonad clade  <cit> , as predicted by morphology  <cit> , or as a sister branch of the giardia-octomitus clade, thereby making diplomonads appear paraphyletic  <cit> . the main problem in resolving the phylogeny of fornicata is the limited amount of data, both in terms of taxon sampling and the amount of sequence information per taxon. for example, to date only one enteromonad genus has been studied by molecular means, using only a single gene  <cit> , whereas there are three genera of enteromonads already described, which are quite different in morphology, and enteromonads are generally not recovered as a clade in phylogenetic analyses of morphological data  <cit> .

in this study we aim to clarify relationships within fornicates, especially among enteromonads and hexamitinae diplomonads, and to better understand the evolutionary history of single and double karyomastigonts. we introduce several important taxa into our molecular analyses, including ten new isolates of enteromonads that represent at least three genera. we also introduce two protein-coding genes into the analyses, α-tubulin and hsp <dig> 

RESULTS
ssu rdna phylogeny
our analyses of ssu rrna genes include the broadest taxonomic sampling of fornicates examined so far. in addition to previously available data we have included five new isolates of the enteromonad genus trimitus , three new isolates of the genus enteromonas, two isolates of a new enteromonad genus , an isolate of trepomonas steini , a new isolate corresponding to the morphospecies trepomonas agilis , a novel spironucleus isolate  and one uncultured eukaryote . we also extended the previously incomplete ssu rdna sequence for spironucleus muris. trimitus sp. – it <dig> and trimitus sp. – kompkoj represent the first observations and isolations of free-living enteromonads reported so far.

the ssu rdna analyses were done using three different alignments, 'large' including a broad eukaryotic outgroup, 'main' including all fornicata and a restricted outgroup, and 'small' including only hexamitinae diplomonads and enteromonads. figure  <dig> shows the ml tree based on ssu rrna genes, with a restricted outgroup . the overall topology of the ssu rdna tree is as follows: fornicata forms a clade with high statistical support , enteromonads branch robustly within the hexamitinae subtree , and giardia and octomitus form the sister clade of the hexamitinae-enteromonad subtree, thus rendering diplomonads plus enteromonads monophyletic to the exclusion of retortamonads, but usually with low or no statistical support . very similar results were obtained when a broader outgroup sampling was employed .

given the strong support for a clade consisting of all hexamitinae and all enteromonads, we performed additional analyses with narrower taxon sampling to examine the internal relationships of this grouping . within the hexamitinae-enteromonad clade, members of the genus spironucleus form three separated basal clades in all rooted analyses: i) spironucleus vortens forms a clade with s. salmonis; ii) s. barkhanus branches with s. torosa and s. salmonicida; and iii) s. muris and s. meleagridis form a clade . our isolate of spironucleus, gepa2h, branches as a sister of s. torosa, suggesting that it could be an isolate of this species, although the genetic distance between gepa2h and s. torosa is greater than that between s. barkhanus and s. salmonicida . representatives of the genus enteromonas constitute a weakly supported or unsupported clade in analyses of the main and small datasets, but are polyphyletic in the ml tree estimated for the large dataset, because the isolate enteromonas hominis branches as a sister to spironucleus muris and s. meleagridis. the members of the genus hexamita and uncultured eukaryote chesi <dig> form a clade with the enteromonads of the genus trimitus, as well as with the new enteromonad genus. all trimitus isolates constitute a highly supported monophyletic group. hexamita, by contrast, does not constitute a monophyletic group within that clade. genus trepomonas constitutes an unsupported clade  in analyses of the main and small datasets and forms a paraphyletic group in analyses of the large data set.

concatenation of ssu rdna, and protein gene data
we have obtained sequences of hsp <dig> and/or α-tubulin coding genes for all outstanding sampled genera of diplomonads, except trepomonas. for three taxa we obtained only one of the protein coding genes . interestingly, the alternative genetic code usage described earlier in all hexamitinae , was also identified in the protein coding gene sequences from two out of three enteromonad genera . analyses of hsp <dig> and α-tubulin genes support the monophyly of the genus enteromonas, as enteromonas geca <dig> and enteromonas hominis enteroii constitute a highly supported clade in both cases .

the sequences in bold font were determined during this study.

the phylogenetic tree estimated for the concatenated ssu rdna, hsp <dig> and α-tubulin data is shown in figure  <dig>  as in the ssu rdna trees, spironucleus vortens and spironucleus salmonicida branch paraphyletically at the base of the hexamitinae-enteromonad clade with high statistical support. spironucleus muris, the genera enteromonas, hexamita and trimitus, and the new enteromonad genus  constitute a clade with weakly resolved internal relationships. by contrast, giardia intestinalis branches as a sister group of the hexamitinae-enteromonad clade with high statistical support , leaving retortamonads in a sister position to the whole 'diplomonads plus enteromonads' clade.

au tests
in order to explore further the evolutionary positions of enteromonads we performed au tests of alternative topologies. in the case of the ssu rrna gene data, we compared a set of  <dig> reasonable trees, including both the ml tree and the topology of highest likelihood in which enteromonads were monophyletic. for the concatenated dataset, α-tubulin, and hsp <dig>  all reasonable trees were examined . the monophyly of enteromonads was not rejected by analyses of any one single gene. in the analysis of the concatenated dataset, however, the monophyly of enteromonads was rejected at the level of 5% .

discussion
molecular phylogeny of fornicata
our analyses of ssu rrna genes include the broadest taxonomic sampling of fornicata published so far. our results are generally consistent with those of other recent studies  <cit> . the genus spironucleus constitutes three separate branches close to the base of the hexamitinae-enteromonad subtree. this topology is in good agreement with previous studies  <cit> , however, all three clades of spironucleus constitute long branches and their position at the base of the hexamitinae-enteromonad subtree could be a long-branch attraction artifact  <cit> . the presence of spironucleus isolate gepa2h within the clade of spironucleus barkhanus, s. torosa, and s. salmonicida is noteworthy, since gepa2h was isolated from the terrestrial tortoise geochelone pardalis, while the latter three species infect marine teleosts. this argues against jørgensen and sterud's  <cit>  proposal that there are more-or-less distinct marine, freshwater, and terrestrial clades within spironucleus. the internal relationships within the remainder of the hexamitinae-enteromonad subtree were weakly or not supported and vary widely with the method of tree reconstruction and alignment. further data will be required for a complete picture of the relationships within hexamitinae.

analyses of concatenated genes quite strongly support the monophyly of diplomonads plus enteromonads to the exclusion of retortamonads and carpediemonas, albeit within the context of a smaller taxon sampling than is presently available for ssu rdna alone. this supports previous morphological studies and analyses  <cit>  but contrasts with some previous studies of ssu rdna data, in which retortamonads branch weakly within diplomonads, as the sister group to giardiinae  <cit> . the tendency for retortamonads to branch within diplomonads in ssu rdna analyses is most probably an analysis artifact, but the cause of this artifact is not clear. our preliminary analyses do not support the notion that either base composition heterogeneity  or simple long-branch attraction is to blame . it is also possible that ssu rdna simply does not contain enough information to resolve the phylogenetic relationships among the ingroup taxa.

the positions of enteromonads
enteromonads and hexamitinae diplomonads form a monophyletic group to the exclusion of other fornicata. this is consistent with previous molecular phylogenies that included a much smaller sampling of enteromonads  <cit>  and one morphological study  <cit> . the clade has very strong statistical support in our analyses, and is further supported by a molecular synapomorphy: the non-canonical genetic code common to all studied hexamitinae  <cit>  appears also to be present in at least two of the three enteromonads for which we obtained protein-coding gene sequence data.

the most striking result of our study is the non-monophyly of enteromonads. the possibility of enteromonads being polyphyletic was suggested speculatively by simpson  <cit>  on the basis of morphological data. the internal relationships of the hexamitinae-enteromonad clade are weakly supported at present, and need further investigation. more extensive taxon sampling for studied protein-coding genes is necessary, as well as more protein-coding genes. nonetheless, our results support the non-monophyletic status of enteromonads, as the monophyly of enteromonads was rejected by au test with the concatenated data set. interestingly, none of the single gene phylogenies themselves rejected enteromonad monophyly. the differing results from analysis of the concatenated dataset and the single-gene datasets could be caused either by an insufficient amount of data in single gene analyses or by conflicting signal between single gene phylogenies. however, none of the single gene ml trees was rejected in au tests of the concatenated dataset, suggesting that there is no strong conflict between single gene phylogenies. it is reasonable to assume therefore that the rejection of enteromonad monophyly on the basis of concatenated data, but not in to single gene analyses, is due to insufficient signal rather than conflicting single-gene data.

many authors have treated diplomonads and enteromonads as taxa of equivalent rank  <cit> , implicitly or explicitly reflecting a widespread assumption that diplomonads and enteromonads are sister clades, or that enteromonads represent a paraphyletic group from which a monophyletic diplomonads group evolved  <cit> . our analysis demonstrates, however, that many, and probably all enteromonads fall within diplomonads and specifically within hexamitinae. moreover, enteromonads represent a non-monophyletic group within hexamitinae. there is no possible interpretation of our results that would allow recognition of diplomonads and enteromonads as separate taxa, without at least one of them being polyphyletic. therefore, we suggest that the taxon diplomonadida and any of its effective synonyms be considered to include enteromonads, and that the taxa enteromonadida and enteromonadinae no longer be used. the term 'enteromonads' should be taken to have a purely descriptive, and not taxonomic, meaning.

evolution of single and double karyomastigont cell organization
in a previous study  <cit>  it was shown that at least one enteromonad clade branches within diplomonads, and branches with or within the diplomonad subgroup hexamitinae, suggesting either that enteromonads are secondarily simplified, possibly in one evolutionary event, or that the double karyomastigont morphology characteristic of diplomonads arose more than once during their evolution. our present study indicates that enteromonads do not constitute a monophyletic group within hexamitinae, and thus switches between single- and double-karyomastigont morphology must have occurred several times during evolution, irrespective of the direction in which these switches occurred. if we assume only one direction of change within the diplomonad-enteromonad clade and assuming, for argument's sake, that our topologies are correct, there are two basic possibilities: either the double-karyomastigont morphology arose many times in closely related groups  or enteromonads arose by secondary reduction from double-karyomastigont ancestors at least three times independently.

there are three potential scenarios describing the switch between single and double karyomastigont morphologies . for comparison, the standard cell cycle of an enteromonad is depicted in figure 4a.

 <dig>  the switch from single karyomastigont morphology to double karyomastigont morphology was envisaged by siddall, hong and desser  <cit>  as a change in the relative timing between karyokinesis and cytokinesis . under this model a cell with a single karyomastigont goes through nuclear and mastigont division and is prepared for cell division. cell division is arrested, however, and the cell goes through another nuclear and mastigont division, resulting in a cell with four karyomastigonts. the cell with four karyomastigonts then divides into two cells, each with a double karyomastigont.

 <dig>  the opposite switch , from a double to single karyomastigont, could also be explained as a change in the timing of karyokinesis and cytokinesis. cells with a double karyomastigont morphology could just go through cell division without nuclear and mastigont division. another similar event would involve a cell with four karyomastigonts  dividing into four daughter cells instead of two.

 <dig>  the last scenario suggests fusion of the nuclei in a cell with the double-karyomastigont morphology. the resulting cell could then lose the second mastigont, resulting in a cell with a single-karyomastigont morphology.

these scenarios have different strengths and weaknesses in terms of plausibility. scenario one seems implausible from a phylogenetic perspective, as it requires a very large number of parallel evolutions of the distinctive doubled cell morphology within the diplomonad-enteromonad clade. scenario two invokes many fewer evolutionary events, but requires that the two nuclei of the parental diplomonad cell be nearly identical , otherwise the single karyomastigont progeny would not be viable. scenario three requires the same number of evolutionary transitions as scenario two, and is compatible with a diplomonad parent that had non-identical and essential nuclei, but is otherwise a more complex mechanism. therefore, the key to understanding the evolution of nucleus number in diplomonads lies in knowing whether the nuclei of diplomonads are identical. naïvely, it might be expected that the nuclei are non-identical, since one copy of each nucleus is transmitted to each daughter cell during division  <cit> , and, in principle at least, the two nuclei would represent separate lineages once the diplomonad state has been fixed. this would allow essential genes to be lost from one or the other nucleus, such that both nuclei would soon be required for the cell lineage to persist and any uninucleate progeny would be unviable. however, this could be avoided if there were mechanisms that frequently generated cells in which both nuclei were copies of a single parental nucleus .

empirical data on the nature of diplomonad nuclei are limited and conflicting. the human parasite giardia intestinalis is the only diplomonad whose molecular and cellular biology has been studied in detail. yu, birky and adam  <cit>  used probes against selected genes to indicate that each nucleus of g. intestinalis contains a complete set of genetic information. bernarder, palm and svard  <cit>  have also deduced from results of facs analysis that the two nuclei of g. intestinalis are diploid. the genome sequence of giardia intestinalis  strain wb clone c <dig> was published by morrison et al.  <cit> , and minimal heterozygosity was detected. very recently, a process of physical transfer of dna between nuclei was reported in giardia cysts  <cit> . however, tůmová et al.  <cit>  reported that the two nuclei of g. intestinalis possess different numbers of chromosomes. the focus on giardia is unfortunate in some respects, as giardia is a highly specialized parasite with an organization of cytoskeletal components  that is substantially different from other diplomonads. it is possible that results obtained for giardia may not be applicable to other diplomonads. giardia also represents the diplomonad group that is most distantly related to the various enteromonad taxa. it would be of great interest to compare the nuclei in one or more hexamitinae diplomonads .

there are some observations that would support scenario  <dig>  albeit indirectly. firstly, the populations of enteromonads often contain some double individuals resembling hexamita in their morphology, with two fully developed karyomastigonts and no apparent signs of cytokinesis . this may suggest that there is some general tendency for delayed or arrested cytokinesis. secondly, a recent study of the flagellar cycle of giardia intestinalis has shown that the two karyomastigonts are not independent, as basal bodies migrate between the two karyomastigonts  <cit> . this means that the flagellar maturation cycle would be corrupted in cells that switched back to a single karyomastigont.

our molecular phylogenies contradict any scenario invoking just one unique evolutionary transition between single and double karyomastigont morphologies within diplomonads. according to the inferred topology, the most parsimonious scenario would have one transition from single to double karyomastigont morphology at the base of diplomonads and several independent reversals to the single karyomastigont morphology. however, taking into account possible inaccuracies in our estimated tree, principally involving spironucleus, and the limited data on diplomonad cell biology, several independent transitions from single to double morphology  cannot be excluded. more data on the molecular and cellular biology of diplomonads in addition to giardia will be necessary for understanding the enigmatic evolution of the double karyomastigont of diplomonads.

CONCLUSIONS
our analyses of ssu rrna, hsp <dig> and α-tubulin genes strongly positioned all enteromonads within hexamitinae diplomonads and showed that enteromonads do not constitute a monophyletic group. these results suggest that transformations between single- and double-karyomastigont morphologies have occurred several times during the evolution of diplomonads, however, it is not possible to confidently determine the direction of these switches without more information about the cellular and molecular biology of diplomonads and enteromonads. we suggest that the high level taxa enteromonadida, enteromonadidae and enteromonadinae should be abandoned and the genera enteromonas and trimitus should be considered as members of hexamitinae diplomonads. the term 'enteromonad' should have a purely utilitarian meaning – diplomonadida with a single karyomastigont.

