BACKGROUND
thymic epithelial cells  perform an essential function to promote many aspects of t cell maturation within the thymus, including thymocyte proliferation, apoptosis, and positive and negative selection  <cit> . however, there are still many gaps in our knowledge of the molecular mechanisms operating within tecs to control these diverse functions. a major obstacle has been the lack of genetic tools for manipulating gene expression specifically in tecs, which has hampered analysis of these molecular mechanisms. while keratin promoters can drive expression of transgenes in subsets or all of tecs  <cit> , they are also expressed widely in epithelium, which restricts their utility for analysis of thymus phenotypes. to circumvent this problem, a recent study made use of embryo chimeras using nude mouse donors and homozygous knockout embryonic stem cells   <cit> ; however, this technique is technically challenging, time consuming, and is limited by the availability of homozygous knockout es cells. identifying an efficient and reproducible genetic method for expressing genes in tecs and generating tec-specific gene knockouts would enable new molecular and genetic studies of tec differentiation and function.

the foxn <dig> gene is expressed in all epithelial cells in the early thymic rudiment from e <dig>   <cit> , and is required cell-autonomously for tec differentiation  <cit> . the foxn <dig> null allele, nude, has a complete failure of tec differentiation. outside of the thymus, foxn <dig> has a very restricted expression pattern, limited to developing hair follicles and skin  <cit> . the first targeted allele of foxn <dig> contained an ires-lacz insertion into the third exon, creating a tagged null allele which was used to show expression of foxn <dig> in both cortical and medullary tecs  <cit> , and to identify the initial expression pattern of foxn <dig> during thymic ontogeny  <cit> . thus, the foxn <dig> gene is a good locus for expressing genes in the thymic epithelium from very early stages.

gene targeting in embryonic stem cells is commonly used to generate alleles of genes tagged with marker genes , or to express other genes of interest such as cre recombinase under the control of an endogenous promoter. loci that are designed to express exogenous sequences under the control of a gene are often referred to as "driver" loci. this approach generally combines creation of a mutant allele with the insertion of a sequence to be expressed. the downside of such a "knockin-knockout" approach occurs when the driver alleles are combined with mutations in other genes. for example, the use of a knockin/knockout cre driver locus in a conditional knockout strategy may result in additional phenotypes due simply to the genetic interaction between the cre driver and the gene of interest.

in addition, there are many loci for which any disruption of function will lead to a phenotypic effect . many of these loci are expressed in temporal and spatial patterns that make them attractive for use as driver loci for the analysis of development. the haploinsufficiency of these loci can in theory be bypassed by the use of promoter fragments or bac-based transgenes derived from these loci to express cre from randomly integrated transgenes. while this approach can certainly be successful, it also can have significant well-known problems. these include the lack of identified regulatory elements for many genes, the potential for widely distributed regulatory elements, the need to screen multiple lines to identify correct expression relative to the endogenous gene, instability of expression patterns for a given line over time, and mutation of genes at the insertion site. a recently published foxn1::egfp transgenic line is a good case in point  <cit> . although this transgene does have correct early fetal expression and is expressed in the adult thymus, its expression relative to the endogenous gene also must be validated independently relative to the endogenous gene at all stages, to verify that all of the required regulatory sequences for correct expression through the life of the animal are present, and that it accurately reflects endogenous gene expression. thus, there are distinct disadvantages to this approach, particularly as a widely applicable strategy.

the creation of multiple different tagged alleles is also extremely useful for multiple mutant analyses. as the number of lacz and gfp-tagged alleles for genes increases, the ability to generate a "rainbow" series of alleles at key loci for marker analyses in mutants becomes increasingly valuable. however, the generation of multiple alleles of the same gene is expensive, time consuming, and labor-intensive, resulting in a practical barrier to the generation of these useful allelic series.

the foxn <dig> genomic locus has been shown by us and others to undergo very high efficiency gene targeting in es cells, with frequencies up to 95% of correctly targeted loci using positive-negative selection  <cit> . we used an approach that we have termed multiplex gene targeting, which allows the simultaneous generation of multiple alleles for a given gene in a single gene targeting experiment. the general approach is to generate targeting vectors that are identical in all respects, except for the sequence of the inserted cassette. correctly targeted cell lines for each vector can then be generated in a single experiment simply by electroporating a mixture of the vectors and then screening for the two alleles. in the current example two targeting vectors were generated, each containing a different marker  with an internal ribosomal entry sequence  inserted at the same location in the foxn <dig> 3' untranslated region . the targeting events in the resulting es cell lines resulted in the expected allele structure, generating multiple independent es cell lines for either the lacz or cre alleles in a single experiment. these results demonstrate that multiplex gene targeting can generate multiple tagged alleles for a given gene in a single gene targeting experiment, significantly reducing the cost and time required to generate these lines.

while the 3' utr can contain sequences that affect mrna stability, foxn <dig> gene expression and function were not affected in heterozygous or homozygous mice carrying either the cre or lacz alleles throughout fetal development to the newborn stage. as the development of lymphoid progenitor cells in the fetal thymus is closely tied to thymic epithelial cell differentiation and function, analysis of thymocyte differentiation can be used as a sensitive and quantitative test for disruption of normal tec differentiation that would occur if foxn <dig> gene expression were perturbed. neither tec phenotypes, nor thymocyte numbers or differentiation profiles were affected in newborn mice carrying these alleles. these data show that multiplex gene targeting into the 3' utr of the foxn <dig> locus can be used as an efficient method for creating multiple alleles to express any gene of interest in all tecs from the earliest stage of thymus organogenesis. by analysis of the published literature, we also identified a number of additional cases where similar 3' utr targeting strategies have been successful for a wide variety of loci. our analysis suggests that multiplex gene targeting into the 3' utr may be a broadly applicable approach.

RESULTS
multiplex gene targeting at the foxn <dig> locus
we built two vectors, both of which were designed to create bicistronic messages expressing the normal foxn <dig> mrna followed by either ires-lacz or ires-cre , and utilizing the endogenous polyadenylation sequences after neo cassette deletion. in each vector, either an ires-lacz or ires-cre cassette was inserted into a unique xho <dig> site in exon  <dig> in the 3' utr,  <dig> bases 3' of the termination codon. the ires sequence used was from ecmv  <cit> . a mixture of equal amounts of the two linearized vectors was electroporated into either 129sv or c57bl/ <dig> es cell lines and subjected to positive-negative selection. 40– <dig> clones from each es cell line were screened by southern blot for presence of a targeting event with a 5' flanking probe, using ecorv to digest the genomic dna, which generated different sized bands for targeting events involving each of the two vectors .

results for the 129sv and c57bl/ <dig> es cell lines were similar. the overall targeting frequencies were 84%  in 129sv cells, and  <dig> %  in the c57bl/ <dig> cell line. frequencies for each vector were such that approximately half of the targeted cell lines were derived from each vector, indicating that the two vectors underwent homologous recombination with equal efficiency. although the vectors were non-isogenic in the c57bl/ <dig> es cells, this did not affect either the frequency or fidelity of the targeting events, suggesting that this locus has relatively few polymorphisms between these two strains. several targeted lines from each vector and each strain were chosen for further analysis. these cell lines were screened with both 5' and 3' flanking probes and with a probe from the neor selection cassette. all bands were the expected sizes for correct targeting events . subsequently, these alleles were genotyped by pcr . we have termed these alleles foxn1ex9lacz foxn1ex9cre.

expression of cre and lacz accurately reflects fetal foxn <dig> gene expression
bicistronic expression of genes from ires constructs can result in lower translation efficiencies of the second coding sequence. in the case of cre, this could result in mosaic cre-mediated deletion, even with appropriate rna expression patterns. to test the expression and activity of cre from the ires in our construct, we compared the known foxn <dig> mrna expression pattern to expression of the foxn1ex9lacz allele, and to the foxn1ex9cre allele using the r26r reporter strain  <cit>  . the timing and localization of initial cre activity as assayed by the r26r reporter was identical to both lacz expression from the foxn1ex9lacz allele and foxn <dig> mrna expression. no expression was seen at e <dig>  with either allele . at e <dig>  and e <dig> , there was no difference between the foxn1ex9cre allele , the foxn1ex9lacz allele  and foxn <dig> mrna , with expression seen in apparently all epithelial cells of the presumptive thymic rudiment. heterozygous and homozygous embryos showed similar timing of expression . no expression was observed in embryos at e <dig>  or e <dig>  that did not carry the foxn1ex9cre allele . thus, both alleles faithfully reflected the early expression of foxn <dig>  without affecting the timing or pattern of initial expression from the targeted locus.

we followed the expression of both alleles at e <dig>  and newborn stages . at e <dig>  both alleles showed similar expression patterns, with punctate nuclear staining distributed throughout both the developing cortical and medullary regions . less intense staining in the cytoplasmic regions of the tec network were also visible, presumably due to inefficient nuclear localization of the lacz gene product. this effect was particularly obvious in the presumptive medullary regions in the foxn1+/ex9cre;r26r+/- thymi . this higher level of lacz activity in medullary regions could be due to a longer half-life for medullary tecs resulting in higher accumulation of lacz protein, and/or smaller cytoplasmic area for medullary tecs resulting in a relative concentration of the protein.

using these reporters and at these stages, we did not see any difference between active foxn <dig> gene expression as indicated by the lacz allele, versus foxn1-expressing cell lineage, as indicated by the cre allele . we also did not see a pattern of foxn <dig> expression at the newborn stage similar to that recently reported using a foxn <dig> antibody  <cit> , in which areas of foxn1-negative epithelia were seen beginning at the newborn stage. while we cannot rule out the possibility that some tecs may down regulate foxn <dig> during development, the difference between our results and theirs may be an issue of the differential sensitivity of the reagents used in the two studies.

ubiquitous expression of cre in the thymus domain at the initial stages of organogenesis, as indicated by the r262r reporter, should result in permanent deletion in all tecs in a lineage-specific fashion. consistent with this prediction, we showed in a recent report that when this cre strain was used to delete the foxp <dig> gene from tecs, at least 90% of g <dig> + tecs had deleted foxp <dig>  or were yfp-positive as measured by the r26yfp indicator  <cit> . as a further analysis of the utility of this cre strain for tec-specific deletion, we crossed the foxn1ex9cre allele to the r26yfp reporter strain and analyzed the percentage of yfp-positive cells by flow cytometry. by this assay, more than 80% of cd45-mhc class ii+ and uea1+ tecs were yfp+ at  <dig> days postnatal . taken together, these and our previous data show that this cre strain can direct deletion in a high percentage of tecs.

our fetal expression data suggest that this is likely to be an underestimate of recombination. since all epithelial cells at early stages of thymus organogenesis are consistently lacz positive by the r26r reporter , all tecs should be labeled in a lineage-specific fashion throughout the life of the animal. our analysis of lacz expression at later fetal stages clearly shows that there are different levels of these reporters in different tec populations, either due to differential accumulation of the reporter protein due to different cell cycle length, or to actual differences in rosa <dig> gene expression . these differences could result in some cells with lower yfp levels being below the level of detection by flow cytometry.

removal of the neor cassette eliminates ectopic cre activity
when we originally tested the foxn1ex9cre strain, the frt-flanked neor cassette was still present in the locus immediately 3' of the ires-cre cassette. analysis of cre activity using the r26r reporter strain showed that while all embryos had the expected foxn1-specific cre activity pattern in the thymus at e <dig> , 5/ <dig> embryos tested also showed variable ectopic expression . this expression pattern is reminiscent of the strain-dependent and variable ectopic cre activity previously reported for the foxg1-cre mouse strain  <cit> . in the case of the foxn1ex9cre strain, deletion of the neor cassette by crossing to the actin-flp deleter strain  <cit>  resulted in complete loss of ectopic expression with no effect on the foxn1-specific pattern . this result provides a dramatic example emphasizing the effect that selectable markers can have on gene expression.

foxn <dig> gene expression and function is unaffected in foxn1ex9lacz and foxn1ex9cre homozygotes
a common problem with mouse strains carrying either marker genes or cre inserted into the coding sequence of the target locus  is the disruption of and loss of function for the targeted locus. while this is convenient for the simultaneous analysis of gene expression and mutant phenotype, it can cause unexpected or undesirable phenotypic complications when crossed with other mutations due to genetic interactions between the two genes. in addition a number of mouse genes are haploinsufficient suggesting that the knockin/knockout strategy would often lead to phenotypes in the driver strain itself. this could confound the analysis of mice containing the driver locus in combination with other mutant allele at other loci. the 3' utr strategy we have employed should greatly minimize the potential for phenotypic effects due to the driver locus itself, as long as the insertion does not affect the expression of the targeted locus. semi-quantitative rt-pcr showed similar levels of foxn <dig> rna in newborn thymi from heterozygous and homozygous foxn1ex9cre or foxn1ex9lacz  mice. these results confirmed that the insertion into the 3' utr did not affect steady-state foxn <dig> mrna levels.

we further performed a phenotypic analysis of fetal tec differentiation and thymocyte development in these two mouse strains. tec differentiation and initial medullary formation appeared normal as measured by immunostaining for keratin  <dig>  and keratin  <dig>  expression  <cit> . at e <dig>  the normal thymus contains small areas of prospective medullary epithelium, as shown by the presence of clusters of k8lok5+ or k8-k5+ cells . this staining pattern was seen in thymi from e <dig>  foxn1+/ex9cre and foxn1ex9lacz heterozygous and homozygous embryos .

we used analysis of thymocyte differentiation as a sensitive and quantitative test for disruption of normal tec differentiation that would occur if foxn <dig> gene expression were perturbed . foxn1+/nu heterozygotes have a mild haploinsufficiency phenotype, with lower total thymocyte numbers but normal thymocyte differentiation patterns . thymi from both foxn1ex9cre and foxn1ex9lacz heterozygous and homozygous newborns had normal thymocyte development, as measured by thymocyte cell number and differentiation profiles when compared to wild type newborn mice . similar results were obtained when the foxn1ex9cre and foxn1ex9lacz alleles were crossed to the foxn <dig> null nude allele . these results demonstrated that both heterozygotes and homozygotes for the foxn1ex9cre and foxn1ex9lacz alleles had normally functional thymi at this stage, further indicating that the 3' utr insertions did not affect foxn <dig> expression or function.

multiplex gene targeting and high-efficiency loci
the current results provide evidence that any loci that undergo high efficiency gene targeting in es cells are candidates for multiplex gene targeting to generate multiple alleles in one step. these alleles could be part of an allelic series for functional analysis or driver loci designed for the expression of exogenous genes in specific spatial or temporal patterns. to determine whether this strategy could be applied to a large number of genes we performed literature mining to document published gene targeting frequencies. it is not possible to do a comprehensive analysis of the entire gene targeting literature since most investigators stopped including targeting frequencies in their papers in the mid-1990s. however, our search suggests that there are many genes available that can be easily used to generate multiple driver alleles to express recombinases and/or marker genes in specific temporal and spatial patterns.

overall, we were surprised at the total number of very easily targeted genes. a recent study found that a number of genes are expressed at a high enough level in es cells to enable the use of promoterless selection cassettes in the targeting vector , thereby greatly enhancing targeting frequencies  <cit> . in a set of  <dig> loci,  <dig> had targeting frequencies of 45%–95%  <cit> . our search of the "classical" gene targeting literature identified additional loci that undergo gene targeting at a relatively high frequency. we focused on genes for which no gene trap es cell lines are listed on the ucsc genome browser  suggesting that a promoterless targeting strategy could not be applied in these cases. we found  <dig> genes in addition to foxn <dig> that exhibit high targeting efficiency with  <dig> of these loci  have targeting efficiencies of 20%–40% while hprt can be targeted at 100% efficiency  <cit> . in addition to these loci, we have identified an additional locus in our own work, the viaat gene, that also undergoes gene targeting at a high efficiency  after positive-negative selection . we have also recently obtained similar results for multiplex gene targeting at the rosa <dig> locus, which has a targeting frequency of 60–80% in our lab . as greater than 90% of the targeted cell lines in both the rosa <dig> and foxn <dig> loci showed correct allele structure, this approach could be of even more utility in the case of genes with lower frequencies, as it would allow screening for multiple rare targeting events simultaneously in a single experiment. given that a number of genes appear to undergo gene targeting at a high efficiency , knockin approaches at many loci may be easier than initially appreciated.

the 3'utr as a location for driver and marker insertion
in the current study we integrated the cre recombinase and lacz genes into the 3' utr of the foxn <dig> gene. we chose this strategy to minimize the possibility that the insertion will disrupt foxn <dig> function, a particular concern because of our evidence showing dosage sensitivity for the foxn <dig> gene. however, as the 3'utr is documented to be the location of sequences that affect the stability and translation of mrnas, it is unclear whether this strategy could be widely applicable to the generation of driver loci. to gain an indication of how widely applicable this approach can be, we performed an extensive analysis of published driver strains to see how often this knockin strategy has been used to generate cre driver mouse strains. we made particular note of any documented effects of 3' utr insertions on the function of the driver  gene. while this strategy does not identify cases in which a similar approach failed and were therefore not published, it can provide an indication of whether our results with the foxn <dig> locus represent an isolated incident or are similar to results obtained at other loci.

our search uncovered  <dig> published 3' utr ires-cre knockin mouse strains . in  <dig> of the mouse strains, the authors had tested the effect of the 3' utr knockin on the function of the driver locus by genetic analysis. in  <dig> out of the  <dig> cases, the normal expression and function of the driver locus was not affected by the 3'utr knockin . it is noteworthy that this approach enabled the construction of a sox9-cre knockin strain that could not have been generated using a knockin/knockout approach, as null mutants for sox <dig> are heterozygous lethal  <cit> . we also found that the 3' utr knockin strategy resulted in the generation of cre strains that faithfully expressed cre recombinase activity in the same pattern as the driver locus .

*heterozygous sox <dig> null mutants die shortly after birth.

nd = not done

our results with foxn <dig> 3' utr and the previously published examples of highly successful 3' utr knockin alleles strongly supports the use of this strategy for the generation of driver alleles. it is important to emphasize that our study and most if not all of the published cre drivers made 3'utr driver alleles without regard to the location of possible 3'utr regulatory sequences. as many of these consensus sequences are now well known  <cit> , combining a simple search for potential elements with the 3'utr insertion strategy should significantly improve the likelihood of success for this approach. the ability to introduce sequences into a mouse locus without disrupting the normal function of that locus minimizes the chances of possible confounding genetic interactions when these alleles are combined with mutant alleles at other loci.

CONCLUSIONS
the current results show that by combining the high targeting efficiency at the foxn <dig> locus with a 3' utr insertion strategy, we have generated two highly useful foxn <dig> alleles. we have consistently obtained very high gene targeting efficiencies at two different locations within the foxn <dig> locus  <cit> , as have other investigators  <cit> . this extremely high gene targeting efficiency makes it very easy to modify the foxn <dig> locus by homologous recombination in embryonic stem cells. the ease of gene targeting will facilitate future analysis of foxn <dig> functions in vivo. insertion of the ires cassette in the foxn <dig> 3' utr did not affect either the expression pattern or level of foxn <dig>  yielding cre or lacz expression and activity in a pattern identical to that of the foxn <dig> gene. flow cytometric analysis of early postnatal thymus confirmed that the cre activity resulted in deletion in a high percentage of tecs. functional analysis of the fetal thymus showed a completely normal wild-type phenotype, further demonstrating that the 3' utr insertion site did not affect gene expression. these results indicate that these alleles can be used in combination with other mutations in other genes with little likelihood of confounding genetic interactions due to dosage effects of foxn <dig>  therefore, the alleles generated in the current study provide key reagents for the in vivo analysis of tec differentiation and function.

these results have significant implications for the design and construction of driver alleles by knockin strategies. our results show that multiplex gene targeting is an effective and efficient method to generate at least two independent alleles for a given locus in a single gene targeting experiment. using this approach can significantly reduce the cost of generating an allelic series for a given gene, as long as the different modifications are made at the identical location within the gene. in addition, while the 3' utr is a common location for sequences that influence mrna stability, analysis of the foxn <dig> cre and lacz 3' utr knockin strains and the successes of other investigators in generating cre driver alleles at multiple loci by similar 3' utr knockin strategies provide evidence that this approach may be generally applicable for the generation of driver lines without additional gene dosage complications. these results therefore suggest that this approach represents a broadly useful strategy that may be applied to many loci.

