BACKGROUND
a number of classical and recent studies have shown that structural similarities among organisms are not necessarily based on homologous characters, but may instead be the result of convergent  evolution. thereby, these matching phenotypes have emerged independently in distantly related organisms  <cit> . accordingly, if misinterpreted as sharing common ancestry, convergently evolved characters might lead to false conclusions in phylogenetic reconstructions.

in the age of genomics, convergent evolution is mostly inferred based on existing phylogenies  and is often used to explain incongruencies between the phylogenetic signal obtained from molecular versus morphological datasets. in this respect, neuronal innervation patterns of organ systems may be used as an independent test of homology prior to phylogenetic analysis, as illustrated by classical studies on the structure of the polychaete nervous system  <cit> . along these lines, it seems reasonable to assume that investigations of neuronal innervation patterns and neurogenesis pathways might also aid in resolving long standing questions regarding the internal phylogenetic relationships of annelida, one major lophotrochozoan lineage. in particular, the basal branches of the annelid tree remain unresolved, despite the additional use of large-scale molecular analyses  <cit> . current interest has therefore partly shifted to lower taxonomic levels, taking a "top down" approach to reconstruct annelid phylogeny.

one widely distributed and abundant group of polychaete fan worms, the spirorbinae, is characterized by a crown of tentacles, commonly referred to as "radioles", and a conspicuous calcareous tube that can be closed with an operculum . all spirorbins described to date brood their embryos either in their coiled tube or in the operculum, unlike most species of the other two traditional subtaxa of the serpulid tube worms, the serpulinae and filograninae  <cit> . a recent cladistic analysis of the relationships among spirorbid subfamilies  <cit>  suggests thereby that the opercular brooders occupy the most derived position on the spirorbin tree. ever since müller  <cit>  published his observations on the development of serpula , the operculum has been viewed as a modified tentacle  of the branchial crown, and it is often used as an important diagnostic character in serpulid systematics  <cit> . accordingly, some authors regard spirorbins as a separate taxonomic entity, based on their unique morphology and development . however, recent studies of serpulid phylogeny using morphological and molecular data recognize spirorbinae as one of altogether four monophyletic clades within serpulidae . moreover, they appear to be the sister group to a mixed clade of serpulin and filogranin taxa  <cit> , although the statistical analyses could not significantly reject the hypothesis that spirorbinae are instead the basal-most taxon of the serpulidae  <cit> . in addition, the current knowledge and status of the taxonomy of the individual serpulid genera, except the ones of the spirorbinae, has been reviewed only lately  <cit> .

in order to test the proposed homology - and thus the potential usefulness for phylogenetic analyses - of one of the most crucial morphological characters in the serpulid bodyplan, the operculum, and to assess the hypothesis that all spirorbin opercula evolved from a cephalic radiole, we investigated the ontogeny of the innervation pattern of the prostomial appendages of the spirorbin spirorbis cf. spirorbis. in addition, we provide a new set of characters for a broad comparison of neurogenesis in polychaete species.

RESULTS
general development and fmrfamidergic immunoreactivity
each embryo of spirorbis cf. spirorbis is encased in an egg capsule and several dozens of embryos are surrounded by a common membrane aligned along the trunk of the mother individual within the calcareous tube . therein, the embryos develop into three-segmented lecithotrophic larvae. these larvae exhibit a short planktonic phase after hatching, settle after a few hours, metamorphose into asymmetric juveniles, and eventually secrete a coiled tube . the anlage of the collar, which surrounds the branchial crown of the adult, is already visible in the encapsulated larva . at the same time, the first fmrfamidergic signals appear in structures of the precursors of the adult central nervous system. the cerebral commissures show an intense staining and are in direct contact with the rudiments of the adult circumesophageal connectives whose signal is faint in the region of the prototroch nerve ring. the ventral nerve cords consist of paired fmrfamidergic axons . slightly later, the cerebral commissures fuse, with additional fibers forming the neuropil of the cerebral ganglion . at the junction of the circumesophageal connectives and the paired ventral nerve cords, a subesophageal commissure interconnects both ventral nerve cords . the latter vary along the longitudinal body axis with respect to the number of axons they comprise. anteriorly, the number of neurons with an fmrfamidergic signal increases, whereas only two axons are present in the posterior region. a second commissure appears exactly in the region where this change of axon number occurs . prior to hatching, the branchial rudiments and the first setae are already present . eventually, after the release of the free-swimming larva, three body regions are recognized: head, thorax with collar, and abdomen . anteriorly, the circumesophageal connectives split into a dorsal and a ventral root. both traverse the cerebral ganglion that exhibits a very strong fmrfamidergic signal . at this stage, the larva possesses various ciliated regions, such as the prototroch, the neurotroch, the apical tuft, and several posterior sensory cilia . one transitional fmrfamidergic perikaryon is located posterior to the apical cilia . apart from that, none of the other ciliated structures shows fmrfamidergic innervation . the same applies to the operculum that develops dorsally on the left side, in close proximity to the rudiments of the branchial crown . in the following, the larva settles, attaches its ventral side temporarily to the substrate, and finally turns by 180°, resulting in the dorsal side of the thorax facing the substrate. this rotation is not complete in the posterior body region, where the larval abdomen is only twisted by a mere 90°. therefore, the former ventral and dorsal parts are now located in a  lateral position. in sharp contrast to the broad distribution of serotonin  in post-settled juveniles, the fmrfamidergic expression is almost exclusively restricted to the head and thorax . all larval ciliary bands have been shed, leaving the developing branchial crown the only external ciliated body region. the sinistral direction of the coiled tube has already been determined at this stage .

development of the serotonergic nervous system
the neurotransmitter serotonin is present in spirorbis cf. spirorbis from the early trochophore stage onwards . the first serotonergic signals appear more or less simultaneously with the fmrfamidergic immunoreactivity. initially, serotonin is found in the early anlagen of the adult central nervous system, such as the cerebral ganglion, the circumesophageal connectives, the ventral nerve cords, and the subesophageal commissure . in addition, serotonin is distributed in a nerve ring underlying the larval prototroch. this serotonergic innervation of the ciliated prototroch changes considerably over time . the primary prototroch nerve ring expands on its ventral side shortly before hatching and forms a network of cross-linked serotonergic fibers . moreover, two clusters of accessory prototroch neurons develop dorsolaterally in the free-swimming larva , and a broad gap appears in the serotonergic prototroch innervation . after settlement, the neurons of the prototroch are reduced to a semi-circle on the dorsal side and degenerate completely during metamorphosis .

the apical organ of free-swimming spirorbis larvae initially comprises four serotonergic flask-shaped perikarya . three of these cells lie in one plane, with the fourth cell body being positioned medially above them. all apical perikarya possess projections that seem to be connected to the rudiment of the adult cerebral ganglion. interestingly, the number and position of these apical serotonergic somata varies over time as well as between individuals with a maximum of seven being present in specimens competent to settle.

the cerebral ganglion is one of the first adult features that are established during neurogenesis. it is divided into two distinct serotonergic hemispheres  in the encapsulated and free-swimming larval stages. posterior to the two domains, the cephalic commissures appear as one strand which is directly connected to the circumesophageal connectives . after settlement, the latter split anteriorly into the so-called dorsal and ventral roots. each root differentiates into a dorsal and a ventral commissure. accordingly, four main commissures, all derived from the circumesophageal connectives, traverse the cerebral ganglion . the cerebral commissures come to lie in close proximity to the subesophageal commissure, because the circumesophageal connectives are relatively reduced in length in juvenile specimens .

two thin axons represent the first rudiments of the developing serotonergic ventral nerve cords while the larva is still within the egg capsule . in later larval stages, the signal of the ventral nerve cords is discontinuous in the second segment. anteriorly, two axons are present on each side, followed posteriorly by a discrete perikaryon with one long axon pointing medially towards the posterior end . the ventral nerve cords consist of multiple fibers in the collar region during the free-swimming larval stage and are interconnected by an additional commissure just posterior to the already established subesophageal commissure . in the abdomen, the ventral nerve cords show a different organization. thereby, it appears that the axons of the inner ventral nerve cords  derive from the posterior ectoderm, whereas the ones of the outer part  are extensions from the anterior thorax region . after settlement, a second commissure is formed in the region where the most anterior neurites of the ventral cords terminate . the architecture of the ventral nervous system changes significantly with the onset of metamorphosis, eventually resulting in the ventral nerve cords being located on the left side in early juvenile specimens due to the rotated body axis . another alteration relates to the shift of the ventral commissures in an anterior direction, resulting in the first ventral commissure merging into the newly formed subesophageal ganglion . furthermore, the two strands of the ventral nerve cords fuse in the segmented setigerous abdomen, except for the posterior-most end . several serotonergic perikarya are associated with the ventral nerve cords from the free-swimming larval stage onwards . the number and position of these cells, which are arranged in three clusters, is not consistent among individuals of the same stage. on the opposite side of the abdomen, dorsal longitudinal neurons are present. interestingly, these two widely separated strands of the peripheral nervous system have a commissural neuron .

the development of the peripheral nervous system starts with a network of collar neurons in the encapsulated larva . in a second step, dorsal peripheral neurons that innervate the abdomen appear during the planktonic larval phase . after settlement, these are directly connected to a transversal thorax nerve which crosses the dorsal body region . one lateral longitudinal nerve runs along each side of the thorax from the transversal thorax nerve to the main collar nerve . here, anterior segmental neurons branch off. they are associated with the first ventral commissure of the paired nerve cords . these anterior segmental neurons are connected to the subesophageal ganglion after metamorphosis, due to a forward migration of the first ventral commissure . moreover, the lateral longitudinal nerves are shortened compared to the pre-metamorphic condition, and the transversal thorax nerve is connected to the ventral nerve cords at the position of the second ventral commissure .

innervation of the branchial crown and the operculum
in adult spirorbis specimens, the branchial crown consists of two branches, the left one carrying four and the right one bearing five tentacles  . terminal filaments, the so-called pinnules, branch off from each radiole. the opercular stalk emerges next to the radioli on the left side . while serotonin is widely distributed in the whole nervous system of the branchial crown and the operculum, we did not detect fmrfamide in these structures.

the earliest serotonergic signals from the two neuronal growth cones of the branchial crown are present in the encapsulated larva, and additional branchial neurons appear in the free-swimming larval stage . several axons outline the contour of the operculum shortly after settlement . at the same time, the two main nerves of the tentacular crown are already established and split dichotomously at their anterior end . during metamorphosis, two branchial crown ganglia develop at the base of the tentacles . from there, neurons branch off and project into the radioli. exactly the same number of branchial filaments arises on either side. at this point of development, it is not possible to distinguish pinnules from radioles. eventually, three distinct nerves innervate each individual branchial filament. accordingly, all radioli and pinnules have one median nerve and two lateral branchial nerves . the latter are located in a different focal plane than the internal nerve. by contrast, the opercular peduncle and lid are only lined by a single, loop-like opercular nerve. the tissue in the middle of the peduncle is innervated by axons that are irregularly linked to the opercular nerve . the neurons at the base of the peduncle emerge from the dorsal cerebral commissures, whereas the branchial crown nerves emerge from a more posterior region . moreover, the branchial crown nerves reach almost to the subesophageal ganglia. accordingly, the neuronal innervation of the branchial crown and the operculum, respectively, arises from two different roots which emerge from two distinct regions of the cerebral ganglion in post-metamorphic spirorbis specimens.

discussion
comparative aspects of polychaete neurogenesis
despite a significant increase of data on lophotrochozoan neurogenesis and larval neuroanatomy  <cit>  and the crucial role of polychaetes for evolutionary inferences, detailed studies on the ontogeny of their nervous system employing immunocytochemical methods are as of yet only available for four species  <cit> . while final conclusions concerning the ancestral neural bodyplan of annelida can therefore not yet be made, a comparison of the data currently available hints towards certain evolutionary trends which may have considerable bearing for our understanding of the origin of the polychaete  nervous system.

within annelida sensu lato, it appears that a segmented body organization has been lost independently multiple times, but that it has been at least partly retained in the larval nervous system of some taxa that show no external signs of metamerism in the adult stage, such as echiurans  <cit>  and sipunculans  <cit> . similarly, multiple variations of the conventional rope-ladder-like nervous system have been described for various polychaetes. accordingly, the number of connectives may range from one to five in adult polychaete annelids  <cit> . the presence of only one nerve in the setigerous abdomen of the adult and a reduced number of ventral commissures illustrates that the metameric arrangement of the nervous system is only weakly expressed in spirorbis as well. these findings are consistent with an earlier description of another spirorbid polychaete, spirorbis moerchi  <cit> . in this species, three pairs of ganglia and three ventral commissures, which are associated with the three larval segments, are formed, and these constitute the only neural components that hint towards a segmented nervous system  <cit> . similar to the condition found in s. spirorbis, the ventral nerve cords are widely separated in the anterior body region before they fuse into one strand in the setigerous abdomen. although the latter is externally segmented in the adult, this condition is not reflected in the nervous system  <cit> . the plasticity of annelid neural segmentation is also demonstrated by the variability concerning the neurogenesis pathways that may lead to the metameric arrangement of individual components of the segmented nervous system. as such, in the sabellid polychaete sabellaria alveolata, two distinct modes of neural development are found, namely the simultaneous formation of the first three pairs of peripheral segmental neurons on the one hand and a strictly progressive formation in anterior-posterior direction of the ventral commissures on the other  <cit> . taken together, these data indicate that the ontogenetic establishment of the segmented annelid nervous system is a highly dynamic process that must have undergone significant modifications from its ancestral developmental pathway in the various annelid lineages, and additional future studies on the subject are needed before we are able to fully understand the mechanisms that underlie annelid segmentation and nervous system evolution.

innervation patterns of the anterior appendages and the evolution of serpulid opercula
the serpulid operculum and its peduncle are commonly regarded as a modified tentacle  of the branchial crown  <cit> . ever since müller's  <cit>  observation that the operculum forms at the tip of a pinnulate radiolus in individuals of the genus serpula, the tentacles have been considered homologous to the operculum. this notion is still widely accepted, despite considerable phenotypic and developmental variation of serpulid opercula. as such, the operculum may either develop directly at the distal tip of a smooth peduncle without pinnules  or indirectly . in the latter case, the peduncle retains its pinnules only in some filogranin species. in addition, the filograninae encompass a few non-operculate forms such as protula .

serpulid phylogeny has traditionally been founded to a large extent on these opercular characters  <cit> . for example, pillai  <cit>  proposed that the spirorbin opercula are not homologous to the ones of other serpulid species, and accordingly suggested a new classification of the spirorbin taxa, while ten hove  <cit>  proposed an evolutionary hypothesis for serpulid phylogeny based on a transformation series of the branchial crown alone. however, the latter author stressed at the same time the lack of other conclusive characters to substantiate serpulid interrelationships. to further assess this issue, neuronal innervation patterns of organ systems may be used as an independent test of homology prior to phylogenetic analysis, as illustrated by recent neuroanatomical studies on euchelicerates and pycnogonids   <cit> . in addition, the comprehensive studies on the cephalic nervous system of polychaetes by orrhage  <cit>  highlight the relevance of such investigations for the homologization of anterior appendages in annelids.

the internal anatomy of the radioles has been analysed in several different serpulid species  <cit>  including spirorbis  <cit> . however, the present study on neurogenesis in s. spirorbis is the first one to raise serious doubts on the proposed homology of opercula and radioles in spirorbinae based on differences concerning  the overall neural architecture,  the innervation pattern, and  the ontogenetic establishment of the nervous supply of the operculum and the radioles. in spirorbis, the number of tentacles increases during development, resulting in an asymmetric branchial crown comprising five radioles on the right side and four on the left side in adult specimens  <cit> . in addition, classical studies have shown that development of the operculum is retarded compared to the radioles  <cit> . indeed, the neuronal rudiments of the branchial crown are formed prior to the ones of the operculum. however, the differentiation of the opercular neurons advances more rapidly during subsequent development, with the opercular nerve lining the entire peduncle even before the radiole nerves differentiate . in addition, exactly the same number of radioles and pinnules arises on both sides . accordingly, we regard the asymmetric arrangement in the adult a secondary condition, probably constrained by limited space in the cephalic region rather than being the result of evolutionary transformation events of a radiole into an operculum.

the general neural architecture of spirorbis shows that each radiole comprises three nerves . a similar condition has been described for pomatoceros, where two nerves are situated in the abfrontal corners  and a third one frontally in close proximity to the food groove . thereby, the abfrontal nerves lie outside the basement membrane of the epidermis, whereas the frontal nerve lies just inside the basement membrane. all three branchial nerves send branches into the pinnules. this tripartite arrangement has been documented for pomatoceros not only for the radioles and pinnules, but also for the peduncle  <cit> . at the top of the peduncle the internal and external peduncular nerves enter the operculum through a small, single gap. there, all three nerves furcate, thus giving rise to numerous small branches which can be traced to the rim surrounding the distal pole of the operculum  <cit> . this tripartite arrangement in both the radioles and the operculum is in accordance with the hypothesis of müller  <cit> . hanson  <cit>  described three branchial nerves also for other serpulid species such as vermiliopsis, protula, salmacina and hydroides, but he did not mention explicitly the neuronal innervation of the peduncle. only for hydroides he clearly stated that the internal and external peduncular nerves are similar to those of the filaments of pomatoceros. however, in juvenile s. spirorbis, there are no three parallel nerves present in the peduncle. instead, a single nerve loop lines the margin of the opercular stalk. furthermore, the two strands of this nerve loop do not lie close together at the transition between the peduncle and the operculum. accordingly, the number, spatial distribution, and site of emergence of the opercular nerves in spirorbis are unique and do not correspond to the situation found in the radioles and in the opercular peduncle of pomatoceros and hydroides.

probably the most striking argument against a shared evolutionary ancestry of the radioles and the operculum in spirorbis is revealed when the cerebral innervation sites of both structures are compared. while the opercular nerves appear to emerge from the dorsal commissures of the cerebral ganglion, the two main nerve bundles of the radioles are associated with the ventral part of the cerebral ganglion. the nerves of the radioles show no connection to the opercular nerves. the innervation of anterior appendages in the serpulidae has been already investigated in detail for selected species, albeit not in spirorbis, and used for homology assessments  <cit> . based on his findings, orrhage described ten different nerve roots of the branchial crown that partly originate from the ventral and partly from the dorsal commissures on either side of the cerebrum, before finally forming one anterior branchial crown nerve. it might be that one or more of these nerve roots have gained new functions in spirorbin taxa that brood in their operculum  <cit> . the resolution of the data presented herein does not allow for unambiguous distinction of individual nerve roots. the question whether this is due to limitations of the used immunolabeling techniques or a lack of differentiation in early developmental stages has to be left open. orrhage  <cit>  does not explicitly describe the innervation of the operculum in spirorbis. nethertheless, we expect that the neuronal root of the operculum would be merged with the other nerve roots to form a single branchial crown nerve in adults, in case that the operculum represents indeed a modified radiole.

the most recent phylogenetic studies propose that hydroides belongs to the serpula-clade, the sister group of the pomatoceros-clade . this implies that the operculum with three peduncular nerves, that evolved from a radiole of the branchial crown, is most likely a shared character of these two sister clades. so far, nothing is known about the neuronal innervation of the operculum in species of the protula-clade, where some of its members do not even have an operculum. therefore, any final conclusions about the ancestral condition of the operculum at the base of the serpulid tree are premature. in principal, several scenarios appear possible in the light of the current phylogenetic hypothesis : 1) opercula evolved at least twice independently, once in the serpula/pomatoceros-clade and once in the protula/spirorbinae-clade, 2) the operculum was lost at the base of the spirorbinae, and secondarily evolved again within this group as an independent opercular structure, or  the operculum is a shared ancestral feature of the serpulidae that was - together with its neural innervation pattern - secondarily modified in the descending lineages. based on our data on the neural innervation pattern of the operculum in spirorbis we favour the former alternative, although additional comparative data on the developmental programme  that underlies radiole and operculum formation in the respective serpulid clades are needed to finally settle this issue.

CONCLUSIONS
our data suggest that the operculum in spirorbis is not a derivative of the branchial crown but an independent structure which originates from the bodywall around the mouth. these findings corroborate a recent molecular phylogenetic study that suggests convergent evolution of direct operculum development, once at the base of the pomatoceros-group and once along the line leading to the spirorbinae  <cit> . in addition, the new data on radiole and operculum innervation presented herein strongly argue for the following scenario:

 <dig>  the operculum of spirorbis is a prostomial appendage and does not belong to the branchial crown. it is thus not homologous to the radioles.

 <dig>  the operculum of spirorbis is not homologous to the opercula of serpula, hydroides and pomatoceros. in the latter three, the operculum is indeed likely to have a shared evolutionary origin with the radioles. therefore, the opercula of serpula, hydroides and pomatoceros are considered homologous to each other.

based on our data we predict that future neuroanatomical and developmental studies of the branchial crown of selected species, especially of the protula-clade , will further contribute to our understanding of both the evolution of opercular structures in serpulid polychaetes and will also aid in our quest for the eventual placement of this group within the annelid phylogenetic tree.

