BACKGROUND
flax  has attracted human attention since the beginning of agriculture  <cit> . this is due in part to the unusual properties of the bast  fibres, which because of their great length and high tensile strength have found use in textiles and many other products  <cit> . fibre length is achieved almost entirely through intrusive growth, which is a process limited to very few cell types in plants  <cit> . the elongation stage is succeeded by a dynamic process of secondary wall deposition, in which a matrix of galactose-rich polymer in the nascent wall is gradually and centripetally replaced by highly crystalline cellulose  <cit> . because secondary wall deposition increases the tensile strength of cells, fibres which have undergone even the very first stages of cell wall thickening can be distinguished mechanically by their resistance to breakage at the "snap-point" of the stem  <cit> . the snap-point thus defines an important developmental transition from cell elongation to cell wall thickening.

previously, we and others have produced libraries of cdnas from fibre-bearing peels of flax and hemp stems  <cit> . in addition to containing bast fibres at various stages of development, these peels also contained many other cell types, including those associated with cambium and transport phloem. analysis of these libraries by cdna microarray hybridization and other techniques identified distinct patterns of expression of transcripts of polysaccharide-related enzymes in stem peels during fibre elongation and cell wall deposition. however, due to inherent technical and biological limitations, it is known that in many circumstances, abundance of transcripts and proteins for a given gene may not be highly correlated  <cit> . this well-established limitation on the biological relevance of transcriptome analysis led us to complement our previous work with a survey of the proteins present in developing flax fibres during the onset of secondary wall deposition. this is similar to a proteomics approaches used to study secondary cell wall development of other cell types in other species  <cit> . for this study of the proteome, we also increased the specificity of our analysis by extracting proteins from phloem fibres that had been individually dissected from the snap point of growing stems, and comparing their abundance to proteins in the surrounding, non-fibre cells of the cortex from the same stems. the objective of this study is therefore to identify those proteins that contribute to the interesting pattern of cell wall deposition in flax fibres.

RESULTS
separation of fibre and non-fibre proteins
to increase our understanding of the proteins that contribute to the unique properties of flax bast fibres, we extracted proteins from ultimate fibres  dissected from the snap-point region of vegetative stems  . the snap-point is the stem region in which secondary wall deposition begins  <cit> . we also collected the surrounding non-fibre cells  from the cortex of the snap-point. throughout the remainder of this report, will refer to the ultimate bast fibres we collected from the snap-point as simply "fibres", and the surrounding, non-fibre cells of the cortex as the "non-fibre fraction". by labelling proteins from fibres and the non-fibre fraction with contrasting fluorescent dyes, and separating the mixture of the two samples simultaneously using 2d gel electrophoresis , we were able to identify proteins that were more abundant in fibres as compared to the non-fibre fraction .

in each of four replicate gels, we detected an average of  <dig> distinct protein spots from fibres, and  <dig> spots from the non-fibre fraction. in total,  <dig> protein spots differed in fluorescent signal intensity by at least  <dig>  fold  between the samples, with  <dig> spots  enriched in fibres and  <dig> spots  enriched in the non-fibre fraction . the distinctive protein profiles of fibres and the non-fibre fraction were also evident from visual inspection of the dige gel image . phloem fibres therefore appear to express a complement of proteins that is distinct from surrounding cell types in the stem.

protein identification by lc/ms
we picked  <dig> protein spots that were enriched in fibre samples for identification by mass spectrometry. spots were selected based on criteria of large spot volume, high fold-enrichment of signals, and well-focused spot morphology. for comparison, we also selected an additional  <dig> spots that were enriched in non-fibre fractions or that were similarly abundant in both types of protein samples. although the patterns of fold-enrichment that we report were reproducible within the statistical parameters indicated , individual ratios should not be extrapolated quantitatively to whole proteins, in part because some proteins may be represented by more than one spot.

a) functional category: atpases ; cell wall polysaccharide metabolism ; cytoskeleton and secretion ; membrane transport ; miscellaneous ; one-carbon metabolism ; primary carbon and energy metabolism ; protein and amino acid metabolism . only the highest scoring protein for each spot is categorized.

b) fold enrichment in fibre tissues or non-fibre tissues as compared to the other tissue type, expressed as linear ratio of mean signal intensities.

c) p-value for a t-test of significant differences in mean signal intensities between fibre and non-fibre tissues.

d) peptide count, i.e. the number of peptides per spot that match the genbank id shown.

e) spots in which multiple proteins were identified. the intensity ratios shown may be due to differences in abundance of more than one protein.

protein identities are sorted by functional category, in the order in which each category is presented in the text, and then alphabetically within each functional category. additional data  is provided in additional file  <dig> 

we subjected a total of  <dig> spots to analysis by lc/ms. of these,  <dig> spots produced spectra that could not be assigned to existing sequences, while spectra from the remaining  <dig> spots produced significant matches  to predicted spectra from genbank protein databases . four spots  contained predicted peptides that matched more than one distinct protein, indicating the presence of multiple proteins in some spots on the gel. of the spots to which we assigned protein identities,  <dig> were enriched by at least  <dig>  fold  in fibre samples, and  <dig> of these were statistically more abundant  in fibres than the non-fibre fraction. conversely, we were able to assign identity to  <dig> spots enriched  <dig> -fold or more in the non-fibre fraction; at least seven of these were associated with photosynthesis . because photosynthesis is a process expected to dominate metabolism in the non-fibre fraction, these observations are consistent with the physical separation of fibre and non-fibre tissues we hoped to achieve by dissection. we will focus the remainder of this report on the spots that were enriched in fibres.

the fibre-enriched proteins to which we were able to assign putative identities were classified into eight functional categories . aside from the category we called "miscellaneous", which represented a diverse set of functions, most of the proteins that were identified in fibre samples could be assigned to one of three categories related to the conversion of carbohydrates for energy or glycan biosynthesis, namely: primary carbon and energy metabolism; one-carbon metabolism; and cell wall and polysaccharide metabolism . the predominance of these proteins for the metabolism of carbohydrates and related compounds is consistent with the major biochemical activities we expected to observe within cells active in secondary wall biogenesis. in addition, we assigned a smaller number of proteins to each of the remaining categories: membrane transport; cytoskeleton & secretion; atpases; and protein & amino acid metabolism. the membership of proteins assigned to spots in each of the eight functional categories is shown in table  <dig>  and is discussed in more detail in the following sections.

primary carbon and energy metabolism
the conversion of monosaccharides and starch into energy is the inferred function of the largest proportion of proteins that were enriched  in fibres, as compared to the non-fibre fraction at the stem snap point . these reactions are also summarized in figure  <dig>  two of the most highly enriched proteins we detected in any functional category were β-amylase , and fructose kinase , which catalyze the first steps in the catabolism of starch and fructose, respectively . the increased relative abundance of these enzymes in fibres provides some insight into the immediate sources of carbon and energy for secondary wall biogenesis. we also detected the statistically significant  enrichment of enzymes of glycolysis and related processes, namely fructose-bisphosphate aldolase , glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase , and phosphoglucomutase , as well as the presence of phosphoglycerate kinase . finally, we identified fibre-enriched protein spots putatively representing  <dig> of  <dig> enzymes of the tricarboxylic acid cycle, where further energy and metabolic precursors are generated from the products of glycolysis. the tricarboxylic acid cycle -associated proteins that were significantly enriched in fibres and included citrate synthase , succinyl coa-ligase , fumarase , and malate dehydrogenase . aconitate hydratase  was also detected, although its fold-enrichment was not statistically significant .

atpases
many subunits of the atpase/synthase complex were identified in either fibres or the non-fibre fraction, including an α-subunit , β-subunits , and a γ-subunit . the tissue-specific abundance patterns of these various subunits were surprisingly complex: the γ-subunit and one β-subunit  were associated with equal spot intensities in both sample types, while the other atp synthase β-subunit , was  <dig> × more abundant in the non-fibre fraction. only the α-subunit was more abundant  in fibres.

in addition to the atpase/synthases described above, we identified peptides from several other types of putative atpases, including three protein spots containing vacuolar-type atpase , of which, two spots  were significantly  enriched in fibres. v-atpases are some of the most abundant membrane proteins in the vacuole and endomembrane system, and their enrichment may reflect increased relative abundance of these organellar structures in fibres  <cit> . we also detected a putative plasma membrane-associated aaa-atpase  in fibres, although this was not deemed to be more abundant in fibres by our usual statistical criteria. both v-atpases and aaa-atpases have been previously demonstrated to be essential for vesicle transport, and might therefore be active in secondary wall-specific processes in developing fibres  <cit> .

cell wall and polysaccharide metabolism
cell walls consist of many types of polymers, including cellulose, hemicellulose, and pectins. however, with the possible exception of an nad-dependent epimerase/dehydratase with similarity to udp-xylose synthases , and gdp-4-keto-6-deoxy-d-mannose- <dig> -epimerase-4-reductase  almost all of the fibre-enriched, cell wall-related enzymes we identified were most likely associated with the metabolism of pectin-like substances. for example, we identified proteins from six spots as β-galactosidases. five of these  were co-located in a charge train and the sixth  was an isolated spot of lower apparent molecular weight. the five spots in the charge train were significantly more intense in fibres , while the lower molecular weight spot was nearly similar in abundance in both types of tissues . within the charge train, peptides from three spots aligned with a chickpea β-galactosidase as the highest scoring match. this chickpea β-galactosidase has previously demonstrated exo- and endo- cleavage activity towards the side-chains of pectins and is found in elongating hypocotyls  <cit> . in developing flax fibres, the deposition of a rhamnogalactan-type pectin consisting of 55–85% galactose is known to precede establishment of the crystalline, cellulosic fibrils that characterize the mature secondary wall  <cit> . because the galactose residues of rhamnogalactans are one of the putative substrates for β-galactosidase, we speculate that the abundance of this enzyme in developing fibres is evidence of an important role for it in remodeling, removing, or recycling of galactans as part a dynamic process of cell wall deposition. however, it is also possible that the β-galactosidase we detected hydrolyzes other galactosyl bonds, such as those that decorate arabinogalactan proteins  <cit> . finally, the appearance of the β-galactosidase spots in a train along the axis of the first dimension separation of our electrophoretic gels is consistent with extensive post-translational modification of this abundant protein.

in addition to β-galactosidase, we also identified other spots representing one or more enzymes with possible roles in the metabolism of pectic polysaccharides. three spots  were more enriched in fibres as compared to the non-fibre fraction and share homology with udp-rhamnose synthase. because these enzymes would normally be expected to contribute to the growth of rhamnogalactans, it is interesting to observe their enrichment in the same cells in which β-galactosidase might hydrolyze galactosidic bonds within these polymers. the potential co-existence of both catabolic and anabolic processes of galactan metabolism is consistent with a rapid turnover of these polymers during cell wall deposition, although the existence of the inferred enzymatic activities must still be confirmed experimentally.

one-carbon metabolism
four enzymes associated with one-carbon  metabolism were identified among the fibre-enriched protein spots in our study. three of these: methionine synthase , methionine adenosyltransferase , and adenosylhomocysteinase  are components of the s-adenosyl methionine  cycle, while the remaining protein, serine hydroxymethyltransferase , catalyzes the transfer of carbon into the sam cycle, via folate. because the cumulative function of these enzymes is to provide activated methyl groups for transfer to acceptors, the identity of the major methyl transferases and their substrates in fibres is an obvious question. in plants, potential acceptors of activated methyl groups include a wide variety of molecules, among them components of pectin or lignin  <cit> . because the amount of lignin present in flax fibres is low in comparison to other types of schlerenchyma, particularly at the early stage of cell wall development associated with the snap point,  <cit> , it seems unlikely that lignin is the major sink for methyl flux through the sam cycle. thus, pectin or other actively accumulating substances may be targets for sam-mediated methylation in developing fibres.

membrane transport
only a few proteins related to transport across membranes were detected in our study. this may be due in part to the difficulty of extracting and resolving certain membrane-associated proteins. nevertheless, we identified a k+ channel β-subunit was highly enriched  in fibres, as well as two porins . the biological significance of the porins is unclear, however, increased expression of k+ channels has been previously correlated with sucrose uptake in developing cotton fibres. thus the strong enrichment of k+ channel proteins we observed may reflect a similar process of the uptake of reduced carbon in flax fibres  <cit> .

cytoskeleton and secretion
structural components of the cytoskeleton, as well as proteins related to vesicle traffic, were also relatively more abundant in fibre protein extracts as compared to surrounding tissues. we observed relative enrichment of at least  <dig> -fold of actin  and tubulin  in fibres. these proteins may be enriched in fibres, as compared to cells of the non-fibre fraction, due in part to the differences in architecture and surface/volume ratios of these cells. additionally, increased relative abundance of cytoskeleton proteins in fibres undergoing cell wall thickening may reflect the role of the cytoskeleton in deposition of cellulose and other cell wall components. an active secretory system, which delivers non-cellulosic polysaccharide components to the cell wall, is also expected to be present in developing flax fibres; the enrichment of myosin , dynamin-like proteins , and gdp-dissociation inhibitor  in these cells is therefore consistent with developmental processes presumed to be active in the cells we sampled. we also note that other components of the cytoskeleton mentioned in a structural context above  may have additional functions specifically related to secretion and other aspects of secondary wall deposition  <cit> .

protein and amino acid metabolism
enzymes related to protein metabolism  were moderately enriched  in fibres as compared to the non-fibre fraction. two translation initiation factors were more abundant in the fibre sample: eif-4a  and eif-5a . proteins in the eif-4a family form part of the ribosomal machinery and are involved in binding and unwinding mrna for translation, while some eif-5a isoform family members have more diverse functions in cell division and related processes  <cit> . a translational elongation factor ef <dig>  was also more abundant in fibres, while spots containing ef1á were similarly abundant  or  <dig> × fold less abundant  in fibres as compared to the non-fibre fraction.

heat shock proteins hsp <dig> , hsp <dig> , and hsp <dig>  were also enriched in fibres. these proteins may function in the processes of cytosolic protein folding and protein import into mitochondria and chloroplasts, which are commonly associated with members of the hsp <dig>  hsp <dig>  and hsp <dig> families  <cit> . additionally, because hsp70s have been shown to have specific functions in cell wall development in yeast, we cannot exclude the possibility that some of these proteins are active at the plasma membrane during the deposition of the flax fibre secondary wall  <cit> .

miscellaneous
several of the proteins we identified could not be classified into any of the larger functional categories we have already described. eight of these proteins were enriched by  <dig> ×  or more in fibres, and may accordingly have specific roles in fibre development. these included annexins , enoyl-acp reductase , maturase k , a 14-3- <dig> protein , peroxidase , and a protein kinase c inhibitor . among these, the enrichment of annexin in developing fibres is particularly interesting, given its previous association with cellulose synthase in structural and proteomic studies of cotton fibres  <cit> .

comparison to transcriptomic analysis
the experimental approach used in the present study differs in many ways from our previously reported microarray analysis of flax stems  <cit> . importantly, in the previous report, we did not dissect fibres away from other stem tissues; rather we compared transcript abundance in stem segments containing fibres at different stages of development. therefore, a global comparison of these datasets is not warranted. notwithstanding these limitations, we noted that three carbohydrate-related enzymes were detected both as proteins enriched in fibres from the snap-point region of the stem, and previously as transcripts expressed in the region of the stem containing the snap-point, including β-galactosidase , fructokinase , and gme  . in the transcriptomic data, β-galactosidase and fructokinase were significantly more abundant in the region of the snap-point as compared to segments from nearer either the apex or base of the stem, while gme showed highest transcript abundance in the apical-most segment, which may be due to differences in the turnover of these various gene products. on the other hand, our previous work also identified many other snap-point enriched transcripts that were not detected as proteins in the previous study. these include arabinogalactan proteins and lipid transfer proteins that were further demonstrated by qrt-pcr to be enriched specifically in the phloem tissues of the snap-point, as compared to leaves or the xylem of stems. discrepancies between transcriptomic and proteomic analyses have been previously documented by ourselves and others, and are presumably due to differences in efficiencies of extraction and detection of various proteins, among many other technical and biological factors  <cit> . for example, bayer et al. specifically noted under representation of agps and other cell wall proteins within their proteomic analysis, due possibly to the high degree of glycosylation of these proteins  <cit> . thus, it appears likely that a comprehensive description of gene expression within developing flax fibres cannot be provided by either transcript or protein profiling, alone, but instead the results of many different experimental approaches must be considered together.

CONCLUSIONS
we have described a differential proteomic profile of a single plant cell type at a well-defined developmental stage, during which secondary cell wall biogenesis is occurring. the fibre-enriched proteins we identified are consistent with the dynamic process of secondary wall deposition previously suggested by histological and biochemical analyses, and particularly the importance of galactans and the secretory pathway in this process  <cit> . the apparent abundance of amylase suggests that starch may be an unappreciated source of materials for cell wall biogenesis. furthermore, our observations confirm previous reports that correlate accumulation of proteins such as annexins, and specific heat shock proteins with secondary cell wall deposition  <cit> . together, the proteins we have identified in this study provide a basis for better understanding the unique properties of phloem fibre secondary cell walls, and define targets for detailed genetic and biochemical analyses in future.

