BACKGROUND
the continuous improvement in the quality of life in recent years, together with the advancement of science and technology, has created a more health-conscious society. data from large population studies suggest that lifestyle factors, such as sedentary lifestyle, dietary intake and adiposity are responsible for 70% of chronic diseases and are a major contributor to reduced longevity  <cit> . thus, society now realises the importance of physical activity and dietary intervention towards the prevention of chronic diseases and ageing. chronic diseases such as cardiovascular disease and cancer are by far the leading cause of mortality in the world, representing 60% of all deaths  <cit> .

prooxidants such as reactive oxygen species  play important roles in triggering chronic diseases. for example, the hydroxyl radical causes lipid peroxidation, modification of dna bases or protein damage and in turn, leads to tissue damage, chronic diseases and ageing  <cit> . in addition to oxidising macromolecules such as dna in the body, prooxidants have been found to regulate gene expression, of which two well-defined transcription factors, nuclear factor kappa-b and activator protein- <dig> are affected, causing inflammation  <cit> . inflammation thus links oxidative stress with chronic diseases.

many studies conducted recently have shown that diets containing high amounts of phytochemicals can provide protection against these prooxidant-induced diseases, due to their high antioxidant activities. antioxidants preclude prooxidant-induced tissue damage by preventing the formation of these prooxidants, by scavenging them or by promoting their decomposition  <cit> . antioxidants are also found to be caloric restriction mimetics, the only intervention known to lengthen the median lifespan of animals  <cit> . among the different groups of naturally occurring antioxidants from plants, carotenoids and phenolics are perhaps the two most important  <cit> . phenolics comprise an aromatic ring, and are important antioxidants because of their high redox potential, which allows them to act as reducing agents, hydrogen donors, singlet oxygen quenchers and metal chelators  <cit> . around  <dig> phenolic compounds have been identified thus far, and they have been classified into different categories based on their basic structures  <cit> . phenolics possess many therapeutic properties. for example, flavonoids have been shown to have antioxidant, neuroprotective, cardioprotective, lipid-lowering, anti-hepatotoxic, anti-allergic, anti-cancer, anti-inflammatory, anti-thrombotic and anti-microbial activities  <cit> .

besides their antioxidant properties, phytochemicals such as phenolics are also known to influence gene expression  <cit> . microarray analysis has thus been suggested as a tool to identify modulations of multiple gene networks by antioxidant micronutrients  <cit> , as the expression profiles of thousands of genes can be measured in a single experiment  <cit> . as dietary intervention generally results in small effects on a big number of genes compared to pharmaceutical intervention which targets a specific biomarker, microarrays can therefore detect a combined effect of several genes belonging to a similar biological pathway  <cit> . indeed, multi-component botanical therapeutics such as phenolics may become particularly valuable in the long-term prevention and treatment of complex diseases requiring extended administration and pleiotropic action  <cit> . in studies on plant phenolics, microarray studies have been carried out to test the biological effects of flavonoids in cultured cell lines in vitro  <cit>  as well as in animals in vivo  <cit> .

the oil palm  contains an excellent repertoire of antioxidant phytochemicals. palm fruit oil contains many lipid-soluble antioxidants, such as carotenoids , as well as tocopherols and tocotrienols   <cit> . another relatively new antioxidant phytochemical from the oil palm fruit is the water-soluble phenolic acid-rich complex, which is recovered from the oil palm vegetation liquor through a series of centrifugation and membrane filtration steps  <cit> . these oil palm phenolics  consist mainly of phenolic acids, including three caffeoylshikimic acid isomers, protocatechuic acid and p-hydroxybenzoic acid  <cit> . opp has been shown to display antioxidant properties and confer positive outcomes on degenerative diseases in various animal models without evidence of causing toxicity  <cit> . the utilisation of opp in the nutraceutical market is however, subject to understanding the molecular mechanisms involved in bringing about the positive benefits observed, whether in healthy or diseased states. the aim of this study was thus to identify the in vivo biological effects and molecular mechanisms of these compounds during healthy states in three major organs  of mice on a normal diet, via microarray gene expression profiling.

RESULTS
weight gain delay and non-toxicity in mice supplemented with opp
we first confirmed that opp was not toxic to mice via physiology, histology, haematology and clinical biochemistry analyses. the body weights of mice steadily increased every week throughout the six weeks of feeding, with mice given opp showing a delayed weight gain . opp did not significantly affect organ weights , fluid intake , food intake , faecal output , organ histology , as well as haematology and clinical biochemistry  parameters.

values shown are means ± s.e.m. statistical analysis did not show significant differences in all the parameters measured.

overview of gene expression changes in the liver, spleen and heart
illumina microarrays were used to study the effects of opp in the livers, spleens and hearts of mice given a normal diet. opp significantly changed  <dig> genes in the liver ,  <dig> genes in the spleen , and  <dig> genes in the heart . the number of genes significantly changed by opp was thus highest in the heart, followed by the liver and the spleen. the lists of genes significantly changed by opp in these organs, together with their fold changes, are supplemented in additional file  <dig> 

the effects of opp on the organs tested were quite subtle. the majority of the differentially expressed genes rarely exceeded two fold change in expression, with the exception of genes considered turned on  or off . the large fold changes observed in this particular group of genes  are arbitrary values as values of  <dig> were assigned when negative expression values were observed after normalisation. these results indicate that opp can act as regulators of gene expression, turning on and silencing genes. in addition, the low fold changes caused by opp indicate that they do not have drastic effects on gene expression in general, and may be used as dietary supplements. such supplements should not bring too drastic a change in the system of an organism, but rather act as an antioxidant buffer to cushion the effects of other environmental influences such as prooxidant production.

an example of the two-way hierarchical clustering analysis carried out on significantly changed genes in the liver is given in additional file  <dig>  the replicates of each condition were clustered to one another, indicating robustness of the filtering criteria used. in order to get an overview of the significant functions affected by opp, we then subjected the microarray data to functional enrichment analysis using the genmapp  <cit>  and mappfinder  <cit>  softwares . the lists of these significantly changed functions are provided in additional file  <dig>  by exploring functions which were considered significantly changed, we further selected genmapps which were considered interesting for pathway analysis. network analysis was also carried out on the differentially expressed genes by using the ingenuity pathways analysis software   <cit> .

gene expression changes in the liver
in the genmapps and gene ontologies found significantly changed in the liver, those related to fatty acid beta oxidation  and cholesterol biosynthesis , were predominant. further analysis on the fatty acid beta oxidation genmapp  revealed the up-regulation of genes such as those encoding long chain acetyl-coa dehydrogenase , short chain acyl-coa dehydrogenase  and hydroxyacyl-coa dehydrogenases  . these significantly up-regulated genes are highlighted in yellow.

other functions which were significantly up-regulated by opp in the liver were complement activation, protein biosynthesis and transport, ion and electron transport as well as translation factors. up-regulated genes involved in complement activation include c1r, c1rl, c1s, c <dig>  c <dig> and cfhl <dig>  in addition, genes involved in ion and electron transport such as those encoding cytochromes p <dig> involved in phase i metabolism  and nadh dehydrogenase  fe-s proteins , were up-regulated. genes involved in phase ii metabolism such as those encoding udp glycosyltransferases  and catechol-o-methyltransferase , were up-regulated as well. translation factors involved in protein synthesis  were also up-regulated by opp.

genes involved in cholesterol biosynthesis on the other hand, such as those encoding lanosterol synthase , sterol-c4-methyl oxidase-like , farnesyl diphosphate synthetase , nad dependent steroid dehydrogenase-like  and 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coa synthase  <dig>  were down-regulated . in this pathway, besides those highlighted in blue , other genes in the pathway had negative fold changes, the most important being hmgcr , a gene targeted by drugs such as statins for lowering cholesterol. the fold change difference of this gene was however, not significant due to the filtering criteria used.

gene expression changes in the spleen
a majority of the genes significantly up-regulated in the spleen were part of the blood coagulation network . some of the up-regulated genes were those encoding von willebrand factor homologue , p-selectin , cd <dig> antigen , integrin alpha 2b , multimerin  <dig> , various glycoproteins  and thrombin receptors . these genes are indicated in red in the blood coagulation network.

while a pathway involves the metabolism of biochemical compounds catalysed by enzymes, a network indicates the relationship of one protein to another. a network analysis may thus help to detect other possible proteins affected by the treatment. for example, a number of coagulation factors  was found to be connected to the genes significantly up-regulated in the spleen blood coagulation network. these genes might thus be up-regulated and contribute to the blood coagulation process observed in this experiment as well, although the statistical threshold used might not result in these genes being selected as significantly changed. a network analysis can also help in the identification of central regulators in specific networks. for example, the vwf gene appeared to be the central regulator in the blood coagulation network, and might thus play a central role in this process by up-regulating the other genes in response to opp treatment.

in addition to blood coagulation, other functions significantly up-regulated in the spleen by opp include actin binding, calcium ion binding, cell adhesion, fatty acid metabolism, focal adhesion, prostaglandin synthesis regulation, sugar binding and tumour necrosis factor binding. genes down-regulated in the spleen on the other hand, were involved in dna replication, interleukin- <dig> signalling, nitrogen metabolism and unfolded protein binding.

gene expression changes in the heart
in the heart, genes up-regulated by opp were involved in acetyl-coa, butanoate, fatty acid and lipid metabolisms, golgi organisation and biogenesis, glutathione metabolism, magnesium ion binding, nitric oxide mediated signal transduction and translation factors. down-regulated genes in the heart include those involved in energy production, such as the tricarboxylic acid  cycle  and the electron transport chain . genes involved in protein biosynthesis such as chromatin assembly or disassembly, haem biosynthesis, mitochondrial genome maintenance, mrna processing and binding, as well as those encoding ribosomal proteins, were also down-regulated.

in the heart tca cycle, a key enzyme, pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase isoenzyme  <dig> , which inhibits pyruvate dehydrogenase and thus minimises carbohydrate oxidation by preventing the flow of glycolytic products into the tca cycle, was up-regulated. in conjunction with this, the expression of other genes involved in the heart tca cycle, such as those which produce nadh  and fadh <dig> , were down-regulated as well. suclg <dig> and sucla <dig>  genes encoding subunits of succinate-coa ligases which convert guanosine triphosphate/adenosine triphosphate  to guanosine diphosphate/adenosine diphosphate  were also down-regulated.

in the heart electron transport chain, ucp <dig>  a gene encoding an uncoupling protein which protects against mitochondrial oxidative damage by reducing the production of ros, was up-regulated as well. on the other hand, genes in the electron transport chain which encode proteins in complex i , complex ii  as well as those in complex v , were down-regulated.

real-time qrt-pcr validation
to confirm the microarray results, the expression levels of six target genes  were measured using real-time quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction . expression levels of these target genes were normalised to the geometric mean of three housekeeping genes, sfrs <dig>  guk <dig> and hnrpab. the direction and magnitude of fold changes of the target genes obtained from the real-time qrt-pcr technique were comparable to those obtained from the microarray technique . correlation of fold changes obtained by the two gene expression profiling techniques was high  , thus indicating that the microarray data obtained were valid.

these six target genes were selected based on their presence in significant functions, their differential scores, their detection levels, their presence as single splice transcripts in microarrays and their availability as taqman assays designed across splice junctions. sfrs <dig>  guk <dig> and hnrpab were used as housekeeping genes as their expression levels were found to be quite stable across treatments in each of the organs tested.

discussion
as opp displayed significant antioxidant activities and conferred positive outcomes in various animal models of degenerative diseases without causing toxicity  <cit> , we hypothesised that it might also have significant biological effects in animals during healthy states. thus, we fed balb/c mice a normal diet with opp for six weeks and looked for signs of toxicity to confirm that opp is safe. microarray gene expression analysis was then carried out on three major organs, the liver, spleen and heart. this study thus represents an important step towards understanding the mode of action of opp during healthy states, before further studies are carried out to identify the molecular mechanisms involved during diseased states.

opp up-regulated fatty acid beta oxidation genes and down-regulated cholesterol biosynthesis genes in the liver
in identifying the in vivo gene expression changes caused by any dietary intervention via microarray analysis, the liver naturally becomes the target organ of interest  <cit> . this is because it is a vital organ for various metabolic functions, including detoxification and production of biochemicals necessary for digestion and maintenance of body processes. in this study, functional enrichment analysis on the microarray data from the liver showed that opp up-regulated several pathways, including lipid catabolism , complement activation, protein biosynthesis and transport, ion and electron transport as well as translation factors.

as the liver is an important site for fatty acid beta oxidation, up-regulation of hepatic lipid catabolism may contribute to the suppression of liver fat and visceral fat accumulation. stocker and keaney  suggested that removal of lipids from the body through fatty acid beta oxidation may prevent lipid peroxidation which contributes to atherosclerosis  <cit> . interestingly, enhanced hepatic fatty acid synthesis and reduced fatty acid oxidation have also been implied in the development of alcohol-induced fatty liver  <cit> . thus, opp may also be able to reduce atherosclerosis and prevent alcohol-induced liver damage based on its ability to up-regulate hepatic fatty acid beta oxidation. increased expression of hepatic genes involved in lipid catabolism has also been shown to be effected by the catechins of green tea  <cit>  and the chlorogenic acids of coffee  <cit> .

the up-regulation of genes involved in complement activation observed in the present study, is similar to that reported for resveratrol  <cit> . in the resveratrol study, complement pathways, both classical and alternative, as well as acute inflammatory response, were up-regulated for reasons unknown, although the authors noted that no evidence of widespread inflammatory response was observed. the induction of the classical complement pathway by opp may be triggered by antibodies, as plant antioxidants were reported to enhance immunity  <cit> . as an important component of innate immunity, complement activation is necessary for protection against numerous microbial infections  <cit> .

genes involved in ion and electron transport such as those encoding cytochromes p <dig> and nadh dehydrogenase  fe-s proteins were also up-regulated by opp. in general, phenolics may be regarded as xenobiotics by animal cells and are to some extent treated as such through interaction with phase i and phase ii detoxification enzyme systems  <cit> . phase i detoxification in the liver involves the activation of a series of enzymes called the cytochrome p <dig> mixed-function oxidases. these enzymes begin the biotransformation process by oxidising, reducing or hydrolysing toxins, thus creating biotransformed intermediates  <cit> . a phase i detoxification gene of special interest is cyp3a <dig>  which encodes the most abundant cytochrome p <dig> in the human liver , responsible for 60% of cytochrome p450-mediated metabolism of drugs in therapeutic use  <cit> . cyp3a <dig> was found to be induced more than 2-fold by dietary flavonoids such as quercetin and grape seed extract in hepg <dig> hepatocytes  <cit> . cyp3a <dig> is the mouse homologue of the human cyp3a <dig>  <cit> . it is interesting to note that opp up-regulated cyp3a <dig>  <dig> -fold in the mouse liver. incidentally, cyp3a <dig> was up-regulated in the mouse liver as well by α-tocopherol  <cit> . this indicates that opp has similar effects to other dietary antioxidants and may thus be involved in drug-herbal/botanical interaction effects. phase ii detoxification enzymes such as udp glycosyltransferases perform conjugation reactions which help to convert biotransformed intermediates into less toxic, water-soluble substances that are easily excreted or eliminated from the body  <cit> . in the present study, genes ugt1a <dig> and ugt1a <dig> encoding udp glycosyltransferases were up-regulated  <dig> -fold and  <dig> -fold respectively. comt, the gene which encodes catechol-o-methyltransferase, an enzyme involved in tyrosine metabolism, was also up-regulated by opp. catechol-o-methyltransferase has been found to be involved in the metabolism of hydroxytyrosol, the major component of olive phenolics  <cit> . the up-regulated translation factors involved in protein synthesis, may also reflect the production of extra enzymes which help in metabolising opp.

other genes up-regulated by opp are those encoding chemokine  ligand  <dig> , gap junction membrane channel protein beta  <dig>  and androgen receptor , which were  <dig> -,  <dig> - and  <dig> -fold increased respectively. cxcl <dig> is a gene encoding a chemokine modulating the progression of liver fibrosis through its action on hepatic stellate cells  <cit> , while gjb <dig> encodes a gap junction membrane channel protein which plays an important role in the regulation of signal transfer and growth control in the liver. the expression of these genes decreased as liver diseases progress to cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma  <cit> . both of these genes were down-regulated by comfrey , a herbal plant containing pyrrolizidine alkaloids believed to cause hepatotoxicity in humans and carcinogenicity in animals  <cit> . ar was also down-regulated by comfrey , as well as by riddelliine  which also contains pyrrolizidine alkaloids  <cit> . hence, the up-regulation of these three genes indicates that opp may have hepatoprotective effects, and also implies that they do not cause hepatotoxicity.

genes involved in cholesterol biosynthesis on the other hand, were down-regulated by opp in this study. cholesterol is an important constituent of cellular membranes and serves as a precursor in the formation of bile acids and steroid hormones. excessive cholesterol however, is implicated in atherosclerotic lesions and gallstone formation  <cit> . the reduced expression of genes involved in cholesterol biosynthesis in the mouse liver suggests a possible role of opp in reducing atherosclerosis and hence, cardiovascular disease. overall, the gene expression changes caused by opp in the liver suggest hepatoprotective and anti-dyslipidaemic effects of the extract.

opp up-regulated blood coagulation genes in the spleen
in the spleen, the most interesting genes up-regulated by opp were those involved in blood coagulation. the regulation of these genes suggests that the spleen might be playing an active protective role in improving blood circulation and clearing blood clots from the body. opp may thus function as anti-thrombotic agents, considering the fact that as a peripheral lymphoid organ, the spleen is also involved in mechanical filtration of the blood to remove unwanted materials  <cit> . however, this is still hypothetical and further experiments are required to show that opp helps in clearing and not causing blood clots.

gene regulation by opp in the heart showed similarities with that of caloric restriction
ageing in the heart involves a transcriptional shift from fatty acid metabolism to carbohydrate metabolism. this shift was also found to differentiate maladaptive hypertrophy  from adaptive or exercise-induced hypertrophy   <cit> . a key enzyme, pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase isoenzyme  <dig> , inhibits pyruvate dehydrogenase and thus minimises carbohydrate oxidation by preventing the flow of glycolytic products into the tca cycle. hence, the up-regulation of pdk <dig> in the heart by opp may prevent a metabolic shift towards glycolysis and thus ageing. another gene, ucp <dig>  encoding an uncoupling protein which protects against mitochondrial oxidative damage by reducing the production of ros, was up-regulated in the heart by opp as well. ucp <dig> may transport fatty acids out of the mitochondria, thereby protecting the mitochondria from fatty acid anions or peroxides  <cit> . besides up-regulating pdk <dig> and ucp <dig>  opp also up-regulated another seven genes in the heart, carnitine acetyltransferase , catechol-o-methyltransferase , ccaat/enhancer binding protein , enoyl-coa, hydratase/3-hydroxyacyl coa dehydrogenase , plasma membrane associated protein , solute carrier family  <dig>   and xanthine dehydrogenase . lee et al.  demonstrated the down-regulation of these nine genes in the hearts of ageing b6c3f <dig> mice  <cit> . six of these genes, pdk <dig>  ucp <dig>  comt, cebpb, s3- <dig> and xdh were significantly up-regulated by caloric restriction, thus opposing the effects of ageing  <cit> . additional genes up-regulated by opp and also by caloric restriction in the heart include carbonic anhydrase  <dig> , carboxylesterase  <dig> , purine-nucleoside phosphorylase  and tumour protein d52-like  <dig>   <cit> . hence, a role for opp in preventing or slowing down ageing of the heart is implicated.

it was also noted that genes up-regulated in the hearts of ageing b6c3f <dig> mice such as aminolevulinic acid synthase  <dig> , mature t cell proliferation  <dig>  and protein tyrosine phosphatase 4a <dig>   <cit> , were down-regulated by opp in the heart in the present study. in the group that had caloric restriction on the other hand, cyclin d <dig> , secreted acidic cysteine rich glycoprotein  and transferrin receptor  genes were down-regulated  <cit> . in the present study, these three genes were also down-regulated by opp. it has been found that caloric restriction confers rapid positive effects on the heart, by rapidly shifting gene expression towards a state of reduced cardiac remodelling and fibrosis as well as enhanced contractility  <cit> . several plant phenolics such as resveratrol, quercetin, butein and piceatannol have been proposed as potential caloric restriction mimetics  <cit> . the regulation of genes by opp in the heart suggests that they may also act as caloric restriction mimetics.

in addition to genes similarly affected by caloric restriction, antioxidant genes such as those encoding erythroid derived-nuclear factor 2-like  <dig> , glutamate-cysteine ligase  and various glutathione s-transferases  were up-regulated. glutathione s-transferases are important antioxidant enzymes essential in the detoxification of carcinogens and scavenging of ros  <cit> . the up-regulation of these antioxidant genes thus indicates that opp provides a higher antioxidant defence in the heart, which is an organ prone to damage by prooxidants.

the expression levels of genes in the heart tca cycle, such as those encoding proteins which produce nadh  and fadh <dig> , were also down-regulated. suclg <dig> and sucla <dig>  genes encoding subunits of succinate-coa ligases which convert gtp/atp to gdp/adp were also down-regulated. finally, genes in the electron transport chain which encode proteins in complex i, complex ii and complex v were down-regulated as well. electrons derived from metabolic reducing equivalents  are fed into the electron transport chain through either complex i or complex ii, and eventually pass to molecular oxygen to form water in complex iv, while atp is being formed in complex v. these results imply that energy production in the heart was down-regulated by opp. hence, in reducing the amount of energy generated, opp may act as antioxidants in reducing the amount of ros produced in the heart, suggesting a beneficial effect of the extract in preventing cardiac oxidative stress.

summary and implications of the study
the discovery of opp opens up a niche for value-added novel nutraceuticals. in this study, we confirmed that opp was not toxic to mice as these compounds did not significantly alter the organ histology of the animals as well as their haematology and clinical biochemistry parameters. in addition, this study identified the global gene expression profiles caused by opp in three major organs of mice on a normal diet. supplementation of opp to these mice resulted in numerous beneficial biological activities during healthy states. in livers of these mice, lipid catabolism genes were up-regulated while cholesterol biosynthesis genes were down-regulated, suggesting that opp may find potential applications as hepatoprotective and anti-dyslipidaemic supplements. opp may also act as possible anti-thrombotic agents since they encouraged the aggregation of platelets in spleens. opp also retarded the ageing process in hearts, similar to the effects of caloric restriction.

although the clinical biochemistry parameters on lipid profiles  measured in this study did not show any significant differences between the groups, mice in the treatment group did show a delay in weight gain throughout the six weeks of feeding compared to the control group. also, while the blood serum lipid profiles measured in the present study did not show any significant differences between the control and treated mice even though the hepatic gene expression profiles had changed, a similar observation was made by matsui et al.  when cocoa was given to mice  <cit> . in this previous study, cocoa ingestion increased total cholesterol concentrations in the blood sera, whereas body weight gain and hepatic cholesterol biosynthesis were decreased  <cit> . hence, the difference between the clinical biochemistry parameters and the hepatic gene expression changes observed in the present study might be caused by other factors, which include reabsorption of cholesterol in the small intestine or other roles that the small intestine may play in the aetiology of obesity  <cit> . perhaps the lipid profiles of livers in addition to blood sera should be conducted in future studies in order to directly correlate these profiles with the hepatic gene expression changes observed.

to our knowledge, this is the first study in which microarray analysis has been carried out on major organs of mice supplemented with opp. in identifying possible pharmacological, nutraceutical or toxicological responses, the biological representation of a set of genes is more interesting than the genes themselves. by using different microarray softwares for statistical and functional analyses, we identified genes, gene ontologies, pathways and networks that were significantly changed by opp in different major organs of mice on a normal diet. the gene expression profiles obtained indicate several mechanisms as to how opp exerts its beneficial effects in vivo. these findings implicate broader pleiotropic effects of opp than previously expected. this study also serves as a model for the dissection of many other complex responses mediated by dietary phenolics and plant phytochemicals in general.

CONCLUSIONS
our study was designed to understand the global functional profiles of opp in mice which were on a normal diet. this analysis shows some of the molecular mechanisms as to how opp exerts biological activities in vivo during healthy states. it thus provides a background for further hypotheses to be tested in future experiments involving opp specifically, and dietary phenolics in general. this study also sets the scene for identifying the molecular modes of action involved in conferring the positive biological effects of opp during various diseased states.

