BACKGROUND
cell development and differentiation in the fetal lung are regulated by mechanical, physiologic, and biochemical factors  <cit> . the markers for peripheral lung development include maturation of alveolar type ii  cells as evidenced by the appearance of lamellar bodies and increased expression of surfactant phospholipids and proteins, and transformation of atii cells into type i cells  <cit> . previously studies have demonstrated that cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator  mrna and protein are expressed in adult atii cells and that the cftr-like chloride channel is functional  <cit> . however, its role in development of fetal atii cells is unclear. one possible mechanism is that cftr-mediated chloride secretion in the fetal lung epithelium can concomitantly increase fluid secretion and lung fluid volume  <cit> . lung distention due to increased fluid secretion and fluid volume can accelerate peripheral lung development and atii cell maturation as demonstrated in tracheal occlusion studies  <cit> . conversely, decreased lung volume in congenital diaphragmatic hernia can result in impaired lung growth and differentiation  <cit> . multiple studies utilizing in utero gene transfer and transient over-expression of cftr have shown increased fetal lung volume, and accelerated maturation of atii cells  <cit> .

mutations of cftr gene have been associated with cystic fibrosis ; however, the mechanism for its direct participation in the disease pathology remains unclear  <cit> . cftr is found in the epithelial cells of many organs including the lung. the crucial role of cftr in the cellular development and cell differentiation in the lung has become somewhat clear with studies involving in utero gene transfer technology developed by larson and cohen  <cit> . this technique circumvents the early developmental role of cftr and allows investigations into the role of cftr  in a stage-specific manner in accessible organs. using this technique, recent studies have shown a role of cftr in fetal lung development because its over-expression increases mechanical stretch in the lung  <cit> .

pulmonary surfactant is essential for the biophysical and immunologic integrity of the lungs and for maintenance of the patency of small airways and alveoli  <cit> . phosphatidylcholine  is the major phospholipid and principal surface-active constituent in pulmonary surfactant. four surfactant proteins – sp-a, sp-b, sp-c, and sp-d – are present, each of which plays a role in lowering of the surface tension or in the innate host-defense mechanisms in the lung. several investigations have used differential centrifugation of the bronchoalveolar lavage  fluid for further fractionation into large aggregates  and small aggregates  of lung surfactant  <cit> . the la fraction contains multilamellar structures, the tubular myelin, surfactant phospholipids and most of the sp-a, sp-b and sp-c proteins. it represents the newly secreted surface-active form of alveolar surfactant, which is capable of reducing the surface tension and is the precursor for the lighter sa fraction of lung surfactant and contains mostly small vesicles, surfactant phospholipids and small amounts of sp-a, sp-b and sp-c proteins  <cit> .

the secretion of surfactant phospholipids in atii cells occurs by exocytosis of lamellar bodies  <cit> . surfactant homeostasis is under feedback regulation by surfactant proteins which increase surfactant clearance and uptake by atii cells  <cit> . different physiological, biochemical and pharmacological factors also regulate surfactant secretion through specific cell surface receptors like β-adrenergic, purinergic and endothelin receptors or by directly affecting second messenger like calcium, camp, and diacylglycerol  <cit> . although the expression of surfactant phospholipids and proteins increases with lung and atii cell maturation, temporal expression of each constituent may be independently regulated  <cit> .

adenovirus-mediated transfer of genes into cells has been used in several cell types including some hard to transfect cells like atii cells. our group has previously used this technique for in utero transfer of cftr constructs and demonstrated gene-specific effects on lung development in various species  <cit> . the expression of adenovirus-mediated transferred gene was transient and lasted only 48– <dig> h post-transfer  <cit> . in our previous studies, we have repeatedly shown lack of inflammation in control animals that were treated with adenovirus-reporter gene constructs confirming our interpretations that the effects were due to the target gene transfer into presumably pluripotent cells in the developing lung. our previous study employing in utero treatment with antisense-cftr  construct showed airway thickening with collagen deposits in the small and large airways and increased airway reactivity to acetylcholine in  <dig> days old rats  <cit> .

this study was undertaken to determine if transient disruption of lung organogenesis can result in altered phenotype of atii cells in the adult lung. because our previous studies suggested accelerated maturation of atii cells with transient over expression of cftr in fetal lung  <cit> , we postulated that a transient knock down of cftr in fetal lung would cause delayed or erratic development and cause persistent effects in atii cell phenotype. we now show that a similar approach utilizing transient in utero disruption of cftr caused changes in surfactant protein expression and in the alveolar surfactant phospholipid pool in lungs of adult ascftr rats. studies with isolated adult lung atii cells from these animals also showed changes in surfactant secretion suggesting altered cell phenotype. the latter was also confirmed by gene array analysis of rna from freshly isolated atii cells, which showed altered expression of several genes including calcium regulating genes, the ca2+-transporting atpase  and calcium-dependent calmodulin kinase kinase <dig> . the latter is known to cause phosphorylation and stimulation of calcium-calmodulin kinase i   <cit> . the expression levels of camki, which also regulates surfactant secretion in atii cells  <cit> , were elevated in atii cells from ascftr rats. thus, transient in utero knock down of cftr causes changes in lung development which is reflected in altered atii cell phenotype in the adult lung.

RESULTS
studies in the lung tissue
airways & parenchymal changes
the model of in utero gene treatment has been used in our laboratories for several investigations to determine the role of cftr in fetal lung development. this model utilizing intra-amniotic delivery of target gene is designed for gestation periods when sufficient fluid is present in the amniotic sac for fluid injection. although transgene expression decreases rapidly in the  <dig> days post-transfer  <cit> , it is noteworthy that the cftr knock down in these animals lasts only for 48– <dig> h post-transfer  <cit> . in our study, we observed structural changes in the 3-month old ascftr rats as evidenced by peribronchial thickening with multicellular airway epithelia suggesting thickening of airways  in comparison to the controls . a previous study from our group had noticed similar changes including interstitial lung fibrosis in  <dig> days old rats that were treated with ascftr in utero  <cit> . lung pathology in human cystic fibrosis  and cftr knock down animal models is characterized by chronic inflammatory changes  <cit> , which preclude a single causative factor for cf. nevertheless, lung pathology and inflammation is observed in young cf patients without any overt bacterial infections . previous studies from our group have indicated lung inflammation in rats that were treated with the ascftr constructs in utero. in the current study also, we observed some cell infiltrates in lung parenchyma of ascftr , but not in the control rats . in the present study, we did not evaluate neutrophil infiltration and resulting inflammation in the ascftr animals. thus, it is unlikely that the study animals suffered from chronic bacterial infection even though the ascftr animals  were maintained under normal housing conditions. thus, this study confirming reproducibility of our model of in utero gene treatment with ascftr was not extended for additional histological studies.

surfactant phospholipids
several studies have evaluated surfactant subfractions of bal fluid samples to investigate the in vivo functions of atii cells. the la fraction represents the newly secreted surfactant which is capable of reducing the surface tension whereas the sa fraction contains old and inactive surfactant components  <cit> . the alveolar surfactant homeostasis is maintained by different mechanisms involving secretion and clearance as discussed above. the bal fluid of ascftr-treated lungs showed higher total pl and pc contents in the la fraction of lung surfactant . the increase in alveolar surfactant pc in la fraction is possibly due to higher secretion, decreased conversion into sa fraction, or a combination of both. the sa fraction of bal fluid showed decreased level of pc in the ascftr-treated group  suggesting decreased conversion of la to sa fraction of lung surfactant. this was also confirmed by distribution analysis of total phospholipids and pc that showed decreased proportion of lipids in the sa fraction . however, we cannot exclude the contribution of increased clearance of sa fraction to overall decrease in the pc pool in sa fraction of lung surfactant in ascftr rats.

relative distribution of total phospholipids and phosphatidylcholine between the large and small aggregates of alveolar surfactant is expressed as percent distribution. results are mean ± se of  <dig> animals in the control and ascftr groups. results are significantly different at p <  <dig> .

surfactant proteins
like surfactant lipids, surfactant proteins are also synthesized and secreted by atii cells. surfactant secretion and clearance is under regulatory control of surfactant proteins, particularly sp-a, since this most abundant surfactant protein plays a major role in surfactant homeostasis by promoting clearance and inhibiting secretion of lung surfactant  <cit> . the sp-a and sp-b mrna levels in the lung tissue were lower in lungs of ascftr group compared to control group . however, western blot analysis of sp-a and sp-b in the la fraction of alveolar surfactant and of the lung tissue did not show any difference between the two groups . the decrease in the mrna levels of these two proteins in the ascftr group can possibly occur because of decreased atii cell number in the lungs  or altered cell function leading to changes in surfactant homeostasis. the surfactant proteins in the alveolar and lung compartments could remain unchanged because of corresponding decreases in the synthesis  and in the degradation of proteins. this probability would suggest dissociation between the synthesis and clearance processes for the surfactant protein and lipid components. we are unable to determine if such dissociation is due to immaturity or pathologic abnormality caused by a transient knock down of cftr in the fetal lung.

although not significantly decreased, the sp-c mrna in the ascftr group also showed a decreasing trend in comparison to the control group. since sp-c is a marker for atii cells, this pattern for sp-c mrna could be a reflection of decreased number of atii cells. immuno-staining of lung sections for prosp-c showed that fewer cells contained prosp-c in the ascftr lungs in comparison to the control lungs . analysis of five random fields in each group for fluorescent objects indicated that the number of prosp-c positive cells was significantly lower in the ascftr group in comparison to the controls .

studies in the atii cells
pc secretion
the secretion of lung surfactant in atii cells is a vital cell function, since its disruption would result in deficiency of alveolar surfactant and lead to respiratory distress. therefore, evaluation of basal and stimulated secretion of surfactant pc can be used to test atii cell function and establish phenotypic changes in the cells  <cit> . during the  <dig> h incubation, the basal pc secretion in atii cells was similar in both groups . the secretagogue-stimulated secretion was expressed as percent of basal secretion. the atp-stimulated secretion was higher by about 30%. similarly, the phorbol myristate acetate -stimulated secretion was higher in the ascftr cells in comparison to the control cells . in order to determine if the secretion changes were accompanied by change in the cell pc pool, we measured equilibrium labeling  of cells in these experiments. the labeling of cellular pc was higher by 30% in the ascftr cells when compared with the control cells . since equivalent numbers of cells were plated for both groups, the results suggest higher pc mass and consequently higher absolute secretion of pc on per cell basis. extrapolation of these findings to the in vivo function of atii cells suggests that the increased pool of cell pc in the ascftr treated lungs could result in greater pool of pc in the alveolar surfactant.

surfactant proteins
since evaluation of surfactant protein expression in lung tissue showed lower levels of sp-a and sp-b mrna in the ascftr treated group , we also measured the mrna levels of these genes in the freshly isolated atii cells . for real-time rt-pcr analysis, control and ascftr cell rna samples were paired for the day of cell preparation. the sp-a, sp-b and sp-c mrna levels in freshly isolated atii cells were similar in the two groups. combining these results and the results from pc secretion experiments, our study suggests lack of coordination between the secretory function of surfactant phospholipids, the pc pool and the surfactant proteins mrna levels suggesting altered atii cell phenotype. the discrepancy in the surfactant proteins expression in the lung tissue  and isolated atii cells , and the decreased immuno-staining for prosp-c in ascftr lungs  suggest that lungs of ascftr rats contain fewer atii cells in comparison to the control lungs.

calmodulin kinase and calcium regulating genes
to obtain additional evidence for phenotypic changes in atii cells, the total rna from freshly isolated atii cells was evaluated for altered gene expression by microarray analysis using affymetrix genechip®. gene array analysis of  <dig>  genes on the chip returned  <dig> genes above the background level. the heat map demonstrating significantly altered expression of  <dig> genes in adult atii cells as a result of transient in utero knock down of cftr  is depicted in figure 8a. forty genes showed at least 50% decrease and  <dig> genes showed greater than 2-fold increase in comparison to the controls. these included atp2c <dig> and camkk <dig> genes that regulate calcium transport or calcium related processes, respectively. because ascftr cells demonstrated increased secretion of lung surfactant upon stimulation with secretagogues, we further verified altered expression of these two genes by real-time pcr. the expressions of camkk <dig> and atp2c <dig> in the ascftr group were  <dig> ± 53% and  <dig> ± 14% of the control group . camkk <dig> can phosphorylate camki and increase its activity several folds  <cit> . western blot analysis showed highly elevated expression of camki . since ca2+ is required for stimulated secretion of surfactant  <cit> , increased expression of proteins regulating intracellular ca2+ levels and ca2+-dependent protein kinase activity could be one possible mechanism for increased surfactant secretion. however, additional or alternate mechanisms like increased receptor density for purinergic receptors  and/or increased pkc activity  could also play a role in increasing surfactant secretion.

discussion
the molecular basis of fetal lung development is believed to be under genetic and hormonal control  <cit> . molecular cloning studies have shown that cftr gene expression is regulated during lung development  <cit> . in addition, changes in cftr expression can regulate fetal lung development  <cit> . we have previously shown that transient cftr over-expression in the fetal lung following in utero gene transfer can modulate lung cell differentiation and maturation  <cit> . the in utero gene transfer is a useful tool to evaluate the developmental role of a gene in lung development  <cit> . previous studies have demonstrated that the gene knock down after in utero transfection with antisense cftr is transient  <cit> . the hypothesis is that this technique aims to alter gene expression in undifferentiated multipotent cells lining the developing airways. the infection efficiency or the cell types infected cannot be determined in these studies because of low virus dose resulting in low infectivity. also, such determination would not be of significance because of the ongoing cell differentiation and proliferation during lung development. although somewhat invasive, the fetuses treated with the control gene show normal differentiation and growth  <cit> . our current study demonstrates that transient in utero knock down of cftr with antisense constructs can alter the atii cell phenotype in the adult animals suggesting persistent changes in cell phenotype possibly due to altered lung development.

the transient perturbations in gene expression due to ascftr treatment in the fetal lung were associated with altered surfactant status in the adult lung as suggested by increased alveolar pool size of surfactant lipids  without affecting the surfactant protein levels. similar results have been reported for surfactant status in cf mice or patients  <cit> . non-infected cf mice showed increased phospholipids pool in large aggregates without accompanying change in the sp-a levels  <cit> . also, the alveolar surfactant phospholipid composition and function are altered in cf patients  <cit> . our study suggests that the increase in large aggregates could result from higher surfactant secretion rather than decreased clearance of inactive components in the small aggregates . the size of alveolar surfactant pool is maintained by secretion and clearance processes which are coupled in normal lung  <cit> . the uptake of surfactant by atii cells and by macrophages are the main routes of clearance and only a small portion of surfactant is cleared by upwards movement along the airways  <cit> . the increased pool size and increased secretion would suggest altered surfactant turnover in ascftr rat lungs. previous studies also suggested altered atii cell phenotype in mutant cftr mice as they showed higher alveolar phospholipid because of the decreased uptake of alveolar pc  <cit> . thus, two different approaches, transient  and stable knockdown of cftr  <cit> , show alterations in atii cell phenotype albeit in different processes. although not directly related to surfactant metabolism, previous studies with isolated fibroblasts and platelets from cf patients also showed a change in pc metabolism since these cells showed increased pc synthesis  <cit> . the ascftr- treated atii cells also show a larger cell pc pool  and increased pc secretion that could contribute to increase alveolar pool of lung surfactant . the increase in pc secretion was observed with both atp and pma  suggesting that the altered response may involve multiple pathways. one of these is likely the pkc-mediated pathway, since atp stimulation of purinergic receptors  <cit>  and consequent increases in intracellular ca2+ and diacylglycerol  <cit>  would also stimulate pkc, while pma directly stimulates pkc activity to increase surfactant secretion  <cit> . the increased expression of atp2c <dig> and of ca2+-dependent camkk <dig> and camki  would suggest that the ca2+-dependent surfactant secretion  <cit>  could be also elevated in atii cells in the ascftr group. although deficiency of surfactant proteins particularly sp-a could explain higher secretion and content of alveolar pc  <cit> , its deficiency in lung or large aggregates was not observed in spite of decreased mrna level in the lung tissue. our study was not designed to determine the underlying mechanism of increased secretion which could occur through several processes including increased ca2+-signaling, higher cell affinity to secretagogues because of increased receptor density, increased activity of intermediary steps like pkc activation for regulation of secretion, or more efficient fusion and exocytosis of lamellar body contents in the ascftr group.

the observations of decreased mrna levels  without accompanying decreases in sp-a and sp-b protein levels in the lung tissue of ascftr rats also suggest altered atii cell phenotype. we cannot determine if dissociation between the transcription and translation processes contributed to this discrepancy. because the mrna levels of these proteins were not decreased in atii cells , it is likely that a decrease in the atii cell number  contributed to the overall decrease in surfactant protein mrna in ascftr lungs. we suggest that the observed changes in atii cell characteristics and cell number could occur because of developmental and cell differentiation-related changes. in previous study  <cit> , developmental and differentiation related changes with cftr over-expression possibly contributed to accelerated differentiation of fetal lung cells.

the results of transient perturbation in cftr expression in the fetus suggest the importance of cftr in fetal lung development  <cit> . the mechanisms that modify the atii cell phenotype in the adult animal are likely complex but could be related to early effects of cftr on expression of smooth muscle function-related genes and on mechanical stretch in the fetal lung  <cit> . previous study has suggested that in utero over-expression of cftr increases stretch in the fetal lung apparently through altered expression of myosin light chain kinase and myosin light chain phosphorylation  <cit> . therefore, we presumed that decreased mechanical stretch results from cftr knock down in the fetal lung that could possibly inhibit maturation of atii cells  <cit> . our current study of alterations in atii cell function with transient knock down of cftr gene expression further supports the modification of fetal lung development and differentiation processes by in utero gene delivery  <cit> . the resulting changes, like altered atii cell physiology, apparently persist in the adult life of the animal suggesting that the effects of such interference in lung development in the fetus could linger for long periods. such outcome supports the previously stated postulate that genetically encoded injury could have immediate effects even with apparently normal lung function and appearance  <cit> . such a scenario can be seen in cf where the deleterious pathway begins early in the fetal lung  <cit> . however, several compensatory mechanisms may function in cf in an organ-specific manner, since the effects of global deficiency of cftr manifest markedly differently in different organs. although some of these mechanisms in the lung may be initiated during the period of in utero gene disruption in our protocol, extensive studies would need to be undertaken for such determination.

in summary, this study has shown that in utero transient disruption of cftr gene results in lasting phenotypic change in atii cell, altered surfactant homeostasis, and expression of several genes in adult rat atii cells. the underlying mechanisms for change in atii cell function is unclear but could result from diminished mechanical stretch in the fetal lung and result in delayed cellular differentiation. further detailed investigations would be needed to establish if decreased number of atii cells and metabolic abnormalities also contribute to altered lung surfactant homeostasis.

CONCLUSIONS
transient in utero disruption of cftr can affect adult lung characteristics suggesting that events in fetal life can have persistent and long lasting effects in the adult life.

