BACKGROUND
high-throughput sequencing of whole genomes of bacterial pathogens enables phylogenetic analysis of the core genome. phylogenetic analysis is a powerful tool for generating hypotheses on the pattern of descent and evolution of species and strains, their host and vector adaptation or pathogenicity. this in turn provides information for comparative genomics, an effective approach for studying genetic differences between strains and/or species that may lead to differences in phenotype related to host or vector associations, pathogenicity and others  <cit> . in this study we used vector-borne bacterial pathogens, the borrelia burgdorferi sensu lato  species complex, to advance the understanding of the phylogenetic relationship of members of this species complex and to put into perspective the evolution of vector- and host associations.

borrelia burgdorferi s.l., also termed the lyme borreliosis  group of spirochetes, forms a species complex now comprising about  <dig> named and proposed genospecies  <cit> . the parasitic bacteria are maintained in natural transmission cycles between reservoir hosts and tick vectors of the genus ixodes  <cit> . a hallmark in the ecology of borrelia is the association with vertebrate reservoir hosts which have been shown to have a major impact on the population structure . some species occupy wide niches being able to utilize a large range of reservoir hosts spanning several species orders  while others  have a narrow reservoir host range  and implications on the geographic distribution and dispersal of the bacteria have been suggested  <cit> . similarly, some borrelia species are transmitted by ixodes species which are considered generalist feeders, e.g., ixodes ricinus, i. scapularis, i. persulcatus, while others are adapted to tick species with a narrow host preference such as i. spinipalpis, i. minor or i. ovatus . both, host and vector associations are obviously contributing to the asymmetrical geographic distribution of species within the distribution range between around 40th and 60th degree northern latitude but the question of how these traits evolved has remained unresolved.

studies on the phylogenetic relationship and global evolution of the b. burgdorferi s.l. species complex were performed using multilocus sequence analysis  or genomic data  <cit> . as expected when using a limited number of loci  support of internal nodes was low and therefore unreliable  <cit> . whole genome data were so far available only for few species of the complex and it is well known that addition of more taxa or more loci may provide more accurate phylogenies  <cit> . a more comprehensive study on b. burgdorferi sensu lato was conducted by mongodin et al.  <cit>  which included eight species of the complex and showed that a robust reconstruction of the evolutionary relationship was obtained using genome-wide single nucleotide polymorphisms .

the aim of our study was to produce a robust phylogeny for the b. burgdorferi s.l. species complex to obtain a better understanding of their global evolution and to put into perspective the evolution of host and vector adaptations. using illumina technology we sequenced  <dig> strains belonging to  <dig> previously described genospecies of the b. burgdorferi s.l. species complex. in addition we downloaded from genbank  <cit>  chromosome sequence data for  <dig> samples including one belonging to a species  not present in our own dataset. we applied a bayesian method to reconstruct a phylogeny with high internal node support based on  <dig> orthologous single copy genes. our data provide evidence that neither host nor vector adaptations cluster monophyletically suggesting that they developed several times independently during the evolutionary history of the complex. adaptation either to a new host or a new vector probably lead to ecological isolation and hence to speciation. the ngs tree suggests that both processes have been important in the evolutionary history of borrelia spirochetes.

RESULTS
to gain knowledge on the global evolution of the bacterial species complex b. burgdorferi s.l., we sequenced  <dig> strains belonging to  <dig> of the approximately  <dig> described genospecies of the complex  and downloaded chromosome sequence data for  <dig> additional lb strains including one strain of b. chilensis  <cit>  and for the relapsing fever strain ly of b. duttonii that was used as outgroup in the phylogeny  <cit> . our final dataset thus comprised  <dig> lb strains from  <dig> species and  <dig> outgroup strain. for  <dig> of the species between one and three strains were sequenced. for four species, a large number of isolates was available and our final dataset contains  <dig> b. afzelii,  <dig> b. bavariensis,  <dig> b. burgdorferi s.s. and  <dig> b. garinii. this allowed us to get an impression on intraspecific variation. b. afzelii and b. garinii are the most frequently found species in questing i. ricinus in europe and all four species are also frequently found in human patients.

phylogenetic analyses of single copy orthologous loci
using blastn  <cit>  searches  <dig> orthologous single copy loci of sufficient quality were found in all lb strains and were included in phylogenetic analyses. using these data a robust phylogeny was reconstructed in beast v <dig> . <dig>  <cit>  where known borrelia species are separated by long branches with good posterior probabilities of inner nodes . after splitting of b. chilensis strain va <dig>  the phylogeny is composed of two sister clades – one clade that contains the species known from europe and asia; the other one consists of species that are known to occur in north america . the root of the tree inferred by beast  <cit>  is confirmed by a phylogeny reconstructed using  <dig> orthologous genes for the lb strains and the outgroup b. duttonii strain ly  <cit>  where b. chilensis is also the first species to diverge and where the posterior probability of the node separating the “eurasian” and “american” clades is much more satisfactory . this second phylogeny, presented in additional file 1: s <dig>  is extremely similar to the first one except for the position of b. lusitaniae and b. japonica that cluster with other species instead of forming a clade together. this small discrepancy is probably due to the reduced power of the analysis with only  <dig> genes found orthologous with the outgroup.fig.  <dig> phylogenetic inference and main host and vector association of b. burgdorferi sensu lato the phylogeny reconstructed with beast v <dig> . <dig>  <cit>  is based on  <dig> orthologous single copy genes. genospecies names and host associations are indicated next to the cluster. as huge number of host species can serve as reservoirs for borrelia  <cit> , for sake of clarity, we used a crude host association referring to rodents , birds  and lizards. for the same reason, not all vector associations can be shown. the following vectors are not shown in the phylogeny : i. hexagonus , i. affinis , i. minor , i. jellisoni , i. uriae, i. pavlovskyi , i. stilesi  and i. granulatus  and i. nipponensis. note the high posterior probability of internal nodes . the scale bar indicates substitutions per site



in the phylogeny shown in fig.  <dig>  borrelia strains generally cluster according to species except strain pkl. it is likely that the strain in our analysis was mislabeled and that the strain analyzed here was b. garinii strain pki. this sample was not included in the estimation of species-specific summary statistics. three strains identified as b. garinii in genbank  <cit>  and borreliabase  <cit> : bgvir strain from russia  <cit>  and sz and nmjw <dig> strains from china  <cit>  clustered within the b. bavariensis clade and were considered as b. bavariensis in our analyses. we had already shown in a previous study  <cit>  that strains bgvir and nmjw <dig> clustered within b. bavariensis and we suggest that all three strains require re-classification.

in the clade containing species from europe and asia, b. spielmanii and b. afzelii form sister clades that seem to have recently diverged. similarly, b. bavariensis and b. garinii are well diverged from one another by a recent speciation event likely induced by a host switch . the two populations of b. bavariensis, the european and asian population, are also very well separated. b. lusitaniae and b. japonica are separated by long terminal branches while b. valaisiana branch off together with b. yangtzensis suggesting a host switch  as driver for speciation. this bears remarkable similarity to the speciation event separating b. garinii and b. bavariensis.

the “american clade”, is separated into two clusters, one that includes b. bissettiae, b. carolinensis, b. kurtenbachii and b. californiensis, and one that includes b. americana and b. burgdorferi s.s.. thus b. burgdorferi s.s. is not representative for the whole species complex, not even the “american” clade even if our dataset contained b. burgdorferi s.s. strains from europe and usa .

there was no monophyletic pattern discernible for vector or host association, i.e., borrelia species being adapted to rodents or birds did not cluster monophyletically  . for example, both b. garinii and b. valaisiana utilize birds as reservoir hosts but fall into different clades of the tree separated by clades of rodent associated borrelia species such as b. afzelii and b. spielmanii. similarly, rodent adapted species are separated in the phylogeny by borrelia species utilizing different reservoir hosts  . the same is true for vector association: not all species that are associated with i. ricinus form a monophyletic cluster . for example, b. burgdorferi s.s. is transmitted by i. ricinus as most european species  but clusters far apart from those species. these data suggest that switches to different hosts and vectors have occurred several times independently throughout the evolutionary history of the species complex.

inferences about human pathogenicity are more difficult because it is unknown whether species that are maintained in specific enzootic transmission cycles are actually human pathogenic or not, i.e., they are not being found in human patients because they are associated with vectors that do not bite humans at any frequency. a species that is unlikely to be human pathogenic is b. valaisiana; it occurs at sufficiently high prevalence in europe and is associated with a vector that is known to bite humans but b. valaisiana strains have never been isolated from a human patient.

divergence of clades
the branch length estimates in phylogenies using beast  <cit>  are expressed as number of substitutions per site. by multiplying branch length by a mutation rate of  <dig> substitutions per site per generation  we obtained rough estimates for the divergence of different clades. first, using the phylogeny rooted with the outgroup b. duttonii, we estimated a divergence time of the lb group with b. duttonii of approximately  <dig>  million generations. second, we used branch times within the phylogeny without outgroup  to estimate the following: the divergence between b. garinii and b. burgdorferi s.s. was estimated to have occurred  <dig>  generations ago . the split between b. garinii and b. bavariensis was estimated to have occurred around  <dig>  generations ago and between the two b. bavariensis populations  <dig>  generations ago. rough estimates of divergence times from the clade regrouping b. burgdorferi s.s. and species occurring in north america can be found in additional file 1: s <dig>  it is important to note that these estimates depend directly on the chosen mutation rate which has not been proven to be accurate for b. burgdorferi s.l..

clonal frame ml analysis
we ran clonalframeml  <cit>  to estimate the relative impact of mutation and recombination on the phylogeny. this analysis showed that recombination occurred within and between species. mean ratios of r/θ were estimated to be  <dig>  suggesting that mutation remains the leading force of evolution for the core genome of borrelia that was investigated here.

summary statistics
genetic diversity   <cit>  andtajima’s d  <cit>  were computed for the four species with sufficient numbers of strains . in general, the genetic diversity  was found to be marginally higher in b. garinii and b. bavariensis  than in b. burgdorferi s.s.  and b. afzelii  . the mean tajima’s d was negative for all populations, in particular for b. burgdorferi s.s suggesting population expansions .table  <dig> mean values  of nucleotide diversity   <cit>  and tajima’s d  <cit>  for  <dig> orthologous genes computed using r package pegas on all samples and within borrelia genospecies







additional file 1: s <dig> shows genes with π or tajima’s d values that deviate by more than two standard deviations from mean values. low values are underlined and high values are in bold letters. these loci could potentially be important during speciation events or during divergence of borrelia populations.

five genes are present in more than one list of genes showing extreme values within a species. in particular we can highlight three genes that could be under balancing selection.  the gene of the ribosomal protein rpll  has a high tajima’s d in b. garinii and in b. afzelii.  the cytidine deaminase gene cdd  has a high diversity and a high tajima’s d in the two sister species b. garinii and b. bavariensis.  the chemotaxis response regulator bb <dig> has high diversity in b. burgdorferi ss and b. afzelii as well as high tajima’s d in b. afzelii. in general, the fact that most of these genes showing extreme values are not shared between species might indicate that the different species have undergone divergent evolution.

all the genes identified here deserve further analysis within species with more samples in order to determine whether they might have been the target of natural selection as shown in a previous paper for b. bavariensis  <cit> .

discussion
host and vector-association as drivers of the evolution of the b. burgdorferi s.l. species complex
we investigated the global evolution of the b. burgdorferi s.l. species complex based on sequences of  <dig> genospecies. for four species  enough strains were available for us to look at intraspecies variation.

in the phylogeny resulting from  <dig> single copy orthologous genes located on the main chromosome  strains generally clustered according to previously determined genospecies and these formed well separated terminal clades suggesting that they are species-like fundamental units  <cit> . including additional members of species that were represented by only one strain might improve the branch length estimation but will probably not change the topology as the genospecies are clearly separated. the robustness of the inferred phylogeny is established by the high statistical support of the internal nodes, in particular when compared to previous analyses using multilocus sequences typing  . in all mlst trees, independent of the tree building method used, statistical support of internal nodes is too low to draw definite conclusions on the evolutionary relationship amongst species and thus, this is a major improvement in our tree. although the overall topology is very similar between mlst trees, there are slight differences due to different taxa being included . slight inconsistencies between our tree and the mlst trees may relate to the same fact. in all trees, b. spielmanii and b. afzelii cluster close together, the same is true for b. bavariensis and b. garinii. whenever b. yangtzensis is included, it forms a sister clade to b. valaisiana. the addition of taxa  changes slightly the clustering of b. lusitaniae and b. japonica but such changes are to be expected when additional taxa are included.

it has been suggested that host association is a major driver in borrelia diversification  and our data are consistent with it, i.e., host association appears to be one of the underlying ecological principles of speciation: lineages associated with certain reservoir hosts form terminal clades. the clustering according to genospecies was also shown by other studies employing genome sequences for borrelia species from a limited geographic region  <cit>  or a limited number of species  <cit> .

our data show, that diversification of lineages may also be driven by vector association. this is particularly obvious in the genospecies b. bavariensis: there are two populations of b. bavariensis, a heterologous population that occurs in asia and a genetically homogeneous population that occurs in europe. the former is vectored by i. persulcatus  while the latter occurs within the distribution range of i. ricinus . the genetic homogeneity of the european population resembles a population that has founded a new ecotype after a strong bottleneck  <cit> . this has led to the hypothesis that the european population has arisen via adaptation to a new vector  <cit> . while both populations are genetically sufficiently closely related to clearly belong to the same species, further divergence and ultimately speciation is predictable through ecological isolation due to different vector associations.

there was no monophyletic pattern of host or vector associations discernible in the phylogeny: species that are known to be associated with birds as reservoir hosts  did not cluster closely together but in different parts of the phylogeny suggesting that the host association has been acquired independently and not via the same common ancestor. this may explain why two species that apparently occupy the same ecological niche occur sympatrically. both, b. garinii and b. valaisiana have been shown to utilize terrestrial birds as reservoir hosts and for both genospecies black birds and song thrushes play a prominent role as reservoir hosts  <cit> . one conspicuous difference lies in the vector associations of these two species. while b. valaisiana is obviously transmitted by i. ricinus and its prevalence in europe is as high as for b. garinii in some regions  <cit> , b. garinii is also vectored by i. persulcatus  <cit> , i. pavlovsky  <cit> , and i. uriae, the latter a tick species that is adapted to sea birds . thus, apart from circulating in terrestrial transmission cycles, b. garinii is also maintained in sea bird transmission cycles by i. uriae . an evolutionary scenario that might explain sympatry of the two european bird associated borrelia genospecies is an overlap of sea-bird and terrestrial transmission cycles in northern europe with a potential entrance port of b. garinii into terrestrial bird transmission cycles  <cit> . a different possibility is a rodent to bird host switch from b. bavariensis  <cit> . investigating the underlying molecular mechanisms will help to elucidate how the host associations in these tick-borne microorganisms did evolve.

the same appears to be true for vector associations. the genospecies b. garinii or b. burgdorferi s.s. are associated with a large number of vector species . other borrelia species show a narrow vector association, e.g., b. spielmanii, which has so far been found only in i. ricinus and occasionally in i. hexagonus  <cit> . b. valaisiana has mainly been found in i. ricinus and infection prevalence in i. persulcatus is drastically reduced compared to i. ricinus  <cit> . in asia, there was one report of b. valaisiana in i. columnae in japan  <cit>  and for one strain from russia the vector is unclear, it could be i. persulcatus or i. pavlovskyi . borrelia strains that were initially thought to be b. valaisiana  <cit>  were later shown to belong to a rodent adapted genospecies, b. yantzensis  <cit> . it makes an interesting parallel to b. garinii / b. bavariensis and provides additional evidence that host adaptation is a driver for the evolution of borrelia genospecies. the data presented here also support the notion that vector adaptations determine the geographic distribution range of species. for example, genospecies such as b. garinii or b. burgdorferi s.s. have a huge geographic distribution range due to their many vector associations while others have much narrower distribution ranges  .

it is much more difficult to make inferences about human pathogenicity because it is unknown whether species that are maintained in specific enzootic transmission cycles are actually human pathogenic or not, i.e., they are not being found in human patients because they are associated with vectors that do not bite humans at any frequency.

recombination, mutation and selection as drivers of the b. burgdorferi s.l. species complex
recombination analysis using clonalframeml  <cit>  showed a r/θ  value of  <dig>  for our dataset. this suggests that, for the genes analyzed in this study, mutation was the leading force of diversification which was also the case for the main chromosome of b. bavariensis  <cit> . it supports our hypothesis that the use of chromosomal orthologous genes is a good strategy to reconstruct the main phylogeny of borrelia, avoiding recombining loci that may bias phylogenetic inferences  <cit> . other authors have calculated elevated recombination compared to mutation; for example jacquot et al.  <cit>  quantified the recombination to mutation rates to  <dig>  and qiu et al.  <cit>  found recombination to mutation rates of 3: <dig>  however, in both studies plasmid sequences were included in the analysis which may have led to calculation of higher recombination rates than mutation rates. interestingly, the same clonalframeml  <cit>  analysis performed on the phylogeny including the outgroup resulted in a r/θ of  <dig> . this ten times lower estimate of recombination to mutation rates when including b. duttonii can be explained by a very low  recombination between borrelia of the lb group and the relapsing fever group.

the larger sample sizes available for four species  allowed us to estimate within-species summary statistics . we found negative values for tajima’s d  <cit>  for the whole dataset as well as in each of the four species. this is consistent with previous data for chromosomal regions of b. burgdorferi s. s., b. garinii, b. afzelii  <cit>  and b. bavariensis  <cit>  and suggests population expansions. hypotheses of population expansion have been put forward by different studies using other methods with european borrelia genospecies  <cit>  and b. burgdorferi s.s. from the usa  <cit> . another possible interpretation of negative tajima’s d is strong purifying selection. however, tajima’s d was variable between genes and we identified in each genospecies several genes that show extremely high or low values . these genes could have been the target of natural selection within the evolution of these genospecies. it is interesting to note that only five genes showed extreme values in two different genospecies suggesting that the four species have been under divergent selective processes. genetic diversity   <cit>  was comparable in all four species and of the same order as in previously published chromosomal data  <cit> . only one gene showed extremely low diversity  in b. garinii, additional file 1: s4) and might have been under strong negative selection. genes showing extreme high values of π  could be pseudogenes or under balancing selection .

evaluating the explosive radiation hypothesis
it had been suggested that, in the evolutionary history of the b. burgdorferi s.l. complex, an “explosive radiation” was followed by a sharp decrease in diversification rates  <cit> . these authors reconstructed phylogenies for three genes using strains from  <dig> borrelia species or seven genes using  <dig> borrelia genospecies and concluded that this group had experienced an explosive radiation . our phylogeny reconstruction does not support this hypothesis and the evolution rates in our phylogeny were not higher for the inner nodes as found by morlon et al.  <cit> . rough estimations of relative divergence of clades suggest that recurrent speciation has occurred within the borrelia burgdorferi species complex. this discrepancy might be due to the low number of genes used by morlon et al.  <cit> . indeed if few genes are used and if their individual phylogenies are contradictory , a star-like shaped tree can result from the combination of the genes  <cit> . to test this we repeated the study by downloading from genbank the sequences for the same three genes for  <dig> borrelia species . the phylogeny reconstructed using beast  <cit>  for the three genes together was indeed star-like, but each individual phylogeny did not have the same shape and the three topologies differed . to further test whether recombination between the genes was important, we used the four -gamete condition  <cit>  to estimate recombination within and between genes . no permutation of the snps positions between genes showed a lower ratio of within versus between genes recombination , hence, showing that recombination within genes was significantly lower than between them. these results suggest that the star-like shape of the phylogeny reconstructed by morlon et al.   <cit>  was due to recombination between loci. thus, we cannot confirm that the evolutionary history of b. burgdorferi sensu lato results from explosive radiation. in fact, we see that diversification and speciation events have been going on throughout the history of the complex.

where is the origin of borrelia?
as already mentioned above, the phylogeny divides the genospecies into two major sister clades: one that harbors species known to occur in europe and asia and one that harbors species known from north america and europe. at present, it is difficult to pinpoint the “origin” of the whole species complex.

considering the “american clade”, it seems that host and vector adaptations followed by diversification have led to speciation in north america  <cit> . there are two groups in the “american” cluster, b. burgdorferi s.s. and b. bissettiae, that occur in europe as well as in north america. with regard to the origin of the species b. burgdorferi s.s., a north american and a european origin have been suggested  <cit> . interestingly, in the branch that leads to b. burgdorferi s.s., strains comprising the species b. americana have to date only been reported in north america  <cit>  while strains belonging to the divergent b. burgdorferi s.s. group  have been found only in europe  <cit> . it poses the question whether the common ancestor of this clade originated in north america or europe. it is reasonable to assume that either these species exist at such low frequency that they have not been detected on the respective continents so far or that some lineages may have died out on one or the other continent leading to the mosaic pattern of geographic occurrence of species observed today and therein lies the difficulty to obtain evidence for one or the other way.

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, we suggest that the b. burgdorferi sensu lato complex represents a dynamic system resembling the cohesion ecotype model  <cit> . the data presented in our study show that switches of host associations followed by speciation have developed several times independently during the evolutionary history of the species complex and this dynamic interplay is likely still going on today. recognition of diversification and speciation through vector adaptation, although known from the relapsing fever group of spirochetes, is new to the lyme borreliosis group of spirochetes with immense impact on the geographic distribution of species. we suggest that, apart from speciation via host association, diversification and speciation through vector adaptation may represent a general mechanism for diversification of tick-borne pathogens with potentially huge impact in the geographic distribution, as it may allow for invasion of new territories. the molecular mechanisms involved in host and vector switches deserve further investigation and the lists of genes showing extreme summary statistic values presented here are good candidates for such analyses.

