BACKGROUND
in the post genome sequence era, repetitive sequences, erstwhile considered junk and devoid of function, are increasingly being implicated in many cellular functions, genome organization and diseases  <cit> . alu repeats, which belong to sine  family of repetitive sequences, are present exclusively in the primate genomes. these elements which are ~ <dig> bps in length have originated from the 7sl rna gene and comprise of two similar, but not identical subunits  <cit> . each element contains a bipartite promoter for rna polymerase iii, a poly  tract located between the monomers, a 3'-terminal poly tract, a number of cpg dinucleotides, and is flanked by short direct repeats  <cit> . based on certain diagnostic site mutations, they have been broadly classified into three subfamilies: old , middle  and the youngest   <cit> . further, some of the alu y sequences are very new and exhibit polymorphisms, indicating that they have recently undergone retropositioning process  <cit> .

alus have been shown to harbor a number of regulatory sites like hormone response element , and a couple of ligand activated transcription factor binding sites  <cit> . these sites regulate the expression of downstream genes, in some cases in a temporal or tissue specific manner. most of the regulatory sites in alus have been reported during the course of characterization of specific genes  <cit> . besides, the intrinsic a-box and b-box rna polymerase iii  sequences and the recombinogenic sites present in these elements are involved in retrotranspositional and recombination process  <cit> .

alus originally demonstrated to have non uniform distribution on the chromosomes through banding studies  <cit>  have been recently substantiated by genome sequence analysis  <cit> . it has been observed that that alus not only show a non- random pattern of distribution in the human chromosomes but also varying densities within genes. additionally, in a genome wide expression analysis, co-variation of expression of gene pairs has been attributed to sequence similarity metric in the upstream region of promoter predominantly contributed by alu repeats present in these regions  <cit> . these effects of alu have been shown to be completely independent of the effects of isochoric  composition on alu density as well as gene expression  <cit> .

identification and analysis of various permutations and combinations of these regulatory elements in otherwise conserved repetitive alus are mostly excluded from genetic analysis. since, alus occupy a tenth of the human genome, it is imperative to identify those, which might assume function in the proper context. our primary aim in this analysis is to find out if any bias exists in the distribution of transcriptional regulatory sites in alus of various evolutionary ages and their distribution with respect to the functional classes of genes.

RESULTS
distribution of functional sites in alus is position specific
as a first step toward examining the role of these regulatory sites, we mapped their most probable positions on alus, using in house developed algorithms . this was carried out on  <dig> alus, each of alu jo, alu jb, alu sx, alu sc, alu yb <dig> and alu y subfamilies. the classification of these evolutionarily distinct subfamilies are based on diagnostic sites  <cit> . besides, members of the most recent and retropositionally active and polymorphic alus were also included in the analysis  <cit> . though the polymorphic alus belong to alu y subfamily, these were treated as a separate category since insertion/deletion of these alus have been associated with many phenotypes/diseases  <cit> . the regulatory sites show positional conservation across all subfamilies in which they are represented . however, these sites are distinct from the diagnostic sites, which are used for classifying alus, which suggests that they have not arisen randomly in different subfamilies.

evolution of regulatory sites is biased and clustered in alus
nearly all the analyzed regulatory sites for rna polymerase ii  are distributed in the region between a- box and b-box with more clustering near the b-box region . there is an evolutionary age specific loss / gain of these sites in various subfamilies leading to a bias in their distribution . newly transposing alus have methylated cpg sites, which are prone to transition. many sites seem to have evolved as a consequence of these transitions. the regulatory elements are most abundant in the middle subfamilies and least represented in the younger alus. some sites like ap <dig>  ere, ncare are present in older and middle alus but rarely so in the younger as well as polymorphic alus. an opposite trend is observed for cetp, wherein the highest density is observed in the younger active and polymorphic alus. rare and tre sites are retained in all subfamilies whereas lxr is specific to only middle alu subfamilies . it is curious, ncare which is also present in the 7sl rna, the progenitor of alus, is not equally represented in all alus and has higher density in the older alus and middle and is very poorly represented in the younger subfamilies.

evolution from retropositionally active to transcriptionally active alu elements
majority of alu retroposition has ceased at least  <dig> million years ago and only a few alu subfamilies are still active  <cit> . transcription of alus is a prerequisite for retrotransposition and there is regulation not only during transcription initiation but also at the level of stability of transcripts  <cit> . alu elements are transcribed by rna pol iii which are composed of two properly spaced conserved sequence motifs, an upstream element named the a-box and a downstream element called the b box which are essential for efficient transcription. deletion of the box b sequences within the alu repeat completely abolishes the transcriptional activity. in the absence of box a sequences even though there is a reduction in efficiency of transcription by  <dig> to  <dig> fold, b-box sequence is still capable of initiating transcription  <dig> bps upstream  <cit> . an intact a box is therefore a critical determinant for rna pol iii retropositional activity. besides, it has been shown by in vitro as well as in vivo studies in the 'b' box that 'g' and 't' residues at the 1st and 3rd positions respectively are very critical for it's functioning  <cit> . our analysis on the distribution of these promoter elements show that the polymorphic alu sequences have the highest density of a box  and is almost absent in older subfamilies . since the younger alus are considered to be transcriptionally more active, this fits in well with the loss of this site in the course of evolution due to accumulation of mutations. the b box motif with the sequence gtrannc shows a similar trend as the a box. interestingly, a fraction of older alu subfamily still retains the b-box sequence. however, 'a' residue at the second position which has not been shown to be critical for transcription is a diagnostic nucleotide  <cit>  for the younger subfamilies. this could result in the increased proportion for b-box in the younger families. we observe a very curious distribution of the b box motif if we consider the sequence gttgagac  wherein we restrict the pattern to the experimentally validated sequence. alu sx and alu sc have the highest density match with this pattern, followed by the older subfamilies and it is present in only < 2% frequency in aluy and polymorphic alus. the "c" at the 4th position in this case is mutated to "t" in the older families. the yb <dig> family that has been reported to be transcriptionally and retropositionally active amongst the younger subfamilies, retains the b'-box element in a significant fraction. this suggests that even though retropositionally competent younger alus are hypothesized to be transcriptionally active, only a minority retains consensus b'-box. it is possible that the enhancing activity of the a box is sufficient to drive transcription from the weaker b'- box in the younger subfamilies. our findings corroborates well with an earlier study in which presence of all subfamilies in the rna polymerase iii driven alu transcript pool was reported  <cit> . additionally, it was also observed that though there was a quantitative bias towards younger subfamilies and younger members of these subfamilies , there was a preferential expression of the middle subfamilies relative to the most active subfamilies. our observations, therefore, further rules out the hypothesis that transcription may be biased only towards retropositionally active subfamilies of alu elements. this could be the reason why only a fraction of younger alus is currently retrotranspositionally active. the presence and retention of b-box coupled with near absence of a box in the alu sx and alusc families suggests basal level of transcription from these elements which could be enhanced through binding of other regulatory proteins under certain conditions such as stress  <cit> . additionally, with evidence of presence of naturally occurring alu antisense as well as edited alu transcripts  <cit> , transcribing alus could play a major role in yet unknown biological processes.

exaptation of alus in the transcriptional regulatory repertoire
alus have been demonstrated to exert effects at transcription, post-transcription as well as at the translation level. in an earlier study on complete chromosomes  <dig> and  <dig>  we have demonstrated that the alu elements are clustered in genes of signaling, metabolic and transport proteins and rarely present in the structural and information proteins  <cit> . this clustering bias was found to be irrespective of genomic location, gc content, length of genes or intronic content. to further address whether the alus harboring transcriptional regulatory sites also show a selective distribution and thereby exert effects on transcription, we analyzed their distribution in the genes of various functional categories of chromosome  <dig>  two different datasets 1) promoter region alus and 2) intronic region alus, harboring regulatory sites were analyzed. the promoter region alus of genes involved in metabolism, signaling were significantly rich in regulatory sites compared to those of information, structure and transport . in the intronic regions, distinction in their distribution with respect to functional categories was not so significant though the intronic regions also harboured alus containing regulatory sites . since the genes of the signaling and metabolic pathway are more subject to regulation by cellular cues like hormonal triggers, this observation is significant. most of the alus in the promoters belong to the middle alu s families and rarely younger alus are present. since younger alus also harbour few regulatory sites and actively retropose, it is possible that there is a negative selection against their insertion in the promoter sites of genes of information pathways and structural proteins .

alu movements and aberrant gene expression
gene inversions, duplications and formation of pseudogenes have been extensively reported to be mediated both through retrotransposition as well as recombination of alus. this, in many cases, has also been associated with aberrant gene expression. for instance, presence of aml sites in an alu upstream of mpo gene, has been first demonstrated to be associated with acute myelocytic leukemia  <cit> . this is due to the presence of a strong sp <dig> site within aml which leads to over expression of mpo gene. aml sites are most abundant in younger and polymorphic alus and a single base pair transition results in mpo site, present predominantly in the members of older subfamilies. in the case of polymorphic alus, many sequences that do not show 100% conservation of aml site still retain the sp <dig> site. interestingly, the core recombinogenic site is also most predominant in younger and polymorphic alus. the presence of recombinogenic sites in polymorphic alus, could therefore not only contribute to genome shuffling but also serve to distribute ectopic sites such as aml through retrotransposition and recombination .

regulatory region distribution through alu expansion
analysis of regulatory sites within alus suggests that a polymorphic alu has the potential to transpose and recombine which allows it to integrate at random sites in the genome. they also harbour potential regulatory sites, which could evolve to become accessory sites for rna pol ii transcription as revealed by their clustering in older subfamilies. further, the alu sequence due to acquisition of novel functions could form a part of the transcription repertoire involved in the regulation of the downstream /associated genes and create novel regulatory networks . these results also corroborate with the hypothesis of evolution of transposable elements of kidwell  <cit>  wherein they had proposed a  <dig> stage life cycle of class ii transposable elements:- invasion and amplification followed by mutations and maturity and finally senescence and fading. in the case of alu, instead of fading, they could also evolve to become members of host regulatory machinery.

CONCLUSIONS
comparison of sequences in the regulatory regions of many homologous genes in human have shown accumulation of alus, not only post divergence from non-human primates but also during primate evolution  <cit> . perhaps, recruitment of cis regulatory elements responsive to cellular cues through alu elements could result in altered spatial and temporal transcription of genes as well as create novel metabolic and signaling networks. these might contribute to the observable physiological complexity in human and primates  <cit> . additionally, the underlying events which would be defining event of speciation of human from chimpanzee  still eludes identification and might to some extent reside in such genomic elements. these issues can now be addressed through comparison of these sites in human and chimpanzee.

currently, alus are repeat-masked in all studies pertaining to identification of predisposition markers in complex disorders. with such wide spectrum of nuclear receptors, which play a major role in maintaining normal physiological state and affect as diverse processes as development, reproduction, general metabolism, residing in alus, it therefore becomes imperative to screen for variations in these sites. this might have important consequences in the candidate genes for those complex diseases that are triggered in response to hormonal imbalances as well as other environmental cues.

