BACKGROUND
a comprehensive understanding of the rapidly expanding corpus of information about the genome, transcriptome, and proteome at large scale requires extensive integration with existing knowledge that often pertains to a number of biological disciplines. despite the existence of specialized databases , most of this knowledge is still stored in the form of unstructured free-texts. different approaches have been developed that automatically retrieve information on molecular interactions from the biomedical literature. some assume that the co-occurrence of gene/protein names in texts corresponds to a biological relationship  <cit> . others assign relationships based on similarities in the texts of abstracts  <cit> . while computationally efficient, these methods do not characterize each interaction . furthermore, relationships are supported by minimal documentation, other than pubmed ids. natural language processing  has also been used as the basis of programs designed to retrieve more detailed information about molecular relationships . however, many of these programs were built for testing purposes and are not available to the scientific community at large  <cit> .

herein, we present a text mining approach, chilibot , which constructs content-rich relationship networks between genes, proteins, drugs and biological concepts  based on linguistic analysis of relevant records stored in the pubmed literature database. the nature of each relationship  is encoded in the network map. the network map is also annotated by sentences describing the relationships . for example, there are an average of  <dig> sentences describing each relationship and  <dig> sentences describing each query term when a maximum of  <dig> abstracts are analyzed for each relationship. thus, chilibot provides a flexible tool for integrating the rapidly expanding body of biomedical knowledge with the highly specialized knowledge of the individual user.

recent analyses of several types of biological networks  have found that their connectivities followed the power-law distribution, specifying that the probability of any node connecting to "k" other nodes is proportional to 1/kn. these networks are classified as scale-free networks and are in direct contrast to the bell-shaped distributions seen in random networks  <cit> . since most nodes in a scale-free network have very few connections, yet a few nodes  have a large number of connections, scale-free networks are robust, resisting the random failure of nodes, but vulnerable if hubs fail. to facilitate comparisons to the structure of other biological networks, the connectivity of networks constructed by chilibot were analyzed and found to follow the power-law distribution characteristic of scale-free topologies.

RESULTS
design and implementation
the overall goal of chilibot is to generate graphical representations of the relationships among user provided terms . this is achieved by automatically querying the pubmed literature database and extracting information using natural language processing  techniques.

chilibot is an internet-based application  <cit> . the system has been tested on freebsd and red hat linux operating systems. users interact with the chilibot server from web-browsers . batch queries can also be conducted, but only from the server side.

terms that can be queried include gene symbols, unigene identifications  and/or free-form keywords . chilibot retrieves the synonyms of the queried terms from an internal database. the synonym table is compiled from  <dig> genomic or proteomic databases . a total of  <dig>  unique symbols were collected; amongst these,  <dig>   contained at least one alias . the synonyms can be edited by users if necessary. pair-wise queries incorporating the synonyms then are sent to pubmed using the esearch utility, followed by retrieving relevant records using the efetch utility. by default, a maximum of  <dig> abstracts per query are retrieved for analysis, however options are available to retrieve 20– <dig> abstracts. both utilities are available from the national center for biotechnology information .

the texts  are then parsed into units of one sentence, which has been shown to yield higher performance levels than paragraphs or phrases in the identification of relationships from medline abstracts  <cit> . sentences containing both query terms or their synonyms are subjected to part-of-speech  tagging using the tnt tagger  <cit> , which is followed by shallow parsing using cass  <cit> . a set of rules  is followed to classify these sentences into one of five categories: stimulatory , inhibitory , neutral , parallel  and abstract co-occurrence only. the overall relationship between each pair of query terms is then specified based on the relationships found in the sentences .

retrieved relationships are visualized using aisee . nodes  are used to represent query terms and lines for relationships. icons with different shapes and colors are added to the middle of each line to indicate the nature of the relationship, with arrows indicating directionality. color coding of individual nodes can be used to report the magnitude of change in experimental data, when provided by the user; different shades of green or red represent up- or down-regulation, respectively, and more saturated colors are associated with larger changes. the weight of an interactive relationship, reflecting the number of abstracts obtained from pubmed, is displayed within the icon . the co-ordinates of the graphical elements are used to link the documentation of the relationships and the query terms to the map. typically, querying a list of  <dig> terms takes 3– <dig> minutes, allowing  <dig> seconds between pubmed connections as requested by ncbi.

performance evaluation
we used a set of  <dig> known relationships  specified in the database of interacting proteins   <cit>  to measure the performance of chilibot in finding relationships. dip was chosen for this purpose because it contains a large number of protein interaction relationships that are manually curated. we defined recall as the fraction of relevant relationships retrieved. the effect of the number of documents analyzed on recall is first evaluated by analyzing a maximum of  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> of the most recent abstracts for each pair of proteins. figure 3a shows that analyzing  <dig> or  <dig> abstracts achieved recalls of  <dig> % and  <dig> %, respectively. thus, increasing the number of documents analyzed does not yield an increase in recall. however, analyzing more abstracts increased the average number of statements demonstrating the relationships , resulting in a steady increase in stimulatory or inhibitory relationships and a decrease in "parallel relationships" . in addition, we also evaluated the effect of the total number of abstracts available in pubmed on recall. of the  <dig> queries conducted by chilibot,  <dig> had no reference in pubmed and no relationship was detected. chilibot also failed to detect a relationship from two queries where each had  <dig> reference available. relationships were detected among the  <dig> remaining queries; the number of references in pubmed ranged from less than  <dig> , between  <dig> to  <dig> , to more than  <dig> . thus, the ability of chilibot to detect relationships depends on the existence of pubmed records, but is not sensitive to the number of references. chilibot's recall proficiency may be attributable to a large dictionary of synonyms , optimized pubmed query structure and non-alphanumeric character processing method , and to the use of both sentences and abstracts as units of analysis. however, we were not able to directly compare the performance of chilibot with other nlp-based pubmed-mining software because none of these are available to the public  <cit> . a potential approach to facilitate such performance comparisons would entail coding software according to published algorithms. however, this is not likely to replicate all details of the original software; thus, the comparisons obtained via such an approach would not be valid.

amongst the  <dig> dip relationships that chilibot did not detect , the largest number represented a failure to recognize abstracts containing generalized protein names , a limitation also reported for flybase  <cit> . recall was also limited by synonym coverage and by the presence of information in the main text, but not in the abstract. since many of the dip relationships were originally based on the main text of a single reference  <cit> , the high recall of chilibot depends on the redundancy of information in the literature.

to estimate precision, defined as the fraction of retrieved relationships that are relevant, we randomly selected  <dig> relationships from the  <dig> relationships recovered by chilibot . we manually confirmed that the documentation retrieved by chilibot contained information about  <dig> of the targeted relationships, and the remaining four shared symbols with other genes. in the interactive category, directionality was correctly identified in  <dig> % and inhibitory/stimulatory properties in  <dig> %. the original data used to perform these analyses are available .

user interface features
one of the key features of chilibot is its capacity to link the relationships represented in the network map directly to their supporting documentation, usually as sentences containing both of the query terms. in addition, each node is linked to its synonym list and to a set of statements demonstrating the use of the term; these statements are selected from abstract texts by an algorithm favoring conclusive statements . by providing the literature in a condensed and highlighted form, chilibot facilitates the rapid comprehension of the relationships by the user.

chilibot provides several options for customizing the query process and for viewing the identified relationships. context specific searches restrict the analysis of relationships to a specific subject area, as defined by the user. internet searches can also be customized  by using google webapi. specific subsets of relationships contained in an overall relationship map can be reconfigured. for example, the user can customize the relationship map by requesting only those relationships with direct linkage to a specific node, or those that have a requisite number of supporting publications .

chilibot also identifies key index terms common to the relationship network. to do so, chilibot uses medical subject headings   <cit> , a controlled vocabulary that indexes the subjects of the documents developed by the national library of medicine. chilibot ranks mesh keywords indexed in the literature that supports the relationship network. the ranking is determined by the frequencies of the keywords, as well as whether the keyword is a major or minor topic of the paper . the top ranked keywords, reflecting the subject area shared by the query terms, can serve as a guide for further reading and suggest new chilibot queries.

chilibot also has the capability of suggesting new hypotheses based on the retrieved network of relationships. such hypotheses, originally described by swanson et al. as "undiscovered public knowledge"  <cit> , referred to the inference of an interaction between two items a and c, based on knowledge that a affects b and b affects c. this involves software that generates a large list of "b" terms from titles returned by pubmed queries. the user filters these terms, aided by the titles and abstracts. variations of this method have been designed and tested by others  <cit> . taking a similar approach, chilibot scans the network of retrieved relationships to find pairs of nodes that have no documented relationship, but have connections to a common tertiary node. these pairs of nodes are classified as having a "hypothetical relationship". the networks that contain these "hypothetical relationships", including the tertiary node, are then provided to the user in graphical format, with links to their documentation.

to test the value of these "hypothetical relationships" in predicting the results of future research, we queried  <dig> genes known to be involved in long-term potentiation , an electrophysiological phenomenon closely associated with memory formation. chilibot identified a direct relationship between ltp and all  <dig> genes, along with  <dig> inter relationships amongst the  <dig> genes. we then performed retrospective studies by limiting the search to literature published before the years  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> . the ltp-related "hypothetical relationships" identified by chilibot, using these date-limited reference sets, are listed in table  <dig>  as an example, by  <dig>  the involvement of calcium calmodulin kinase type ii  in the induction of ltp had been established  <cit> . it was also known that camkii phosphorylates synapsin i  <cit> . based on these and similar relationships  that were documented in the literature available by  <dig>  chilibot predicted the involvement of synapsin i in ltp, which was subsequently demonstrated empirically by  <dig>  <cit> . retrospective analyses like these depend on the progression of specific knowledge in scientific fields during a particular time period. thus, if we were to test a different set of search terms, we would not expect to obtain the same number of suggested hypotheses, nor would we expect the same proportion of such hypotheses to be validated by the current literature.

based on the literature that is currently available, chilibot identified new hypothetical relationships, such as those between synaptophysin/creb and synaptotagmin/creb. currently no direct empirical evidence for these relationships is available. however, scanning the 5' untranslated region of the synaptophysin and synaptotagmin genes did show multiple creb binding sites, providing bioinformatics-based evidence supporting the plausibility of these potential interactions. although these examples are promising, they are hypothetical relationships. further review of the scientific literature, such as the sentences provided by chilibot, is required to clarify the rationale for these hypotheses.

network topology of relationships retrieved from the literature
recent large-scale studies of metabolic  <cit> , transcriptomic  <cit>  and proteomic  <cit>  networks, based on analyses of experimental data, have found that their topologies belong within the class of scale-free networks.

for comparison to the preceding biological networks, we studied the connectivity of the literature-based networks obtained by applying chilibot to three groups of randomly selected genes . the resulting networks contain  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> nodes and  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> relationships, respectively. visualization of the network structure of one of the groups is provided . the connectivity of the  <dig> groups was averaged and plotted in figure.  <dig>  showing a power-law distribution. the relatively low value of n =  <dig>   may reflect the fact that many relationships are yet to be documented. in addition, we also found a positive correlation between the number of abstracts available per node and the number of connections to that node . this suggests that the discovery of biological relationships attributable to specific nodes might be influenced both by the amount of scientific effort deliberately devoted to understanding that node and the intrinsic connectivity of that node. although the commitment of greater resources by the scientific community to certain nodes may bias the topology of the scientific literature to some extent, this is likely to be regulated and limited by the strength of the findings, which would be directly related to the intrinsic connectivity of a particular node. thus, it is reasonable to postulate that the topology of the biomedical literature on gene/protein interactions may reflect that of the interactions per se.

the scale-free topology of gene/protein relationships provides another dimension for comparing and prioritizing research targets after large-scale experiments. currently, genes or proteins with large-fold changes are generally favored for further study  <cit> . however, by itself, a large-fold change may be insufficient to predict whether such molecules are pivotal in the regulation of important biological processes. for example, in many biological signaling pathways, a small increase in up-stream events ) is usually associated with a hundred to thousand-fold increase in down-stream events  <cit>  . therefore, knowledge of a network's critical nodes , which may be predicted by network connectivity  <cit> , is likely to increase the power and efficiency of identifying potential experimental targets capable of modifying network function.

CONCLUSIONS
chilibot graphically summarizes the relationships amongst a large set of user provided terms by analyzing abstracts retrieved from the pubmed literature database. we have found in our benchmark tests that these retrieved relationships are reliable. we believe that the scientific community will benefit from this literature mining capability along with the many features that chilibot provides, especially in an era of science when insight can be submerged in an overwhelming sea of data and modularized knowledge.

