BACKGROUND
insects constitute nearly 80% of species on earth and are among the most diverse group of organisms in the history of life, giving them considerable potential to provide insight into evolutionary mechanisms. insects, with their large number of species, their biomass, diversity of adaptation, and ecological impact, support the structure and function of ecosystem and biodiveristy on the lands of the earth. numerous crops rely on insects for pollination, with the importance of insects extending into other agricultural and human health concerns. insects have been in existence for at least  <dig> million years, making them among the earliest land animals. though nearly one million insect species have been classified and named, their actual number is believed to be between  <dig>  and  <dig> million. it is widely accepted that insects diverged as members of one of the largest subphyla in arthropods more than  <dig> million years ago. during this time, insects experienced rapid evolution and a radiation that is considered faster than any other group  <cit> , migrating into nearly all available environmental niches except the benthic zone  <cit> . mitochondrial dna strongly supports an insect-crustacean clade as a sister group, which excludes the other arthropod subphyla collectively known as the myriapods  <cit> . the insects are a monophyletic group, a universally held view supported by morphological and molecular features.

the structure of an organism is an outgrowth of development tailored to meet functional demands in an idiosyncratic evolutionary history. like other segmented animals, insects are composed of a series of repeated units called metameres. extant arthropods share many taxonomical characteristics, such as an exoskeleton, jointed appendages, and reduced coeloms and hemocoels. the segments of the insect body are organized into three major tagmata unique to this subclass: the head, thorax, and abdomen  <cit> . the thorax has three pair of legs, and in pterygotes, the wings. in the abdomen, we find the presence of an ovipositor in females. in addition to the macro-scale features mentioned above, other defining features of the insecta include: the loss of musculature and the presence of the johnsonton's organ in the antenna, loss of articulations between the coxae and the sterna, sub-segmentation of the tarsus into units called tarsomeres, articulation of the pretarsal claws with the apical-most tarsomere  <cit> , and the presence, at least primitively, of a long terminal filament  <cit> . insects are one of only four lineages of animals with powered flight, the others being pterosaurs, birds, and bats. wings refine insect design, vastly improving mobility, dispersal, and complex behaviors to adapt to environmental challenges. it is widely held that insects evolved flight just once, at least  <dig> million years before pterosaurs, perhaps  <dig> million years ago  <cit> . other noteworthy features include the development of the posterior tentorium into a tranverse bar, and metamorphism and segmentation of metameres  <cit> .

it is likely that the specialized features of the insecta clade are based on components specific to its proteome. characterization of this protein set should improve understanding of the molecular basis for the diversification of insects and their extensive success in ecological niches. toward elucidating this molecular basis, we have characterized the eukaryote and insect proteomes. the large number of eukaryote genome sequences now available, including various insect genomes, makes it possible to characterize proteomes computationally. in this work, we utilized the insect genome sequences of fruit fly, mosquito, silk worm, beetle, honeybee, locust ests, and the non-insect eukaryote genomes of nematode, human, and yeast.  since our approach utilizes genome sequence for approximating the proteome, the resolution of the proteome characterization improves as more genomes become available. this rapid characterization of proteomes through computation facilitates rational hypothesis generation and experiment design in applied research in many areas, such as biodiversity, agriculture and human health.

RESULTS
insect and eukaryote protein sets
we modeled the insect proteome by selecting the subset of drosophila protein sequences with homology to predicted genes in all insect-species studied here. similarly, we defined the subset in drosophila common to the eukaryote species studied here: mosquito, silkworm, beetle, honeybee, human, nematode and yeast. because at this time it is not possible to definitively determine the eukaryote and insect proteomes, estimates are useful for comparative assessments. our protein sets were derived from a collection of  <dig>  protein sequences established for drosophila melanogaster, which we reduced to  <dig>  orthologous groups; proteins with significant similarity were considered as singletons in our processing, since paralogs may have arisen after speciation.

to determine the proteins in the drosophila orthologous groups common to all insects studied here, called the insect core set, we used predicted proteins from insect genome sequences and est sequences. we obtained  <dig> orthologous groups from the intersection of the whole genomes of five holometabolous insects . one aspect of our approximation is to use homologs to drosophila proteins to characterize proteomes, implicitly assuming that function follows structure. this could contribute to differences in our characterization from the actual proteome, but it does not significantly detract from our use of the characterizations. we discuss further implications of our approximation in more detail below.

using the insect-core protein set, we removed proteins with significant similarity to any genome sequence in yeast, human, and nematode . the remaining  <dig> orthologous groups  form the insect-specific set, and  <dig> of these groups are represented in the hemimetabolous insect locust ests . the insect-specific set contains proteins with homology evidence to all insects studied here; in addition, these sequences are without significant similarity to the non-insect species. since we are interested in genes and proteins in insects which developed in insects after their divergence from other eukaryotes, we searched entire non-insect eukaryotic genomes in alignments with the insect-core proteins in order to exclude remnants of common ancestral genes. to refine the insect-specific proteins, we removed proteins with similarity to non-insect proteins in the ncbi protein database as described in methods . this reduced the  <dig> candidate insect-specific proteins to the final insect-specific set consisting of  <dig> proteins .

we found  <dig> proteins with homology to all eukaryotes considered in this study using methods similar to those above .

as the eukaryotes used in this study are all opisthokont, this set of proteins should be properly considered opisthokont core proteins. many of these eukaryotic core proteins – the opisthokont core proteins – are involved in housekeeping or general metabolic processes. we also defined  <dig> proteins as drosophila specific by eliminating proteins homologous to other insect proteins as discussed in methods .

go annotations and functional categories
we categorized proteins in the eukaryote  and insect-specific sets  using high-level gene ontology categories with results shown in figure  <dig>  in both the eukaryote and insect-specific sets, metabolic proteins constituted the highest fraction, 25% and 20%, respectively. disproportionately represented categories are interesting to consider for candidate proteins that confer distinguishing characteristics. in the eukaryote/opisthokont set, genes responsible for processes such as cell division, cell motility, cell cycle, reproduction and cellular process are more highly represented by factors from about two to twenty. these proteins and their respective functional categories may distinguish insects less from eukaryotes/opisthokont than those proteins in categories that have a significant representation in the insect-specific set and are underrepresented in the eukaryotic/opisthokont set. these more highly represented categories in the insect-specific set are: larval development ; defense response ; and stress respone . what's more, a significant number of the insect-specific proteins were found to be related to pheromone/odorant binding proteins , insect cuticle proteins, and proline-rich proteins .

discussion
biological process categories
our analysis of the eukaryote/opisthokont core and insect-specific protein sets was based on functional categories representative of high-level go designations. metabolism is the largest category of our eukaryotic/opisthokont core and of the insect-specific proteins. significantly larger categories for the insect-specific proteins relative to the eukaryote core are stimulus and defense response . a representative insect-specific gene in the stimulus response category is pediii/cg <dig> which has been reported to function in sensory perception  <cit> . in the eukaryote/opisthokont core proteins, the more highly represented insect-specific categories are not pronounced fractions thereby highlighting the insect-specific proteins as candidates for specialized roles. in the eukaryote/opisthokont core, other housekeeping processes such as cellular division, cell cycle and cellular organization processes constitute a larger fraction of the total protein set. the disproportionate distribution of the eukaryote/opisthokont core and insect-specific sets may be at the very foundation of insect evolution. it is important to note that the disproportionate distributions of functional types of proteins between insects and eukaryotes/opisthokont may be caused to some degree by the methodology; the small number of proteins in the insect-specific core may be caused by the limited number of insect genomes used, artificially underrepresenting the insect proteome. however, assuming an approximately representative distribution of unrepresented proteins makes it unlikely that the overrepresented categories are invalid.

the five insects with whole genomes are all holometabolous and might not be representative of all insects. at present, a complete genome sequence for hemimetabolous has not been sequenced, most likely because hemimetabolous insects often have large genomes   <cit> . fortunately,  <dig>  high quality est sequences from the hemimetabolous insect migratory locust permit us to perform analysis with all insects  <cit> . we determined the insect-specific orthologs in the locust ests to arrive at a collection of six sets of insect-spectific proteins. our analysis found the functional distribution of the orthologous proteins in of the six insects to be similar with the functional distribution of the largest set from the five holometabolous insects .

we have noted above, the computed insect-specific protein dataset is an approximatation dependent on available genome sequence. inclusion of additional genomic data could alter the protein set. the lack of many representative outgroups might causes false positives, i.e. some proteins might be inaccurately included in our list. for example, the gene cg <dig> related to immune function is identified as an insect-specific gene in this study, but its homolog was recently reported in the sea urchin  <cit> . improved quality of genome sequences and gene annotations for the insects used in this study will improve the accuracy of our computed proteins sets  <cit> .

molecular function categories
a considerable number of the  <dig> insect-specific proteins were found to be related to insect cuticle proteins and pheromone/odorant binding proteins  . molting and metamorphosis are crucial processes in the developmental history of the insects involving cuticular proteins. cuticular proteins are involved in important composite structural materials for insect cuticles, which provide protection, support, and locomotion; these prevent water loss via a wax layer, provide sites for waste product deposition, and protect from ultraviolet radiation  <cit> . olfaction is essential to insect survival and reproduction, such as in location of food sources and mate selection. these olfactory driven behaviors contribute significantly to the ability of insects to adapt to the environment. the odorant-binding proteins, which compose the insect olfactory system, are involved in the recognition of odorants of plants by insects  <cit> . the pheromone binding proteins , abundantly present in the sensillum lymph of pheromone-responsive antennal hairs, are thought to be important in the recognition and discrimination of species-specific pheromones  <cit> . the olfactory system in insects evolved as a remarkably selective and sensitive system, approaching the theoretical limit for a detector. even a single pheromone molecule is enough to elicit impulses at the olfactory neuron  <cit> . the large number of odorant and olfactory proteins in the insect-specific set suggests that in the evolution and diversification of insects, communication and adaptation with the environment played key roles in shaping their morphological and physiological characteristics.

other insect-specific proteins in our insect-specific set have been found essential to development through experimental procedures  <cit> , supporting our insect-specific proteome characterization. moreover, these have been found to be active in insects and are of interest for evolutionary reasons including their suspected roles in diversification. for example, the gene sinuous , which is active in tracheal system development, can partially rescue the tracheal defects of sinuous mutants  <cit> . the exuperantia  protein in our insect-specific set is the earliest factor known to be required for the localization of bicoid mrna to the anterior pole of the drosophila oocyte. exu is highly enriched in the sponge bodies; mutation of exu in drosophila may result in defection of embryonic development  <cit> . larval serum proteins , another type of protein in the insect-specific set, belonging to the hemocyanin superfamily. this family is thought to function as storage proteins that provide amino acids and energy during non-feeding periods of immature and adult development  <cit> .

low mutation rate of insect-specific proteins
it is widely accepted that all insects have arisen from a common ancestor that diverged from an aquatic arthropod more than  <dig> million years ago, and that they coevolved with a specific plant group  <cit> . homologs to the insect-specific proteins should be present in the ancestor and be conserved by natural selection. to test this, we analyzed the ratio of the number of nonsynonymous substitutions per nonsynonymous site  to the number of synonymous substitutions per synonymous site  for the insect-specific proteins in drosophila; in this analysis eukaryote/opisthokont core proteins and drosophila specific proteins were used as controls. the high percentage of insect-specific proteins have a ka/ks ratio lower than  <dig>   suggesting negative selection in these proteins  <cit> . as non-synonymous changes are more likely to be deleterious, under negative or purifying selection pressure, these substitutions were eliminated in functionally active proteins, which may have provided a steady protein complement for insects  <cit> . furthermore, the higher ka/ks ratio of insect-specific proteins is on average greater than that of the eukaryote/opisthokont core proteins. this may reflect the later appearance of insect-specific set,relative to proteins in the common eukaryote ancestor.

to determine whether these conserved genes appeared with low redundancy, we ascertained the number of paralogs in the insect-specific genes with the number of paralogs in the eukaryote/opisthokont core genes. gene duplication is considered one of the principal mechanisms in generating new genes and redundant sequences of genes with the same function  <cit> . duplicated sequences of established genes often degrade to pseudogenes because purifying selection preserves essential coding sequence, while non-essential duplicates may lose function through random mutations favorable to natural selection. the relationship between duplicates and their functional ancestor is not fully understood. some authors suggest that the stronger selective constraints on housekeeping genes relative to tissue specific genes is not due to their lower genetic redundancy  <cit> . however, our results agree with the observation of constrained duplication since most of the eukaryote/opisthokont core and insect-specific proteins are without paralogs . this suggests that genes with established function may tend to avoid duplication, thereby tolerating fewer genetic perturbations. however, the insect-specific proteins are inclined to arise from genes producing a greater number of paralogs, which is in contrast to proteins in the eukaryote/opisthokont core. this may confer insect adaptation to changes in the environment. for example, cg <dig> and cg <dig> have been found to function in defense response; both arise from paralogous groups in drosophila with ten and four members, respectively.

our analysis suggests that our working set of insect-specific proteins had been shaped by strong natural selection, with environment as one of the selective influences.

CONCLUSIONS
an analysis of the genetic basis of evolution and development in insects was performed by characterizing the eukaryote/opisthokont core and insect-specific proteomes through genome analysis. studies of the conservation and divergence between different organisms can provide clues to the molecular basis of species diversity and adaptation. the characterization of proteomes based on genome sequences provides a rapid method to approximate and update putative proteomes as genome sequences become available. using this approach, we isolated fifty insect-specific proteins, many supported by experimental studies.

proteins related to stress and immune responses constitute a significantly larger fraction of the proteins in our characterization of the insect-specific proteome, in contrast to our characterization of the eukaryote/opisthokont core proteome. the large component of olfaction and cuticle development proteins specific to the insect suggests the significance of communication and adaptation to the environment in insect evolution. purifying selections in the evolution of insects were indicated in the analysis of nonsynonymous-to-synonymous substitution ratios, with a larger fraction of multi-paralog proteins possibly providing insects with an adaptive advantage over other eukaryotes. due to the nature of our computatational method, our insect-specific proteins can increase or decrease with the inclusion of additional genome data from insects and non-insect species.

