BACKGROUND
domestication is a natural process that occurs in organisms subjected to rearing in animal husbandry, horticulture and aquaculture, adapting them to artificial environmental conditions which differ from those their progenitor wild strains evolved within. domestication is often coupled with selective breeding to further accentuate desired phenotypic traits such as enhanced growth rate  <cit> . salmonids  provide an ideal model for domestication due to variability between individual fish for many desirable phenotypic traits, and, unlike for many domesticated agricultural species, in most cases wild strains remain as comparators to the domesticated strains  <cit> . this difference in phenotype between wild and domesticated strains has been found by quantitative genetic studies to be determined mainly by additive genetic differences that accentuate phenotype in domesticated strains relative to the wild parental line  <cit> . our understanding of both undirected and directed selection occurring during domestication is based mainly on observations of the phenotypic characteristics of the animal , with knowledge regarding the specific underlying genetic and physiological features under selection still poorly understood. improving our understanding of the molecular genetic basis of domestication will assist in identifying loci involved in control of phenotypic traits, both those desirable for the culture environment and those that may pose risks to wild strains. indeed, of major concern to fish biologists is the intentional or unintentional release of domesticated fish stocks. introgression of domesticated and wild genomes may result in hybrid progeny with reduced fitness for their environment  <cit> . however, a recent study by skaala et al. has demonstrated improved survival of hybrid progeny  in the wild  <cit> . to assist in addressing such concerns, it would be beneficial to understand genetic changes occurring during domestication as well as the effects of interacting genomes on gene regulatory processes. this knowledge would aid in the prediction of the detrimental outcomes of such crosses  <cit> .

inter-breeding between distinct populations can lead to different results depending on genetic and environmental factors. hybridization of strains with low genetic variation and phenotypic range  may in theory yield hybrid progeny with desirable phenotypes through heterosis, where the offspring possess a more favourable phenotype than their parental strains  <cit> . out-breeding depression can also occur where the off-spring express a non-favourable phenotype relative to parental strains, leading to reduced fitness of the hybrid progeny and the potential for negative impacts for wild stocks  <cit> . phenotype-genotype relationships have been examined for traits such as survival, aggression, predator evasion, and feeding motivation  <cit> , and for growth potential of wild-domesticated hybrid progeny in relation to their parental strains  <cit> . the overall findings of these studies suggested that domestication-induced traits are regulated mainly by additive genetic variation. out-breeding with continually backcrossing of hybrid progeny into a wild genome may result in dilution of the domesticated-induced phenotype and a reversion to wild phenotype  <cit> . while these studies have focused mainly on the effect of domestication through quantification of the phenotypic trait in the hybrid relative to both parents, the advent of microarray technology has enabled exploration at the mrna level. research on the relationship between mrna levels and phenotypic traits has been reported in mouse  <cit>  and drosophila sp  <cit> . however, several studies have also applied this technology to explore the genetic variation arisen through domestication in rainbow trout  <cit> , atlantic salmon  <cit> , coho  <cit> , brook charr  <cit>  and lake whitefish  <cit>  salmonid species.

the present study uses microarray technology to screen for differences in mrna abundance levels between fast-growing pure domesticated, slow-growing pure wild, and wild-domesticated hybrid  rainbow trout in liver tissue. domesticated strains used within this study have been under selection for enhanced growth rate for greater than  <dig> years and show highly different growth rates relative to their wild comparators , and are comparable to growth rates seen for growth hormone transgenic fish  <cit> . the main aims of this study were to  investigate changes in mrna levels that have arisen through domestication, and relate these findings to growth and other physiological changes,  investigate the relationship among genotypes regarding their effects on mrna levels, specifically that for wild-domesticated hybrids relative to parental strains, and  investigate the effect of developmental stage on mrna levels by inclusion of both age-matched and size-matched wild-type reference groups. previous studies of domestication  <cit>  have tended to size and stage-match wild reference groups to domesticated populations in attempts to control for either developmental  or environmental  variance between groups due to size and stage differences. this study included both size-matched and age-matched wild groups as comparators.

methods
strains and fish culture
strains of rainbow trout  utilized in the present study were a wild strain  derived from pennask lake, british columbia and a fast-growing domesticated  strain which has undergone selection for enhanced growth rate for over  <dig> years. the domesticated trout are derived from campbell lake trout farms , a commercial strain used in aquaculture in british columbia. in addition to the pure strains, wild-domesticated f <dig> hybrids  were also generated. these three genotypes of fish grow at very different rates, and thus to facilitate comparisons, wild strain trout were analyzed as age-matched  individuals and, using stock from the previous year, as individuals size-matched  to the d strain trout. strains were generated and reared at the fisheries and oceans canada centre for aquaculture and environmental research  in west vancouver, bc. in june  <dig>  a series of crosses were performed to assess phenotypic and genetic relationships between the d and w strains. for the molecular analysis described here, a single cross was selected to minimize complications arising from allelic differences that may exist among individuals within each of the strains. thus, groups were derived from 1) one female d trout crossed with a d male to generate pure domestic  trout, 2) the same d female was crossed with a w male to generate w/d hybrid progeny, and 3) to generate pure w trout, one w female was crossed with the same w male used to generate the w/d progeny. in the previous year , w trout were selected from a large, randomly mated set of crosses from fish from the same wild source as for  <dig> broods . all families  were reared individually under the same culture conditions in fresh aerated well water  at a density of less than  <dig> kg/m <dig> under simulated natural lighting and photoperiod . fish were fed stage-appropriate artificial salmon diets  to satiation three times per day for the wild-type, domesticated and f <dig> hybrid groups. all experiments were approved by the dfo pacific regional animal care committee and adhered to guidelines of the canadian council for animal care.

sampling
for analysis, six fish were selected from each of the groups  during february  <dig>  at this time, the domesticated strain individuals had grown to a body size that closely matched that of the  <dig> w strain fish . liver tissue was sampled from six individual fish from each experimental group; wa, ws, d and w/d rainbow trout. lengths and weights  at the time of sampling varied between all groups. in terms of fish weight, domesticated and size-matched wilds were the largest in terms of mass relative to wild-domesticated hybrid and age-matched wild groups. prior to tissue sampling no food was provided to the fish for a  <dig> hr period. fish were terminated by over-anaesthetization with  <dig> mg/l tricaine methane sulfonate plus  <dig> mg/l sodium bicarbonate , followed by decapitation.

rna extraction
liver tissue was excised and placed immediately in rnalater as specified by the manufacturer  and stored at -80°c until analysis. total rna was extracted from individual liver tissues using trizol reagent  by pellet pestle homogenization  and purified using qiagen’s rneasy minelute cleanup kit. quality and quantity of rna was examined spectrophotometrically at  <dig> nm and  <dig> nm and rna purity estimated using 260/ <dig> ratio ≥  <dig> .

microarray hybridization
microarray experiments were designed to comply with minimum information about a microarray experiment  guidelines  <cit>  and all scanned images and quantified raw data files have been deposited in gene expression omnibus  <cit>  with geo platform accession number . all hybridizations were carried out using 44k salmonid oligonucleotide arrays containing four arrays per slide, provided by the consortium for genomics research on all salmon project   <cit> . a reference design was used in all hybridizations, composed of pooled total rna from wild size-matched rainbow trout . this pooled sample served as the cy <dig> labelled control  to which each individual fish was compared. each experimental group  included  <dig> individual fish. thus, in total  <dig> 44k oligo-arrays were utilised during this study. total liver rna for individual fish from each experimental group was hybridized to one of four arrays per individual slide. for each experimental group the positioning on the slide was: d, w/d, wa and ws.

total rna  for both reference and experimental samples was converted to cdna and crnas derived therefrom were labelled with the appropriate fluorescent dye using the agilent low input quick amp  kit, following manufacturer’s instruction. agilent spike a control and spike b control were added to reference  and experimental  samples, respectively. following denaturation  and crna synthesis  steps, the reaction was heated at 70°c for  <dig> min and, then placed directly on ice to inactivate the affinityscript enzyme. crna was then labelled with the appropriate fluorescent dye by the addition of  <dig> μl of transcription master mix cocktail containing either cy <dig> or cy <dig>  the reaction mix was incubated at 40°c for  <dig> hr and, subsequently stored at -80°c until use. labelled crna samples were thawed and then purified using qiagen’s rneasy mini spin columns. labelled crna samples were quantified spectrophotometrically at  <dig> nm, incorporation of cy dyes and specific activity of each sample were calculated as per manufacture’s guidelines . hybridizations were carried out in accordance with liqa kit protocol, using  <dig> ng of experimental and reference pool crna.  <dig> μl of this hybridization reaction mix was loaded in order d, w/d, wa and ws to each of the respective individual grids on the 44k oligo-array using agilent’s surehyb enabled hybridization reaction chamber and gasket slides. hybridization was carried out at 65°c for  <dig> hr in a rotary hybridization oven at  <dig> rpm. following hybridization, slides were washed as per manufacture’s protocol. slides were scanned immediately using scanarray express  scanner at  <dig> μm resolution at 90% laser power, with pmt values of  <dig> for cy <dig> channel and  <dig> for cy <dig> channel.

data analysis
scanned arrays were quantified using imagene  <dig>   and data files processed prior to import into genespring  <dig>  . data was imported into genespring under the following conditions: raw data was converted to a threshold value of  <dig> , raw data was log <dig> transformed, and lowess normalisation and baseline transformation to the median value of all samples was performed. as a quality control, data for each slide was examined using scatter plot and ma-plot to examine dye bias and technical variation between slides for each biological replicate.

of the  <dig>  entities ,  <dig>  were present in this study and this list was used for the final statistical tests. this entity list was created by filtering based on expression  and flags to account for background, false positives and absent spots. statistical analysis was performed using a one-way anova assuming equal variance with tukey’s post-hoc and benjamini hochberg  multiple corrections. significance was determined using p values ≤  <dig>  or ≤  <dig> . figure  <dig> details the number and type of expression found to differ between all pairwise comparisons of wa, ws, d and w/d-hybrid, and a list of annotated entities can be found in the additional files provided .

hierarchical clustering was performed on all mrnas with signals above background on the array and on significant mrnas found during analysis, using euclidian distance measurement and clustering based on condition  and mrna level . it should be noted however that hierarchical clustering in reference to its use here is not a statistical analysis method, and in this case was only used as a means of visually inferring relationships among genotypes. as an additional quality control, a 3d-pca plot was examined to assess group cohesiveness  each of the genotypes . clustering according to genotype was evident, with all individuals within a genotype clustering together. some overlapping of individuals within the d and w/d groupings was noted. following statistical analysis of differentially expressed mrnas, all replicates were removed from mrna entity lists. for replicate removal of same named mrnas, in each case the first mrna within each replicate group was selected. this was done consistently for removal of same name replicates from each entity list. venn diagrams were employed during analysis to determine the proportion of mrnas that were mutually expressed in comparisons of d to wild-type groups and those unique to wa or ws groups relative to d groups. this was performed in order to draw some conclusions with regards the relevance and or necessity for size matching fish during experimental design. venn diagram breakdown was also used in this study to examine mutually expressed mrnas found on comparison of wild-domesticated hybrid trout in relation to all other groups.

examination of mrna regulation patterns between genotypes was performed using spss software version  <dig>  . one-way anova assuming equal variance with tukey’s post-hoc and benjamini hochberg  multiple corrections was performed on a combined list of mrnas found to be significantly different for pairings of d to wild-type trout during microarray statistical testing . statistical testing was performed on normalized log expression values from all individual fish within the d, w/d and wa and ws groups and differences were noted as significant with a p value ≤  <dig> . regulation of mrnas was defined as additive if significant differences were noted for comparisons of both w/d to w and w/d to d. regulation of mrnas was defined as non-additive if the w/d-hybrid was significantly different from one but not the other parental strains. regulation of mrnas was defined as d-dominant  if w/d was significantly different from the wild-type but not from the d parental strain. regulation of mrnas was defined as d-recessive  if w/d was significantly different from d but not the w parental strain. during analysis, there were some cases where a mrna resembled additive effect but was not significantly different from both parents. to confirm an additive effect or no effect  of genotype for these mrnas linear regression analysis was used. linear regression analysis was performed for each individual mrna. expression values  for an individual mrna were plotted across the three genotype groups and the slope of the line determined . the effect of genotype on mrna regulation was classified as resembling additive  if the slope of the line was significantly different from zero ; if the slope was not significantly different from zero, mrna regulation was classified as no effect  of genotype.

functional pathways were assigned where possible to the significant mrnas found in comparison between all group pairings using uniprot knowledgebase  <cit> , embl-ebi  <cit> , gene ontology  information provided in array annotation file and an in-house database.

RESULTS
entity list generation and statistical analysis
levels of liver mrnas were analyzed using a 44k oligo-array  for four groups of rainbow trout , wild-domesticated hybrid , slow-growing age-matched wild-type , and slow-growing size-matched wild-type ). comparisons among these groups allowed assessment of the influence both of genotype  and developmental stage  on mrna levels. following data normalisation and quality control filtering a total of  <dig>  out of  <dig>  oligos spotted on the array platform  were found to be present within the confines of this experiment. significant entity lists were generated for each group pairing and were also further filtered to examine differences greater than  <dig> fold to focus on mrnas with major differences in expression. figure  <dig> details the number of mrnas found significant within each pairing, before  and after  filtering on fold change, and with replicate same named mrnas entities removed. statistical analysis using a one-way anova was also performed with significance levels adjusted to p ≤  <dig>  for more stringent analysis  which in most groups reduced the number of significant mrnas to nearly half. in total,  <dig> or  <dig> %  of all entities expressed on the array were deemed to be significantly different  in terms of mrna levels among any of the different rainbow trout group pairings . mrnas with major changes were defined as those having a greater than 2-fold difference  in mrna level between any of the group pairings. this focus decreased the number of mrnas to  <dig>  of all expressed entities on the array  and will be referred to as the comprehensive significant entity list.

differences in mrna levels found for w , d , and w/d  rainbow trout
figure 2b details the number of mrnas found to differ significantly among the various comparisons of d, w/d, wa, and ws trout. the largest proportion of mrnas showing significant differences were noted for d when compared to w-type trout groups , with similar numbers found with comparisons to either age-matched or size-matched wild-type groups. comparison of the w/d group relative to wa and to d groups showed similar amounts of differential mrna expression, whereas comparison of w/d to ws showed higher amounts of mrnas with different levels of expression. some mrnas  were also found to differ between the two wild-type groups .

wa relative to ws trout
differences in liver mrna levels were noted between wa relative to ws-type trout . of the comprehensive significant entity list,  <dig> %  differed in mrna expression between wa relative to ws groups . when visualized via heat maps of mrna levels, individual mrna expression patterns appeared consistent for all individual fish within each group but differed between the two wild-type groups . expression profiles within this pairing show similar levels of up or down mrna regulation . note that prior to the application of a fold change ≥  <dig> , wa differed quite substantially in term of mrna levels  in comparison to ws-type trout.

d relative to wa and ws trout groups
the largest proportion of differences in mrna levels in liver was found in comparisons of d relative to either wild-type group. of the comprehensive significant entity list,  <dig>  and  <dig>  mrnas differed significantly between d and wa and ws, respectively . venn diagram analysis of both significant entity lists showed  <dig> of these mrnas were shared in comparisons of d to wa and to ws-type trout . figure 2a and 2b detail the proportion of up and down mrna regulation for all significant mrnas found between pairings of d relative to w-type trout. for d relative to wa similar levels of up and down mrna regulation are noted, whereas for d relative to ws a higher proportion of mrnas were up-regulated as opposed to down-regulated . hierarchical clustering of those mrnas found common to both wild-type in comparisons to d produced two cluster groups, with domesticated  and wild/domesticated  rainbow trout groups clustering together and, age-matched  and size-matched  wild-type rainbow trout clustering together . examination of mrna expression levels  and type  were found to be very similar for both wild-type groups relative to d . however, the unique differences in mrna levels found here in comparison of d relative to wa and d relative to ws  further emphasises the difference between wild reference groups. individual variation  within and between groups was examined using a 3d-pca plot . all samples within each genotype were found to cluster together within the pca plot, with some overlap seen for d and w/d hybrids as expected.

w/d hybrid relative to d and wild-type trout
w/d hybrid group were compared to wa, ws and d groups. the largest degree of variation in mrna levels was found in comparison of w/d with ws, with  <dig> mrnas  from the comprehensive significant entity list differing in this pairing. similar proportions of differences in mrna levels were found in comparison of w/d relative wa and d groups . a greater proportion of mrnas were up-regulated in w/d relative to w-type fish, while similar levels of up/down regulation were noted for those mrnas significant in w/d relative to d fish . venn diagram analysis of significant entity lists for each w/d pairing, show very few  mrnas to be common between all groups . however,  <dig> mrnas were shared between pairings of w/d to wa and ws-type trout .

relationship of genotype and mrna levels
those mrnas  found to be statistically different  between d relative to w-type rainbow trout during microarray analysis were used to determine the influence of genotype  and developmental stage on mrna regulation. one-way anova was perform on normalised log intensity values for d, w-type and w/d hybrid groups, to determine additive , d-recessive , or d-dominant  genotype effects for the  <dig> mrnas . examples of each genotype effect are shown in figure 6a. this list of differentially expressed mrnas between d relative to w-type can be divided into three groups. group a represents differentially expressed mrnas found between d and both wild-type groups, group b represents mrnas that differed significantly only between d relative to wa type trout, and group c represent mrnas that differed significantly only between d relative to ws type trout. for group a, similar levels of additive, d-dominant and d-recessive genotype control were noted, however a tendency for increased prevalence of additive and d-recessive model can be seen . within this group it was found that a d-dominant genetic variation was more prominent for up-regulated as opposed to down-regulated mrnas . table  <dig> shows a large proportion of mrnas within group a that were regulated in a d-recessive or d-dominant manner relative to domesticated fish. these results indicate a strong influence of both the wild and the domesticated genome in mrna regulation. high levels of concordance , for additive, d-recessive and d-dominant effects, was found when using either wa or ws type trout for comparisons. this implies that for group a, mrna regulation is most likely due to the effect of genotype and not a result of age or stage differences between d and wild fish.

table shows the number of mrnas from the d relative to w-type entity list that showed additive , d-recessive  or d-dominant  mrna regulation patterns relative to the domesticated parent. included are those mrnas that were found to differ significantly in d relative to wa only and d relative to ws only. included in the table are those mrnas that showed no effect  of genotype on mrna regulation.

*a: additive , r: d-recessive , d: d-dominant  and ne: no effect of genotype.

table  <dig> shows that for groups b and c the greatest degree of concordance when analysing the effect of genotype  on mrnas abundance was seen for d-recessive regulation. a significant proportion of mrnas within these groups were unaffected by genotype . for example, mrnas that displayed a d-dominant response when comparing w/d to d and wa groups, showed either no effect  or were consistent with additive effects when comparing the same mrna expression for w/d to d and ws trout groups. these results indicate that the controlling factor for differences in these mrnas is most likely dictated by differences in fish developmental stage or life history between domesticated and wild rainbow trout rather than by genotype. examples of additive , d-recessive  and d-dominant  genotype effects are shown in figure 6a, along with illustrations of the effect of development stage on expression levels  and those resembling additive .

physiological differences in liver for wa, ws, d and w/d rainbow trout
in order to determine which physiological pathways differ between the domesticated and wild-type strains examined, functional pathways were assigned where possible to the comprehensive significant entity list  identified from all group comparisons. the functional pathways were categorised under  <dig> umbrella terms . physiological pathways which showed alterations between groups were primarily associated with the following groups: response to stimulus , cell/tissue structure and development , and transport .

differences in physiological processes between wa and ws type trout groups were primarily in cell/tissue structure and development, response to stimulus, lipid metabolism, and transport . in terms of expression profiles, it was noted that the majority of mrnas which showed up-regulation in wa relative to ws trout were associated with metabolic pathways, mainly lipid metabolism, transport systems and response to stimulus . down-regulated mrnas within this pairing related mostly to cell/tissue structure and development  and response to stimulus .

the main physiological pathways which differed between d to w-type groups were found in transport, response to stimulus, cell/tissue structure and development, metabolism  and protein synthesis . of the mrnas within this group, 15% had unknown functions and therefore could not be assigned to any physiological pathway group. for mrnas which demonstrated unique differences in mrna levels in d relative to wa or d relative to ws, the proportion of mrnas and types of physiological pathways were similar for both groups, but the specific mrnas and mrna expression profiles  differed . some physiological pathways which differed in d relative to wa, but not ws, were homeostasis, protein metabolism, translation and apoptosis.

figure 7c details the physiological pathways which differed between w/d hybrid relative to w-type and d-type trout . although few mrnas were shared between w-type trout and d when either was compared to w/d , some similarities were noted in the types of altered physiological pathways. while a large proportion of mrnas within these pairings were unknowns, the main pathways identified were transport, response to stimulus, cell/tissue structure and development and protein synthesis. difference in physiological pathways for w/d relative to d, in relation to w/d relative to w-type, were in signalling, generation of precursor metabolites and energy, nucleotide, protein and carbohydrate metabolism. figure 4b details the number of mrnas that differ in expression levels for w/d relative to wa only and ws only.

discussion
to assess the genetic and physiological transformations that occur as part of the domestication process, the present study measured differences in mrna levels between slow-growing wild and fast-growing domesticated strains of rainbow trout, and analyzed the influence of combining domesticated and wild genomes in f <dig> wild-domesticated hybrid progeny. this research also assessed the effect of comparing mrna levels of domesticated and hybrid genotypes to two different wild-type control groups that were either size-matched or age-matched to the domesticated genotype.

substantial significant differences in mrna expression were found for fast-growing domesticated rainbow trout relative to the slow-growing wild trout, with  <dig> % of all detected mrnas differentially expressed between these genotypes. further, significant differences were also observed for both of these parental strains relative to their wild-domesticated hybrid f <dig> progeny, although to a lesser extent than between parental groups. among all detected mrnas, hybrids possessed  <dig> % and  <dig> % of mrnas with different expression levels relative to size-matched and age-matched wild trout , and  <dig> % of mrnas differed when compared to domesticated trout. the lowest proportion of differentially expressed mrnas was noted in comparison of age-matched and size-matched wild rainbow trout, with  <dig> % of all detected mrnas differing in this pairing. a related study comparing wild rainbow trout and a domesticated strain  found similar results, where 6% of all detected mrna differed in liver tissue  <cit> . previous work on brook charr found  <dig> % of all detected liver mrnas differed between domesticated and wild populations at the juvenile stage  <cit> . studies with atlantic salmon whole fry found that  <dig>  - <dig> % of all detected mrnas differed in hybrid progeny with respect to their parental populations  <cit> , whereas  <dig> % of all detected mrnas differed in second generation farmed wild backcross relative to wilds  <cit> . similar results for hybrid relative to parental populations were observed in a study of normal and dwarf lake whitefish  <cit> . slight differences among these data sets likely arise by differences in experimental design  and variation due to the salmon species under investigation.

similar proportions of mrnas are up- vs. down-regulated in domesticated fish relative to their wild counterparts . these results are different from the findings of tymchuk et al.  <cit>  who found a higher representation of down-regulated mrnas in the liver tissue of domesticated relative to size-matched wild rainbow trout. in the present study, many of the same mrnas were found to be concordantly regulated in domesticated trout relative both to age-matched and size-matched wild trout. a concordant response is consistent with differences between slow-growing wild and fast-growing domesticated strains being changes that are stable across developmental stages and rearing conditions, and thus may be critical changes that have arisen during the domestication process. it is important to consider that although the domesticated strain used in this study has undergone selection for enhanced growth performance and shows vastly different growth rates to their wild counter parts, not all genetic differences between the strains will have arisen from domestication selection and not all will be related to growth. other unintentional differences in behaviour, morphology and physiology likely have also arisen and could account for some of the genetic differences noted here. between wild-domesticated hybrids and parental groups, proportionally more mrnas were up-regulated relative to age- and size-matched wild trout, whereas similar levels of up and down mrna regulation were observed relative to domesticated trout.

the analysis of hybrid progeny in conjunction with the pure domesticated and wild parental strains allowed examination of the influence of genotype on mrna regulation. specifically, co-dominant expression is occurring if the level of mrna product in the hybrid is intermediate between the parental strains, d-dominant expression if levels resemble the domesticated strain , d-recessive if levels resemble the wild-type strain , and over- or under-dominant if levels are respectively greater or lower than all the strains. for those mrnas that showed concordant responses between domesticated and both wild-type groups , hybrid inheritance patterns showed similar levels of additive, d-dominant and d-recessive control. however, a slightly higher proportion of additive and d-recessive modes of regulation can be seen. these findings are concordant with a previous study examining mrna abundance differences between wild and domesticated strains of atlantic salmon from two environments  <cit> . the large proportion of mrnas showing recessive and dominant genotype regulation suggests specific genetic influences of both the wild and domesticated genome in mrna regulation in hybrids. the prevalence of dominant and non-additive responses reveals that introgression between domesticated and wild populations considerably alters the genetic control of mrna levels from that evolved in wild individuals, and therefore may disrupt gene regulatory systems important for developing phenotypes for optimal fitness in nature. in contrast to the responses seen for mrna levels, previous research examining the influence of genotype on selected traits such as growth and behaviour found mainly additive regulation  <cit> . in such cases where f <dig> progeny have been examined, it is anticipated that the backcrossing of f <dig> hybrid genome combination to wild-type would further disrupt mrna regulatory systems via outbreeding depression. in contrast, numerous studies examining the influence of genotype on mrna levels have found mainly non-additive, dominant or transgressive modes of regulation  <cit> . if we consider that the expression of a particular phenotypic trait such as growth rate or maturity are a result of complex networks of genes working in unison, as opposed to a single gene, it is possible that non-additive genotype effects noted in gene regulation responses are masked when gene complexes are formed to give rise to the visible phenotype  <cit> . based on the combined results of the current and many previous studies, we agree with the conclusion of normandeau et al.  <cit>  and roberge et al.  <cit>  that the consequences of hybridization on both mrna regulation and phenotype expression are highly dependent on the specific genetic architecture of the crossed populations and therefore, highly unpredictable. the number of fish per genotype  used in the present analysis of genotype effects on mrnas regulation may have generated levels of variance that would prevent identification of differences among the groups for specific genes, and as such, actual differences may be somewhat greater. it is also possible that some of the effects seen may be a result of strain variation within each group which could generate non-homogeneity of genotype among the w/d hybrid fish selected, despite each showing intermediate growth rate and body size relative to the parental strains. although the issue of within and between genotype variation was examined as part of this study and, little variation between individuals was noted, further study including analysis of additional individuals and strains would be beneficial.

to assess whether specific biological pathways were being influenced, functional assignments for differentially regulated mrnas were determined for each of the genotypes. differences between domesticated and wild rainbow trout showed a high representation of mrnas involved in transport, metabolism, response to stimulus, cell/tissue structure and development, protein synthesis and transcription. the majority of mrnas involved in these processes had higher mrna levels in domesticated trout. examination of alteration in fish physiology for domesticated and growth hormone  transgenic coho  <cit>  and domesticated rainbow trout  <cit>  observed similar changes in stress and immune response, cell and tissue structure, energy production and protein synthesis physiological pathways. comparable results for alterations in fish physiology have also been seen for brook charr  <cit>  and atlantic salmon  <cit> . the combination of these results suggests that similar biological pathways are altered in multiple species of domesticated fish, as well as gh transgenic fish, in order to support faster rates of growth, and that these changes may be both causal of or responsive to the underlying genetic variation that has led to altered phenotypes in fast-growing strains  <cit> .

specifically, in terms of metabolism, energy acquisition and utilisation, mrnas displaying the highest level of fold change between domesticated and wild strains were apo-a1- <dig> precursor, elovl fa elongase  <dig>  faa and protein canopy homolog  <dig> precursor, nadh-ubiquinonereductase chain  <dig>  cytochrome c and cox iv- <dig>  with under expression of acbp. the elevated levels of many mrnas involved in lipid metabolism may reflect the greater demand in domesticated fish for growth-related resources necessary to support increased growth performance  <cit> . additionally, many mrnas associated with protein synthesis were over-expressed in domesticated trout. protein synthesis plays a strong role in fish growth through mediation of many growth related pathways  <cit> . mrnas which displayed the highest level of over-expression were 40s ribosomal proteins  and superoxide dismutase. although superoxide dismutase has been linked to other roles which include antioxidant defence, it is included within this group for its role in protein biosynthetic process and growth regulation. given that the liver tissue is highly involved in protein turnover, amino acid metabolism and lipid metabolism for its role in protein biosynethic during periods of accelerated growth the elevation of mrnas within these pathways for the domesticated population was not unexpected.

during this study many mrnas associated with oxygen and macromolecule transport were found to be expressed at a high level in domesticated relative to wild trout. mrnas involved in these pathways may show increased levels due to the higher metabolic rate of the domesticated trout, required for increased growth and nutritional absorption. notable with respect to transport, mrnas involved in ion transport were found to be down-regulated in domesticated fish. mrnas which displayed the highest level of over-expression were, solute carrier family  <dig> member  <dig>  hemoglobin subunits beta  and alpha  and vitellogin- <dig> precursor. similar results of increased expression of hemoglobin beta and alpha subunits in liver tissue were reported by rise et al.  <cit>  for examination of gh transgenic coho expression. tymchuk et al.  <cit>  observed different results to those described above, with increased expression of hemoglobin found only in the brain tissue of domesticated rainbow trout. differences seen between studies maybe due to, strain selection, variance in fish growth rate, or, perhaps to differences in the vascular circulatory systems in the liver tissue.

results of differential mrnas expression in liver tissue showed over-expression in domesticated trout of many mrnas involved in the activation and regulation of the complement pathway and innate immunity. increased expression in domesticated trout was noted for lectin precursor, complement c3- <dig>  fucolectin  <dig> precursor, complement factor b precursor, c-type lectin domain family  <dig> member m and decreased expression of primary defence mechanisms exemplified by ig mu chain c region membrane bound form. these results are contradictory to the findings of tymchuk et al.  <cit>  who described down-regulation of many mrnas involved in the stress and immune system, and attributed this fact to tradeoffs incurred by domesticated trout in order to sustain increased growth rates. debes et al.  <cit>  also noted down-regulation of some immune related mrnas in domesticated atlantic salmon. however, up-regulation of cd <dig> and mhc class ii combined with higher levels of lysozyme c transcript was also noted, and is different from the findings of tymchuk et al.  <cit> . it was suggested that elevated levels of these mrnas may relate to domesticated fish displaying a higher resistance towards vibriosis, a common bacterial disease in aquaculture relative to wild populations  <cit> . it is possible that increased expression of mrnas involved in the complement pathway may be explained by an increased host defence system in domesticated rainbow trout, an acute phase response prior to sampling, or alternative uses for these mrnas in regulatory pathways in domesticated trout.

an objective of this study was to investigate changes in mrna levels in domesticated trout using different wild-type comparators. whenever two strains with different growth rates  are being compared, they will, at a specific age, naturally have different body sizes if provided with satiating levels of food. since body size is linked to developmental stage in many fishes, differences in mrna levels are anticipated between such groups simply due to the fish being developmentally distinct, rather than due directly to genetic differences causal of the domestication phenotype. to date, studies investigating the effect of wild reference group selection have focused mainly on wild populations from different geographical location  <cit> , population groups  <cit> , life stages  <cit>  and environmental treatment  <cit> . bougas et al.  <cit>  clearly demonstrated the influence of wild population selection on changes in mrna expression by assessing two wild populations from different river systems. further studies by debes et al.  <cit>  illustrated the effect of wild rearing environment on differential mrna expression when either wild population was paired to domesticated populations. the present study aimed to extend previous experiments by our group and others by examining differences that occur within a specific strain reared in the same environment, with one wild group a year older than the other. domesticated populations were matched to wild-type fish of either the same age or the same size  in order to distinguish alterations in mrna expression that have arisen due to differences in fish developmental stage rather than due to domestication.

significant differences in mrna expression were noted for age-matched relative to size-matched wild-type trout, with  <dig> % of all detected mrnas differing greater than 2-fold . when domesticated trout were compared to wild-type trout groups, unique differences in mrna levels were noted. this comparison reveals how developmental stage and/or age, can alone cause differential mrna levels, independent of effects arising from domestication. further confirmation of these findings was found upon analysis of the effect of genotype on mrna regulation comparing parental to hybrid groups. unique mrna expression patterns were observed between domesticated and either age-matched or size-matched wild-type trout, consistent with a clear effect of fish development stage on mrna levels. the biological pathways influenced by these mrnas in both groups of wild-type trout also differed, primarily with respect to transport, response to stimulus, and, most strongly, cell/tissue structure and development, and lipid metabolism. the manner in which wilds differed in terms of physiology strongly supports the case of difference due to age, development, and life history. these results suggest that caution should be applied in interpreting data where only one control group  is selected in experiments comparing fish with different growth rates.

CONCLUSIONS
the present study has shown that considerable differences in genetics and physiology are associated with strains of domesticated and wild-type rainbow trout. assessment of genotype effects demonstrated mainly additive and d-recessive mrna regulation in hybrid progeny. to better understand the consequences of hybridization , further study would be beneficial, including assessing additional strains and species, allelic variation among individuals within strains, and second generation hybrid crosses to identify specific quantitative trait loci influencing morphology, physiology , and mrna levels . the mrnas within the d-recessive class may be of particular interest in this regard as we predict that these genomic blocks may show highly significant eqtl associations with growth. the present study revealed the importance of assessing the effect of developmental stage on differential mrna levels between fast-growing domesticated and slow-growing wild-type groups. differences in mrna levels  were more prominent for age-matched as opposed to size-matched wild-type controls, suggesting that matching groups by size  may provide more biologically meaningful data indicative of genetic differences between strains.

availability of supporting data
the data set supporting the results of this article is available in gene expression omnibus  repository  with geo platform accession number .

competing interests
the authors declare that they have no competing interest.

authors’ contributions
slw wrote the manuscript and performed all bioinformatics and statistical analysis. ds produced the british columbia family crosses and conducted all microarray hybridizations. rhd, rgd and slw were involved in the design of the study and data interpretation. all authors read and commented on the manuscript.

supplementary material
additional file 1
significant mrna entity list  of domesticated relative to age-matched wild-type rainbow trout .

click here for file

 additional file 2
significant mrna entity list  of domesticated relative to size-matched wild-type rainbow trout .

click here for file

 additional file 3
significant mrna entity list  of wild-domesticated relative to domesticated rainbow trout .

click here for file

 additional file 4
significant mrna entity list  of wild-domesticated relative to age-matched wild-type rainbow trout .

click here for file

 additional file 5
significant mrna entity list  of wild-domesticated relative to size-matched wild-type rainbow trout .

click here for file

 additional file 6
significant mrna entity list  of age-matched wild relative to size-matched wild-type rainbow trout .

click here for file

 additional file 7: figure s1
significant differences found in mrna levels between group pairings as determine by anova p ≤  <dig>  with fold change of ≥  <dig>  bar chart shows the amount of up-regulated and down-regulated mrnas found in each group pairing of fast-growing domesticated , slow-growing age-matched wild , slow-growing size-matched wild , and first generation hybrid cross  rainbow trout.

click here for file

 additional file 8: figure s2
physiological pathways found significant in pairings of domesticated  and wild-domesticated  relative to either age-  or size-matched  trout populations. s2a.) the physiological pathways up- or down-regulated, unique to d relative to wa  or ws . s2b.) the physiological pathways up- or down-regulated in w/d relative to wa , ws  and d  populations.

click here for file

 acknowledgements
the authors wish to thank nserc  strategic program  and the canadian regulatory system for biotechnology  for their funding support. the authors would like to thank rosalind leggatt for her help in editing the manuscript. thanks are also extended to ben sutherland for all his guidance in the use of imagene and genespring software’s.
