BACKGROUND
levels of genetic differentiation are highly variable across the genome
 <cit> . in particular, regions of the genome harboring genes under divergent selection or causing reproductive isolation might exhibit accentuated differentiation between populations, for example because such regions are resistant to introgression. in this context, it is important to realize that divergent selection itself can generate reproductive isolation, for example via ecologically-based selection against immigrants and hybrids
 <cit> . reproductive isolation can also arise due to negative interactions between loci that cause intrinsic post-zygotic isolation , and dmis can evolve by selection or drift
 <cit> . introgression can be less impeded at neutrally evolving regions or those not involved in dmis, leading to low differentiation. thus, genomic divergence may be particularly heterogeneous during the process of population divergence with gene flow, during which genetic differentiation accumulates in some regions, while the homogenizing effects of introgression prevent differentiation of other regions
 <cit> . such ideas concerning heterogeneous genomic divergence have a long history in the hybrid zone literature
 <cit> , but have been revitalized by new genomic studies
 <cit> .

but many processes other than selection and reproductive isolation can promote genetic differentiation. if overall gene flow levels are very low, for example due to geographic isolation, then pronounced genetic differentiation might arise due to the stochastic effects of genetic drift
 <cit> . these stochastic effects might be accentuated by variable mutation rates and by low levels of recombination
 <cit> . these points have led some to question whether highly differentiated regions necessarily harbor genes affecting reproductive isolation
 <cit> . likewise, recent divergence and inadequate time for lineage sorting might result in weak differentiation of regions that will eventually become highly differentiated
 <cit> . finally, geographic variation in aspects of genetic architecture such as recombination rate variation , and in local selective regimes, could result in different genomic regions being differentiated or resistant to introgression in different parts of a species range
 <cit> . collectively, these issues raise the question of the extent to which highly divergent genomic are causally important for speciation versus being incidental consequences of divergence between populations already undergoing little or no introgression
 <cit> .

there are several ways to test if highly differentiated regions reside in regions of reduced introgression. first, mapping studies could test whether phenotypic traits involved in divergent adaptation or causing reproductive isolation map to regions of strong divergence between natural populations
 <cit> . second, experiments might measure selection on the genome directly
 <cit> , and ask if divergent selection acts on regions of strong differentiation. third, one might estimate if genomic regions that are exceptionally differentiated between allopatric populations undergo atypical patterns of introgression in zones of admixture
 <cit> .

here, we adopt this third approach following
 <cit>  using a previously published dataset from timema cristinae stick insects. the genotyping-by-sequencing approach which generated these data used restriction enzymes to cut up the genome into dna fragments that are distributed across the genome, sequenced tens of millions of these fragments on the illumina next-generation sequencing platform, and aligned the fragments to discover genetic variation . this approach was thus aimed at surveying genome wide patterns of differentiation, rather than focusing in on specific genes that causally affect adaptation and speciation. previous work used this dataset to test which ecological and geographic factors affect variability in genetic differentiation 
 <cit> . the results revealed that the number of exceptionally differentiated ‘outlier loci’, allele-frequency clines, and the overall distribution of genomic differentiation were recognizably affected by multiple factors such as host-plant use, geographic distance, climatic variability, and selection to avoid maladaptive hybridization 
 <cit> . previous work did not estimate variation across the genome  in levels of introgression. thus, the novel prediction we test here is that there will be an association between locus-specific divergence and locus-specific introgression, consistent with highly differentiated loci contributing to reproductive isolation.

our approach involves three steps . first, we estimate locus-specific genetic divergence  between two allopatric  populations of t. cristinae. this step included, but was not restricted to, the identification of high-fst outlier loci 
 <cit> . second, for the same loci used in step one, we estimate patterns of locus-specific introgression in admixed populations. third, we quantify the correspondence between locus-specific divergence for allopatric populations and locus-specific introgression in admixed populations. we find substantial, but far from extreme, correspondence between divergence and introgression. the previous study using this dataset also reported evidence for local adaptation to climatic conditions, by virtue of documenting associations between allele frequencies at specific loci and climatic variables
 <cit> . however, past work did not test for selection against foreign alleles, as would be predicted by local adaptation. we expand past work by reporting evidence for selection against foreign alleles in the admixed populations due to local adaptation. the results shed insight into the relationship between genomic divergence and introgression during speciation. 

the study system
timema are wingless, herbivorous insects inhabiting southwestern north america
 <cit> . the current study considers t. cristinae, which uses two host species 
 <cit> . populations using different hosts exhibit heritable differences in a suite of characteristics, such as color, color pattern, body size, and body shape. these differences generate extrinsic reproductive isolation due to ecologically based selection against between-host migrants and hybrids, and have also driven the evolution of sexual isolation due to reinforcement. in contrast to this extrinsic and sexual isolation, dmis appear absent in this system
 <cit> .

host patches used by t. cristinae are sometimes separated from patches of the alternative host, usually via regions containing unsuitable hosts. all populations found in such geographically separated patches are termed ‘allopatric’. we study here two allopatric populations, la and prc, which are known from past work to be strongly genetically differentiated, undergo little or no between-host gene flow, and are thus ‘non-admixed’
 <cit> . our estimates of genetic divergence  here thus all stem from la and prc .

in contrast to allopatric scenarios, the two host species are sometimes distributed in adjacent patches that are in direct geographic contact with one another. previous work has shown that such adjacent populations undergo extensive between-host gene flow and are ‘admixed’
 <cit> . we study two such admixed populations here, hv and mr, which exhibit very weak genetic divergence and high gene flow between hosts
 <cit> . for the snp data analyzed here estimates of burrow’s composite measure of hardy weinberg and linkage disequilibrium  within populations
 <cit>  were very low, indicating the snps were largely statistically independent from one another 
 <cit> . nonetheless, as expected if hv and mr were admixed, estimates of Δ within these populations were significantly greater than those for la and prc . our estimates of introgression here thus all stem from the admixed populations hv and mr.

the genomic clines approach
the analytical approach we use is that of ‘genomic clines’
 <cit> . genomic clines are mathematical functions that describe the probability of locus-specific ancestry along a gradient in genome-wide admixture or hybrid index. hybrid index  is defined as the proportion of an admixed individual’s genome inherited from one of two parental populations .

we thus measured genomic introgression of la and prc genetic regions in admixed hv and mr t. cristinae. we were not concerned with the geography of introgression, but rather with the movement of genetic material from one genomic background into another within a geographic region i.e., genomic introgression
 <cit> . we quantified locus-specific genomic introgression using the bayesian genomic cline model on the basis of two locus-specific genomic cline parameters
 <cit> . these cline parameters specify the probability that individual j with hybrid index h = h inherited a gene copy at locus i = i from la . the base probability of la ancestry for a locus is equal to an individual’s hybrid index. the genomic cline center parameter, α, specifies an increase  or decrease  in the probability of la ancestry for a locus relative to the base expectation. the genomic cline rate parameter, β, specifies an increase  or decrease  in the rate of transition from low to high probability of la ancestry as a function of hybrid index and measures the mean ancestry-based pairwise linkage disequilibrium between a locus and all other loci. more formally,

  Φ_ij=h_j+2h_j−h_j^2α_i+β_i2h_j− <dig>  

where Φ_ij is given by a simple transformation of Φ_ij to ensure 0≤Φ≤ <dig> and that Φ is a monotonically increasing function of hybrid index. simulations have demonstrated that selection against specific hybrid genotypes , whether arising from single locus  or multilocus  incompatibilities, affects α and β, but the effect of selection on α is often more pronounced, particularly if dispersal from parental populations is limited
 <cit> . underdominance and epistatic dmis thus tend to cause extreme genomic cline parameters .

study design and predictions
related work in the t. cristinae system demonstrated that multiple geographic and ecological factors each leave clear patterns in the genome
 <cit> . one major result was that the number of outlier loci tended to increase with greater geographic separation between populations, partially due to stronger selection  between more distantly separated populations.

here, we extend this previous work in two major ways. first, we provide novel analyses testing whether local adaptation results in selection against foreign alleles, a process that can reduce introgression and promote the genetic differentiation that drives speciation
 <cit> . the admixed populations that we estimate introgression in are geographically much closer to one allopatric population  than to the other. if divergent selection in allopatry causes exceptional genetic differentiation and if local adaptation along environmental gradients selects against foreign alleles , we predict a greater number of fst outlier loci should exhibit elevated la ancestry than elevated prc ancestry . we stress that this analysis relies strictly on the departure of individual loci from the genome-wide hybrid index , rather than on average hybrid index  itself.

second, we test for correspondence between locus-specific differentiation between allopatric populations and locus-specific introgression in admixed populations. here we focus on absolute  levels of α because although loci with highly negative versus highly positive α values differ in their probability of la versus prc ancestry, both loci with highly negative and highly positive α values exhibit exceptional patterns of introgression in admixed populations. a wide range of outcomes is possible because reproductive isolation can evolve via selection or drift and might evolve via similar or different processes in allopatric versus admixed populations. we focus here on some likely possibilities.

first, some regions might exhibit strong divergence between the allopatric populations and high  α values in the admixed populations. these likely represent regions that truly differentiated between la and prc via divergent selection, and which contribute to reproductive isolation in admixed populations . second, some regions will exhibit low divergence and low  α values. these likely represent neutrally evolving regions that do not readily differentiate and which do not contribute to reproductive isolation. third, some regions might exhibit strong divergence in allopatry but low  α in the admixed populations. such regions might not harbor genes under divergent selection or those reducing introgression, but have nonetheless differentiated strongly in allopatry due to genetic drift. alternatively such regions could harbor genes experiencing divergent selection in allopatry that are unrelated to reproductive isolation in admixed populations. possible mechanisms causing such discordance between α and fst are geographic variation in the genomic architecture of local adaptation or in local selection pressures. both these types of variability among populations can cause high fst and α to occur in some geographic regions, but not in others. such factors could also explain loci with high α but low fst. we enumerate the frequency of these different outcomes and discuss the results with respect to understanding speciation.

methods
description of the snp dataset
the data we analyzed come from six of the eight populations examined by
 <cit> . two populations were excluded because they reside on a different mountain from the others. a total of  <dig>  snps were obtained from illumina sequencing of highly multiplexed genomically reduced fragment libraries. this represents a subset of the loci examined by
 <cit> , created by removing low variant loci . low variant loci are uninformative about ancestry, and could artificially inflate the correlation between fst and genomic cline parameter estimates
 <cit> . description of sampling and sequencing protocols, sequence assembly, variant calling, fst estimation and methods for delimitation of ‘outlier loci’ with exceptionally high fst values are described in full detail in
 <cit> . notably, both the current study and
 <cit>  used the same bayesian analytical framework which ensures that missing data will not lead to high fst, because it fully accounts for uncertainty in genotypes, allele frequencies, and fst caused by missing data and low sequence coverage. low sequence coverage will simply cause greater uncertainty in fst  and will mean that fst for the locus will be more similar to the prior expectation . in other words, for a locus to be an outlier or have a high fst there must be sufficient data for that locus for the likelihood  to overcome the prior .

we obtained highly congruent results from the two admixed populations and thus present mainly results from hv in the main text. full results for mr are provided in the additional materials.

genomic cline estimation
we implemented a bayesian genomic cline model that incorporates uncertainty in genotypic state inherent in next-generation sequence data
 <cit> , but is otherwise identical to the model described by
 <cit> . we estimated marginal posterior probability distributions for hybrid indexes and cline parameters  using mcmc. we ran five independent chains for  <dig>  steps each and recorded samples from the posterior distribution every 20th step following a  <dig>  step burn-in. we combined the output of the five chains after inspecting the mcmc output to assess convergence to the stationary distribution. significance of individual α values was assessed using 95% credible intervals. we detected very little variation in β and no loci departed significantly from a β value of zero. we thus present below only results for α.

comparative analyses
the zones of admixture we studied were geographically closer to la than to prc. if local adaptation varies relatively continuously along environmental gradients  and thus selects against foreign prc alleles in the admixture zones, we predict an excess of loci with elevated la ancestry , relative to those with elevated prc ancestry . we thus tested whether high-fst outlier loci between prc and la were more likely to have elevated la ancestry  than expected by chance in admixed populations. the genomic cline parameter α represents a deviation from the ancestry probability predicted solely from hybrid index and is constrained to sum to zero. thus, we used the expectation that 50% of outlier loci should have α >  <dig> as a null hypothesis. we tested for a significant deviation from this expectation based on a binomial probability distribution with pla =  <dig> . additionally, we obtained bayesian posterior estimates of the probability that fst outlier loci had estimates of α >  <dig> by specifying a binomial likelihood for the number of fst outlier loci with α >  <dig> and an uninformative beta prior on pla . we also conducted these analyses with all  <dig>  loci for comparison.

we used correlational analyses to test for relationships between locus-specific fst and locus specific absolute values of α. we used the empirical quantiles of the estimated fst and absolute α values to delimit different combinations of high and low values for these two parameters . for fst, we used the 95th quantile to determine loci with ‘low fst’ . for α, we are interested in extreme negative and positive values. therefore we used the  <dig> th and  <dig> th empirical quantiles .

RESULTS
genomic introgression
we observed substantial variation in genomic introgression . in hv,  <dig> loci out of  <dig>  had α values significantly greater than  <dig>  and  <dig> loci had α values significantly less than  <dig> . similarly, for mr  <dig> loci had α significantly greater than  <dig>  and  <dig> had α significantly less than zero . the relationship between locus-specific α values from the two different admixed populations was substantial . nonetheless, many loci had different α values between the two admixed populations, indicative of geographically variable genetic drift, genetic architecture, or selective regimes . we detected little variation in hybrid index within each admixed population. mean hybrid indices across loci were  <dig>   and  <dig>   for hv and mr, respectively.
 <dig> 
 <dig> for statistics.

directionality of α values
the fact that more loci with α values significantly different from zero were highly positive than highly negative provides the first indication that there was selection against foreign alleles in admixed populations. we conducted more explicit analyses examining this trend. we found that for high-fst outlier loci from the allopatric population pair there was a consistent and significant excess of highly positive α values relative to highly negative α values in the admixed populations . this means that there were many outlier loci with elevated la ancestry, and more so than loci with elevated prc ancestry.

outliers are designated at the 95% level and extreme outliers at the 99% level. see text and
 <cit>  for details.

see text for details.

relationship between  α and fst
here we focus on absolute levels of α because although loci with highly negative versus highly positive α values differ in their probability of la versus prc ancestry, both loci with highly negative and highly positive α values exhibit exceptional patterns of introgression in admixed populations. we detected a highly significant positive correlation between fst and absolute values of α , indicative of relationships between genetic differentiation, divergent selection, and reproductive isolation. however, many loci departed from this general relationship, and sometimes strongly so. we thus enumerated the frequency of different combinations of high and low fst and high and low  α values . at the 95% quantile level,  <dig> % of loci exhibited both highly positive  α and high fst values, as expected for regions differentiating between allopatric populations via divergent selection that also affect reproductive isolation in admixed populations. a substantial proportion of loci exhibited low  α despite high fst .

see text for further details.

discussion and 
CONCLUSIONS
when populations diverge in the face of gene flow, exceptionally differentiated genomic regions are often assumed to harbor genes undergoing reduced introgression whereas, in contrast, the remainder of the genome is homogenized by high introgression
 <cit> . however, a number of factors other than low introgression might affect differentiation
 <cit> , leading to regions that are highly differentiated but relatively incidental to the speciation process
 <cit> . thus, tests of the relationship between genetic divergence, selection, and introgression are required.

here we provided such a test and found some correspondence between locus-specific divergence and locus-specific introgression. specifically, we detected accentuated ancestry from either allopatric population for highly differentiated loci, consistent with such highly divergent regions contributing to reproductive isolation in the admixed populations. there are reasons to expect such correspondence in the system examined; population sizes are large, introgression in admixed populations is known, admixed populations are relatively old, and gene flow from allopatric populations into admixed populations is low
 <cit> . these are the conditions under which variation in introgression will more closely reflect locus-specific contributions to reproductive isolation, resulting in correspondence between locus-specific divergence and locus-specific introgression
 <cit> .

the observed correspondence between divergence and introgression is consistent with previous work in other systems documenting genomic islands of divergence
 <cit>  and with studies demonstrating that phenotypic traits contributing to divergent adaptation and reproductive isolation map to regions of the genome that are highly divergent between natural populations
 <cit> . however, correspondence between divergence and genomic introgression in our study was only partial, and we discuss the implications of this below. our results are consistent with a previous study in a butterfly that pioneered the approach we used here, and documented similar 
