BACKGROUND
the identity of each cell in a multicellular organism is determined by the unique gene-expression patterns of that cell type and is specified by a complex system characterised by intricate molecular circuits. within these networks, regulatory elements control and modulate rna and protein expression levels. the application of the systems biology approach holds great promise for the identification of the structure and dynamics of cellular pathways  <cit> , thus facilitating the understanding of the complexity associated with cellular functions. however, only a small part of these pathways has been characterised in such a way to enable them to be useful for mathematical modelling and predicting in vivo dynamics.

in recent years, the wide use of various high-throughput technologies has generated a large amount of data regarding the transcriptome and the proteome states of cells. part of these data is stored in publicly available databases, such as: the gene expression omnibus  <cit> , arrayexpress  <cit>  and the stanford microarray database   <cit>  that collect microarray experiments data; the human protein reference database   <cit>  and the biogrid  <cit>  that store protein-protein interaction  data. data collected in such resources can be integrated allowing the collection of different types of information that can be useful for strategies that aim to understand regulatory unit interactions and cellular pathways dynamics.

the comparison of gene expression profiles can be used to predict whether a number of genes are functionally related. the hypothesis is that if two genes have a similar expression profile across many biological samples then they may be functionally related. indeed, expression profile similarity in a large number of experimental conditions is an empirical evidence that the considered genes could establish some relations to determine cell functioning. the relationship can be the involvement in the same biological process or the physical interaction between proteins. hence, the analysis of the rna expression levels supported by the integration of ppi data helps the reconstruction of cellular pathways.

the co-expression analysis approach was recently applied to many human microarray datasets, revealing functionally coherent groups of genes  <cit>  and was used to create a database of co-expressed gene networks in mammals  <cit> . the measure of the similarity among pairs of expression profiles was based on the correlation, that permits the identification of a profile of similar shape regardless of the expression level. however, the application of co-expression analysis on datasets including samples generated with heterogeneous experimental conditions may cause some issues. in this context, it is important to adopt a strategy that considers subsets of samples. indeed, some of the collected samples may be not relevant for the pair of genes analysed because the genes may not be active in some sample types. moreover, two genes may be positively correlated in some conditions while negatively correlated in others.

in this work, we present a strategy based on data mining and data integration to identify genes functionally related to each other through a biological pathway or a physical interaction. the calculation of the similarity of gene expression values over a number of samples is coupled within an optimisation system that identifies the subsets of samples where the correlation between the expression profiles is the highest. the pipeline integrates data from the gene ontology  project  <cit>  and ppi databases in order to characterise the putative partners of the gene of interest and the type of relationship that they establish. we report the results of two applications of the presented methodology: one, for validation purposes, concerns pyruvate kinase , while the other is related to the prediction of the putative partners of the gene t-box  <dig> , a transcription factor with the t-box dna binding domain that is involved in the regulation of developmental processes.

RESULTS
coupling data mining and data integration for the identification of functionally related genes
the methodology, represented in figure  <dig>  takes as input a genes-by-samples expression matrix x, where the element xi, j is a measure of the gene i expression in the sample type j.

the first part of the procedure calculates the extent of the correlation between the expression profiles of the studied gene and all the other genes in x. the calculation of a gene pair correlation is coupled within the optimisation process. this procedure is based on a genetic algorithm that, for each gene pair, partitions the samples into three disjoint sets such that the set c+ contains the samples in which the correlation between the genes is positive, c- contains the samples in which the correlation is negative and c <dig> contains the samples in which there is no correlation. the first and the second sets can be empty but at least one of them must have a size larger than a predefined threshold ; the third group has a predefined limited size that represents the maximum number of samples that can be considered not relevant. subsequently, genes are ranked according to the correlation values that they exhibit with respect to the gene of interest. the strategy implements different ranking possibilities. indeed, it is possible  to focus the attention on the genes showing the highest positive or negative correlation,  to produce a unified list or  to consider the genes that show a dual behaviour, that is the genes that are positively correlated with the gene of interest in some samples and negatively correlated in other samples. the decision on how to do the ranking is left to the user since it is related to the specific case study.

once the ranking is done a number of top ranked genes are selected as input for the subsequent part of the analysis. regarding this selection, the set of genes within the first percentile constitutes a reasonable choice since its elements encode for proteins that are close to each other in the ppi network .

the analysis follows with the integration of the go terms and ppi data. go terms are used to provide a list of potential components, functions and processes that are significantly enriched in the selected genes. this task is accomplished comparing the distribution of the go terms among the selected genes with a reference distribution. in particular, the system searches for over- and under-represented terms. due to this calculation, it is possible to obtain an initial idea of the biological role of the studied gene.

ppi data are integrated from hprd and biogrid. the strategy builds the network by establishing the products of the selected genes along with their first neighbourhood in the ppi network . the system calculates the all-pairs shortest paths length between the proteins included in the considered network and their clustering coefficients. the shortest path between two nodes of a graph is the shortest way to walk from a node to the other following the connections between nodes; the length of the shortest path is the number of edges included in it. the clustering coefficient is a measure of the neighbourhood density of the considered node  <cit> . the information gained from the analysis of the shortest paths and clustering coefficients is used following the evidence that the shorter the distance between two proteins in the ppi network, the higher the probability that they have a similar function  <cit> . by the integration and analysis of ppi data the system determines, first of all, the subset of the functional relationships among the selected genes that are constituted by physical interactions between the encoded proteins. moreover, it provides a list of modules of interacting proteins encoded in a format that can be used as input for software like cytoscape  <cit>  that allows network visualisation and analysis. these modules contain proteins that are close in the ppi network, participate in the same biological processes and in some cases could represent protein complexes.

breast cancer case study: breast primary tumour expression data from smd
a dataset composed by breast cancer expression data was assembled using data available in the literature. indeed, we were interested in gaining some insight into the potential functional partners of the tbx <dig> protein in breast cancer or breast pathologies. in humans, mutations in tbx <dig> result in the ulnar-mammary syndrome , an autosomal dominant disease that is characterised by mammary gland hypoplasia and other congenital anomalies, suggesting that tbx <dig> is required for normal breast development  <cit> . in addition, tbx <dig> was found over-expressed in breast cancer tissues and cell lines  <cit> . therefore, since the level of expression of tbx <dig> is lower in non-cancer breast epithelial cells with respect to breast malignant cells, in order to identify genes co-regulated with tbx <dig> in breast cancer, we used expression data generated from breast primary tumour samples. the dataset was downloaded from smd and includes  <dig> samples  annotated in the database as breast primary tumours. data were retrieved as preprocessed log <dig> fold changes, representing expression variations with respect to the reference conditions used in the experiments in which samples were collected. in order to validate both the methodology and the considered dataset, the pipeline was applied to a gene of known function, pk. the protein encoded by this gene catalyses the transphosphorylation of phosphoenolpyruvate producing pyruvate and atp and it constitutes the last step of the glycolytic pathway.

genes within the top percentiles of the ranked lists are enriched in proteins that are near to each other in the ppi network
in order to empirically choose a subset of the ranked gene list produced after the optimisation process, we analysed the distribution of the ppi among the proteins encoded by the ranked genes. following the evidence that proteins that are near to each other in the ppi network have a similar function  <cit>  we expect that if the genes within the top percentiles of the list are composed by proteins functionally related we would find that the proteins that they encode are separated by a short distance in the ppi network. recently, it has been shown that the average distance of protein pairs in the human ppi network is  <dig>   <cit> . therefore, we considered a pair of proteins  to be near if d ≤  <dig> where d is the distance between  in the ppi network. we calculated the proportion of the protein pairs with d ≤  <dig> with respect to all the possible pairs in a chosen percentile. in both the applications of the presented strategy, we found that the portion of protein pairs that are near to each other in the ppi network is the highest in the first percentile and decreases considering the genes included in the subsequent percentiles, figure  <dig> 

this result has a dual implication. first, it constitutes a validation for the presented methodology, and in particular for the optimisation process that evaluates the expression similarity. indeed, its ranked output reproduces the evidence that functional similarity should correspond to closeness in the ppi network. second, the analysis of the trend of the portion of protein pairs that are close in the ppi network with respect to the percentiles of the ranked list enables one to choose a cutoff for the selection of the genes for subsequent analyses.

in both the cases of pk and tbx <dig>  the genes included in the first percentile were selected as the final gene list, since they exhibited the highest portion of proximal protein pairs.

pyruvate kinase functionally related genes
the output of the optimisation process  was ranked considering both positive and negative correlation coefficients. the analysis of the go term enrichment among the selected genes revealed that they are involved in metabolic processes, cell cycle and response to dna damage . the presence of genes that participate in metabolic processes is expected since pk has a key role in metabolism. moreover, it seems reasonable to find genes involved in cell cycle, considering that the dataset concerns breast cancer and proliferating tumour cells where expression of pk is crucial  <cit> . indeed, since highly proliferating cells require energy, glycolysis is a major pathway involved in energy production.

list of the most significant go terms that are over-represented among the genes identified to have an expression profile correlated with that of pk.

response to dna damage is a process that is tightly coupled with cell cycle. due to the unique nature of how some tumour cells grow in acute cycling and hypoxic conditions and that tumour cells have elevated rates of glucose uptake but reduced rates of oxidative phosphorylation, the unique cellular metabolism found in cancer cells may be correlated in part with the function of genes involved in dna damage response, for instance, brca <dig> which may have a role in regulating genetic instability in hypoxic cells  <cit> . in order to test for a potential biological role of genes positively and negatively correlated to pk, the go terms enrichment was evaluated separately in the two subsets . the analysis revealed that the positively correlated genes are mainly involved in metabolism, cell cycle and dna repair. this reflects the direct functional relationship among the processes listed above under tumour conditions. conversely, we found that the top ranked genes negatively correlated with pk are enriched in go terms related to "response to stimulus" and "immune system processes". it is well established that there is a relationship between cancer cells and the immune system for regulating tumour dormancy, tumour survival and tumour progression  <cit> . hence, the evidence of a relationship of negative correlation between pk and genes involved in immune system processes can be the consequence of the necessity to inhibit the immune system to allow cell growth.

however, it is important to consider that the rna used to generate the expression data in the analysed dataset was usually not derived from microdissected breast tumour cells. this implies that the rna of different cell types can be present in the samples used for analysis and, since these cells have not been excluded, it is possible that the reported functional relationships include genes that are specific of immune system cell types.

the integration and the analysis of the ppi established by the proteins encoded by the selected genes revealed a number of modules of interacting proteins. one of these , includes proteins with a role in dna replication and repair. all these proteins are encoded by genes that were reported to be positively correlated with pk.

globally, the results described above constitute another validation of the methodology that is successfully able to identify a subset of genes that share some functional relationships with the gene of interest under analysis.

prediction and experimental validation of tbx <dig> functional partners
the output of the optimisation process  was ranked considering both positive and negative correlation coefficients. the go terms distribution was studied to search overrepresented terms among the selected genes. the terms with the most significant p-values are associated with processes, functions and components that are consistent with some predicted biological roles of tbx <dig> . the  <dig> top ranked genes  are involved in transcription regulation with a particular role in developmental processes , in signal transduction  and in regulation of apoptosis . it seems reasonable that tbx <dig> could regulate a network of transcription factors, generating the amplification of its signal by activation or repression of a cascade of other genes involved in the control of dna transcription. another class of possible tbx <dig> targets is the group of genes involved in cell signalling and cell communication, like membrane proteins, g-coupled membrane receptor or signal transduction proteins, as prrt <dig> or rgl <dig>  and transport proteins, as sh3bp <dig>  in this class of genes, for instance, we reported a gene that encodes for a calcium dependent membrane protein, fstl <dig>  involved in the process of cellular adhesion. it is not surprising that tbx <dig> could control genes of the cell cycle or apoptosis, which are processes in the tumour development.

list of the most significant go terms that are over-represented among the genes identified to have an expression profile correlated with that of tbx <dig> 

the table lists the first twenty top ranked genes along with their normalised r' and raw r correlation coefficients. the asterisk  indicates the experimental validation of the predicted relationship.

also in the case of tbx <dig>  the genes found negatively correlated are enriched with go terms related to immune system processes. the interpretation of this correlation might be similar to that observed for pk in that the samples used for the analysed data set may not be derived from microdissected cells but may consist of several different cell types.

the integration and the analysis of ppi data revealed a number of modules of interacting proteins. one of these  includes proteins that have a role in immune system processes.

sequence based prediction and experimental validation of tbx <dig> transcription regulated targets
since tbx <dig> is a transcription factor, it is expected that a subset of highly correlated genes identified with the presented approach, could be tbx <dig> gene targets or protein co-factors. indeed, since correlation does not imply causation, tbx <dig> highly correlated genes are not necessarily tbx <dig> direct targets.

in order to find the tbx <dig> regulated targets, an independent computational analysis was carried out to identify the tbx <dig> transcription factor binding sites  on the genome. the analysis was done using rexspecies  <cit> , a tool that analyses sequences using data from multiple species.

we found that  <dig> genes within the top ten ranked genes after the optimisation process have the tbx <dig> tfbs upstream to their gene transcription start site. they are gata binding protein  <dig> , the top ranked gene, and gli-kruppel family member  <dig> , table  <dig> 

these two genes have not been previously described to be targets of tbx <dig> . the two putative tbx <dig> targets where validated using formaldehyde-mediated dna-protein crosslinking  <cit> . dna-protein interactions can be probed in vivo using an approach whereby dna-bound proteins are first cross-linked to the dna by treatment with formaldehyde that results in instantaneous formation of cross-linked networks, preventing transient redistribution of the cellular components. the formaldehyde-crosslinked chromatin is sonicated to introduce random and limited breakage. then the dna-bound protein region of the chromosome can be enriched for by immunoprecipitation with specific antibodies. the protein bound dna regions can then be amplified and thereby validated with the use of specific primers designed to encompass the putative tbx <dig> protein binding site. this type of analysis can be used to identify putative tbx <dig> protein interaction regulatory regions and enhancer sequences on chromatin that modulate cell function  <cit> . this assay was performed using two different cell lines, the la <dig> cell line  <cit>  and a well known human breast cancer cell line, bt <dig>  primer pairs were selected to amplify beta-actin which was used as a negative control for both cell lines , and gata <dig>  or gli-kruppel family member   regions containing the potential binding sites for tbx <dig> protein. as figure  <dig> shows, we performed pcr amplification on total genomic dna as a positive control of the pcr products ; in the pcr on pre-immune  sera, no band was amplified as expected by the fact that chromatin should not be precipitated by the pi sera . pcr on the chromatin dna immuno-precipitated with tbx <dig> antibody confirmed that tbx <dig> protein binds in vivo to gli <dig> and gata <dig> in la <dig> cells. and gli <dig> in bt <dig> cells .

CONCLUSIONS
the presented methodology identifies functionally related genes analysing a large dataset of microarray experiments and integrating data from literature. during the evaluation of a pair of expression profiles the system identifies the sample subsets where the correlation is the highest. this feature is important especially when the datasets consist of a large number of samples collected in different experimental conditions, since the pool of active biological processes depends on these conditions and hence not all the samples can be useful for the expression similarity calculation.

a dataset containing primary breast cancer expression data was assembled from the literature and used to search genes functionally related to a gene of known function, pk, and for the prediction of tbx <dig> functional partners. in both cases the methodology found a number of genes that share functional relationships with the gene under analysis. the integration of ppi data provided a validation of the results, confirming that genes ranked within the top percentiles encode proteins that are close in the ppi network, an evidence of functional relationship. moreover, the analysis of ppi data enabled the identification of interacting protein modules among the putative partners of the gene of interest. in order to prove the prediction of the methodology concerning the tbx <dig> gene, we used a combination of chromatin immunoprecipitation  and polymerase chain reaction  analysis, a technique that is used to validate in vivo dna-binding protein locations on chromatin dna. the cell-type-specific transcription program is controlled by the availability of a set of transcription factors and the accessibility of their target sites in the chromatin. target-site accessibility is modulated by multiple factors, including dna methylation and histone modifications. by this technique we validated two main tbx <dig> target genes, gli <dig> and gata <dig>  gata <dig> is one member of a transcription factor family that plays an essential role in the specification of and maintenance of differentiated cell types, in particular in mammary gland differentiation  and in breast cancer has emerged as a strong predictor in tumour differentiation  <cit> . it is not thus surprising that the transcription factor tbx <dig>  <cit> , being involved in tumour progression, could control the gata <dig> transcription factor. it has already been reported a clear role for gli <dig> transcription factors in the normal mouse mammary gland development  <cit>  and gli <dig> may have a particular role in the breast cancer metastasis to bone in vivo  <cit>  as gl <dig> is involved in mediating epithelial-stromal tissue interaction  <cit> .

in conclusion, the presented strategy is demonstrated to be a useful tool to mine large datasets available in the literature in order to identify functional and physical relationships established by the gene of interest and to characterise its biological role starting from the study of the available information related to its predicted partners.

