BACKGROUND
data mining approaches have found applications in many knowledge discovery domains, including biological research and clinical medicine  <cit> . within data mining developments over the past twenty years, decision tree  learning models have received considerable attention. decision trees are popular for several reasons, for example, the capacity to model complex relationships with logical rules. as negevitzky   <cit>  points out, they are also simple, easy to understand, and can be constructed relatively quickly.

in general, learning models are multi-stage decision processes that start with an initial set of datasets, which consists of various observations or cases for which a known class label has been assigned. in each dataset, segmentation algorithms look at known facts stored in a knowledge base and perform a series of tests in a specific order. at each stage of this process a decision is made and some records are separated into subsets with greater purity in terms of the class membership. this process usually continues until no more rules can be found or some stopping criterion is fulfilled. a decision tree model is a specific example of a learning model, and is represented by a tree structure. the tree structure consists of nodes, non-leaf nodes and branches. the non-leaf nodes represent the attributes and leaf nodes represent the values of the attribute to be classified.

such learning models were applied to abundant diagnostic pathology laboratory data resulting from the testing of patients suspected of infection by either hepatitis b virus  or hepatitis c virus . such data has not been extensively mined for patterns to advance predictions for laboratory diagnoses. pathology data presents special challenges for investigators, including data imbalance for particular responses or predictors, and high individual patient data variation that makes both pattern recognition and rule detection difficult. pathology data is similar worldwide, and therefore efficient analysis of such data is of wide interest to the clinical professions for enhanced laboratory diagnoses.

the immunoassay marker examined for hbv infection was hepatitis b surface antigen , and for hcv a polyclonal anti-hcv antibody response . as well as the specific immunoassay data, case-associated routine diagnostic pathology variables were included in the pattern recognition analyses . both hbv and hcv are of widespread health significance as leading causes of liver disease worldwide  <cit> , and responses to hbv or hcv infection as reflected by routine pathology variables, such as liver function test enzyme profiles , are crucial to diagnosis and treatment monitoring. we demonstrate that the choice of key characteristics of data and decision tree algorithms can improve the sensitivity and specificity of diagnostic laboratory decision-making , encouraging other pathology laboratories to conduct similar experiments on appropriate data.

u/l units per litre, g/l grams/litre, pg picograms, fl femtolitres.

in this study we describe an empirical investigation of immunoassay results  and associated routine pathology data , which featured significantly more negative than positive hbv or hcv cases, by constructing single decision trees and ensembles  <cit> , and using different data pre-processing techniques on the aggregated pathology data. the aim of the study was to use the resulting trees for the enhanced laboratory diagnosis of hepatitis virus infection, by exploiting the range of multi-variable pathology laboratory data associated with direct virus immunoassay testing. to achieve this aim we interrogated a data set of  <dig> records from  <dig> –  <dig> made available by act pathology at the canberra hospital, act australia.

RESULTS
single decision tree
table  <dig> shows that for negative hbsa and negative hepc predictions based on a single tree, derived from routine pathology test explanatory variables , the “basic single” approach was extremely effective . this is associated with the large sample set available for patients who tested negative to hbv or hcv. for positive hbsa and hepc cases, where patient sample size was limited , the basic single approach was very poor at predicting a positive hbsa , but improved for predicting a positive hepc result, most likely a result of the 3-fold larger sample size. . for both positive hbsa and hepc cases, the maximum accuracy rates of approximately 65% were achieved though applying the “matched single” approach of data pre-processing. for positive cases, matched single pre-processing was significantly superior to the other data selection option tested, bootstrap single. interestingly, prediction accuracy rates were reduced significantly for hbsa and hepc negative cases after bootstrap single pre-processing, with matched single processing further reducing the accuracy rates compared to the other methods. a representative decision tree from the above described single tree analysis is shown in figure  <dig> 

see software methods for sensitivity and specificity calculations, and phase  <dig> methods for descriptions of the decision tree analyses.

ensemble analysis
to augment the prediction capacity of decision trees, decision tree ensembles can be constructed with the average of the multiple tree results used for accuracy prediction. another advantage of this approach is that the relative importance of each explanatory variable used in the model can be estimated due to the average frequency of its appearance across the multiple trees comprising the ensemble .

for the basic multiple approach , the accuracy rates achieved for the prediction of positive hbsa were approximately 60%, which is lower than the rates achieved using a single tree with matched single pre-processing . the best result overall was found for positive hepc  using scaled data, but this results was <  <dig> % different from the other positive hepc basic multiple results . there was no need to scale and/or log the data prior to predicting positive hbsa. the raw result  was  <dig> % superior to the various scaling and log pre-processing. for the basic multiple method, prior data scaling and/or log transformation had a negligible effect on prediction accuracy over that found for non-transformed raw data. for the prediction of negative hbsa or hepc, basic single and bootstrap single methods for single decision trees were vastly superior compared to basic multiple ensemble decision trees.

methods employed were  basic multiple,  majority multiple and  clear negative analyses . prior to accuracy analysis, explanatory variables were subject to one of four pre-processing methods: none , scaling, logging and scale-logging. scaling sets the range of each explanatory variable to a common range of  <dig> –  <dig>  logging uses natural logarithm transformation. scale-logging uses a common range of  <dig> –  <dig> then takes the natural logarithm.

majority multiple pre-processing  found that the prediction of a negative virus infection result was superior for hbsa compared to hepc. for negative hbsa and hepc, scale and/or log transformation did not improve the performance of this prediction model, and again basic single and bootstrap single decision tree methods were superior . for the prediction of positive hbsa or hepc results, prior scaling and/or log transformation did not improve percent accuracy beyond the results for raw, non-preprocessed data. however, this method did improve the results of single decision tree basic single and bootstrap single methods . for positive hepc prediction, ensemble trees produced from non-preprocessed data , scale, log and scale-log pre-processing methods produced similar prediction accuracy rates as a single tree, matched single method.

finally, the clear negative method produced the best prediction accuracy for positive hbsa  and hepc  for decision tree ensembles . these results were also superior to matched single pre-processing for single decision trees . for hbsa prediction from routine pathology data by a single decision tree, log or scale-log transformation were the best methods, while for hepc positive data scaling produced the best results, but only marginally higher compared to the raw  data . for negative hepc predictions by this method, with or without prior data transformation or processing, predictions were poor at  <dig> – 37%. likewise, negative hbsa prediction was also poor with accuracy rates of  <dig> % for raw or scale methods and  <dig> % for log alone or scale-log methods for decision tree ensembles. the basic single decision tree  was clearly the best methods for negative hbsa and hepc prediction.

across the  <dig> experiments using ensemble classifiers, the best mean accuracy rate was obtained for positive hepc, using the clear negative method on scaled data. the results of the analysis of variance of the mean accuracy rates further explore the interactions of importance to these results .

the experiment examines interactions affecting the prediction of hbsa and hepc immunoassay outcome.

 = significant at  <dig>  level.

method = basic single, basic multiple, majority multiple or clear negative.

pre-processing = none, log, scale, or scale-log.

virus = hepatitis b or hepatitis c.

outcome = positive or negative.

method.outcome = the interaction between method and outcome; other interactions between pairs of variables to be interpreted similarly.

analysis of variance
the analysis of variance  shows that accuracy rate depends on outcome . positive cases have a higher accuracy rate on average than negative. there is also a significant interaction between method  and outcome . majority multiple does better on average at predicting negatives, whereas the other two methods perform better on average at predicting positives. the other significant interaction is between virus type  and outcome . while hepc positive status leads to higher accuracy rates on average, the reverse is true for hbsa. since basic multiple and majority multiple methods produce  <dig> and  <dig> accuracy rates respectively, our results include boxplots of the range of accuracy rates for those methods across the two viruses and two outcomes . figures  <dig> and  <dig> summarise results only for the scale method of pre-processing, since that was found to be the most successful experiment . the other pre-processing results are similar, which are confirmed by the non-significant effect of pre-processing in the analysis of variance in table  <dig> 

the location of each mean accuracy rate shown in the centre of the boxplot is confirmed by the figures in the “scale” column of table  <dig>  the spread of the accuracy rates is slightly larger for positive outcomes compared to negative outcomes. this strengthens the significant effect of outcome on accuracy rate found in the analysis of variance above. there is not much difference in the accuracy rate distributions for the two viruses, which also strengthens the non-significant effect of virus on accuracy rate found in the analysis of variance .

discussion
infection by hepatitis b virus  or hepatitis c virus  are significant agents of acute and chronic hepatitis world-wide, and leading causes of liver cancer and cirrhosis. prevalence rates can vary widely between different countries; for example, hbv carrier prevalence within europe ranges from  <dig>  to  <dig> % and hcv from  <dig>  to  <dig> %  <cit> . the health impact of hbv worldwide is substantial with  <dig> billion cases of infection,  <dig> million cases of chronic infection and  <dig>  deaths each year associated with liver carcinoma or other hbv-induced liver disease  <cit> . based on who estimates from  <dig>  worldwide hcv prevalence was around  <dig> %, with approximately  <dig> million people affected by hcv disease. due to prolonged disease latency post hcv infection, prevalence rates are difficult to calculate, so the quoted rates may be underestimated  <cit> .

primary diagnosis of hbv or hcv, and subsequent monitoring of infection, relies significantly on immunoassay techniques available via pathology departments to detect hepatitis b virus surface antigen , or patient anti-hcv antibodies  associated with previous infection. within the suite of immunoassay markers available for hbv detection, hbsa was chosen since it is a common hbv screening test and is elevated relatively soon after infection . for all analyses, hbsa or hepc were used as the respective response variables in the single and ensemble decision tree methods. the explanatory variables used for all analyses comprised a range of other routine pathology tests run simultaneously with the hbv or hcv immunoassay on the same serum samples. these additional tests reflect a number of physiological functions that are potentially perturbed by infection and illness, including liver function, kidney function, presence of anaemia and infection or allergy . judgments based on the linear reference ranges decided by the laboratory for individual assay results assist in both primary diagnosis and subsequent monitoring of disease or infection, if present.

given the extensive range of biochemical, cellular and physiological data available associated with hbv or hcv immunoassay via simultaneously collected routine pathology laboratory results, a pattern recognition approach beckons to reveal data patterns that reflect both the presence of hbv/hcv infection, as well as infection persistence and severity . to address this opportunity, single decision trees and tree ensembles were employed. a tree ensemble consists of several individually trained trees that are jointly used to solve a problem. given the over-representation of negative cases in both the hbv and hcv data, tree ensembles can give a significant improvement in prediction accuracy over a single classifier. generally, constructing ensembles consists of two phases, a training phase and a combining phase  <cit> .

in the training phase, several techniques to cope with the imbalanced nature of the data were explored. one popular method for balancing a training set is bootstrapping  <cit> . this technique generates a training set using random drawing  from the original training set. consequently, in every new training set there are data points that appear more than once while others do not appear at all. bootstrapping is an effective technique for improving a classifier with poor performance, especially where a classifier has been presented with a small training sample set or training set with misleading data points. a second method involves downsizing the large class either at random or at “focused” random  <cit> . training sets were produced using a subset of the negative individuals, as there are many more negatives than positives in both the hbv and hcv data sets.

in the combining phase, we have chosen to use a majority voting strategy to combine predictions of the component classifiers. in majority voting each component classifier votes for a category, and the category with the majority of votes defines the ensemble category. the best approach for negative hbsa and hepc data accuracy was the “basic single” method  due to the size of these datasets.

for smaller datasets, as found for both hbsa and hepc positive cohorts, other methods were required to achieve high predictive accuracy based on associated routine pathology data . furthermore, the “clear negative” method, which used other pathology data  to give the most certain true negative cohort, was very effective. for this method, patient data with hbsa <  <dig>  and alt <  <dig> u/l were considered to be “clear negative” for hbv. we also considered patient data with hepc ≤  <dig>  as “clear negative” for hcv. such combining of diverse pathology data to increase the probability of a correct true negative or true positive detection is particularly crucial in the context of blood transfusion, where the accidental transmission of infectious agents must be avoided  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
this study examined the effect of data characteristics on decision trees used to predict hbv or hcv infection status, as detected by specific immunoassay. improved understanding of the behaviour of such techniques will lead to the better definition of patient groups that display different data patterns associated with hbv or hcv infection, and hence demonstrate a different physiological response as defined by biochemical and cellular responses to infection, determined by routine pathology blood tests. once rules are determined via data mining, patient profiles can be designed that will guide molecular genetic studies on the biological basis of disease resistance or susceptibility, with the shorter term benefit of enhancing the laboratory diagnosis and monitoring of hepatitis virus infection through combined data rules, particularly for data sets with few positive cases. this study focused on interactions between aspects of the data and its pre-processing that allow decision trees to generate effective rules, which model hepatitis virus infection, derived from routine blood test data that assesses liver and kidney function, as well as a range of markers that explore red and white blood cell function.

