BACKGROUND
alzheimer’s disease  is a progressive neurodegenerative disease involving multiple pathologic processes and is characterized by the deposition of amyloid beta  peptide, neurofibrillary tangles  composed of hyperphosphorylated protein tau, and neuronal cell death  <cit> . recent studies indicate that epigenetic pathways could be involved in the pathogenesis of ad  <cit> . dna methylation  plays important roles in regulating gene expression and is involved in multiple neurodevelopmental and neurodegenerative disorders .

changes in 5mc at the global level or at specific loci are seen in the brain tissues of ad model mice, as well as ad patients . although some regions and loci show hypermethylation  <cit> , global dna hypomethylation has been observed in the entorhinal cortex of some ad patients  <cit> , suggesting dna methylation is differentially affected in a region- and loci-specific manner. previous studies also found that the promoter regions of amyloid precursor protein  and presenilin  <dig>  displayed age-dependent hypomethylation . furthermore, in vitro hypomethylation of psen <dig> increased the cleavage of app and the production of aβ in a neuroblastoma cell line  <cit> . recently, two large-scale epigenome-wide association studies uncovered the alteration of site-specific methylation in the brains of ad patients  <cit> . these results imply dna methylation could play important roles in the pathogenesis of ad.

recently, another cytosine modification, 5-hydroxymethylcytosine , was identified and found to be highly abundant in the neuronal system . ten-eleven translocation  family proteins, including tet <dig>  tet <dig>  and tet <dig>  are known to catalyze the hydroxylation of 5mc to 5hmc . recent studies strongly indicate that 5hmc not only serves as an intermediate of dna demethylation, but can also perform as a stable epigenetic marker. 5hmc is ~10-fold more enriched in neurons than other cell types, and it is acquired globally and exhibits dynamic features and region-specific patterns during postnatal development and aging of the neuronal system  <cit> . genome-wide studies reveal that 5hmc can be enriched in distinct genomic regions, such as gene bodies, promoters, and distal regulatory regions , and the enrichment of 5hmc ate gene bodies could be positively correlated with transcriptional level, which might be achieved via interaction with histone modifications . the alteration of global 5hmc and differentially hydroxymethylated regions  are seen in several neurodevelopmental diseases, including rett syndrome, autism, and neurodegenerative diseases like huntington’s disease and fragile x-associated tremor/ataxia syndrome , suggesting 5hmc could play important roles in neurological diseases .

despite the clear alteration of dna methylation observed in ad, whether and how 5hmc is involved in ad pathogenesis still remain largely unknown. using an immunostaining method, condliffe et al. found a significant decrease of global 5hmc in the cortex and cerebellum of ad patients  <cit> . in contrast, using the same technique, other studies reported an increase of global 5hmc in both ad mouse model and patients samples . to study the alteration of 5hmc in ad and explore the potential role of 5hmc-mediated epigenetic regulation in the pathogenesis of ad, here we investigated the effect of aβ on 5hmc in vitro and found aβ treatment could significantly decrease the level of 5hmc in a dose-dependent pattern. furthermore, we found that 5hmc levels displayed an age-dependent decrease in the hippocampus, but not in the cortex and cerebellum, of app-psen <dig> double-transgenic  mice. using a chemical-labeling 5hmc enrichment approach, we performed genome-wide profiling of 5hmc. we found that, although ad pathogenesis did not change the overall distribution of 5hmc, there were differentially hydroxymethylated regions  in dtg mice. the dhmrs identified are involved in a number of neuronal signaling pathways, indicating a 5hmc-mediated epigenetic pathway could potentially play important roles in the pathogenesis of ad.

RESULTS
aβ reduces the global level of 5-hydroxymethylcytosine in vitro
aβ deposition is one of the hallmarks of ad pathogenesis, and is known to induce neuronal cell death and other neuronal pathogenic outcomes. to study the roles of 5-hydroxymethylcytosine -mediated epigenetic modification in ad pathogenesis, we first studied the effect of aβ, a toxic form of peptide associated with ad, on the level of 5hmc with cultured cells. after being treated with aβ peptide for 48 h, the overall level of 5hmc in hek293ft cells decreased, and aβ peptide at a 1-μm concentration was the most effective dose . to ensure equal spotting of total dna on the membrane, the same blot was then stained with  <dig>  % methylene blue .fig.  <dig> the effects of aβ peptide on 5hmc level in vitro. a-b dot-blot assay shows aβ treatment significantly decreased total 5hmc levels in a dose-dependent manner in hek293ft cells. aβ at 1-μm concentration is the most effective at decreasing 5hmc levels . c-f the cultured anscs are positive for neural stem cell markers nestin  and sox <dig> . g the representative images of dot-blot assay of aβ treatment on 5hmc level in anscs. h the quantification result indicates aβ at 1-μm concentration significantly decreases 5hmc level in anscs . i-j dot-blot assay indicates that the global level of 5hmc in cortex is significantly higher than in hek293ft cells and anscs 



considering cognitive function is severely impaired and the roles of adult neurogenesis in learning and memory, we further tested the effect of aβ peptide on 5hmc levels in adult neural stem cells . anscs harbors in specific regions, subventricular zone of lateral ventricle and subgranular zone of dentate gyrus of adult mammalian brain, and is involved in neurological disorders including ad. the isolated anscs were positive for neural stem cell markers nestin and sox <dig> . after treated with aβ peptide at a 1-μm concentration for 48 h, the level of 5hmc was also significantly decreased in the cultured anscs . we also compared the overall level of 5hmc in hek293ft cells, anscs and neuronal tissues. we found that 5hmc level was significantly higher in neuronal tissues than in hek293ft and anscs cells, which both are capable of proliferation . taken together, these results indicate that aβ peptide could significantly affect the level of 5hmc in multiple cultured cells.

5-hydroxymethylcytosine level decreases during aging in an ad mouse model
previous studies have indicated that 5hmc could be acquired in the brain during postnatal development and aging  <cit> . to examine whether the level of 5hmc is affected during ad pathogenesis, we dissected multiple brain regions, including cortex, cerebellum, and hippocampus from 12-week-old  and 67-week-old  wild-type  and app-psen <dig> double transgenic  mice. consistent with our previous study  <cit> , from 12 weeks to 67 weeks, 5hmc exhibits no or slight acquisition in the cortex and cerebellum of both wt and dtg mice . quantification results showed no significant difference of these brain two regions between wt and dtg mice . in hippocampus, there is no significant change in 5hmc in wt mice during aging; however, at the 67-week time point, the 5hmc level of dtg mice hippocampus decreased significantly compared to age-matched wt control . collectively, these results indicate that the global level of 5hmc is affected in specific brain regions during ad pathogenesis.fig.  <dig> reduced 5hmc level at specific brain regions in a mouse model of ad. a-f representative images of 5hmc dot-blot assay of 12- and 67-week-old wt and dtg mice cortex , cerebellum , and hippocampus . g-i the quantitative results indicated that the global levels of 5hmc did not show significant difference in cortex and cerebellum of wt and dtg mice . in hippocampus, the overall abundance of 5hmc was significantly decreased in dtg mice compared to wt mice at 67-week stage while it did not show observable difference between wt and dtg mice at 12-week stage . 



acquisition of 5hmc on gene bodies is altered in aged ad mice
to explore whether the distribution features of 5hmc in the genome are altered during ad pathogenesis, we employed a previously established 5hmc chemical labeling and affinity purification method  <cit>  and performed 5hmc genome-wide profiling. based on dot-blot results, our subsequent study focused on hippocampus. to perform genome-wide sequencing of 5hmc, hippocampus tissues were dissected from three adult  dtg mice and three littermate wt mice; at the 67-week time point , hippocampus tissues were dissected from two dtg mice and two wt littermate mice. through deep-sequencing, 11– <dig> million total reads and around 9– <dig> million monoclonal reads were generated from each sample . sequence data were analyzed using our established pipeline  <cit> , and peaks were identified by macs software  <cit> .  <dig> and  <dig> 5hmc peaks were called from adult wt and dtg mice, respectively . at the 67-week time point,  <dig>  and  <dig>  peaks were identified from wt and dtg mice, respectively . although during the aging process, ad pathogenesis did not significantly affect the shared peaks between adult and aged mice of each genotype:  <dig> peaks were shared between adult and aged wt mice, and  <dig> peaks were shared between adult and aged dtg mice, the number of total peaks decreased remarkably in aged dtg mice compared to wt littermates. . at the chromosome level, there was no visible difference between wt and dtg mice . consistent with our previous work  <cit> , depletion of 5hmc on the x chromosome was also observed in both wt and dtg mice .fig.  <dig> genomic features of 5hmc peaks in hippocampus between wt and dtg mice. a-b  <dig>   <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig>  of 5hmc peaks were called from 12- and 67-week-old wt and age-matched dtg mice biological replicates, respectively.  <dig> peaks overlapped between 12- and 67-week-old wt mice.  <dig> peaks overlapped between 12- and 67-week-old dtg mice.  <dig> peaks overlapped between 12-week-old wt and dtg mice.  <dig>  peaks overlapped between 67-week-old wt and dtg mice. c genome-wide 5hmc reads were counted within each 10-kb bin in wt_ <dig> wk and dtg_12wk mice genome. 5hmc levels were not significantly different between adult wt and dtg mice. d genome-wide 5hmc reads densities were higher in wt mice than in dtg mice. e, f, g and h normalized 5hmc read densities on transcription end sites , transcription start sites , gene bodies, and cpg islands. the enrichment of 5hmc significantly decreased in adult and aged dtg mice compared to age matched wt mice, but no significant difference was observed at tss, tes, and cpg islands. t-test, p <  <dig> 



we next determined the distribution of 5hmc on distinct genomic regions. genome-wide 5hmc read density was detected in the dtg mouse model . at the 12-week point, we saw no significant difference between wt and dtg mice . however, until the 67-week point, the shifted entire plot pattern suggested that wt bins had more 5hmc reads . furthermore, the distribution of 5hmc was studied at  <dig>  kb up- and downstream of transcription end sites , transcription starting sites , gene bodies, and cpg islands by ngs-plot software . we found that the distribution of 5hmc showed no observable differences on tess and cpg islands between wt and dtg mice , whereas it was slightly increased on tsss in wt mice compared to age-matched dtg mice . from the 12-week to 67-week time point, 5hmc was acquired on gene bodies in both wt and dtg mice , however, at 12- and 67-week time points, the enrichment of 5hmc in gene bodies showed a significant decrease in dtg mice compared to age-matched wt mice , suggesting the acquisition of 5hmc in gene bodies was inhibited during ad pathogenesis.

differential hydroxymethylated regions  associated with ad
the partial overlapping of 5hmc peaks in wt and transgenic mice suggested differential hydroxymethylation. we next sought to identify differential hydroxymethylation regions  in the genome. compared to age-matched wt mice,  <dig> and  <dig> specific dhmrs were identified in adult and aged dtg mice, respectively . among them,  <dig> specific dhmrs were shared between adult and aged dtg mice, which did not appear in either adult or aged wt mice . the dhmrs identified in adult and aged dtg mice displayed similar distribution trend: abundantly enriching in intron, exon and intergenic regions , suggesting a high conservation during ad progress.fig.  <dig> identification and characterization of dhmrs in ad mouse model. a compared to age-matched wt mice,  <dig> and  <dig> dhmrs were identified from adult and aged dtg-specific mice, respectively.  <dig> specific dhmrs were shared between adult and aged dtg mice, which did not exist either in adult or aged wt mice. b the distribution features of dhmrs identified in adult and aged dtg mice, respectively. dhmrs highly enrich in introns, exons and intergenic regions. pearson’s chi-squared test with yates’ continuity correction was performed using their absolute mapped reads inside and outside of each genomic feature. p-values for these tests were significant . c kegg assay shows dhmr-associated genes are significantly enriched in multiple neuronal signaling pathways. d kegg assay indicates aged mice specific dhmrs-associated genes are also significantly enriched in multiple pathways, including alzheimer’s disease



to further reveal the biological function of identified dhmrs in both adult and aged dtg mice, the genes associated with these dhmrs were extracted for enrichment analysis. we found  <dig> genes associating with the identified dtg-specific dhmrs . dhmr-associated genes were highly enriched in multiple signaling pathways, such as the wnt and erbb pathways, which play important roles in the neuronal system . furthermore, we generated  <dig> aged dtg mice-specific peaks, and extracted  <dig> genes, which associated with those peaks . gene ontology assay showed that those genes significantly enriched in some pathways, such as alzheimer’s disease pathway, wnt signalling, etc. . taken together, these results suggest that the specific enrichment of 5hmc could play some role in regulating the expression of genes related neuronal function, and involve in the pathogenesis of alzheimer’s disease.

two recent large-scale studies identified alterations of dna methylation in some loci of ad patients  <cit> , suggesting dna demethylation might be involved in this process. an igv image showed the overall reduction of 5hmc peaks in aged dtg mice compared to age matched wt mice . interestingly, in dtg mice specific and aged dtg mice specific peaks associated genes identified in our current study, two genes are also found in the two ewas ad studies: ank <dig>  cdh <dig> . we next examined the 5hmc distribution profile of the genes identified in those two ewas studies, and we found the enrichment of 5hmc peaks in some regions of those genes decreased . these data suggest dna methylation is altered in ad associated loci, and the potential roles of dna demethylation in the pathogenesis of ad.fig.  <dig> identification and characterization of dhmrs in ad mouse model. a a representative igv image shows the reduction of overall 5hmc in aged dtg mice compared to wt mice and adult dtg mice. b-c representative igv images show the decrease of 5hmc in some genomic regions of ank <dig> and cdh <dig>  d 5hmc highly enriched in the gene body of app gene in adult and aged dtg mice compared to wt mice. macs software default statistic test, p-value cutoff: 1x10−5




previous studies also noted that the enrichment of 5hmc in gene bodies might be positively correlated with gene expression  <cit> . in our ad model mice, two ad-associated genes, app and psen <dig>  were over-expressed. we found 5hmc peaks highly enriched in app gene bodies, especially in exons, in both adult and aged dtg mice compared to wt mice . it is of interest to note that we did not see significant difference of 5hmc distribution in psen <dig>  these data indicated that 5hmc enrichment could be one of the mechanisms promoting gene expression.

discussion
in the present study, we performed in vitro and in vivo studies to characterize the alterations of 5hmc-mediated dna demethylation in a mouse model of ad. we found the overall level of 5hmc is significantly higher in brain tissues than in cell lines and adult neural stem cells. ad pathogenic protein amyloid peptide led to a decrease of global 5hmc in cultured cells. our in vivo study also found the level of 5hmc decreased in one specific brain region, i.e., the hippocampus, but not other studied brain regions of ad mice during the pathogenesis of ad. genome-wide profiling results indicated that the distribution of 5hmc altered in distinct genomic regions, especially in gene bodies. the differentially hydroxymethylated regions  identified in hippocampus of aged d-tg mice displayed high enrichment of multiple signaling pathways that are related to neuronal development and neuronal function. some ad-associated genes showed altered hydroxymethylation. our study therefore uncovered new roles for 5hmc-mediated epigenetic modification in neurologic disorders and revealed a new layer of the pathogenic mechanism of ad.

global and site-specific alterations of dna methylation had been identified in ad . epigenome-wide association with ad revealed the relationship between differential methylation of cpgs and the expression of nearby genes, some of which are connected to a known ad susceptibility network  <cit> . previous studies had inconsistently reported about the alteration of dna demethylation . in our present study, aβ treatment led to a significant decrease in global 5hmc level of different types of cells in vitro. the significant alteration of demethyaltion was only observed in hippocampus but not in cortex and cerebellum during the ageing of ad model mice, suggesting the alteration of demethylation is region specific, which might explain the data contradiction between different studies. considering the acquired aβ deposition during the ageing of ad model mice, these results indicated the increased aβ deposition decreased overall 5hmc level. together with previous studies, it supports the idea that dysregulation of dna demethylation is age- and region/loci specific, indicating an interaction between amyloid accumulation and dna modification.

previous studies have found 5hmc is highly enriched in the neuronal system  <cit> , and the enrichment is enhanced and displays dynamic features during postnatal development and aging of the brain  <cit> , indicating 5hmc could be important for brain function. subsequent studies did find that 5hmc-mediated epigenetic modification is involved in multiple neurological disorders, including autism spectrum disorders, huntington’s disease, and fxtas  <cit> . moreover, the rett syndrome protein mecp <dig> could bind to 5hmc, and its dosage is negatively correlated with 5hmc level  <cit> . our present results revealed that the overall distribution features of 5hmc in tsss, tess, and cpg islands did not change, but the enrichment of 5hmc in gene bodies was significantly decreased compared with age-matched wt mice. previous research found that the 5hmc level in gene bodies is positively correlated with gene expression  <cit> . our results that the highly enrichment of 5hmc in the gene body of app further supports this concept. considering no observable difference of 5hmc in another overexpressed gene psen <dig>  it suggests that 5hmc enrichment in gene body is one but all of mechanisms to modulate gene expression. further, our present studies identified some dhmr-associated genes enriched in multiple signaling pathways that are related to neuronal function and neurological disorders  <cit> . these results suggest a potential mechanism to explain how 5hmc-mediated epigenetic modification functions.

our present studies also uncovered altered demethylation in some specific loci in aged d-tg mice, and some loci were related with the onset and progress of ad. interestingly, the loci with altered dna demethylation identified in our study were also found displaying altered dna methylation profile by two large-scale studies in human  <cit> . although our present and these two studies mainly provided the relevant evidence, all these results suggest dna methylation and demethylation changes are involved in ad. further experimental work needs to be conducted to address the mechanism how altered dna methylation and demethylation affect the onset and pathogenesis of ad.

CONCLUSIONS
overall, our results indicate that not only is the global level but also the distribution features of 5hmc altered in ad model mice. aβ treatment decreased 5hmc both in vitro and in vivo. the acquisition of 5hmc in gene bodies during postnatal development was significantly inhibited in the hippocampus of ad model mice, although the overall features in tsss, tess, and cpg islands were unaffected. the dhmr-associated genes identified in ad mice are specifically related to some signaling pathways that play a role in neuronal function and neurological disorders. taken together, our present results argue that 5hmc-mediated epigenetic modification could have an important function in ad.

