BACKGROUND
vertebrate mitochondrial  genomes have been the subject of many studies of phylogeny and evolutionary genetics and genomics, by virtue of characteristics such as their manageable size and generally conserved gene content and order. interest in snake mitogenomics has focused on topics as diverse as gene duplications, truncations and order rearrangements  <cit>  fig. 1], attempts to resolve the contentious phylogenetic relationships of the major snake lineages  <cit>  and references therein] and, in addition, inferring patterns and understanding processes of genome functionality and metabolic protein evolution  <cit> .

the most basal split within extant snakes is between scolecophidia  and alethinophidia. there is a large asymmetry in the number of extant species in these two clades with only 15% of species belonging to scolecophidia. within alethinophidia, most species  belong to the 'advanced' snake clade caenophidia, while the remaining  species comprise the paraphyletic henophidia, whose phylogenetic intrarelationships are contentious  <cit> .

complete or near-complete mt genome sequences have been published for over  <dig> snake species  <cit> . two innovative and important recent studies  <cit>  inferred phylogenetic relationships among snakes based on complete mt genome sequence data for  <dig> and  <dig> species  respectively, and used this framework to examine mt genome evolution. these two studies demonstrated that snakes are unusual among vertebrates in their accelerated mt gene evolution, in that protein-coding gene branch lengths along certain branches  are disproportionately long relative to rrna genes, and that episodic bursts of gene- and branch-specific evolution underpinned adaptive remodeling of metabolic proteins early in snake evolution that are potentially causally associated with control region duplication and/or major changes in anatomy, ecology and behaviour.

jiang et al.  <cit>  and castoe et al.  <cit>  sampled five and six non-caenophidian snakes, respectively. given that these studies found the most dramatic shifts in evolutionary rate and mt genome rearrangement to have occurred along more basal internal branches, it is important to increase sampling of non-caenophidian lineages in order to identify more precisely where/when in snake evolution some key mitogenomic features  were acquired, and to conduct more stringent tests of the gene- and branch-specific patterns that have been identified. here we report mt genome sequence data for three additional henophidian  snake species: anilius scytale, rhinophis philippinus and charina trivirgata . henophidian sampling is increased further with the inclusion of the tropidophiid tropidophis haetianus and another boid species, eunectes notaeus. in addition to the single scolecophidian included in  <cit>  and two included in  <cit> , two species of ramphotyphlops and one typhlops species are added here. these data are included in new analyses of snake phylogeny and mitogenomic evolution.

RESULTS
mt genomes of anilius scytale, rhinophis philippinus and charina trivirgata
the entire mt genome of c. trivirgata, except for the repeat regions within the control regions, was sequenced. all mt genes in a. scytale and r. philippinus were sequenced except for the trnas flanking the duplicate control region situated within the iqm trna cluster . as previously described for other alethinophidian genomes  <cit> , the three new mt genomes possess two control regions. this was confirmed in all three species despite incomplete sequencing because it was possible to sequence both the 5' and 3' ends of both control regions in c. trivirgata and the 5' ends of both control regions for a. scytale and r. philippinus. in all three genomes prominent c-rich regions - characteristic of the control region 5' end in the majority of vertebrate mt genomes - were found. we failed to sequence the 3' ends and trnas adjacent to crii for both a. scytale and r. philippinus, possibly because of extensive repeat regions typically found at the 3' end of the control region. while this paper was in preparation castoe et al.  <cit>  sequenced the mt genomes of a. scytale and tropidophis haetianus. the mt genome of t. haetianus also has a duplicate control region and a translocated trnaleu gene.

as in other alethinophidian mt genomes, the trnaleu  gene in c. trivirgata was found translocated from its typical vertebrate position between the genes 16s and nd <dig> to downstream of crii. the same can be assumed for a. scytale and r. philippinus because this gene was not found between 16s and nd <dig>  as in other alethinophidian snakes, the origin of light strand replication is present in all three newly sequenced mt genomes, with the stem being  <dig> bp long.

the lengths and gc content of ribosomal and protein-coding genes of the three mt genomes are shown in table  <dig>  gene lengths and gc content are similar to those of other snakes. however, coi in a. scytale and r. philippinus is much shorter than that of c. trivirgata . in xenopeltis unicolor, python regius, boids and caenophidians, coi is  <dig> sites in length whereas in t. haetianus, rhinophis philippinus, cylindrophis ruffus, a. scytale and scolecophidians coi length is 1536- <dig> nucleotides . this difference in length is attributable to gaps of variable size occurring at the 3' end of coi . the length of nd <dig> sequences also differs among major snake lineages:  <dig> nucleotides for all colubroids except achalinus meiguensis  but  <dig> for acrochordus granulatus and henophidians. this difference in length is due to a single gap 130- <dig> nucleotides into the sequence.

phylogenetic analyses
the total number of nucleotides in the alignment was  <dig> , with  <dig> amino acid sites. the maximum likelihood  and bayesian phylogenetic analyses performed in this study yielded trees with unequivocal support for major snake taxa regardless of the method or model used. as we explain below, many of the differences in analytical results were relatively minor and did not conflict strongly in that the contentious nodes were weakly supported. the only strongly conflicting results are shown in fig.  <dig> and  <dig>  where boids are sister to either python + xenopeltis + cylindrophis + rhinophis  or to all alethinophidians except anilius and tropidophis .

the maximum likelihood  gtr+i+Γ tree based on the 4-partition nucleotide model is shown in fig.  <dig>  this is identical to a tree recovered by running the 2nd codon positions under the tn+i+Γ model, and the bayesian analysis in which nucleotide data was split into  <dig> partitions . the bayes factor for the 26- partition model  against the 4-partition model  was b <dig> =  <dig>  , indicating that there was no significant difference between the two models.

support for nodes labelled a-m  in all trees is shown in table  <dig>  the following clades received very high to maximal support in all analyses: all alethinophidians except anilius and tropidophis , rhinophis + cylindrophis , boidae , caenophidia , colubroids except achalinus meiguensis , viperidae , 'colubrids' + elapidae . the clade uniting python + xenopeltis  received very high support in all trees except the cat-gtr+Γ tree  although support was still fairly strong in this tree .

for both nucleotide and amino acid data, the tree in fig.  <dig> was the preferred tree. the p-values shown here reflect the likelihood of topology of the tree in fig.  <dig> compared to topology  <dig>  whereas topology  <dig> is not rejected with nucleotide data, it is rejected at the 5% level with amino acid data.

although the inferred trees unanimously supported a clade comprising core alethinophidians , relationships between anilius and tropidophis were not resolved compellingly. anilius scytale + t. haetianus  was strongly supported in gtr and mtrev analyses  but only moderately supported in the cat-poisson+Γ tree. this clade was not recovered at all in the cat-gtr+Γ tree , although the alternative - t. haetianus and a. scytale as successive outgroups to other  alethinophidians - was only weakly supported . a clade comprising rhinophis + cylindrophis and python + xenopeltis  was recovered in all trees and received strong support in bayesian analyses but only weak to moderate support in ml analyses . achalinus meiguensis + remaining colubroidea  received very high to maximal support in nucleotide analyses but low support in amino acid analyses with the exception of the mtrev+i+Γ analysis run with the program phylobayes . in the cat-poisson+Γ tree a. meiguensis joins with acrochordus granulatus with weak support . enhydris plumbea is the sister to elapidae  in nucleotide analyses and the phylobayes mtrev+i+Γ analysis  but this clade received moderately high support only in the mrbayes nucleotide analysis. most amino acid analyses recovered e. plumbea to be the sister of a clade comprising colubrines and elapids , but this never received strong support.

the values given are for expected likelihood weights of local rearrangements , bootsrap, and bayesian posterior probabilities . ml: maximum likelihood lr-elw; mltn: ml lr-elw for analyses where 2nd codon positions were analyzed under the tn+i+Γ model; mlb: ml bootstrap; mb: bpp for analyses performed with mrbayes; pb: bpp for analyses performed with phylobayes ; pbc: bpp for pb analyses using cat-poisson model; pbm: bpp for pb analyses using the mtrev+i+Γ model. nt: nucleotide analyses; aa: amino acid analyses.

only node c  is strongly supported or conflicted in different analyses. mrbayes analyses and amino acid ml analyses recovered node c with very high or maximal support , whereas this node received <70% bootstrap/lr-elw support in ml nucleotide analyses. cat-gtr and cat-poisson analyses recovered the alternative topology shown in fig.  <dig> with ≥  <dig> bpp. interestingly, the mtrev analysis run with phylobayes also recovered the boid relationship shown in fig.  <dig>  albeit with only  <dig>  bpp . statistical tree comparisons with nucleotide data could not reject the tree shown in fig.  <dig> as significantly suboptimal compared to that in fig.  <dig> , the difference in likelihood between the two trees only negligible . with amino acid data however, the cat topology  was rejected by all statistical tests at the  <dig>  significance level .

relative rates of molecular evolution of mt genes
relative nucleotide branch lengths of rrna genes and protein-coding genes can be visualized in figs.  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig>  as expected, rrna branches  are substantially shorter overall than protein-coding branches . cat analyses also produced the same trend . branches leading to serpentes, alethinophidia, typhlopidae and l. humilis show especially accelerated amino acid change relative to rrna nucleotide branch lengths . our phylogenetic analyses produced two alternative resolutions of basal nodes among core henophidians  and so the rates analyses were carried out twice. the different trees barely affected relative evolutionary rates, and the results shown here are based on the phylogeny in fig.  <dig> 

patterns of evolution for different genes along different branches found in this study are broadly concordant with those presented by jiang et al.  <cit> . branch lengths of rrna and protein-coding genes are generally positively correlated, positive deviances from this correlation being most prominent for co genes, atp genes, cytb and nd <dig> , with only slight deviances in other genes/clusters. these same trends were evident under both of the nucleotide partitioning schemes used , and in the plot of rrna vs. amino acid branch lengths , the latter suggests that markedly raised protein-coding gene evolutionary rates are not simply due to large numbers of synonymous changes. the most dramatic acceleration in relative rate of evolution occurred along the branches leading to serpentes and to alethinophidia, for which there was an acceleration in most protein-coding genes. relative rate accelerations were found along the branch leading to a. scytale + t.haetianus in coi and nd <dig> . there were no dramatic relative rate shifts in overall protein-coding gene evolution along the branch leading to core alethinophidians, although there was a slight relative acceleration in cytb evolution here . the other branch that showed the most dramatic elevation in protein-coding gene relative rates was that leading to typhlopidae, which had elevated relative rates in coi, co <dig>  atps, nd <dig>  nd <dig>  nd <dig> and nd <dig>  however, relative rates of evolution in most protein-coding genes along terminal typhlopid branches and the internal branch leading to ramphotyphlops are moderately decelerated, also reflected in the amino acid plot . in the rrna tree , typhlopids have the longest branches of all snake taxa except a. granulatus and l. humilis, the latter having elevated rates in all genes. the branch leading to scolecophidia has relatively accelerated rates for coi, co <dig>  cytb, nd <dig>  nd4l and nd <dig>  but dramatically decelerated for nd <dig> and nd <dig>  the branch leading to colubroidea occurs below the scatter distribution in the graphs for most genes, nd <dig> being a notable exception . this deceleration is also seen in the amino acid plot . the branch leading to elapidae shows slight accelerations in rate in genes nd <dig>  nd <dig> and nd <dig>  which is also reflected in the amino acid plot . rates of evolution in nd <dig> show indications of relative acceleration in several terminal branches within henophidia.

discussion
relationships among the major lineages of snakes
the phylogenetic relationships among non-caenophidian snakes has fundamental importance for the interpretation of early snake evolution  <cit> , but despite increased geno- and phenotypic character sampling over recent years, explicit quantitative phylogenetics has yet to deliver an entirely robust tree. our analyses confirmed strong support for many nodes that have been robustly resolved in other studies, for example colubroidea, caenophidia, colubridae, and nodes that were supported by other molecular studies but found to be equivocal or generally not recovered by morphological studies . however, as with previous molecular studies, most deeper henophidian nodes could not be resolved robustly in this study. low node support is often associated with short internal branches that can result from incongruence within data and/or too few character changes . as is evident in figs.  <dig> and  <dig>  there are many short internal branches among henophidians, but that this is not a feature of mitochondrial data alone is indicated by relatively short branches and problematic nodes in analyses using nuclear data also  <cit> .

prior to the first broad-scale molecular snake phylogenies, morphological phylogenies had reached a consensus on several relationships among major snake lineages  <cit> . morphologists were not entirely surprised by some of the new molecular findings because they mostly affected the less robustly inferred regions of morphological phylogenies, including the possible close relationship between pythons, xenopeltis, and loxocemus, the non-monophyly of macrostomatan alethinophidians and the non-monophyly of dwarf boas  <cit> . however, the sister-group relationship between anilius and tropidophiids proposed by several molecular studies  <cit>  remains a notable sticking point between molecular and morphological studies  <cit> , especially considering that recovery of this clade in larger nuclear gene studies  <cit>  negates dismissal of this hypothesis as an aberration of mt data alone. it might be noted that this relationship was not very strongly supported in our analyses.

mitogenomic evolution in snakes
previous studies  have mapped the duplication of the control region and translocation of trnaleu to the internal branch leading to extant alethinophidians, but incomplete taxon sampling  had left this proposition incompletely tested. our identification of these same derived mitogenomic features in a. scytale provides empirical support for this. the same features are present in all alethinophidian genomes sequenced to date.

our analyses of relative rate variation in mt gene evolution across the snake tree produced several results in concordance with the study of jiang et al.  <cit> , including overall dramatically accelerated  protein-coding gene evolutionary rates along the internal branches leading to serpentes and to alethinophidia though with notable gene- and branch-specific variation . notable differences between our results and those of jiang et al.  <cit>  are: no snake branches disproportionately longer for rrna  than combined protein-coding  genes that would suggest dramatic relatively accelerated rrna evolution; no notable acceleration in relative rate of cytb evolution  along branch leading to serpentes; internal branch leading to colubroidea with relatively decelerated coi and cytb evolution . the latter is potentially dependent on the position of achalinus meiguensis, which was not resolved robustly here, but analyses with this taxon excluded produced the same patterns .

this study has generated new findings, notably: an overall dramatically accelerated protein-coding gene evolution on the branch leading to typhlopidae; terminal branches within typhlopidae and the internal branch leading to ramphotyphlops generally falling below the main distribution in gene-gene plots ; relative acceleration in coi and nd <dig> along the branch leading to a. scytale + t. haetianus; the terminal branch leading to a. scytale slightly accelerated for cytb, nd <dig>  nd <dig> and nd6; further relative acceleration in cytb and nd <dig> evolution along branch leading to core alethinophidians; relative acceleration in nd <dig>  nd <dig> and nd <dig> along the branch leading to elapidae. although we did not carry out the in-depth analytical tests of positive selection or protein structural modelling performed by castoe et al.  <cit> , the rrna vs. protein-coding amino acid branch length plot  demonstrates that some of the acceleration in molecular evolution along the branches leading to serpentes, alethinophidia and typhlopidae is likely to be adaptive in that it leads to changes in protein sequences, and is not simply an increase in 'silent' substitutions.

our greater taxon sampling enabled us to identify additional trends in mt gene evolution for some snake clades. within scolecophidia, we found dramatic relative acceleration in protein-coding gene evolution along the branch leading to typhlopidae but subsequent relative deceleration  along all terminal typhlopid branches. the terminal branch joining leptotyphlops humilis to the rest of the tree appears above the main distribution in most gene-gene plots , but comparison with other lineages is complicated because only one leptotyphlopid mt genome has been sequenced. additional sampling of leptotyphlopids is required to clarify mitogenomic evolution along this branch. the inclusion of l. humilis is not responsible for the rapid protein evolution identified along the branch leading to typhlopidae because this branch is similarly long in amino acid trees that exclude l. humilis . the generally long branches within scolecophidia and seemingly strongly fluctuating rate dynamics suggest that mitogenomic evolution within this group is worthy of greater attention. although scolecophidians represent one half of the basal divergence among living snakes they are often overlooked, perhaps because of their superficial morphological and ecological homogeneity, which is, however, deceptive  <cit> .

castoe et al.  <cit>  observed that dramatic adaptive shifts in the evolution of metabolic proteins occurred along the branch leading to alethinophidia and so were potentially temporally associated with the origin of a duplicated control region, and they suggested that these shifts along this internal branch were causally associated with major anatomical, ecological, and behavioural changes such as an ecological niche shift to a non-burrowing lifestyle, increased body size, increased skull kinesis and gape and prey size, development of specialized venom proteins, and the ability of individuals to dramatically remodel their organs and physiology. the scenario of a single major switch from a burrowing to non-burrowing  condition early in alethinophidian history has been eroded by some of the more recent phylogenetic results for henophidian snakes, so that identifying broad suites of phenotypic adaptive change along the branch leading to alethinophidia is not as trivial as previously assumed. however, the rapid remodelling of metabolic proteins before the burrowing anilius diverged from other alethinophidians and, importantly, evidence of elevated relative rates of metabolic protein evolution in the branch leading to the exclusively burrowing scolecophidia  rejects the exact correlations that underpin some of the precise aspects of the hypotheses previously proposed to explain the observed mitogenomic evolutionary patterns.

CONCLUSIONS
phylogenetic analyses of complete mt genome data strongly support many of the clades identified in previous studies such as core alethinophidia, colubroidea and cylindrophiidae + uropeltidae, but deeper henophidian nodes were not resolved with compelling support. extended taxon sampling allowed us to identify dramatic acceleration of metabolic protein evolution within scolecophidia in addition to the rate shifts identified by jiang et al.  <cit> . in addition, control region duplication and most of the rate acceleration in mt genes occurred before anilius and tropidophis branched off from the rest of alethinophidia, although less dramatic acceleration in protein-coding mt genes occur in these lineages. our new data discount a consistent link between extraordinary bursts of mitogenomic evolution early in snake history and control region duplication or transition to a non-burrowing lifestyle and macrostomatan feeding ecology. further taxon sampling for mt genomes can contribute to an improved phylogenetic understanding and will be crucial for further investigation of mitogenomic evolution. we identify priority taxa for both phylogenetic and mitogenomic studies to be anomochilus, bolyeriids, the monotypic xenophidion and loxocemus, and more scolecophidians .

