BACKGROUND
gradients of chemokines and growth factors play an important role in many developmental and physiological processes such as axon guidance  <cit> , immune response  <cit> , morphogenesis  <cit> , and cancer metastasis  <cit> . traditionally, boyden chamber  <cit> , under-agarose assay  <cit> , and micropipette-based assay  <cit>  have been used to study cellular behavior in soluble gradients. unfortunately, these conventional assays are not capable of generating and maintaining stable gradients over long periods due to inherent limitations of their macroscale approach  <cit> . in addition, they typically require relatively large amounts of costly reagents and often do not allow real-time monitoring of cell behavior.

recent developments in microfluidic devices that apply miniaturization technologies from the microelectronics industry have resulted in microscale devices that hold the promise of overcoming limitations imposed by conventional macroscale methods. microfluidic devices that can generate stable soluble and surface gradients of complex profiles have been developed in last few years  <cit> . these gradient-generating microfluidic devices allow miniaturized real-time cellular assays  <cit>  for investigating migration  <cit> , proliferation, differentiation  <cit> , and apoptosis  <cit> . we have previously reported on "christmas-tree" network-based microfluidic devices for investigating migration of neutrophils  <cit>  and metastatic cancer cells  <cit>  as well as differentiation of human neural progenitor cells   <cit> . although these devices can create stable concentration gradients, one important limitation has been the need to culture cells inside the microfludic devices before each experiment. setting up a microfluidic experiment required at least 2– <dig> hours of preparation time for each set resulting in throughput of 2– <dig> experiments a day. furthermore, it was difficult to perform experiments with sensitive cells such as npcs and neurons that did not plate well in the devices.

recently, a network of vacuum channels was used to provide uniform bonding to any underlying flat surface  <cit> . this vacuum-sealed microfluidic device was used to investigate the kinetics of leukocyte adhesion under defined shear flow in 6-well tissue culture plates. here we developed a novel hybrid microfluidic-vacuum device that incorporates a network of vacuum channels and a microfluidic gradient generator. unlike the previous vacuum-sealed device  <cit> , which generates differential shear stress, our hybrid microfluidic-vacuum device generates concentration gradients of soluble factors in a single chip. this device has several advantages over previous microfluidic devices that required bonding of two separate pieces:  it allows the reversible application of microfluidic gradients onto wet cell culture surfaces,  it demonstrates high reproducibility and functionality, and  it is a highly adaptable method for incorporating the advantages of microfluidics to biological assays without changing well established tissue culture protocols. this hybrid device is a versatile experimental platform that is compatible with various wet biology protocols and should find a number of applications in biomedical research.

RESULTS
design of the hybrid microfluidic-vacuum platform for gradient generation
there were no significant design limitations for vacuum channels; a wide range of dimensions  and designs  were successfully used. the vacuum channels were placed anywhere between  <dig> – <dig> mm away from the fluidic channels. when the channels were placed closer, chance for leakage between vacuum channels and fluidic channels was greater, and it often led to failed seals. due to the soft elastomeric property of poly , the vacuum channels provided dependable bonding of the hybrid device onto flat glass or plastic. surface coatings  had no obvious effects on vacuum bonding or on subsequent gradient generation. in addition, we measured the vacuum force on a tip of tubing connected with a syringe to the house vacuum line. the vacuum pressure required to maintain the seal was 1– <dig> torr . use of house vacuum was sufficient for the experiments to work reproducibly.

by flowing different solutions from the three inlet reservoirs, continuous laminar streams can generate stable gradients that are perpendicular to the flow. multiple gradient profiles were generated at different downstream positions of the inlets  on a single device and controlled by adjusting flow rates . cells exposed to these flow rates in a gradient chamber were subjected to fluid shear stress in the range of  <dig>  × 10-3- <dig>  × 10- <dig> dyne/cm <dig>  this value is significantly lower  than physiological shear stress on endothelial cells during normal blood flow   <cit> . figure 1b shows two different gradient profiles at  <dig>  mm and  <dig> mm downstream from the junction of fluidic channels  containing fluorescein isothiocyanate -dextran  in the middle reservoir, while the side reservoirs contained buffer only. the gradients could be maintained for 6~ <dig> hours depending on reservoir capacity  and flow rate. gradient profiles of fitc-dextran compared favorably to simulation results .

an important advantage of the hybrid microfluidic device is that cell-based experiments can be routinely performed due to simpler setup and shorter setup time compared to conventional microfluidic gradient devices. moreover, cell cultures can be prescreened for optimal health, density, and distribution. setup time was typically <  <dig> min, allowing for several time-lapse cell migration experiments per day. microfluidic experiments could be initiated whenever cells were ready in petri dish or multi-well culture plates . other advantages are:  the hybrid device allows experiments with sensitive cells  that are difficult to culture inside microfluidic devices, and  reversible bonding allows for straightforward immunocytochemistry or other endpoint analyses after gradient applications. to remove the device after an experiment, vacuum was turned off after adding about  <dig> ml of media . after a few minutes, the device detached from the surface and floated to the surface. attachment and viability of cells were not adversely affected by this release process.

although this device brings many advantages to cell culture studies, a limitation is that the design is not compatible with complex fluidic networks. long, serpentine channels have a higher chance of bonding failure. bonding failure can occur if the surface is uneven  or if there is a leak between the vacuum network and fluidic channels. bonding failure rate was relatively low  and could be further reduced by using simple fluidic channels and providing a sufficient gap  between the vacuum network and fluidic channels. device integrity and gradient quality were monitored by checking the fluorescence gradient profile in the microchannel by adding a small amount of fluorescent dye in one of the reservoirs.

real-time live and dead assay of mouse npcs in a microfluidic device
compared to human npcs  <cit> , we found that mouse npcs were difficult to culture inside irreversibly-bonded microfluidic devices. initial plating efficiency of mouse npcs was poor, and they displayed lower proliferation rates and higher cell death rates compared to petri dish controls . we therefore cultured mouse npcs in 6-well plates, then selected healthy cultures for vacuum device application.

to test the ability of this device to seal and generate gradients, we exposed mouse npcs to hydrogen peroxide  gradients, a rapid inducer of cell death  <cit> . to simultaneously investigate cellular responses to fixed and graded hydrogen peroxide concentrations, the fluidic channel network contained both control and gradient regions and time-lapse images were taken in both regions. the control region had three microchannels that combined into a single channel where gradients were formed . cell-impermeant propidium iodide  at  <dig> μg/ml was preloaded to identify dead cells before gradient application. after  <dig> hours of exposure to hydrogen peroxide  with a flow rate of  <dig>  μl/min, cells in the two left channels were alive and pi-negative , while cells in the right channel became pi-positive  . in the gradient region, an increasing number of cells showed pi staining over time and from right to left as hydrogen peroxide diffused from the right inlet channel and across the main channel  . cell death corresponded well to the concentration of hydrogen peroxide in both control and gradient chambers . we divided the gradient region into two areas based on the mean concentration  of hydrogen peroxide based on simulations. .

during experimental setup, some cells become trapped at the edges of channels  and might interact with live healthy cells in the channels. these cell-cell interactions might lead to false positive results. however, the hybrid vacuum devices should minimize such results. first, due to continuous perfusion, paracrine signaling by trapped dead cells should be transient and minimal, particularly in the orthogonal direction. second, one can avoid interpretive pitfalls by avoiding cells near the edges. third, edge effects can be minimized by making the channels larger . these results confirmed the ability of vacuum to seal and isolate the microfluidic channels using live cells grown on a petri dish.

cancer cell chemotaxis
one of the main applications for microfluidic gradients are studies on cell migration and chemotaxis  <cit> . to further compare the hybrid microfluidic-vacuum device to conventional microfluidic chemotaxis chambers, we performed chemotaxis assays with mda-mb- <dig>  a human metastatic breast cancer cell line. for our experiment, epidermal growth factor  was used as a chemoattractant, since it has been implicated as an important factor in breast cancer cell metastasis, and it was shown previously that mda-mb- <dig> cells responded to egf gradients in a chemotactic manner  <cit> . in general, linear gradients of egf were not effective in inducing directional cell movement as compared to non-linear concentration gradients.

using the hybrid device, mda-mb- <dig> cells were observed for  <dig> hours in an egf gradient  with a withdrawal rate of  <dig>  μl/min. egf-containing media was added to the right reservoir while the other reservoirs contained media alone. figure 3a shows that cells were observed migrating toward higher concentrations of egf. polarized extensions of lamellipodia toward higher egf concentrations were observed in the majority of cells . a rayleigh test revealed that migration was directional toward high egf concentration, and the mean migration angle was  <dig> ° . in addition, cells in the steepest part of the gradient  displayed the greatest directional migration , while cells elsewhere displayed random movement . these results  were similar to those obtained from previous microfluidic chemotaxis chambers  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
this paper reports a hybrid microfluidic device integrated with vacuum networks and its application in biological experiments. this device provides a simple yet highly adaptable tool for incorporating the advantages of microfluidics to basic biological assays without changing established tissue culture protocols. one of the main advantages of this chamber is that it can be directly used on adherent cells cultured in a standard tissue culture plate. in addition, the hybrid microfluidic-vacuum platform allows for higher throughput, generates stable concentration gradients, and can be useful for studying cellular behaviors of sensitive cells . using the advantages of this microfluidic platform, we have developed real-time optical assays to investigate cell proliferation and death in mouse npcs, and chemotaxis of mda-mb- <dig> breast cancer cells exposed to egf gradients.

