BACKGROUND
apoptosis, a type of programmed cell death, is an active process. it is a normal component of the development and health of multicellular organisms. the study of apoptosis is an important field of biological inquiry since a deficiency or an excess of apoptosis is one of the causes for cancers, autoimmune disorders, diabetes, alzheimer's, organ and bone marrow transplant rejection, and many other diseases. accordingly, a quick and easy assay for quantification of apoptosis would be very useful for many biological researchers.

currently, methods available to help detect apoptosis in vitro include several morphological staining methods   <cit> , dapi   <cit> , hoechst staining  <cit> , and etc), annexin v staining  <cit> , dna ladder  <cit> , tunel   <cit> , caspase-3/ <dig> activity  <cit> , and ssdna staining  <cit> . however, these methods have at least one of the following limitations:

1) involvement of multiple steps
all current staining methods, annexin v, and dna laddering assays require detaching, washing and transferring the cells. these procedures might damage the cell membranes and change the cell population distribution of live, apoptotic and/or necrotic cells. procedures with multiple steps also require more time to perform the assay, and more materials allowing for loss of the cells through the procedures.

2) lack of the ability to quantify live, apoptotic and necrotic cells at the same time
dapi staining, caspase-3/ <dig> activity, dna laddering, and ssdna staining methods only detect increase of apoptotic signals, and can not easily quantify percentage of live, apoptotic, and necrotic cells.

3) non-specific detection
the tunel assay is widely used for detecting apoptotic cells. however, it has been shown to provide false positive signals in some necrotic cells  <cit> .

despite the many characteristics of apoptotic cells analyzed by current methods, chromatin condensation and nuclear fragmentation remain the hallmarks of apoptotic cells  <cit> . it has been suggested that as a rule, classification of cell death in a given model should always include morphological examination coupled with at least one other assay  <cit> . fluorescence light microscopy with differential uptake of fluorescent dna binding dyes  is a method of choice for its simplicity, rapidity, and accuracy. in such an assay, apoptotic index and cell membrane integrity can be assessed simultaneously and there is no cell fixation step, thus avoiding a number of potential artifacts  <cit> . acridine orange  permeates all cells and makes the nuclei appear green. ethidium bromide  is only taken up by cells when cytoplasmic membrane integrity is lost, and stains the nucleus red. eb also dominates over ao. thus live cells have a normal green nucleus; early apoptotic cells have bright green nucleus with condensed or fragmented chromatin; late apoptotic cells display condensed and fragmented orange chromatin; cells that have died from direct necrosis have a structurally normal orange nucleus  <cit> .

a 96-well plate format is ideal for examining multiple cell types and performing multiple assays while using very small amounts of materials. it is also a suitable format for high throughput drug screening. to overcome the shortcomings of current methods that quantify apoptosis in vitro, and to take advantage of the 96-well plate format, we present here an improved eb/ao staining assay performed entirely in a 96-well plate.

RESULTS
we modified the conventional eb/ao method by centrifuging the cells in a 96-well plate to bring down all the cells, including floaters, to the bottom of the plate. using this method, we obtained quantification of live, necrotic, and apoptotic cells for both suspension cells , and adherent cells , under normal growth and apoptosis-inducing conditions that was comparable to the conventional eb/ao method.

determining the live, apoptotic and necrotic cells was comparable between these two methods for jurkat cells: a) live cells have normal nuclei staining which present green chromatin with organized structures; b) apoptotic cells contain condensed or fragmented chromatin ; c) necrotic cells have similar normal nuclei staining as live cells except the chromatin is orange instead of green.

overall, quantification of live, necrotic, and apoptotic control and treated jurkat cells was quite comparable using both methods . the chi-square tests showed that the cell counts were independent of the method used for each treatment condition . the largest differences in cell counts between the methods were only a 2% lower live cell count and a 2% higher apoptotic cell count for the treated condition using the conventional method . however, these small variations would be within the standard deviations of these assays. thus, for suspension cells, the modified method was quite similar to the conventional method in terms of quantification and detection of the live, apoptotic, and necrotic cells.

as for jurkat cells, the quantification of live, necrotic, and apoptotic cell populations in both control and treated a <dig> cells was quite comparable using both methods . the chi-square tests showed that the cell counts were again statistically independent of the staining method used for both treatment conditions . in this case, the largest differences in quantification obtained using these two methods were only 3% necrotic and apoptotic cell counts for treated a <dig> cells . thus, in accordance with the suspension cell results, the two staining methods were quite comparable for adherent cells. further, we also found similar results with a <dig> cells treated with other apoptotic triggers .

we note that there was a lot more debris in the adherent cell samples produced using the conventional method. this suggests that the conventional method, with multiple step preparation of adherent cells, could cause some cell damage and break apart some highly fragile cells such as late apoptotic or necrotic cells. this undesired artifact might change the distribution of live, apoptotic, and necrotic cells in the cell population under some conditions.

these results suggest that our method is especially well suited for analyzing adherent cells, since it provides further characteristics to differentiate live cells from apoptotic cells. additionally, it is much easier to collect all the cells, including floaters, than using the conventional method. furthermore, by eliminating the detaching and washing steps, this method drastically reduces the time needed to perform the test, decreases the possibility of losing floating cells as in the conventional method, minimizes damage to adherent cells, and may allow more accurate quantification of apoptotic status under certain conditions.

CONCLUSIONS
we present here an improved eb/ao staining method by substituting the detaching and washing steps with a simpler centrifugation step with 96-well plates. this modified method combines the advantage of the 96-well format and the conventional eb/ao staining method for apoptotic quantification. our new technique is easy to perform, time efficient, and especially suitable for adherent cells. in addition, inverted fluorescence microscopes and 96-well plate holders for centrifuges are readily available in most research departments. our new method only requires small amounts of inexpensive eb and ao for each experiment.

since this method is straightforward to perform with only one step of gentle centrifugation using 96-well plates, it can also be easily combined with other 96-well-plate-based assays within one experiment, such as cell viability assay , cell death assay , or certain caspase activity assays. therefore, multiple endpoints of cell death and apoptosis can be measured in a single experiment with very small amounts of cells. this could be very valuable for the cells difficult to grow in large amounts .

in summary, our apoptotic quantification method represents an improvement over the currently available techniques especially for adherent cells. it is highly specific, simple, time efficient, and available in a 96-well format. further, it can quantify live, apoptotic and necrotic cells at the same time.

