BACKGROUND
genetic markers are nowadays an essential part of plant and animal breeding programs. next-generation sequencing  techniques allow discovering, sequencing, and genotyping thousands of single nucleotide polymorphism  covering the whole genome  <cit> . these snps are being used in analyses like transcriptome assembly  <cit> , generation of high-quality draft genomes even for complex genomes  <cit> , understanding plant growth  <cit> , evaluating the effect of epigenetics in plant development  <cit> , isolation of mutant genes  <cit> ,species evolution and economic insight  <cit> , genetic diversity  <cit> , gwas  <cit> , and gs  <cit> . the gbs technique is one of the most used ngs approaches . it was developed originally for barley and maize, and later extended to other complex genomes species like wheat . gbs that relies on methylation-sensitive restriction enzymes is highly efficient  <cit> . however, gbs generates a large proportion of missing data when alleles are obtained due to the use of short reads and when low sequencing depth are used  <cit> . therefore, different strategies to impute missing data have been developed and used for genetic analyses  <cit> . some imputation methods use reference panels and are based on linkage disequilibrium , while other methods do not require reference panels. in the first group, the most common methods are known as mach  <cit> , impute  <cit> , fastphase  <cit> , plink  <cit> , and beagle  <cit> . all of them use haplotype segments from a reference panel densely genotyped to impute missing markers . mach uses a markov chain based algorithm to infer pairs of haplotypes for each individual’s genotypes  <cit> . impute considers the sequence of pairs of known haplotypes as hidden states, then models the sequence of hidden states based on a recombination map estimated from the reference data, and finally it predicts unknown genotypes  <cit> . the fastphase algorithm is a haplotype clustering algorithm that samples missing genotypes based on allele frequencies estimated from reference haplotypes, and then uses an expectation- maximization  algorithm to estimate parameter values to infer missing genotypes  <cit> . plink predicts missing data by the local haplotypic background and by the haplotype formed by the two or more flanking snps  <cit> . finally, beagle is a haplotype clustering based algorithm that uses the localized haplotype cluster model to group haplotypes at each marker and then finds the most likely haplotype pairs based on the individual’s known genotypes  <cit> . therefore, strong ld among markers and low minor allele frequency  is required for effective ld imputation methods  <cit> . additionally, more markers with an even genome coverage and therefore smaller distance among markers, and markers with larger subpopulation differentiation are also desirable to ensure imputation accuracy  <cit> . the second group of methods do not require a reference panel and include imputation by the mean, the mvn-em algorithm, and random forests  <cit> . in mean imputation, the most common allele at a particular marker in the population is used to impute missing data. mvn-em, on the other hand, considers the realized additive relationship matrix between the lines and an em approach assuming that marker genotypes follow a multivariate normal distribution designed for use with gbs. finally, random forest methods use an algorithm with multiple decision trees to determine a prediction value for each missing data point. for an overview of the imputation methods see  <cit> .

several studies found that imputation can improve qtl power detection  <cit> , but other studies found that large power is accompanied by either larger false positive rates or an increase in the multiple-testing penalty  <cit> . unless a ‘one-hit’ procedure is used , large imputation error can be generated  <cit> . other studies found that imputation should be carefully evaluated because quality control of the data is an important source of loss of power  <cit> . to carry on gwas analysis, where one marker at a time is being tested, marker-trait associations can be estimated without marker imputation using the available information at each marker.

the aim of this study was to compare the performance of imputation methods for gwas analysis when no reference panel is available in a wheat gbs panel. specifically, our objectives were:  to evaluate the effect of imputation using a golden standard , to determine whether ascertainment bias is responsible for imputation success;  to evaluate whether the outcome of the imputation performance is affected by the marker score matrix used to simulate the qtl; and  to compare the effect of imputation in a real phenotype wheat panel using gbs data with different missing rates  and four phenotypic traits.

RESULTS
the strategies we pursued are explained in the methods section, and the general procedure presented in fig.  <dig>  we used different number of qtl and heritabilities to simulate the qtl, along with different thresholds for calling the qtl. we summarized the results with power  and false positive rate .fig.  <dig> general scheme of the procedures we followed for each component. a procedures for golden standard  and ascertainment bias ; b procedure for gwas performance based on simulated matrix; c procedure for comparison of the effect of imputation in a real phenotypic dataset. each procedure details the germplasm, genotypic and phenotypic dataset used, as well as simulation approach to obtain each phenotypic vector and gwas analysis marker score matrices used. procedures that used wheat data are in green and procedures that used barley data are in purple. dh, days to heading; gbs, genotype-by-sequencing; mvn-em, multivariate normal expectation maximization; not-imputed marker score matrix; nona, no missing data marker score matrix; ph, plant height; qtl, quantitative trait loci; rf: random forest marker score matrix; snps, single-nucleotide polymorphism; spm, spikes per square meter; tkw, thousands kernel weight




ascertainment bias in imputation performance comparison 
when we used a golden standard matrix of barley for simulating the qtl , we found that for major qtl effects, larger power was obtained without imputing the genotypic matrix. furthermore, for minor qtl effects, larger power was detected without imputing the genotypic matrix or imputing it with the mvn-em method . the smallest false positive rate was obtained for the genotypic matrix imputed by the rf method , and the largest false positive rate was obtained with the mvn-em imputation method . false positive rates were still really small . power was also small in general . the same pattern was found when using different threshold levels for the dissection of quantitative traits .fig.  <dig> power  and false positives rate  for major and minor qtl with  <dig> qtl, for the golden standard from barley with a bonferroni threshold corrected by the effective number of independent markers. each parameter was calculated for the combinations of: heritabilties , a marker score matrix to simulate the qtl , and marker score matrices to perform the gwas analysis 




when we simulated qtl over an imputed matrix , we found that larger power was obtained with the imputed genotypic matrices , while the largest false positive rate was obtained with the mvn-em imputation method  . however, when qtl were simulated over a not-imputed matrix, the largest power was obtained when a not-imputed or imputed by the mvn-em genotypic matrices were used . this pattern was consistent across number of qtl  and heritabilities . the same pattern was found when using different threshold levels for the dissection of quantitative traits .fig.  <dig> power  and false positives rate  with  <dig> qtl, for major and minor qtl for ascertainment bias in imputation performance comparison in barley, with a bonferroni threshold corrected by the effective number of independent markers. each parameter was calculated for the combinations of: heritabilties , marker score matrices to simulate the qtl , and marker score matrices to perform the gwas analysis 




imputation effect for real gbs data with 25 %, 35 % or 50 % missing information
by using naturally sparse genotypic matrices like gbs in wheat with 25 %, 35 % or 50 % missing data information , we detected that larger power was obtained when a not-imputed or imputed by the mvn-em genotypic matrices were used . however, when simulating over a matrix with imputed data, larger power was obtained by recover qtl with an imputed matrix . this was true for the different number of qtl  and heritabilities . differences between power were more evident for major qtl, resulting in a reasonable increase of power for high heritabilities . the largest values of false positive rate were found when simulating with the ysim-nimp and gmvn-em or the ysim-rf and gmvn-em . additionally, the same pattern was found using different threshold levels .fig.  <dig> power  and false positives rate  with  <dig> qtl and 50 % missing rate, for major and minor qtl to evaluate the gwas performance based on simulated matrix with a bonferroni threshold corrected by the effective number of independent markers. each parameter was calculated for the combinations of: heritabilties , marker score matrices to simulate the qtl , and marker score matrices to perform the gwas analysis 




imputation effect on gwas for real phenotypes
we compared the qtl obtained for gwas analysis using real phenotypic data from wheat, between the not-imputed matrix  with different missing rates , and the genotypic data imputed with the mean, mvn-em or rf method . the performance of gwas analysis was similar across imputation methods , but not all qtl were detected across methods. for the  <dig> traits, plant height , days to heading , thousand kernel weight  and spikes per square meter , we detected different putative qtl when using imputed or not-imputed matrices. in general, the mvn-em imputation method performed similarly to non imputation, having some qtl being detected by both methods . however, each approach found also unique qtl .fig.  <dig> qq plots of the p-values resulted from the gwas analysis from real phenotype wheat data with 50 % missing rate and a bonferroni threshold corrected by the effective number of independent markers. for each trait measured and each marker score matrix evaluated, a qq-plot of the p-values from the gwas analysis is presented. the marker score matrices were: nimp  in turquoise, mean  in green, mvn-em  in coral and rf  in orchid. the phenotype traits are: dh, days to heading; ph, plant height; spm, spikes per square meter; tkw, thousands kernel weight


fig.  <dig> manhattan plots of the gwas analysis for real phenotype wheat data with 50 % missing rate and a bonferroni threshold corrected by the effective number of independent markers. for each trait measured and each marker score matrix evaluated, a manhattan plot of the gwas analysis is presented. the phenotypic traits are: dh, days to heading; ph, plant height; spm, spikes per square meter; tkw, thousands kernel weight. the marker score matrices were: nimp , mean , mvn-em  and rf . qtl detected by the nimp matrix are in turquoise, qtl detected exclusively by the mvn-em matrix are in coral, qtl detected exclusively by the mean matrix are in green, and qtl detected exclusively by the rf matrix are in orchid




differences between methods for false positive rate
when we performed fpr boxplots with the replications for analyzing if the differences between the methods are significantly different or due to random errors , we found that fpr rates were larger for:  the imputed genotypic matrices by the mvn-em method for the golden standard,  the imputed genotypic matrix by the mvn-em method  for the ascertainment bias,  the imputed genotypic matrices by the mvn-em or rf methods  for the gbs data with 35 % or 50 % missing data,  and the imputed genotypic matrices by the rf method  for the gbs data with 25 % missing data.

discussion
new whole-genome genotyping techniques are constantly being developed and used for genetic analyses like gwas  <cit> . although gbs is a powerful tool for genotyping hundreds of individuals with thousands of snps, it generates large amounts of missing information, and therefore, researchers have applied several strategies to impute these missing . however, when retained a considerable amount of missing information using gbs data in wheat or artificially removing genotypic data from complete panels in barley, we found that imputation does not improve the dissection of quantitative traits performance in several situations. our results should be restricted to our panels that have a specific ld  and snp quality, due to the continuous improvement of the sequencing technologies that allows the decrease of costs and therefore the increase of sequencing depth and quality, leading to a lower missing rate.

ascertainment bias in imputation performance comparison 
when we used the “golden standard” marker score matrix, the not-imputed marker score matrix outperformed the imputation methods for all the combinations of parameters . the higher values of false positive rate found with the mvn-em matrix and lower values of power found with the rf matrix for all thresholds could be a consequence of an imputation error affecting the signal of the qtl.

the fact that we also found that the not-imputed marker score matrix outperformed the imputation methods comparing both, power and false positive rate simultaneously, when we used real gbs data , suggests that using an imputed matrix for gwas analysis could introduce an ascertainment bias. this could be caused when there is no reference panel, and the uncertainty of genotypic probability distributions due to the imputation is not considered, as methods based on ld have found that if some restrictions are taken into account , the imputation accuracy and then the gwas is improved  <cit> .

although the low power found to detect qtl for the barley marker score matrix could theoretically be due to low ld between markers in the same ld blocks, we do not expect this to be the reason of low power in our study. when there are unlinked qtl controlling a trait, the power is moderate even with large populations and high heritabilities  <cit> . however, we do not expect unlinked qtl within the ld blocks due to the cluster of markers within those blocks  <cit> , and because the genome coverage of the markers was very high, having 50 % of its snps, at a distance smaller than  <dig>  cm . the small population  used for barley dataset could be the reason affecting the low values of power detected, as the power is a function of the population size  <cit> . however, this should not differently affect the imputation methods. additionally, the great differences found in power and false positive rate between major and minor qtl, could indicate that major qtl are the qtl mostly detected by any of the imputation methods. other ld structures in different populations could make our results to vary, therefore, this results are restricted to the populations used in this analysis. further analyses considering different population structure should be tested.table  <dig> snps coverage on the golden standard matrix , indicating for each chromosome , the number of snps, the length , the largest gap without markers , the median distance between pairs of adjacent markers, and the 25 % and 75 % quantiles of the adjacent marker distances




imputation effect for real gbs data with 25 %, 35 % or 50 % missing information
the differences found when we simulated qtl on top of imputed or not-imputed marker score matrices  were probably due to the imputation method used and the simulation. therefore, we found that not-imputing was the best option for evaluating one marker at a time in gwas analysis using gbs data with 25 %, 35 % or 50 % missing information, especially for detecting major qtl.

imputation effect on gwas for real phenotypes
as no significant differences were detected in the real wheat datasets in terms of the type  <dig> error inflation imputation , we consider that imputation does not improved the gwas performance and therefore is not needed.

the traits evaluated in this paper were selected for having high heritability values and being related or a component of grain yield. the high heritability values may have reduced the differences between the qtl found with gnimp or gmvn-em.

we found qtl where previous qtl were reported. the qtl found for tkw  with the gnimp, gmvn-em and gmean matrices for 50 % missing data, and with the gmean matrix for 25 % and 35 % missing data, are partially coincident with a qtl reported for green leaf area  <cit> , a qtl reported for near differential vegetative index  <cit>  and a qtl reported for yield, anthesis and plant height  <cit> . a qtl found for tkw  with the gnimp, gmvn-em and gmean matrices for 25 %, 35 % and 50 % missing data, is coincident with a qtl reported for grain yield and plant height  <cit> . the qtl found for tkw  with  <dig> marker score matrices  for 25 %, 35 % and 50 % missing data, spm  with the gnimp matrix for 25 % and 50 % missing data, and with  <dig> marker score matrices  for 35 % missing data, are coincident with a qtl reported for kernel weight, near differential vegetative index and flag leaf  <cit> . a qtl found for dh  with gnimp
and gmvn-em for 50 % missing data is coincident with a qtl reported for grain filling duration  <cit> . a qtl found for spm  with the gnimp and gmvn-em matrices for 25 %, 35 % and 50 % missing data, is coincident with a qtl reported for anthesis and plant height  <cit> . the qtl found for dh  with the gnimp matrix for 50 % missing data, is coincident with a qtl reported for yield and plant height  <cit> . a qtl found for dh  with the gnimp matrix for 35 % and 50 % missing data, and with the gnimp and gmean matrices for the 25 % missing data, is coincident with a qtl for yield and plant height  <cit> . a qtl found for ph  with the gnimp and gmean matrices for 50 % missing data, is coincident with yield and anthesis  <cit> . these positions are based on bins and should be regarded as an approximation. these could be improved after the draft of the genome is available  <cit> .

as we found that qtl detected by the gnimp and gmvn-em matrices were similar, we believe that imputation do not improve gwas analysis.

CONCLUSIONS
imputation can introduce an ascertainment bias to gwas analysis using gbs within crops when a reference panel is not available. comparing the gwas performance by the power and false positive rate with imputed or not-imputed marker score matrices, poorer performance was found when an imputed marker score matrix was used. additionally, the power and false positive rate changed in a clear way between major and minor qtl, showing that differences among imputation methods were more evident for major qtl and that the detection of minor qtl is negligible. our results are restricted to the wheat panel used, as with different ld they could vary, and as well with different gbs quality data, which is affected by different snp identification algorithms.

