BACKGROUND
recently, transcriptomic studies using dna microarray and qpcr identified gene expression changes in e. coli  <cit> . accurate quantification of transcriptomic changes requires reliable normalization methods to minimize technical variations, such as the quality/quantity of samples and instrumental bias. to date, normalization with internal reference genes is the most frequently used and reliable method for qpcr data  <cit> . to the best of our knowledge, there has been no systematic study to identify reference genes for qpcr in e. coli. to date, rrsa encoding ribosomal rna 16s  <cit>  and ihfb  <cit>  are the two most frequently used reference genes in e. coli. however, the stability of these two genes has not been validated.

e. coli has been extensively used in biotechnology for the production of proteins, therapeutic metabolites, and biofuels  <cit> . recombinant dna technology has provided various means to express proteins with diverse functions and for the over-production of metabolites in e. coli. as a result, a set of invariant reference genes for qpcr normalization during recombinant protein production is highly desired in e. coli.

in the present study, we aim to identify and validate a set of reference genes for the accurate normalization of transcription analysis in recombinant protein producing e. coli cells. candidate reference genes were systematically selected from public microarray database. the temporal expressions of these twenty genes, rrsa and ihfb were quantified in two different e. coli strains induced to express enzymes of the 1-deoxy-d-xylulose 5-phosphate  pathway at two different temperatures. two independent statistical algorithms 'genorm'  <cit>  and 'normfinder'  <cit>  were utilized to identify reliable reference genes stably expressed under the conditions tested. further analysis examined if normalization factors derived from these novel reference genes or that of rrsa or ihfb allowed accurate quantification of the expressions of genes producing lycopene. this study illustrates the importance of the use of validated reference genes in transcriptional studies in e. coli.

RESULTS
high protein overexpression inhibits metabolite production
bl <dig> , a widely used e. coli strain for recombinant protein production  <cit> , has been used to produce lycopene, an natural antioxidant  <cit> . the lycopene precursors, isopentenyl diphosphate  and dimethylallyl diphosphate , are produced via the dxp pathway which can be increased by the expressions of four rate limiting enzymes, dxs, idi, ispd, and ispf  <cit> . to increase lycopene production, these four enzymes were expressed in bl <dig> cells at 28째c and 37째c . the expression of these enzymes under non-induced condition  was found to increase lycopene production at 37째c. however, when expression was induced with iptg induction , lycopene production was significantly lower as compared to non-induced conditions. at a lower temperature , non-induced and mild iptg induction  but not strong iptg induction  enhanced lycopene production. this finding is consistent with previous observations of the inhibitory effects of high induction on lycopene production  <cit> . in order to test the hypothesis that this inverse correlation of lycopene production with increasing induction may simply be due to the decrease in the expressions of genes involved in the lycopene pathway, we measured the transcriptional changes by qpcr. in the process of carrying out such measurements, we were confronted with the critical issue of selecting reliable reference genes for normalization of transcriptional changes.

selection of candidate reference genes from microarray
a suitable reference gene should be stably expressed across all experimental conditions used in the study. such reference genes are commonly identified by analyzing the expression stabilities of a pool of pre-selected candidate genes. however, the selection of such candidates poses a major challenge without a priori knowledge or assumptions of their stabilities. to identify suitable candidate genes, we surveyed five major microarray databases  for projects pertinent to protein over-expression studies in e. coli. to minimize platform specific biases and variations caused by different data normalization strategy, only the uniformly normalized affymetrix microarray data from m3d database  were selected  <cit> . the  <dig> sets of microarray data from m3d database comprise over-expression studies of a total of  <dig> recombinant proteins classified into four major functional categories , providing a broad spectrum of experimental conditions in which stably expressed reference genes can be identified. among the  <dig> genes expressed across all arrays, the top fifty genes were selected based on their low coefficient of variation of signal intensities. these fifty genes were then further analyzed for their genetic loci and functional classifications  <cit> . genes that belong to the same transcription unit were excluded and genes from diverse functional classes were selected to avoid potential transcriptional co-regulation. twenty genes were short-listed as candidate reference genes for further analyses .

meta-analysis of the expression profiles of  <dig> arrays relevant to recombinant protein production. twenty candidate reference genes were selected based on the lowest cv. the log <dig> transformed values of the average signal intensities among the  <dig> arrays were shown as mean. ihfb was included for comparison, and commonly used reference genes were highlighted.

temporal expression of candidate reference genes in e. coli cells over-expressing metabolic pathway genes
the temporal expressions  of the  <dig> candidate reference genes,  <dig> commonly used reference genes and  <dig> lycopene synthetic genes were analyzed by qpcr . all but two of the candidate reference genes were expressed at detectable levels in bl <dig> cells. the absolute levels of expressions of each gene were interpolated from standard curves and the expression levels of these genes spanned over  <dig> logs . all the qpcr assays showed high efficiency of amplification  and low intra- and inter- assay variations .

stabilities of candidate reference genes and common housekeeping genes
two independent statistical algorithms, genorm and normfinder, were used to analyze the gene expressions. genorm is based on pairwise variation analysis and assumes none of the reference genes are co-regulated. normfinder is a model based method that analyzes the stability of each candidate gene, assuming all input samples are of equal quality and quantity. the "m value"  or "stability value"  are inversely correlated to the stability of the candidate gene. the stability of the  <dig> candidate genes, rrsa and ihfb across all experimental conditions was analyzed by the two methods. interestingly, both approaches identified cysg, idnt, and hcat as the most stable reference genes . on the contrary, rrsa and ihfb were poorly ranked . in addition, pairwise variation analysis by genorm showed that the combination of cysg, idnt, and hcat is sufficiently stable  to serve as normalizer.

further analysis of candidate gene stabilities in cells grown at different temperatures or at specific time point  revealed that the stability rankings of candidate genes do vary among different subgroups. however, cysg, idnt and hcat were consistently more stable than rrsa and ihfb under all subgroups examined. the results suggested that the three novel candidate genes may serve as better normalizers than the commonly used rrsa and ihfb for gene expression profiling in bl <dig> cells.

comparison of the normalization factors generated by different reference gene
to account for sample to sample variations introduced during rna isolation and quantification, raw expression profiles of target genes were scaled by a normalization factor  calculated based on independent measurement of one or more internal reference genes. when multiple genes are used, nf is the geometric average of the relative expression level of each gene  <cit> .  as we have previously shown  <cit> , nf based on an unstable reference gene could differ significantly from the nf of a stable gene, which resulted in misinterpretation of normalized target gene expression. to test the robustness of the three novel genes in each subgroup, the nfs computed based on cysg, idnt and hcat  were compared to the nfs based on the three most stable genes in each subgroup , e.g. cysg, ssra and pflc . similarly, the deviations of nfrrsa and nfihfb from nftop <dig> were examined. remarkably, nfcysg/idnt/hcat differed from nftop <dig> by less than 40% in all subgroups examined, whereas nfrrsa deviated from nftop <dig> by as much as 290% . thus, the expression stabilities of cysg, idnt, and hcat were sufficient to warrant their use as reference genes in each experiment subgroup. on the contrary, the analysis further highlighted the instability of rrsa and ihfb and suggested that the use of rrsa and ihfb as reference genes were likely to lead to significant misinterpretation of lycopene synthetic gene profile.

choice of reference genes affects the interpretation of target gene regulation
to demonstrate that the use of unstable reference genes could substantially alter the interpretation of target gene expression profiles, we examined the target gene profiles normalized by four nfs: nftop <dig> , nfcysg/idnt/hcat, nfrrsa and nfihfb. . no significant difference was observed in target gene expressions normalized by nfcysg/idnt/hcat or nftop <dig>  in both cases, lycopene synthetic genes were found to be stably expressed upon iptg induction. the results showed the reduction of lycopene production at high induction was not due to limited transcription of lycopene synthetic genes. in comparison, different conclusions were derived when the results were normalized with rrsa or ihfb. lycopene synthetic genes appeared to be significantly downregulated or upregulated when rrsa or ihfb were used as normalizers, respectively. such misinterpretation was caused by the up-regulation of rrsa and the down-regulation of ihfb expressions upon iptg induction . a detailed time course analysis of rrsa and ihfb expression further confirmed that they were regulated during recombinant enzyme production. at  <dig>  h after iptg induction, rrsa and ihfb were not regulated but the expressions were significantly altered at  <dig> h and  <dig> h after iptg induction .

further validation of novel reference genes in an e. coli k- <dig> derivative strain
besides e. coli bl <dig> , e. coli k- <dig> derivatives were also frequently used for recombinant protein production and metabolic engineering. unlike bl <dig>  utilizing t <dig> system from bacteriophage, the k- <dig> derivatives employ endogenous expression system. to test if the same set of reference genes is applicable across strains, the expression stabilities of the  <dig> candidate genes , rrsa and ihfb were evaluated in a k- <dig> derivative, dh10b. similar to that of bl <dig>  dh10b cells were engineered to over-express dxs, idi, ispd, and ispf controlled by arabad system at 28째c. sample preparation and data analysis were performed as described for bl <dig> 

when analyzed by normfinder and genorm, the three most stable groups of genes in dh10b were cysg/rrsa/pbpc and cysg/rrsa/iicy, respectively . to test if the use of cysg/idnt/hcat as normalizers was still applicable, nfcysg/idnt/hcat was compared with nfcysg/rrsa/pbpc in dh10b. no statistically significant difference was found . the transcript levels of target gene crte normalized by the two sets of reference genes were also comparable . these suggested that the combination of cysg/hcat/idnt is indeed stable in dh10b cells to provide accurate interpretation of qpcr results. the results showed that lycopene synthetic genes were not transcriptionally regulated  after induction in dh10b. consistent with results in bl <dig>  normalization with an unstable reference gene ihfb overestimated the upregulation of crte transcription . finally, it is worthy to note that unlike in bl <dig>  rrsa was stably expressed in dh10b , suggesting that the expression systems and genetic differences among e. coli strains can affect the choices of qpcr reference genes.

discussion
normalization of gene expression is critical for the accurate interpretation of transcriptional changes determined by qpcr. the use of total rna as a reference has been explored as an alternative method to normalize qpcr gene expression but this approach was found not to be suitable as ribosomal rna, the main constituent, was found to be regulated  <cit> . the use of multiple reference genes is deemed as the preferred method, where technical variations are taken into account  <cit> . in this study we aimed to identify reliable reference genes for qpcr in recombinant protein producing e. coli, since over expression of recombinant proteins in e. coli is extensively used in biotechnology.

we first analyzed single platform and uniformly normalized microarray expression data from a substantial number of recombinant protein over-expression studies. from these, we selected  <dig> candidate reference genes based on their variation of signal intensities across all selected arrays. the expression of the  <dig> candidate genes and  <dig> commonly used reference genes were then measured by qpcr under a variety of conditions, including different strains, growth stages, temperatures, and induction levels. the expression of cysg, idnt and hcat were found to be most constant as ranked by genorm and normfinder. furthermore, scaling with the geometric average of these three genes  provided accurate data interpretation under all tested conditions. the genes, idnt and hcat, encode transporters for idonate and 3-phenylpropionate, respectively and cysg encodes a metabolic enzyme involved in siro-heme synthesis. putative regulations of these gene expressions were predicted in ecocyc http://ecocyc.org/, but only the control of idnt expression by its substrate idonate was experimentally verified in e. coli  <cit> . idonate is not a commonly used ingredient in e. coli media, which might explain the constant expression of idnt in the diverse microarray studies which we have analyzed and the qpcr study carried out herein.

normalization of gene expression using the scaling factor derived from the three most stable genes  revealed that the induction of the  <dig> enzymes  of the dxp pathway did not inhibit the expression of the enzymes involved in the lycopene production. the lycopene biosynthetic genes expressed from multiple copy plasmid and some of endogenous dxp pathway genes were found to maintain constant transcription levels during high induction levels. in contrast to the empirically validated reference genes described here, rrsa  <cit>  encoding ribosomal rna 16s and ihfb  <cit> , were unvalidated but yet commonly used as reference genes in e. coli. disturbingly, we found that ihfb and rrsa were less stable than cysg/idnt/hcat under many conditions tested. the expression of lycopene biosynthetic genes normalized with ihfb appeared to be upregulated by up to  <dig> fold during induction, while rrsa overestimated gene downregulation by up to  <dig> fold . this type of incorrect interpretation can lead to faulty conclusions with regard to transcriptional regulations and is especially problematic in guiding further genetic manipulations. these results showed that the e. coli transcription machinery is fairly robust, and the lycopene production inhibition is not due to altered transcriptions of genes in the pathway examined. the results also illustrate the importance of the use of reliable, validated reference genes for qpcr analysis in e. coli.

in addition, the stabilities of gene expressions of rrsa in two tested strains were not consistent. we found that rrsa expression was fairly stable in dh10b but not in bl <dig> . this could be due to the strain-specific expression systems of the two cells. bl <dig>  was engineered to produce recombinant t <dig> rna polymerase for target protein expression whereas dh10b uses e. coli endogenous expression systems. another possibility could be due to the differences in their genetic backgrounds. nonetheless, this example clearly highlights the necessity of evaluating the suitability of reference genes in different experimental contexts. extending the study herein, it will be of interest to examine the use of the normalization factor of these three genes  in more specific applications including conditions in biotechnology such as heat/cold-shock stresses, the presence of alcohols, and knockout of metabolic genes, and the study of pathogenic strains.

CONCLUSIONS
this systematic study included the meta-analysis of public microarray data and extensive in house qpcr analysis. twenty candidate genes were identified and their expression stabilities were analyzed and compared with two commonly used reference genes rrsa and ihfb. the expression of cysg/hcat/idnt was found to be most constant in the two recombinant protein producing e. coli strains across different growth stages, growth temperature, and inducer concentrations. only the normalization factors derived from cysg/hcat/idnt but not the ones derived from rrsa or ihfb provided accurate interpretation of transcriptional responses in the tested conditions. the identified reference genes in this study could be useful for other studies involving recombinant protein producing e. coli.

