BACKGROUND
staphylococcus aureus is a highly adaptable pathogen that is responsible for tens of thousands of serious infections every year in the united states  <cit> . over  <dig>  people die due to antibiotic-resistant s. aureus infections   <cit> . resistance has emerged in s. aureus to all major classes of antibiotics and is expected to be an ongoing problem  <cit> . many cellular factors in s. aureus contribute to antibiotic tolerance and resistance  <cit> . for example, resistance to β-lactam antibiotics is due to the acquisition of an additional penicillin-binding protein , pbp2a, which has a lower affinity for β-lactams than the other pbps  <cit> . pbp2a does not act alone, however; many other auxiliary factors are required for phenotypic β-lactam resistance  <cit> . the cell wall stress response and the stringent response are also required for s. aureus to mount a robust cellular response to antibiotic-induced stress  <cit> . a better understanding of how these cellular components work together to combat environmental stresses could lead to new strategies for more efficacious dosing of existing antibacterial agents as well as the development of novel therapeutics.

transposon libraries are powerful tools for probing bacterial physiology  <cit> . in conjunction with next-generation sequencing  technologies, high quality transposon libraries have been used to characterize essential and conditionally essential genes in a variety of bacterial species  <cit> . several variations of high throughput transposon insertion site sequencing have been reported, including transposon directed insertion-site sequencing , insertion sequencing , high-throughput insertion tracking by deep sequencing , and transposon sequencing   <cit> . these approaches chiefly vary in the method of transposon delivery, being tailored for a particular species, and in the preparation of library dna to map transposon insertion sites. creation of high-density transposon libraries in s. aureus has been challenging because its thick cell wall precludes high-efficiency electroporation of dna containing the transposon, and there are no systems in s. aureus for transposon delivery via conjugation  <cit> . thus, most high coverage transposon libraries in s. aureus typically utilize a temperature sensitive plasmid containing the transposon and require high-temperature plasmid-curing steps to remove the plasmid delivery vehicle after transposition has occurred  <cit> . during this curing step, temperature-sensitive transposon mutants may be culled, making it challenging to differentiate essential genes from those that are required for growth at elevated temperatures.

here we report the design and application of a phage-based transposition method that is compatible with a new ngs protocol and surmounts the many challenges associated with creating high-density transposon libraries in s. aureus. in fact, this method is so efficient that we were able to multiplex together transposon constructs with different regulatory elements that have the ability to over- and under-express as well as inactivate any gene in the genome to create a single highly-diverse library with more than  <dig>  unique transposon mutants . we have used this library to identify genes essential for growth at 30°c and have assessed transposon mutant fitness at a set of low and high temperatures to identify temperature-sensitive and resistant mutants. nineteen genes identified as essential in previous studies were found to be conditionally-essential, demonstrating growth inhibition at elevated temperatures. in addition, mutants in the menaquinone biosynthesis pathway were found to be significantly enriched at high temperature. mutations in this pathway have previously been found in small colony variant  strains isolated from in vivo infections that are resistant to antibiotics, and our results suggest that heat stress is one condition that may select for these mutants. the phage-based delivery and insertion site sequencing methodology described here will facilitate comprehensive functional genomic studies of s. aureus physiology.table  <dig> 
number of reads and transposon insertions from two biological replicates



donor strain
number of reads
unique ta sites hit

p
pen

p
cap

p
tup

p
erm


RESULTS
adapting the transposon system for compatibility with any staphylococcus aureus strain
recently, we reported a phage-based approach for s. aureus that enables high efficiency delivery of transposons  <cit> , but it was not compatible with next generation sequencing. the phage-based transposon system developed previously uses a conditionally replicative transposon donor plasmid, which is moved by generalized phage transduction to a himar <dig> transposase-expressing strain that cannot support plasmid replication . following transduction, the transposase inserts the transposon into ta dinucleotide sites randomly across the genome. whereas other transposon systems generate only null genotypes due to gene disruption, the phage-based system was designed to allow over- and under expression of genes as well as inactivation  <cit> . this was achieved by building a set of transposon donor constructs harboring the mariner inverted terminal repeats  flanking an erythromycin resistance gene under the control of its own promoter and terminator along with an outward-facing weak, medium or strong promoter. genes proximal to the insertion site can be upregulated or downregulated to different extents depending on the orientation of insertion and the strength of the promoter . this phage-based transposition system was used to select for determinants conferring resistance to a panel of antibiotics. it was shown to be useful for nominating antibiotic targets through gene upregulation and for identifying other cellular factors involved in antibiotic resistance through deletion/downregulation  <cit> . however, in its original format the phage-based system was limited to sequencing single colonies isolated after positive selection on agar plates. thus, its use as a functional genomics discovery tool was limited and we sought to reengineer it to take full advantage of the power of next generation sequencing.figure  <dig> 
strategy for using phage-based transposition to make high quality transposon libraries for ngs sequencing.  the transposon insertion library is made by creating a high-frequency transducing lysate of the transposon cassette that is able to replicate as a plasmid in the donor strain . the lysate is mixed with the recipient strain  carrying a temperature sensitive plasmid from which the himar <dig> transposase is expressed, and erythromycin resistant transposon insertion mutants are selected.  by fitting the transposon cassette with an outward-facing promoter, genes can be up- or down-regulated, or inactivated if non-essential, in a single library pool. in order to cover a wide range of gene expression levels, different promoter containing transposon constructs can be multiplexed and then identified during ngs sequencing by unique dna barcodes  to collect fitness-gene dose relationships by monitoring read counts.



we first modified the transposase plasmid used in the recipient strain to include orf <dig>  the gene encoding the Φ <dig> ci-like repressor. the original phage-based transposon delivery system was used to make mutant libraries in s. aureus strains rn <dig> and col  <cit> , and the transposon donor plasmids were designed with a 1 kb Φ <dig> homology region to stimulate efficient packaging of transposon donor plasmid dna as concatemers by the phage . it proved necessary to integrate the Φ <dig> ci-like repressor  into the genome to prevent replication and lysis of the recipient strain by the wt Φ <dig> population that did not package plasmid. because we wanted to use the phage-based transposition system in other s. aureus strains without having to first integrate the ci-like repressor into the genome, we moved the orf <dig> gene into the transposase plasmid  to achieve transposase expression and inhibition of Φ <dig> replication in a single step .

we selected hg <dig> as our strain background for library preparation because a high quality plasmid-delivered library has been made in the same strain and provided a reference for validating our method  <cit> . however, in contrast to rn <dig> and col, a high number of ermr colonies was observed in hg <dig> even in the absence of functional transposase . we initially speculated that phage-transposon hybrid dna containing an attp site was being integrated within a recipient hg <dig> subpopulation where the chromosomal attb site had become available through spontaneous excision of the resident prophage, thus leading to the high background of non-transposase catalyzed events . to confirm this possibility, we introduced the porf <dig> transposase plasmid into wild type rn <dig>  which also contains an available attb site. as with hg <dig>  we now observed a high background of non-transposase catalyzed ermr colonies in rn <dig> attb+ , consistent with a role for phage-mediated att-site specific integration in increasing background . to block this pathway, we constructed a strictly virulent transducing phage  by replacing the attp-int site with a frt site from the yeast 2-μm plasmid site-specific recombination system  <cit>  , thereby preventing integration. the use of Φ11-frt decreased the background of non-transposase-catalyzed transposon integration in rn <dig> as fewer ermr colonies were produced by the truncated transposase expressing strain , but the background in hg <dig> remained unacceptably high . we therefore considered a second mechanism for the production non-transposase catalyzed ermr colonies. homologous recombination between phage-transposon hybrids carrying the ermr cassette and the resident Φ <dig> prophage in hg <dig> could also yield ermr colonies . to determine whether this was occurring, we constructed a strain of hg <dig> where the Φ <dig> prophage was specifically removed using the same att::frt exchange strategy employed to create the Φ11-frt donor phage . the combination of this recipient strain  with Φ11-frt packaged transposon donors reduced non-transposase catalyzed ermr background colonies to less than 1% . with removal of the Φ <dig> prophage, this strategy now allows us to create high-density transposon mutant libraries with a very low background of non-transposase catalyzed transposon integration using the phage-based transposition system in any strain of s. aureus that is transducible by Φ <dig> figure  <dig> 
elimination of non-transposase catalyzed transposon integration in strain hg <dig>   the ratio of erythromycin resistant colonies arising from non-transposase catalyzed  to transposase dependent  events was determined in the s. aureus rn <dig>  or hg <dig>  recipient strain background by comparing the number of colonies resulting from transduction of the transposon into the full transposase or truncated transposase expressing strains . the presence of the phage attachment site in the bacterial chromosome , the phage attachment site in the donor lysate , and a Φ <dig> prophage in the recipient is indicated for each combination.  putative mechanisms for integration of the ermr cassette of the transposon into the recipient chromosome include transposase catalyzed , integrase mediated site specific recombination , and homologous recombination  of phage-transposon hybrids resolved from concatemeric transposon donor dna.  the integrase pathway was blocked by replacing the integrase  gene and the attl sequence with a frt element by allelic replacement. to cure the resulting prophage, the attr site was also replaced with a second frt site and a phage donor lacking int-attp was isolated by introducing the flp recombinase. in the process, a recipient hg <dig> strain was generated from which the Φ <dig> prophage was specifically cured and replaced with a single frt element, preventing homologous recombination.



adapting the phage-based transposon system for next-generation sequencing
to adapt the transposon system for ngs, modifications to the donor plasmids were required. the initial design included the incorporation of: 1) the p <dig> illumina adapter sequence within the transposon cassette to enable illumina based ngs, 2) unique three base pair barcodes specific to each outward facing promoter element for de-multiplexing after sequencing, and 3) a mmei site to capture the transposon-genome junction. the mmei restriction site was embedded within one itr of the transposon by a single base pair change, and facilitates processing of transposon insertion sites by cutting non-specifically 20-base pairs downstream of its recognition site   <cit> . early efforts to prepare and sequence our transposon libraries using the reengineered constructs were plagued by high plasmid-transposon junction read counts, despite the fact that the vast majority of ermr colonies arose via bona fide transposition events . when we used pcr to probe the transposon junctions in isolated transposon mutant colonies, we observed a small population harboring both plasmid- and genomic-transposon junctions , as previously reported  <cit> . however, when a single base pair was changed in the canonical itr dna sequence to create the mmei site, the population of transposon insertion mutants containing plasmid-transposon junctions increased to over 50% . we hypothesized that the mmei modified base in the itr was important for recognition by the himar <dig> transposase in vivo, resulting in a transposase-dna complex that often failed to engage the initially encountered itr and instead read through to a downstream non, contiguous itr within the concatemer   <cit> . the ensuing transposition event would thus capture and introduce the intervening plasmid region into the recipient genome. therefore, we added two noti sites to the plasmid, one immediately after the mmei-modified itr within the plasmid backbone and the second immediately upstream of the p <dig> adapter sequence . following an added noti digestion step, the plasmid-transposon junctions could now be selectively removed as described below and in the additional file  <dig> .figure  <dig> 
reduction of transposon-plasmid junction ngs reads with flanking
not
i restriction sites.  inverse pcr was used to amplify the itr <dig> transposon junctions for twelve colonies as has been described  <cit> . three out of twelve of these colonies also contained transposon-plasmid junctions . this ratio increased to seven out of twelve when the canonical itr sequence was altered to incorporate a mmei recognition site . results are representative of multiple independent experimental replicates.  the putative mechanism for transposase catalyzed integration of transposon-plasmid junctions may involve engagement of non-contiguous itr repeats , resulting in chromosomally integrated transposon multimers. in contrast, when both itr sequences are optimal, contiguous itrs are most frequently mobilized .  colors are used to identify the positions of the sequences in this drawing. to selectively remove transposon-plasmid junctions, we introduced two noti sites into the transposon construct that flanked the mmei modified itr <dig>  in addition, we included a p <dig> illumina sequencing primer site with a unique 3-bp dna barcode to identify the p
out promoter that faces outward from itr <dig> during ngs sequencing.  after first digesting gdna with noti, the transposon-plasmid junction content was substantially reduced in comparison to figure 3a.



our optimized sample preparation procedure for transposon mapping is outlined in figure 4a, and a detailed version can be found in the additional file  <dig>  briefly, genomic dna is extracted from a pooled transposon library and then digested with noti followed by a size-selective poly-ethylene glycol  precipitation to remove liberated plasmid-transposon junctions   <cit> . a pcr-based quality control check is performed to confirm that background due to transposon-plasmid junctions is minimal . a biotinylated dsdna adapter containing a noti compatible overhang is then ligated and the dna is digested with mmei. the transposon-genome junctions with 2-base overhangs are bound to streptavidin dynabeads and ligated to an adapter containing the indexing barcode and priming site for the illumina sequencing primer. primers containing the p <dig> and p <dig> sites are then used to amplify the transposon-genome junctions bound to the streptavidin dynabeads. the fragments are run on a 2% agarose gel to confirm size, gel extracted, and multiplexed with other samples prior to sequencing. using this protocol, we routinely reduced the amount of contaminating plasmid-transposon reads to less than 1%. to confirm the quality of the dna insert library for ngs, we developed a quality control procedure for determining level of background due to transposon-plasmid junctions . this strategy, which utilizes restriction enzyme digestion followed by size-selective precipitations, can be generalized to other bacterial species and transposon library sequencing strategies to prepare transposon libraries for ngs.figure  <dig> 
protocol for the preparation of a high quality transposon dna library for ngs.   genomic dna is isolated and digested with noti. high molecular weight dna is selectively precipitated using an 8%peg + nacl solution, and transposon-plasmid junctions  are removed in the supernatant. a biotinylated dsdna adapter with noti overhang is ligated  before digestion with mmei, which cuts non-specifically  <dig> bp from its recognition site within itr <dig> into the genome to liberate biotinylated-transposon-genome junctions as short dna fragments . . biotinylated fragments are bound to streptavidin beads , and an illumina sequencing primer adapter containing an indexing barcode and mmei compatible ends is ligated . primers annealing to the p <dig> site and the illumina sequencing primer adapter sequence  are used to pcr amplify the transposon-genome junctions , agarose gel purified, and submitted for illumina sequencing . ngs reads capture both the 16-bp of flanking genomic dna as well as the transposon donor specific barcode located between the p <dig> and itr <dig>   fragments arising from transposon-plasmid junctions are removed by size selective peg-nacl precipitation, while the remaining fragments lack both p <dig> annealing sites and mmei sites for ligation of the illumina sequencing primer adapter. these fragments are therefore not amplified in step  of 4a.  by performing the size-selective precipitation on a  <dig> kb dna ladder, we show that small  <dig> bp fragments of dna are retained in the solution , while larger dna is precipitated .  six transposon donor constructs were multiplexed and designed to attenuate expression of genes proximal to the insertion site according to the regulatory elements located at the ends of the transposon backbone. each donor can be identified from ngs reads by the unique  <dig> bp barcode.



creation and sequencing of a transposon library
using the strains and methods described above, we created a  <dig> million colony transposon library using six different transposon donor constructs containing promoters of different strengths. the donor constructs contained transposon cassettes with a panel of different outward facing promoters , a construct with the ppen outward-facing promoter on one end and the erythromycin-resistance gene promoter  on the other but no intervening transcriptional terminator , and a transposon construct with no outward facing promoter elements  . library cultures were grown for 12- <dig> generations in tryptic soy broth , harvested between an od of  <dig> and  <dig> , and genomic dna isolated. after processing samples for ngs , galaxy was used to separate the data by sample index and donor construct barcodes   <cit> . the data were filtered by illumina quality score for high quality reads and mapped with bowtie  to the s. aureus nctc <dig> reference genome  <cit> . full details of the bioinformatics analysis are available in the methods section.

we used two biological replicates for our analyses and computationally de-multiplexed the data by transposon construct based on their unique barcode . for each of the donor constructs, we obtained  <dig> to  <dig> million reads that could be mapped to ta insertion sites. depending on the constructs, insertions were identified in  <dig>  to  <dig>  of the ~ <dig>  unique ta sites in the s. aureus genome . on average,  <dig> ,389 ±  <dig>  reads hit  <dig>  ±  <dig>  ta sites for each of the six transposon constructs, with  <dig>  ta sites in common between all six of the donor constructs, and  <dig>  ta sites covered by at least one donor construct.

identification of essential genes
to validate the quality of the library and assess whether insertions due to individual transposon constructs could be reliably analyzed, we used the data obtained to identify essential genes. we first compared the number of reads per gene for each transposon donor construct using principal component analysis and found that the transposon constructs with outward-facing promoters co-clustered away from the promoterless  and weakest promoter  constructs . this indicates that transposon insertions in to the same ta site by different transposon constructs are differentially tolerated due to polar effects on downstream genes. this results in different numbers of reads mapping to each gene depending on the identity of the transposon construct. however, because transposon constructs containing an outward-facing promoter  clustered together, the number of reads mapping to each gene for each of these constructs will be more similar to each other than to blunt or perm. because of the similarity between the constructs with an outward-facing promoter, the data from these constructs was combined for the gene essentiality analysis.

we then identified essential genes using a recently published method, el-artist  <cit> . this method uses a hidden markov model  to categorize genes as essential, non-essential, or containing essential domains . because this method uses local context of the ta site as well as the number of reads in that ta site to determine essentiality, it lessens the impact of the intrinsic variability in the data and allows us to robustly ascertain the importance of every gene to cellular survival  <cit> . there were  <dig> genes found to be essential in all three categories , the blunt construct had the greatest number of essential genes , while the perm construct had slightly fewer , and the other promoter constructs had the least  . we were curious about the differences between the blunt construct and constructs containing promoter elements. when a transposon inserts into the coding sequence of a gene, it not only interrupts the expression of that gene, but can also disrupt the expression of other genes due to polar effects. it is possible that some of these polar effects are abrogated by the promoters in the perm and other promoter constructs, which allow downstream genes to be expressed from the promoter in the transposon instead of the native promoter. if this is true, then the genes found to be essential with the blunt construct, but non-essential with the other constructs, should be next to or near other essential genes. of  <dig> essential genes found using the blunt construct that were non-essential for the perm construct and the other promoter constructs,  <dig> were immediately proximal to another essential gene. another five were immediately proximal to a domain essential gene, and three of these were followed by another essential gene. only two genes were not adjacent to an essential or domain essential gene. these data suggest that when a transposon containing an outward-facing promoter inserts into a region containing many essential and domain essential genes, the insertion may result in a less lethal phenotype than the standard transposon construct. due to these differences and to compare our data with previous studies which did not have constructs containing promoters, we chose to use only the blunt construct for subsequent analyses.

the blunt construct, which is not fitted with gene expression modulating elements, does not include promoters that affect proximal gene expression and is most similar to previously investigated transposons  <cit> . therefore, we used it for the rest of the analyses so that we could compare our results to previous studies. in two biological replicates, there were ~ <dig>  unique insertion sites due to the blunt construct. using the circos program to display the number of reads per ta site  <cit> , we visually confirmed randomly distributed insertions throughout the length of the genome . of the  <dig> coding regions of the genome that are not part of the Φ <dig> family lysogen, el-artist called  <dig> non-essential,  <dig> domain essential, and  <dig> essential .figure  <dig> 
the essential gene sets at 30°c.  the circos program was used to map transposon insertion sites across the genome, with a histogram depicting the number of reads per ta site in purple. the innermost blue rings depict the locations of non-essential genes for which a fitness cost was not observed, while the outermost red ring depicts those genes identified as essential. the middle green ring represents those genes that were found to be domain essential.  venn diagram comparing our essential gene list to chaudhuri et al. and valentino et al  <cit> . there is extensive overlap between the three studies.  <dig> genes were classified as essential in all three works. these represent a core set of genes required for cell growth regardless of experimental and analytical variations.



we compared these results to two previous studies that identified essential genes in s. aureus based on transposon mutant analysis, one in the hg <dig> genetic background  <cit>  and the other in sh <dig>  <cit> . both strains are derived from the nctc  <dig> parent strain. the transposon libraries were made, grown, and analyzed using different methods, but there were  <dig> essential genes in common between this study and the previous study in hg <dig>  and  <dig> genes in common between all three studies . there were  <dig> genes identified as essential in both previous studies that did not meet our cutoffs for essentiality. of these, two are no longer considered to be genes, eight were in our list of non-essential genes, and  <dig> were found to be domain essential. because the previous studies were done using transposon libraries made using a high-temperature plasmid-curing step, we checked to see if any of these genes would be identified as essential by el-artist at 43°c. of the  <dig> domain essential genes, nine were identified as essential at high temperatures, with nine of the remainder found to be domain essential as at 30°c. one gene, saouhsc_ <dig>  encoding the phosphor-carrier hpr was found to be non-essential at 43°c. transposon insertions in domain essential genes are likely to result in cells that are weak and/or have growth defects, and depending on the stringency of the method of analysis, these mutants may be mistakenly classified as essential. in addition, at the more stressful high temperatures, some of these weakened mutants may no longer be able to survive. finally, of the eight genes we found to be non-essential that were previously identified as essential, four became essential at high temperatures, and one became domain essential. the four genes that became essential at 43°c include genes known to be important for high temperatures growth such as the heat shock genes, dnaj  and dnak , as well as sepf  which is discussed below. however, overall there was substantial agreement between our essential gene list and the lists generated in previous studies despite analytical and experimental differences  . the  <dig> genes found to be essential in all studies comprise a core set of essential genes required for cell survival regardless of the experimental and analytical variations used to identify them.

identification of genes important for growth at different temperatures
because the phage-based method for transposon delivery does not involve a high temperature plasmid curing step, mutant libraries retain insertions in temperature sensitive genes. hence, after validating the transposon library grown at 30°c, we identified transposon insertions that confer temperature-sensitive and resistant phenotypes by comparing mutant fitness at 16°c, 23°c, 37°c, and 43°c to that at the reference temperature 30°c. at each temperature the library was grown for 12- <dig> generations and the number of reads due to insertion of the blunt transposon in each gene was compared to the number of reads obtained after outgrowth at 30°c. two biological replicates were carried out for each condition and the data were analyzed using the mann-whitney u test, correcting for multiple hypothesis testing with the benjamini-hochberg procedure  <cit> . genes showing a greater than five-fold change  in the number of reads at the test temperature compared to the 30°c control were considered significant if the corrected p-value was less than  <dig> . a full list of affected genes can be found in additional file  <dig> 

at 16°c and 23°c, only one gene, saouhsc_ <dig>  contained a significantly different number of reads due to transposon insertions compared to the 30°c control, with the number of reads being enriched six-fold and five-fold, respectively. at 37°c, reads due to transposon insertions were found to be enriched in five genes involved in branched chain amino acid degradation, ilve , saouhsc_ <dig>  bkda <dig> , bkda <dig> , and saouhsc_ <dig>  . branched chain fatty acids are built from branched chain acyl-coa primers, which in turn are derived from the degradation of branched chain amino acids  <cit> . branched chain fatty acids increase membrane fluidity upon incorporation into phospholipid bilayers  <cit> . in bacillus subtilis, enzymes that catalyze the degradation of branched-chain amino acids are induced during cold shock and are speculated to increase membrane fluidity by promoting the incorporation of branched chain fatty acids into membrane lipids  <cit> . in our data there is a bias against transposon insertions in the branched chain amino acid degradation pathway at temperatures lower than 37°c, in agreement with studies in s. aureus and listeria monocytogenes implicating branched chain fatty acids in growth at low temperatures  <cit> . two genes, saouhsc_ <dig>  encoding sepf, and the hypothetical protein likely co-transcribed with it, saouhsc_ <dig>  proved to have significantly fewer reads at 37°c. sepf is a protein of unknown function thought to be involved in cell division, and was previously identified as essential in s. aureus  <cit> , but these studies show it is essential for survival only at temperatures greater than 30°c.

a significant number of genes were found to be affected by transposon insertion when grown at 43°c, with  <dig> being enriched and  <dig> being depleted. because this method for creating transposon libraries does not involve a high-temperature plasmid curing step, we expected to retain many temperature-sensitive mutants. we used two methods for identifying temperature-sensitive mutants represented in the library. the first was the mann-whitney u analysis used for every temperature. for the second analysis, we used the 43°c data and the essential gene analysis described in the previous section to identify genes essential at 43°c that were not identified as essential at 30°c. we confirmed that the number of reads mapping to these genes had decreased at 43°c from 30°c. we compared these genes to other essential genes lists  <cit> , and identified  <dig> genes that had been annotated as essential in at least two other transposon library analyses, but were only temperature-sensitive with our method . to further analyze the temperature sensitive gene subset, we classified them according to cellular function . because protection from temperature stress relies on the coordinated response of many different pathways regulated by signaling systems and alternative transcription factors, we were not surprised to find that  <dig> regulatory genes were significantly depleted at 43°c, including yych  and yyci , which were identified as essential in another transposon library  <cit> . the yych and yyci genes negatively regulate the two component system, walkr, which is a major regulator of peptidoglycan metabolism that controls autolytic activity  <cit> . deletions of yych and yyci result in upregulation of walkr, which induces cell wall defects  <cit> . as walkr positively regulates autolytic activity  <cit> , increased autolysis of peptidoglycan could explain how derepression of walkr produces a temperature-sensitive phenotype. we also found, as expected, that many genes implicated in the heat shock response were required for survival at 43°c. these included the chaperones dnak  and dnaj   <cit> , the transcriptional regulator hrca   <cit> , the protease clpc   <cit> , and mcsb , an arginine phosphotransferase that negatively regulates the stress response repressor ctsr  <cit> . grpe , which acts in a complex with dnak and dnaj, narrowly missed our cutoffs   <cit> .table  <dig> 
genes with a growth defect at 43°c that were previously identified as essential



category
gene locus
name
mprf
lcpa
*mprf aiso annotated as fmtc, and lcpa also annotated as msrr.

genes that influence fitness at high temperature.  genes contributing to fitness at 43°c were classified by cellular function. genes associated with the cell envelope constituted the largest fraction of the hits.  six genes known to be associated with the heat-shock response were found to be temperature-sensitive. the number of reads in each gene normalized to  <dig> million sample reads is shown at the various temperatures tested. loss of lyra and mprf was found to have opposite phenotypes at 43°c, with an increase  and decrease  in fitness being observed, respectively.  to validate these phenotypes, null mutants in s. aureus hg <dig> were grown to mid-log phase, diluted, and grown at 43°c. while Δmprf did not grow, confirming temperature sensitivity, the Δlyra strain grew at nearly twice the rate of wt.



the largest category of genes with significant changes in number of reads when grown at 43°c included those involved in cell envelope related processes . this category includes genes involved in peptidoglycan  biosynthesis, cell shape/division, membrane lipid composition, transcriptional regulation of cell-envelope genes, and predicted membrane proteins . transposon insertions into biosynthetic genes directly involved in pg biosynthesis were notably depleted, including pbp <dig>  and pbp <dig> , which encode cell wall transpeptidases  <cit> , one of two alleles of mura  involved in pg precursor biosynthesis  <cit> , alr <dig>  which encodes one of two alleles of alanine racemase  <cit> , and saouhsc_ <dig>  which encodes an amic-like peptidoglycan amidase  <cit> . insertions in several genes involved in cell shape/cell division were also affected at 43°c. for example, reads due to transposon insertion were depleted for roda , mrec , and mred , which encode scaffolding proteins that coordinate pg biosynthesis and influence cell shape  <cit> , and also for ezra , which is thought to coordinate z-ring functions with pg synthesis  <cit> , ftsh   <cit> , sepf   <cit> , gpsb   <cit> , and saouhsc_ <dig>  saouhsc_ <dig> encodes a  <dig> amino acid ftsk-like protein suggested to be involved in chromosome localization  <cit> . as noted above, insertions in this gene conferred a growth advantage at 16°c and 23°c, but are deleterious at high temperature. this gene was identified in other studies as essential in s. aureus  <cit> . the putative cell wall teichoic acid ligases, lcpa  and lcpb , were also depleted at 43°c, consistent with the vital role of wall teichoic acids in orchestrating pg assembly and maintaining envelope integrity  <cit> . the integral membrane protein mprf , which attaches lysine to phosphatidylglycerol, was also important for fitness at high temperatures  <cit> .

in addition to the mutants that were depleted at 43°c, we identified a number of processes for which disruption resulted in a significant growth advantage compared to growth at 30°c . pathway enrichment analysis using biocyc  <cit>  showed that the number of reads due to transposon insertion were significantly enriched in seven genes in the aromatic amino acid and menaquinol biosynthetic pathways  . in addition to producing phenylalanine and tyrosine, the aromatic amino acid pathway provides precursors  for menaquinone biosynthesis   <cit> . menaquinones are isoprenylated electron transport chain cofactors embedded in the membrane that are necessary for oxidative phosphorylation  <cit> . insertions in ispa , which encodes a putative geranyltransferase, were also enriched at 43°c. geranyltransferases initiate the condensation of isoprenoid units into longer chains used in the synthesis of menaquinones, and loss of ispa likely decreases the pool of menaquinones . we also identified insertions in hemy , a gene involved in the production of protoheme  <cit> . loss of these factors is thought to shift s. aureus growth towards an anaerobic metabolic regime, which markedly impacts s. aureus membrane physiology and generates small colony variants   <cit> . the observed growth advantage could also be related to more efficient anaerobic catabolism at high temperature, and/or decreased oxidative stress. five subunit genes in the f-type atpase involved in electron transport were found to be essential at 43°c : α-subunit , β-subunit , γ-subunit , a subunit , and b subunit  , suggesting the electron transport system  mutations can have opposing effects on fitness at elevated temperatures depending on which step in the ets is blocked. among cell envelope-related genes, reads due to transposon insertion were notably enriched in lytd , encoding a putative β-n-acetylglucosaminidase  <cit> , and lyra , a polytopic membrane protein. disruptions in lyra were previously shown to increase lysostaphin resistance and are lethal when wall teichoic acid biosynthesis is blocked  <cit> , and both these phenotypes are consistent with an important role for lyra in cell envelope biogenesis.figure  <dig> 
the electron transport system influences sensitivity to high temperatures.  nine genes were identified as growth advantaged at 43°c in comparison to 30°c. the number of reads per gene normalized to  <dig> million reads is shown for each temperature.  pathway analysis revealed that this subset of genes  is involved in the biosynthesis of components within the electron transport system, including protoheme and menaquinones.  blocking the electron transport system at the f-type atpase level, however, decreased fitness at 43°c . the number of reads per gene normalized to  <dig> million reads is shown for each temperature.



to confirm the results of our automated transposon insertion analysis pipeline, we constructed and measured the growth rates of null mutants of lyra  and mprf  . while there were no differences in growth of the mutants compared to wild type at 30°c, growth related phenotypes became apparent at 43°c after  <dig> to  <dig> generations of outgrowth . the wild type strain grew more slowly at 43°c than at 30°c , the Δmprf strain ceased dividing altogether, and the doubling time of the Δlyra mutant decreased to 34 minutes at 43°c from 41 minutes at 30°c . these results confirm the changes in fitness that were deduced from the changes in read number due to transposon insertion in lyra and mprf at 43°c.

discussion
adaptation of the transposon library for ngs
we have adapted a phage-based transposition method to reliably create large and diverse transposon libraries that can be analyzed using high- throughput illumina sequencing. the high background due to non-transposase-catalyzed recombination in the hg <dig> strain was reduced to negligible levels by removing the Φ <dig> family prophage and using a strictly virulent transposon donor phage  for transduction. other strains that harbor Φ <dig> family prophages, such as s. aureus newman  <cit> , may have a similar background problem that makes removing the Φ <dig> family prophage necessary for working in these genetic backgrounds. fortunately, many commonly used s. aureus strains, including rn <dig>  col, usa <dig>  and mw <dig>  do not harbor highly similar prophages and need not be reengineered. indeed, we have successfully constructed ultra-high density transposon libraries in several other s aureus strains, including the usa <dig> and mw <dig> backgrounds, using the same tools described here .

to realize the full potential of the phage-based delivery system for transposon library generation, we optimized both the donor constructs and the ngs sample preparation procedure. the donor constructs were modified to include two noti sites so that a straightforward digestion step could be used to reduce plasmid-transposon junction background . while plasmid-transposon junctions are particularly problematic in our case due to the generation of concatemeric dna by the phage, many in vivo transposon delivery vehicles suffer from some degree of transposon donor plasmid retention. plasmid-transposon junctions consume valuable ngs read counts and the lack of sequence diversity can affect quality scores for the entire sample. we demonstrate that plasmid contamination can be solved by introducing dual restriction enzyme sites flanking the plasmid-transposon junction. preprocessing genomic dna samples with noti allowed us to replace shearing methods with mmei digestion, a strategy that simplifies library preparation  <cit> . moreover, because transposition efficiency is high and the ngs library preparation protocol is robust, we are able to multiplex several different transposon constructs in the same library. by adding a dna barcode that specifies the gene expression regulatory element in the transposon construct, the roles of over- and under- expression of genes as well as inactivation can be assessed under a given condition during data analysis. for functional genomics and systems level analyses, the ability to capture over- and under-expression genotypes is particularly important because for the first time we will be able to probe the relationship of essential genes to a given cellular process through over/under expression of essential genes.

gene essentiality at a set of temperatures
the power of the redesigned phage-based transposition system was demonstrated through the preparation of a transposon mutant library containing ~ <dig>  independent insertions in the s. aureus hg <dig> strain background . we identified essential genes at 30°c, and found good agreement between our essential gene list and two other lists published previously, although  <dig> genes previously annotated as essential were classified by us as domain essential  <cit> . taking advantage of the fact that the phage-based transposon delivery method does not involve a high temperature plasmid curing step, we also carried out a study of the genetic factors involved in withstanding temperature stress. many genes responsive to heat- or cold-shock have been identified in s. aureus based on transcriptome data  <cit> , but a systematic and comprehensive analysis of the fitness of temperature-sensitive or resistant mutants has not been reported. we assessed the importance of each gene at five different temperatures based on enrichment or depletion of corresponding ngs reads. while reads per gene were largely unchanged compared to the 30°c control between 16°c, 23°c, and 37°c, reads for  <dig> genes were significantly affected at 43°c .

in addition to genes previously linked to heat shock and stress responses, we also found that many genes involved in cell envelope processes contribute to fitness at elevated temperature. some genes in which reads were depleted at 43°c, such as pbp <dig> and pbp <dig>  directly participate in crosslinking pg  <cit> , but others play less understood roles in pg synthesis. for example, our studies have implicated roda, mrec, and mred in withstanding temperature stress, as reads in all three genes were depleted by ~50-fold at 43°c . in rod-shaped organisms, different biosynthetic machines are dedicated to septal and side wall pg synthesis. roda, mrec, and mred are components of the machine that makes side wall pg, while ftsz, ftsl, and div1b interact with ftsw as part of the pg biosynthetic machinery at the septum  <cit> . s. aureus is a coccoid organism and is not known to have distinct pg biosynthetic machines, and yet it contains genetic elements suggestive of both a primary pg biosynthetic machine and a secondary machine  <cit> . in contrast to roda/mrec/mred, ftsz, ftsl, div1b, and ftsw were deemed essential from our analysis and are likely part of the predominant pg biosynthetic apparatus . roda/mrec/mred may be part of a secondary machine that takes on an important cellular role under environmental stress conditions.

we also identified mprf as important for survival at 43°c . mprf attaches lysine to phosphatidylglycerol in the cell membrane and is involved in cationic antimicrobial peptide resistance  <cit> . mutants in mprf have not previously been shown to be temperature sensitive. therefore, we constructed an mprf deletion strain and confirmed that it exhibited a pronounced growth defect at high temperature  as it ceased growing completely by mid-log phase. when these cells were plated and grown at 30°c, colonies did not grow, confirming that without a mprf gene, high temperatures are lethal.

in contrast to mprf, loss of another cell envelope gene, lyra, conferred a growth advantage. reads due to transposon insertion in this gene were substantially enriched at 43°c compared to 30°c. the growth advantage of a Δlyra strain compared to wildtype s. aureus was confirmed . deletion of lyra was previously shown to impart resistance to lysostaphin, an oligopeptide protease that cleaves gly-gly bonds in crosslinked pg  <cit> . recent work has implicated lyra in display of cell surface proteins  <cit> , but how its deletion confers increased growth rates at higher temperature is not clear. as an integral membrane protein, lyra may regulate multiple aspects of cell envelope structure. perhaps through the loss of interactions with other protein partners, the absence of lyra induces a pleiotropic cell envelope phenotype capable of withstanding a variety of cell envelope stressors.

small colony variant mutants withstand heat stress
transposon insertion mutants with reads mapping to genes that are part of the aromatic amino acid and menaquinol biosynthetic pathways were significantly enriched at 43°c . the small colony variant  phenotype of menaquinone  mutants in s. aureus has been well studied  <cit> . the loss of electron shuttling redox cofactors in the electron transport chain induces a characteristic colony morphology, noted for its slow growth, lack of pigmentation, and pinpoint colony size  <cit> . the ensuing reduction in flux through the electron transport chain decreases atp pools by diminishing respiration, which shifts global metabolism towards fermentation  <cit> . emergence of scvs is closely associated with persistent infections  <cit> , and scvs are particularly resistant to many clinically used antibiotics  <cit> . interestingly, our data revealed a marked growth advantage for menaquinone biosynthetic mutants at 43°c, including mend, menc, and menf. mutations in these same genes have been associated with scv formation in s. aureus clinical isolates, which normally are rapidly outcompeted by the faster growing wild type population  <cit> . elevated temperature clearly acts as a selective pressure that favors the emergence and propagation of scvs in vitro. recently, strains with increased resistance to vancomycin were found to emerge in an in vivo mouse model independent of vancomycin treatment  <cit> . whether the host pyrogenic response induces scv selection in vivo, however, remains an outstanding question.

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, we have developed a phage-based method for reproducibly creating high quality, ultra-high density transposon libraries in any s. aureus strain transducible by Φ <dig>  we have optimized transposon cassettes and sample preparation procedures to selectively remove transposon-plasmid junctions, and our solutions for reducing background due to these junctions are likely to be useful for other s. aureus strains, other bacterial species, and other transposon systems. by multiplexing bar-coded donor constructs, we showed that we can make massive transposon mutant libraries and identify insertions due to each type of donor. in this study, we used the data for the blunt transposon construct to identify genes important for s.aureus survival at high temperatures. furthermore, we found that scv mutants are selected for under conditions of heat stress. this system, including the gene expression modulating transposon cassettes, will be useful for future functional genomics analyses aimed at establishing novel strategies for the development of antibacterial agents and garnering insights into the infection biology of s. aureus.

