BACKGROUND
sequence alignment is the most critical step in molecular phylogenetic analysis. it defines homologous sites and putative evolution of site-specific variation  <cit> . however, sequence portions in multiple sequence alignments  may have low alignment confidence, that is they are ambiguously aligned  due to a variable number of indels, and thus different alignment solutions with identical cost scores are possible  <cit> . such portions are usually excluded from further analysis  <cit> , as methodologies often only work on a single msa, and ambiguities require subjective prioritization of a single alignment solution. length-variable regions also have an increased probability of homoplastic evolution. however, it is recognized that ambiguously aligned portions do carry substantial phylogenetic signal  <cit> .

methods that do not require a single msa provide one solution to this problem. direct optimization  optimizes alignments and trees simultaneously under parsimony, likelihood, or in a bayesian framework  <cit> . however, while do can handle uncertainty in alignments due to sequence length variation, it is computationally intensive and support is usually calculated by sampling of alternative alignments and trees, as credible intervals, posterior probabilities, or bremer support. these are not directly comparable to bootstrap support, which in do is only possible by creating pseudo-alignments, which defies the purpose of do. furthermore, it is also disputed whether alignments with optimized cost or likelihood scores under a given setting will return optimized tree topologies  <cit> .

an alternative to do or to excluding ambiguous regions is the separate analysis of indels and encoding them as non-dna characters  <cit> . the simplest approach is to encode residues by sequence length  or coding them as identical or different without measuring the degree of identity or difference  <cit> . tools such as snap  <cit>  and mafft  <cit>  include options to encode short indels . more complex methods dealing with larger gaps include frequency-based, motif-based, and pairwise distance-based methods. frequency-based methods such as 'ambiguous regions coding', arc  <cit>  calculate the relative frequencies of bases and base pairs and their spatial distribution within sequences of ambiguously aligned regions. motif- or 'word'-based methods search for common 'substrings' in ambiguously aligned sequences  <cit> . applications include arc and 'n-local decoding'  <cit> . the only pairwise distance-based method appears to be 'integration of ambiguously aligned sequences', inaase  <cit> , which encodes each region as a single character with a corresponding step matrix. inaase recovers phylogenetic signal contained in ambiguous regions rather accurately, whereas arc produces topologies that do not always agree with the underlying signal  <cit> . the size of step matrices is limited to a fixed number of states:  <dig> states in paup*  <dig> b <dig> ,  <dig> states on newer cpus  <cit> , therefore inaase cannot be applied to alignments that include a large number of taxa or complex and highly variable ambiguous regions. in addition, the search time  is increased about  <dig> to  <dig> times depending on the number and size of the step matrices included .

the solution to the size and performance limitations of step-matrix-based analysis is to transform the multidimensional step matrix into unidimensional scores prior to phylogenetic analysis. this way, computing pairwise alignment scores can be applied to a theoretically unlimited number of otus and to ambiguous regions with high length variation and complexity. this is achieved by ordinating the step matrix and dissecting it into perpendicular axes. the axis coordinates for each otu can then be used to obtain codes to replace the ambiguously aligned regions. the ordination method of choice must accept similarity  or dissimilarity  matrices as input, which excludes principal component analysis .

three commonly used methods can ordinate otus based on identity or distance matrices: polar ordination , non-metric multidimensional scaling , and principal coordinates analysis or 'metric multidimensional scaling', pcoa  <cit> . nms has become the default ordination method for ecological data  <cit> , but the ordination is computed via an iterative numerical procedure that starts from a random starting configuration. therefore, sample points that have identical original data scores , and hence should fall on exactly the same point in the ordination diagram, will instead slightly disperse. this would affect sequence ordination, since identical sequences would result in slightly different ambiguous region codes. polar ordination and pcoa do not exhibit this problem, and the latter method has the advantage of being an eigenvector analysis, which calculates the degree of variance explained by each axis  <cit> . pcoa has been applied to sequence ordination, although mostly for visualizing sequence and tree spaces  <cit> ; http://pbil.univ-lyon <dig> fr/mva/pco.php). because of its properties, it is the default method for the algorithm proposed here.

in this paper, we describe the computational procedure to encode ambiguous regions:  compute pair-wise distance matrices for ambiguous regions of an alignment,  ordinate the distance matrices, and  encode the ordination scores and integrate them into a phylogenetic data matrix. our novel method, pics-ord, was tested using three biological and  <dig> simulated datasets. one biological dataset  was extracted from a large dataset of over  <dig> otus and three genes  of the lichenized fungal family graphidaceae , whereas the second dataset represented  <dig> otus and one partial gene  of the family physciaceae. the third dataset, representing  <dig> otus and one partial gene  of the lichen family parmeliaceae, was used to assess computational speed for large datasets. both similarity matrices created by clustalw  <cit>  and ngila  <cit>  were tested.

RESULTS
maximum parsimony
the three ambiguous regions of the 100-otu graphidaceae dataset showed different degrees of congruence with the non-ambiguous alignment portion . the phylogenetic signal of region  <dig> correlated better with that of the non-ambiguous alignment portion compared to regions  <dig> and  <dig>  for regions  <dig> and  <dig>  identity scores between ambiguous sequences were on average higher than expected when identity scores between non-ambiguous alignment portions were low, suggesting some degree of homoplasy through a saturation effect in short ambiguous sequences.

recoding of the non-ambiguous alignment portion of  <dig> otus with arc, inaase, and pics-ord with clustal, and pics-ord with ngila distances, resulted in partially deviating maximum parsimony topologies  when compared to the tree derived from the uncoded, original dna alignment . arc and pics-ord with clustal distances resulted in comparatively high relative rf  distance values of nearly 40%, whereas inaase and pics-ord with ngila distance gave better values near 25%. inaase recoding produced two conflicts  compared to the uncoded dna topology: fissurina was resolved as paraphyletic and the graphis-chroodiscus clade was nested within the chapsa-leucodecton-thelotrema clade. arc recoding also exhibited two conflicts: non-monophyly of the chapsa-leucodecton-thelotrema clade and leucodecton being nested within the ampliotrema-fibrillithecis-melanotrema-myriotrema-ocellularia clade. pics-ord recoding with clustal distances resulted in one conflict, viz. paraphyly of the diorygma-glyphis-platygramme-sarcographa clade, whereas. pics-ord recoding with ngila distances did not show any conflict with the topology derived from the uncoded dna.

all recoding methods resulted in some loss of backbone support, whereas support for terminal nodes remained largely unchanged . arc did not support the large sister clade of the basal split, which received absolute support  in uncoded dna analysis and good support  with the other recoding methods. genus group support was generally lower with encoded data and especially under arc and pics-ord. genus support was high for all recoding methods and especially using pics-ord with ngila distances, with the exception of inaase which recovered diorygma with lower support and did not recover the otherwise strongly supported fissurina. the best overall recoding performance  was thus found with pics-ord using ngila distances. the performance of arc was fairly poor, with high relative rf value, conflictive topology, and absence of support for the largest backbone node.

maximum likelihood
maximum likelihood analysis of the 100-otu graphidaceae dataset with ambiguous regions either excluded or encoded using pics-ord  resulted in largely congruent topologies, with only one major clade switching positions between analyses . three further major clades had internal topologies changed between analyses: the ampliotrema-fibrillithecis-melanotrema-myriotrema-ocellularia clade, the diorygma-glyphis-phaeographis-platygramme-sarcographa clade, and the chapsa-leucodecton-thelotrema clade. however, this topological conflict was not supported, except for the clustering of chapsa and leucodecton under pics-ord. the two analyses involved  <dig> backbone and terminal nodes of interest. of these,  <dig> nodes had absolute support  in both cases . fourteen further nodes had increased support under pics-ord, with an average increase of 23% for five backbone and genus group nodes and 6% for nine terminal genus nodes. especially notable was the increase under pics-ord from 40% to 79% for the chroodiscus-diploschistes node and from 57% to 96% for the fibrillithecis-myriotrema node, two nodes that are supported in multigene studies . for two genus group nodes , support decreased slightly under pics-ord , whereas the two major backbone nodes of the large sister clade to fissurina-dyplolabia showed substantial decrease in support under pics-ord . the two latter nodes are not recovered in multigene studies. the remaining four nodes appeared in one of the two analyses only: with ambiguous regions excluded, glyphis clustered with the phaeographis-platygramme-sarcographa clade and leucodecton with thelotrema, in both cases lacking support , whereas under pics-ord, glyphis clustered with diorygma  and leucodecton with chapsa ; the latter topologies are congruent with multigene studies. inclusion of ambiguous regions under pics-ord thus did not only result in overall increased bootstrap support, but also in topologies that are more in accordance with multigene studies using mtssu, nulsu, and rpb <dig> .

simulations
we generated  <dig> simulated datasets of aligned sequences, each split into five partitions. partitions  <dig> and  <dig> had unambiguous alignments, while 3- <dig> had different degrees of alignment ambiguity. sections 1- <dig> were combined in one analysis, while  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> in another. raxml analysis of the  <dig> simulated datasets recovered the best trees when sections 1- <dig>  were trea-ted as pre-aligned without changes, with a mean relative rf value of  <dig> %  and recovering the true tree  <dig>  times out of  <dig> . excluding ambiguous sections 3- <dig> resulted in less accurate topologies on average :  <dig>  datasets gave identical trees compared to pre-aligned sections 1- <dig> , seven  datasets resulted in improved topology, but  <dig>  datasets showed worse topology. recoding ambiguous sections using pics-ord on average improved topologies under all three employed substitution models and particularly under gtr :  <dig>  datasets gave identical trees compared to ambiguous sections excluded for sections 3- <dig>  encoded,  <dig>  datasets resulted in improved topology, and  <dig>  datasets gave a worse topology. thus, recoding ambiguous sections under pics-ord resulted in identical or improved topologies compared to excluding ambiguous sections in  <dig>  out of  <dig> cases. all differences were statistically significant using a wilcoxon matched pairs test .

simulated datasets are given as sections 1- <dig>  3- <dig> or sections 1- <dig>   <dig> under different treatments of ambiguous regions . ***/**/* = significant at the  <dig> / <dig> / <dig>  level; -- = not significant; / = topology improved/worse.

the 705-otu physciaceae dataset showed  <dig> nodes at the backbone, genus group, genus, species group, and species level . eighteen nodes were present under pics-ord but absent when ambiguous regions were excluded; of these, nine had support values ranging between 14% and 69% and nine had values ranging between 77% and 100% under pics-ord . a total of  <dig> nodes had higher support under pics-ord compared to both alternative treatments, and the differences ranged between  <dig> % and 54% for  <dig> nodes, between 11% and  <dig> % for ten nodes, and between 2% and 10% for  <dig> nodes. for another ten nodes, pics-ord gave higher support values compared to one of the alternative methods and identical values compared to the other, with an average increase of  <dig> %. nineteen nodes behaved identically for all three methods, with support values of 100%. for seven nodes, pics-ord gave higher support values compared to one alternative method  but lower values compared to the other . the remaining ten nodes showed lower support values for pics-ord compared to both alternative methods, with an average decrease of  <dig> % . pics-ord thus showed overall increased support for  <dig> nodes and overall decreased support for only ten nodes, with an average increase over all nodes of  <dig> % and a maximum increase for one node versus ambiguous regions excluded of 78%. all nodes with increased support under pics-ord or which appeared only under pics-ord correspond to clades and taxa that are supported in two-gene or multigene studies including also mtssu and nulsu .

discussion
our study shows that ordination of distance matrices, while introducing a small amount of distortion, recovers phylogenetic signal remarkably well. for non-ambiguous data with a 'known' topology derived from uncoded dna, inaase and pics-ord with clustal identity scores performed similarly, with most but not all clades recovered accurately. pics-ord with ngila zeta cost scores slightly outperformed both methods, whereas the performance of arc could be best characterized as fair. problems with arc have been reported  <cit>  and are based on the fact that the recoding method used in arc is not distance-based but encodes sequences based on length and relative frequency of individual bases and base pairing patterns  <cit> . under certain, usually rare circumstances, this can lead to erroneous codes, as the following example illustrates: consider sequences  ttggccaaccggtt,  aaccggttggccaa, and  agccagctggctaa. sequences  and  are more similar to one other, differing in four transitions only, whereas sequences  and  are dissimilar. however, because they have similar base and base pair frequencies, arc will encode sequences  and  as being more similar to one other and sequences  and  as being dissimilar, as the arc codes demonstrate:   <dig>    <dig>  and   <dig>  therefore, arc may not only recover topologies in conflict with non-ambiguous portions of the alignment but also in conflict with the phylogenetic signal contained in the ambiguous regions. distance-based methods avoid this problem. inaase has been shown to perform well when the dataset is sufficiently small, recovering phylogenetic signal with great accuracy, even though the actual number of codes is very small, with a single character representing each ambiguous region  <cit> . for large datasets with over  <dig> distinct sequence patterns in ambiguous regions, pics-ord with ngila zeta cost scores offers a good and fast alternative. zeta cost scores slightly outperformed simple identity and cost scores in our analysis, confirming the results of previous studies  <cit> .

since pcoa ordination is an eigenvector analysis, the eigenvalues can be used to assess the amount of information represented by each ordination axis and be implemented as weight factor. however, if the pics-ord codes are used as ordered characters, the coding method encodes the ordination scores proportionally to the amount of variance explained by each axis, and a weighting factor will not markedly affect the overall performance. weighting of the axes based on eigenvalues is recommended when the codes  produced by pics-ord are analyzed as unordered characters or in a gtr model under maximum likelihood, although tests  did not suggest marked changes in topology or support with unweighted or weighted pics-ord codes. one might also consider weighting to balance the influence of dna versus pics-ord characters in a partitioned dataset. however, in general this will not be necessary. the number of code columns  retained by pics-ord for each ambiguous region depends on the number of different sequence motifs present, with a maximum number corresponding to the number of otus. in our experience, only about 25-35% of sites will have positive eigenvalues and about 15-25% will be retained after removing invariant sites. the first ambiguous region each of the 100-otu graphidaceae, the 706-otu physciaceae, and the 1814-otu parmeliaceae dataset retained  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> sites, respectively. in addition, only the first few axes will be clade-informative, that is they contain structure largely congruent with clades resolved by non-coded dna, and hence increase clade support, whereas the higher axes tend to be 'near-constant'. in a typical dataset of 100- <dig> otus, the number of sites retained by pics-ord for each ambiguous region that are 'clade-informative', will be roughly 5- <dig>  in its datasets containing roughly  <dig> unambiguously-aligned nucleotide sites, the 'clade-informative' pics-ord axes, assuming 2- <dig> ambiguous regions, would therefore add roughly about 15- <dig> sites, replacing originally ambiguous portions of roughly 100- <dig> bases in length.

the usefulness of including ambiguous regions in phylogenetic analyses and the performance of the corresponding recoding method can be evaluated using two criteria: improved confidence  and improved topology . topology can be judged indirectly: when two different methods applied to the same dataset result in topological differences, but under certain conditions the topologies converge, this can be seen as improvement towards phylogenetic accuracy, as long as the resolution does not decrease and no novel topologies appear  <cit> . ambiguous regions likely contain homoplastic phylogenetic signal which could mask the signal contained in non-ambiguous portions of the alignment. a simple way to test this is to plot distance matrices obtained from non-ambiguous and ambiguous regions against each other. if there is an acceptable level of congruence, one would expect that inclusion of ambiguous regions by means of a coding method should improve support and/or topology. the best way of testing these criteria is through the use of simulation studies  <cit> . however, simulated data are typically not as 'messy' as real biological data, and only a combined approach inclu-ding biological and simulated data allowed us to assess the performance of our novel recoding method.

the simulation study showed that excluding ambiguous regions resulted in significantly worse topologies and that including them by means of pics-ord allowed the recovery of a substantial part of the phylogenetic signal contained therein. the most accurate topologies were obtained when analyzing the simulated datasets unchanged ; however, since in real biological data we cannot know the true alignment, the inclusion of ambiguous regions by means of recoding, rather than excluding them, is the next best option. in pics-ord, recoding ambiguous regions is based on a single optimal solution for each pairwise alignment given ngila's model of log-affine gap costs, and the transformation of these pairwise alignments into distances reduces the risk of misinterpretation of positional homologies compared to frequency-based methods such as arc.

the potential power of recovering phylogenetic signal contained in ambiguous regions is shown in our analysis of the 100-otu graphidaceae dataset. the topology and support obtained when including ambiguous regions of the mtssu gene by means of pics-ord matches the topology and support obtained by a three-gene tree  better than the topology based on exclusion of ambiguous regions. published 2-gene and 3-gene phylogenies of graphidaceae  recovered the fissurina, ocellularia, phaeographis, and thelotrema clades with strong support . in our approach, pics-ord recoding for these clades increased support by 9% for the fissurina clade and by 18-20% for the ocellularia and thelotrema clades. graphis was supported sister to the ocellularia clade when ambiguous regions were excluded but that support disappeared when using pics-ord recoding; in 2-gene and 3-gene phylogenies, graphis does not appear as sister to the ocellularia clade. similarly, wirthiotrema appeared sister to the thelotrema clade when ambiguous regions are excluded, but sister to a clade including diploschistes under pics-ord, which is more in line with published 2-gene and 3-gene phylogenies. this indicates that the phylogenetic signal contained in the ambiguous portion of the mtssu gene is congruent with the phylogenetic signal contained in other genes  and therefore should not be excluded from phylogenetic analysis. the predictive power contained in ambiguous portions of the mitochondrial small subunit ribosomal dna and in the nuclear internal transcribed spacer ribosomal dna, especially at lower hierarchical level, make these genes promising candidates for dna barcoding in ascomycota  <cit> .

during our study, we made some preliminary comparisons  between pics-ord and direct optimization methods such as poy, bali-phy, prank, and satè  <cit> . although pics-ord recoding introduces a slight distortion of the original data, we did not find that topological accuracy was increased when using do instead of pics-ord recoding, either with the simulated or with the biological datasets. in fact, some of the do methods tested consistently returned less accurate topologies, even if the alignment and tree scores were improved under variable cost settings. in addition, inference time was substantially increased for all do methods compared to analyzing mixed datasets including pics-ord codes under maximum likelihood in raxml, by a factor of ten to one hundred or even more depending on the method. the detailed results of our comparison with do methods will be presented in a forthcoming publication.

pics-ord thus offers a simple and cheap-to-compute alternative to direct optimization and recoding methods such as inaase  <cit> , when phylogenetic trees are derived from fixed multiple alignments with substantial ambiguous portions. for smaller datasets capable of being handled by inaase , inaase and pics-ord coding with clustal give fairly similar results, and inaase might be the preferred method, since the step matrices reflect the actual sequence distances before ordination. however, inaase can only be implemented with parsimony analysis and not within a bayesian or maximum likelihood framework. also, pics-ord with ngila zeta costs scores outperformed inaase, and application of a power-law model of indel evolution was shown to be superior to other methods for sequences with variable indels  <cit> . a criticism of pics-ord might be that the resulting codes are abstract entities and do not directly correspond to dna or phenotype data. however, since the ordination axes are perpendicular to each other and the ordination space is a reflection of the original pairwise distance matrix space, the pics-ord codes can be interpreted as mathematically independent components of the original sequences' distances, thus fulfilling two important requirements for their phylogenetic analysis: mathematical independence and reflecting the original distance space. besides easy computation of ambiguous region codes and seamless integration of data partitions , pics-ord allows for a practically unlimited number of otus and sequence patterns to be analyzed.

the modularity of pics-ord allows for flexible parameter settings, including transition:transversion ratio and gap penalties similar to those of inaase when calculating simple pairwise cost scores in ngila  <cit> . alternative distance measures other than those provided by clustal  or ngila  are also conceivable, such as those based on 'n-local decoding'  <cit> . another possibility for fine-tuning pics-ord lies in the number of ordination axes selected for recoding and in the way the principal coordinates are encoded. this allows for adjustments of pics-ord codes with respect to the relative length of ambiguous regions within a given alignment. the fact that pics-ord codes are simple integer values permits combined analysis of dna and pics-ord code partitions in a bayesian framework  <cit> , with up to 6-state ordered codes, and under maximum likelihood with raxml  <dig> . <dig>  using a gtr or mk model or characters as ordered, with up to  <dig> states. this was previously impossible with mixed letter/integer codes or codes representing user-defined step matrices. in addition to the improved topological accuracy, a further argument for using pics-ord versus direct optimization or inaase is computational speed: recoding the ambiguous region in our 705-otu dataset on a dual-core intel processor took two minutes, and analysis of the partitioned dataset under maximum likelihood in raxml on the same machine required about  <dig> hours including rapid bootstrapping . for the 1814-otu parmeliaceae dataset, recoding took about  <dig> minutes for each region and maximum likelihood analysis including rapid bootstrapping  in raxml lasted eight days. this is comparable to the time a 50-100-otu dataset would have taken to be analysed on the same processor under maximum parsimony in paup with ambiguous regions included as inaase step matrices. computational speed can further be substantially increased when running the software on multi-processor computers and web servers  <cit> . since pics-ord uses a set of integer codes to represent each ambiguous region for a given otu, another problem of inaase is avoided: the limited number of available symbols when coding an entire ambiguous region as a single character.

while pics-ord recoding was here applied to dna data, the underlying method can be used to incorporate any kind of multidimensional distance matrix as unidimensional columns in a phylogenetic dataset and hence simplify the analytical approach and considerably increase computational speed.

CONCLUSIONS
pics-ord offers a simple and fast method to recode regions in multiple sequence alignments that exhibit low alignment confidence scores  and include them as separate partition in phylogenetic analyses. pics-ord can deal with datasets of practically unlimited size and the codes can be analyzed under maximum likelihood and bayesian approaches, thus eliminating the disadvantages of previously available methods of ambiguous region coding while retaining the relative accuracy of distance-based recoding methods. the incorporation of ngila allows for a variety of models of indel evolution to be implemented in the coding process, including a power-law zeta model. pics-ord is especially useful for phylogenetic analyses that use ribosomal genes , as these genes are difficult to align even across closely related taxa, and is therefore a useful alternative to computationally intensive methods that optimize alignments and trees simultaneously. for typical mtssu and its datasets or other multiple sequence or protein alignments that contain portions aligned with low confidence but containing phylogenetic signal, pics-ord coding will substantially improve topology and increase support compared to excluding such portions from the analysis.

