BACKGROUND
the mammalian myocardium contains several cell types, of which the cardiac myocytes  make up most of the heart's mass. although a small proportion of cm in the adult myocardium remains mitotic, most cm lose the capacity to undergo cell division shortly after birth  <cit> . in the adult heart, approximately 70% of the cells is represented by non-myocytes, most of which belong to the fibroblast compartment. in this study, we investigate how the stress response of cardiac cells to increased mechanical stress  can be compared to genotoxic stresses induced by two dna damaging agents, ionising radiation  and ultraviolet radiation .

in cardiac cells, ms is increased during excessive pressure or volume load of the heart, as seen in hypertensive and valvular heart disease. this results in an adaptive growth response leading to structural and functional cardiac changes, including cm hypertrophy and hyperplasia of fibroblasts, to compensate for the increased workload  <cit> . in vitro cyclic stretch of rat cardiac cells has been shown to be an appropriate model for cellular changes that occur during overload of cardiac muscle in vivo  <cit> . mechanical signals may be transferred to the nucleus of cells through integrin receptors, cytoskeletal filaments and nuclear scaffolds  <cit>  and through ion channels, ion exchangers and hormone receptors  <cit> .

radiation induced heart disease  has been recognised as a late adverse effect of thoracic radiotherapy if the heart was situated in the radiation field  <cit> . ir induces the formation of reactive oxygen species that react with different components of the cell, thereby inducing macromolecular lesions. ir can activate several signal transduction pathways, involving growth factor receptors, death receptors and dna damage sensing proteins  <cit> . primary fibroblasts in culture are known to go into senescence shortly after ir  <cit> , after which terminal differentiation of these cells is induced  <cit> . cultures of cm do not demonstrate cell death, nor a loss of function upon a single dose of  <dig>  rad   <cit> .

the density of dna damaging events after uvc, which include helix-distorting photolesions, is three orders of magnitude higher than the density of dna damage that occurs after ir  <cit>  and sufficient to block cellular dna replication and transcription. signal transduction after uv is mediated via components of the cellular membrane, involving growth factor receptors, and via dna damage sensing proteins  <cit> . uv is known to induce cell cycle arrest and apoptosis in several cell types  <cit> .

the aim of the study was to identify and compare differentially expressed genes  in cardiac cells in response to ms, ir or uv. to this purpose, cultures enriched for ventricular cm or fibroblasts were exposed to one of the three stressors. differentially expressed genes were identified using affymetrix genechips. several statistical methods have been developed to analyse affymetrix gene expression microarrays. we used a method based on linear modelling on probe level  <cit>  to describe the signal of every perfect match  probe. because overall changes in the expression of functionally related genes are more informative than the expression pattern of single genes, genes in microarray studies can be assigned to functional groups  <cit> . in the present study, such an approach was used to classify genes, based on biological function or on the role of a gene product in common intracellular pathways.

RESULTS
accuracy of the linear model
as an example for the accuracy of the linear model that was used to describe the pm probe signals, figure 1a shows a dot plot of all pm probe signals as calculated by the linear model, against the actual pm probe signals determined from fibroblasts after uv. these data were used to calculate correlation coefficients  between the signals calculated by the model and the actual pm signals obtained. figure 1b shows the distribution of r <dig> values for fibroblasts after uv. the majority of probe-sets have a correlation coefficient ≥  <dig> , indicating that the model used fitted the data accurately.

numbers of differentially expressed genes
a series entry  at gene expression omnibus , a public gene expression database of ncbi  <cit> , gives access to all microarray data generated in this study. figure  <dig> represents the numbers of genes with a unique locuslink id that were up-regulated or down-regulated  in cm-enriched cultures/fractions and cultures of fibroblasts after one of the three stressors. when using these criteria, the numbers of differentially expressed genes  after uv were considerably higher than after ir or ms. after each of the three stressors more genes were up-regulated in cm-enriched cultures/fractions than in cultures of fibroblasts. conversely, higher numbers of down-regulated genes were determined in fibroblasts. these differences were most pronounced after ms .

based on information available at nettaffx™  <cit> , extended with standard textbooks and recent literature, genes with a unique locuslink id were assigned to several functional groups. subsequently, the status of each gene within a functional group was determined in both cell populations . individual probe-sets within these functional groups and their q-value after the three stressors are listed in table  <dig> . in this table, down-regulated genes are distinguished from up-regulated genes by a minus-sign in front of their q-value. figure  <dig> shows the percentage of genes in a functional group that are differentially expressed after ms, ir or uv. in accordance with figure  <dig>  the highest percentages of genes were differentially expressed after uv , followed by ir . in general, the percentages of differentially expressed genes were lowest after ms . several functional groups, including heat shock proteins and genes involved in cholesterol biosynthesis, showed high proportions of differentially expressed genes with a hypergeometric probability p <  <dig> . these functional groups were considered to have significantly high percentages of differentially expressed genes. on the other hand, in the group of genes encoding for ion channels and exchangers, low percentages of differentially expressed genes with a hypergeometric probability p <  <dig>  were determined, both after ir and uv.

percentages of up-regulated genes
general stress response genes
probe-sets that showed an up-regulation or down-regulation after more than one stressor are listed in table  <dig> . the overlap in responsive genes between ir and uv was larger than the overlap between ms and one of the radiation types. both after ir and uv, several genes that are known to play a central role in the radiation response of cells, including p <dig>  gadd <dig> and mdm <dig>  were up-regulated. these genes were not up-regulated after ms. a striking large proportion of genes encoding cytoskeletal components were down-regulated both after ir and uv.

validation of microarray results by semi-quantitative pcr
gene expression changes detected using microarrays were validated by semi-quantitative pcr, using rna from cm-enriched cultures at  <dig> hours after ms. the increased gene expression of tenascin c and biglycan were confirmed with pcr in two independent experiments. in these two experiments, tenascin c gene expression increased  <dig>  and  <dig>  times, respectively. biglycan gene expression increased  <dig>  and  <dig>  times, respectively. figure  <dig> shows a representative result of the tenascin c pcr.

discussion
in this study, a linear model was used to describe genechip pm probe signals and to determine effects of three types of stressors on gene expression in two neonatal rat heart cell populations, consisting of cm that are known to be terminally differentiated cells and fibroblasts that still have the capacity to undergo mitosis. several studies have shown a good correlation between affymetrix genechip data and rt-pcr  <cit>  or northern-blot  <cit> . in a previous study neonatal rat cm-enriched cultures and cultures of neonatal rat cardiac fibroblasts were irradiated with a single dose of  <dig>  gy and some mrna transcripts were quantified by competitive pcr  <cit> . in accordance with the present study, no significant changes in gene expression of transforming growth factor-β <dig> , fibroblast growth factor- <dig>  and collagen type i were determined at  <dig> h after ir in cultures of cardiac fibroblasts. moreover, no significant ir-induced changes were determined in gene expression of atrial natriuretic peptide  in cm-enriched cell populations in both the latter and the present study. on the other hand, cm-enriched cultures showed a reduced tgf-β <dig> expression  at  <dig> h after  <dig>  gy, which was not observed in the present study. this might be due to differences in experimental design between the two studies, as in the former study cm-enriched cultures were obtained by incubation with bromodeoxyuridine to prevent fibroblast proliferation. also, during and after irradiation, the cells were incubated in higher serum concentration than used in the present study.

here, differences between the two cell populations are observed in the predominant type of gene expression response, i.e. up-regulation versus down-regulation. after all three stressors, differentially expressed genes were mostly up-regulated  in cm-enriched fractions, while in cultures of fibroblasts the majority of changed genes were down-regulated. after ms, these differences were most pronounced. paracrine signalling is involved in the response of cm and cardiac fibroblasts in co-cultures subjected to ms  <cit> . in the cm-enriched cultures used in this study, remaining fibroblasts might stimulate gene transcription of the cm, resulting in higher numbers of up-regulated genes. it cannot be excluded that differences in level of toxicity between the three stressors applied in this study caused differences in gene expression levels.

of the three stressors examined in this study, both ir and uv are known to induce oxidative stress. accordingly, both stressors induced high numbers of up-regulated genes involved in anti-oxidative processes. the high percentages of up-regulated genes encoding heat shock proteins in both cell populations after ir and uv might indicate oxidative stress induced protein damage in these cells. in comparison, after ms only few genes encoding heat shock proteins were up-regulated in either cell population.

heinloth et al.  proposed a model for the regulation of several gene expression patterns after ir and uv in human dermal fibroblasts, based on microarray analysis. the general view that p <dig> plays a central role in signal transduction after ir and uv was confirmed in their study. moreover, ir down-regulated the expression of genes involved in mitosis. uv, on the other hand, induced the expression of genes involved in protein degradation and the mapk pathway  <cit> . the latter data are in accordance with the data of the present study, showing that uv did affect genes participating in the mapk pathway  in both cell populations, but ir did not. moreover, in cm-enriched fractions, ir resulted in a down-regulation of a large percentage of genes involved in mitosis. several genes, involved in cell cycle regulation and mitosis are expressed in foetal cardiac myocytes and down-regulated in adult myocytes, in accordance with their terminal differentiation  <cit> . due to the close relation between foetal and neonatal cells, an expression of mitotic genes in the neonatal cm used in this study can be expected.

the high numbers of up-regulated genes involved in ubiquitination and protein degradation in both cell populations after uv are also in accordance with the study of heinloth et al.  and with other studies on cultured cells after uv  <cit> . these results might reflect the need of cells to replace molecules that were damaged by uv irradiation, although the proteasome is also proposed to play a role in several cellular processes, including dna-repair, cell cycle regulation and cell survival after irradiation  <cit> .

in cm-enriched cultures, ms led to a relatively high proportion of up-regulated genes that are involved in cholesterol biosynthesis. among these genes, expression of 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme a reductase, which forms the starting enzyme of the mevalonate pathway and is considered to be the key enzyme in cholesterol biosynthesis, was up-regulated. this suggests that in neonatal rat cardiac myocytes cholesterol biosynthesis is stimulated after ms. neonatal rat heart myocytes that undergo hypertrophy in culture show an increased biosynthesis and intracellular accumulation of cholesterol  <cit> . moreover, the mevalonate pathway has been proposed to play a role in ras activation in neonatal rat cardiac myocytes subjected to ms in culture, leading to hypertrophy  <cit> . in vivo hypertrophy of the heart is also associated with elevated myocardial cholesterol contents  <cit> . an increased cholesterol biosynthesis in cardiac myocytes that undergo ms might therefore accompany a hypertrophic response of these cells. however, of the three foetal genes that are known to be re-expressed in hypertrophic myocytes, i.e. smooth muscle alpha-actin, anp and beta-myosin heavy chain, only the last gene was up-regulated at the time point of investigation. in contrast to ms, ir and uv led to a down-regulation of genes involved in cholesterol biosynthesis in cm-enriched fractions. in previous studies, alterations in cholesterol contents of cardiac myocytes and fibroblasts were associated with alterations in protein to dna ratios, levels of several enzymes including atpases and phosphatases, and diffusion rates of membrane proteins  <cit> . moreover, a decrease in beating rate observed in aging cultures of cm was opposed by increased membrane amounts of cholesterol  <cit> . the role of cholesterol biosynthesis in the cellular functions of cardiac cells after ms, ir or uv needs further investigation.

higher numbers of differentially expressed genes involved in ecm formation, including genes encoding collagens, fibronectin and laminin, were determined in cm-enriched cultures after ms than in cultures of fibroblasts. as mentioned before, paracrine signalling between cm and remaining fibroblasts might play a role in cellular responses in these cm-enriched cultures. alterations in expression of genes involved in ecm formation might originate from remaining fibroblasts after stimulation by cm. interestingly, ms does not affect the expression of these genes in cultures of fibroblasts, which suggests that paracrine signalling from cm is necessary for alterations in expression profiles of genes involved in ecm formation in fibroblasts.

the down-regulated genes encoding cytoskeletal components in cultures of fibroblasts after ir and uv, including myosin and troponin, are mostly cm-specific. therefore, these genes are likely to originate from remaining cm in the fibroblast cultures, although their numbers were low . the extremely low numbers of differentially expressed genes encoding for ion channels and exchangers might be explained by a low number of cardiac cell type-specific genes within this functional group.

CONCLUSIONS
ms, ir and uv mainly induce stress-specific and cell-type specific gene expression profiles in neonatal rat cm-enriched cultures and cultures of neonatal rat heart fibroblasts. functional groups that show significant percentages of differentially expressed genes suggest that certain cellular pathways are activated after one or more stresses.

