BACKGROUND
haemophilus influenzae is a common pathogen among children and immuno-comprised adults with clinical manifestations that are largely type specific. the encapsulated h. influenzae serotype b  usually causes invasive infections, such as meningitis and septicemia  <cit> , whereas the much more common nonencapsulated, or nontypeable, h. influenzae is a major cause of otitis media, sinusitis, and pneumonia  <cit> . h. influenzae colonizes the nasopharynx of up to 75% of the population, from where the hib strains in particular can invade the bloodstream and subsequently pass to the central nervous system. in the course of this pathogenic sequence, the organism moves from sites with high partial oxygen pressure  to lower oxygenated body compartments . these latter levels of oxygen, however, are generally sufficient to inflict injury on colonizing bacteria that are strictly anaerobic in nature or that have been deprived of defences against oxygen toxicity  <cit> .

molecular oxygen chemically oxidizes redox centers in all aerobic organisms, generating a flux of hydrogen peroxide  and superoxide radicals  that can potentially damage the cell through chemical modification of cellular building blocks, in the case of dna leading to an increased and lethal mutation rate  <cit> . the array of protective measures oxygen-respiring aerobes developed to deal with h2o2/o2•- emphasises the burden that oxidative stress clearly puts on aerobic life. aerobic organisms generate – or garner from their surroundings – a variety of water- and lipid soluble anti-oxidant compounds. additionally, virtually all oxygen-respiring organisms contain enzymes that convert o2•- and h2o <dig> to innocuous products. moreover, several damage removal/repair enzymes are constitutively synthesized to deal with chemically modified proteins, lipids and dna. finally, since o2•-/h2o2-levels may vary from time to time – because these levels are the result of a first order chemical reaction with respect to oxygen tension  <cit> , and because such stress can also result from an exogenous source  – organisms are able to adapt to such fluctuating oxidative stresses by inducing the synthesis of antioxidant and damage/repair enzymes. because of the ubiquity of o2•-/h2o2-scavenging enzymes among oxygen-respiring organisms, it follows that scavenging should hold a prominent place among the protective measures against oxygen toxicity.

this prediction was affirmed by studies of superoxide dismutase -deficient and hydroperoxidase-deficient mutants of escherichia coli. soda- sodb-  <cit>  and katg- kate- ahpr-  <cit> e. coli both suffer elevated rates of oxygen-mediated dna damage when grown aerobically in rich broth. by characterizing and comparing the h2o2-sensitivities of acatalasaemic  e. coli and e. coli defective in alkyl hydroperoxide reductase , seaver and imlay  <cit>  found that the h2o <dig> dismutase activity of catalase and the h2o <dig> peroxidatic activity of ahpr serve redundant, but distinct roles inside the e. coli cell. the bipartite alkyl hydroperoxidase system ahpr, composed of a typical 2-cys peroxiredoxin ahpc  and the flavoprotein reductant ahpf  <cit> , are the primary scavengers of endogenous low level h2o <dig>  while catalase is the more effective scavenger when h2o2-levels are high and, presumably, when the absence of a carbon source depletes the cell of nadh necessary for ahpr activity.

compared to competing bacteria in the upper respiratory tract of humans, h. influenzae is generally more sensitive to either oxygen- and h2o2-mediated cytotoxicity  <cit> , which may corroborate with the predicted absence of an ahpr homologue in the sequenced h. influenzae rd genome  <cit> . nonetheless, mutating the sole structural gene for catalase, designated hkte, does not cause h. influenzae type b strain eagan to grow poorly under aerobic conditions, nor to be reduced in virulence  <cit> . in fact, acatalasaemic h. influenzae rd compared to its parental strain is not significantly more sensitive to the antimicrobial h2o2-production of streptococcus pneumoniae  <cit> , implying that catalase does little to protect h. influenzae under these conditions.

additional and efficient hydroperoxidase activity was thus envisioned to be expressed by h. influenzae, and recently a candidate structural gene, termed pgdx, was cloned and characterized  <cit> . pgdx encodes for the atypical 2-cys peroxiredoxin pgdx, which catalyzes the reduction of both h2o <dig> and organic hydroperoxides, specifically by using glutathione – which h. influenzae has to garner from its surroundings  <cit>  – as the reducing substrate. besides its probable role as central h2o2-scavenger, murphy et al.  <cit>  proposed a function for pgdx in the process of biofilm formation of non-typeable h. influenzae during respiratory tract infections, and showed that chronic obstructive pulmonary disease patients persistently colonized with h. influenzae can develop antibodies against pgdx.

in this study, a hkte/pgdx h. influenzae rd mutant unable to produce either catalase or pgdx was constructed and evaluated with respect to its sensitivity towards endogenously generated and exogenously supplied h2o <dig>  these mutations were moved to hib strain eagan, the prototypic virulent strain used to assess virulence utilizing the infant rat model, to explore the impact of increased h2o2-stress on the ability of h. influenzae to cause invasive disease. virulence of the hkte/pgdx double mutant was compared with that of the isogenic pgdx single mutant strain, and with wild-type virulence established for the hib strain eagan parent.

RESULTS
construction of a hydroperoxidase-deficient h. influenzae rd mutant
on the basis of earlier reports  <cit> , we suspected that the remainder of hydroperoxidase activity in the acatalasaemic h. influenzae rd mutant ab <dig>  could be attributed to the atypical 2-cys peroxiredoxin pgdx. to explore this hypothesis further, we constructed a derivative of ab <dig> in which the pgdx gene is insertionally inactivated by an ampicillin resistance cassette . one chloramphenicol/ampiccillin resistant colony was isolated and termed hkte- pgdx- h. influenzae rd from here on. allelic exchange as a result of a double cross over event and the consequent lack of pgdx expression was confirmed by pcr and western blotting respectively .

because of the probable h2o2-stress provoked by the disruption of both the hkte and pgdx genes, pgdx disruptants of ab <dig> were selected under anaerobic conditions. unexpectedly, however, hkte- pgdx- h. influenzae rd colonies were indistinguishable from wild-type colonies when grown aerobically on sbhi plates. on mic plates, aerobically grown hkte- pgdx- h. influenzae rd colonies were on the contrary roughly edged and much smaller than their wild-type counterparts .

in order to assess residual hydroperoxidase activity inside hkte- pgdx- h. influenzae rd cells, the rate of h2o2-dissipation was measured in a reaction mixture containing  <dig>  μm of h2o <dig> and  <dig> ×  <dig> whole cells of either the wild-type rd or the hkte- pgdx- h. influenzae rd strain . while wild-type cells removed h2o <dig> to levels beneath the limit of detection within twenty minutes, no h2o2-turnover was noticeable in the reaction mixture containing hkte- pgdx- h. influenzae rd cells, indicating that the double mutant is unable to remove low micromolar concentrations of h2o <dig> from solution.

low micromolar h2o2-toxicity is bacteriostatic rather than bacteriocidal to hkte- pgdx- h. influenzae rd
aerobically grown hydroperoxidase-deficient katg- kate- ahpr- e. coli does not survive repeated subculturing in rich luria-bertani broth  <cit> . more precisely, growth rates and final densities are reduced after each dilution, which indicates h2o2-stress mediated dna damage  <cit> . because of our observation that the hkte- pgdx- h. influenzae rd double mutant is indistinguishable from its isogenic parent when cultured aerobically on sbhi solid media, we wondered whether the hydroperoxidase-deficient double mutant strain fare as well in aerated liquid medium. fig. 3a shows the aerobic growth curve of wild-type and hkte- pgdx- h. influenzae rd cells in sbhi broth. the aerobic growth defect of the hydroperoxidase-negative strain is marginal, though significant, characterized by a slightly lowered doubling time and a reduction in final cell density. more precisely, upon the entry of the early stationary phase of growth, doubling of the hkte- pgdx- h. influenzae rd culture rapidly stopped. however, no significant decrease in the number of viable cells was apparent when comparing dilutional plating of early stationary phase cultures with overnight cultures .

in a previous report, we showed that, because catalase is less efficient in scavenging metabolically-generated h2o <dig> than is pgdx, catalase of h. influenzae rd cells that lack functional pgdx  is induced about two-fold during routine aerobic growth compared to catalase activity of totally hydroperoxidase-proficient cells  <cit> , while a transient induction of about seven-fold is noticeable after an anaerobic culture was shifted to air  <cit> . this observation favours the general view that the oxidative stress encountered by microorganisms during an aerobic shift is substantially higher than during routine aerobic growth. so, wild-type and hkte- pgdx- h. influenzae rd cells were grown anaerobically in sbhi broth to early exponential phase, after which the cultures were shifted to air . hydroperoxidase-deficiency once more did not bring about a fundamental reduction in growth rate in response to the applied oxidative stress, while again lowered the final culture density compared to the isogenic parent. from these anaerobic-to-aerobic shifted cultures, dilutions were prepared at the early stationary phase, and aerobic growth was monitored . the resulting growth curves are similar to those obtained from anaerobically pregrown cultures, indicating that the higher level of oxidative stress encountered during the shift to aerobiosis does not cause significant dna damage to hydroperoxidase-deficient h. influenzae rd grown in rich medium.

on the other hand, growth experiments in chemically defined mic medium show that under these conditions strain hkte- pgdx- h. influenzae rd is highly vulnerable to oxidative stress. no growth was observed in fully aerated cultures after dilution  or after shifting an anaerobic early exponential phase culture to air . moreover, severe growth retardation was noticeable under the microaerophilic conditions present in a non-shaking candle extinction jar . the underlying cause of the encountered oxidative stress is likely to be the accumulation of h2o <dig>  since the addition of puryvate  or catalase to aerobically growing hkte- pgdx- h. influenzae rd cultures resulted in wild-type growth .

in  <dig>  boehme and coworkers  <cit>  reported that certain amino acid biosynthesis pathways of e. coli are extremely vulnerable to oxidative inactivation. to test the hypothesis that aerobically grown hkte- pgdx- h. influenzae rd cells in mic medium are not viable because of the inability to synthesize certain amino acids or vitamins, the growth experiments were repeated in mic medium that was supplemented with all  <dig> essential amino acids , together with the vitamins riboflavin, niacinamide, pyridoxine and thiamine  . the aerobic growth defect of the hkte- pgdx- h. influenzae rd strain was largely alleviated by the amino acid/vitamin enrichment of the minimal medium, as inferred from the slightly lower doubling time compared to growth in rich sbhi broth.

the growth experiments described above are based on the cytotoxicity of low micromolar concentrations of h2o <dig> which are inevitably generated during oxygen-respiration  <cit> . the effect of higher levels of h2o <dig> – which e.g. could be the result of the antimicrobial repertoire of bacterial competitors  <cit>  or host phagocytes – on the fitness of the hydroperoxidase-deficient hkte pgdx double mutant, was assessed via disk diffusion testing . based on inhibition zone diameters, strain hkte- pgdx- h. influenzae rd assayed on sbhi agar plates was slightly, though significantly more sensitive to the supranormal concentrations of h2o <dig> applied on the paper disks compared to the wild-type rd strain. on the other hand, identical experimental conditions except the use of mic agar plates as the solidified growth medium, brought about hypersensitivity of the hkte pgdx double mutant's condition to high levels of h2o <dig>  although more resistant than strain hkte- pgdx- h. influenzae rd, the wild-type strain was also heavily sensitized to the cytotoxicity of the supranormal levels of h2o <dig> when assayed on mic agar plates.

in summary, respiratory-generated h2o <dig> seems to affect growth of hydroperoxidase-deficient h. influenzae rd by blocking the supply of cellular building blocks, resulting in bacteriostasis. it thus appears that hkte- pgdx- h. influenzae rd prevents the continuously generated stream of h2o <dig> being bacteriocidal, either by limiting the ferrous iron-mediated chemical reduction to the extremely harmful hydroxyl radicals  or perhaps by having particularly efficient dna damage repair mechanisms.

crude hkte- pgdx- h. influenzae rd cell extracts contain low-specific nadh peroxidase activity
because pgdx reduces peroxides, while concomitantly oxidizing glutathione, direct spectrophotometric monitoring of in vitro pgdx activity is feasible by following the nadph-dependent reduction of glutathione disulfide catalyzed by the flavoprotein glutathione reductase. by using t-butyl hydroperoxide  as the peroxide substrate, the usefulness of this assay to enzymatically confirm the hkte pgdx double mutation was limited because of severe background activity, i.e. oxidation of the nicotinamide nucleotide reductant was already apparent in reaction mixtures solely containing nadph, t-booh and crude extract. similar nadph-dependent peroxidase activity was observed for mixtures containing nadph, h2o <dig> and crude extract. because this in vitro peroxidatic activity conflicts with the previous conclusion that hkte- pgdx- h. influenzae rd cells are totally devoid of h2o2-scavenging activity, we determined the kinetic parameters of the nadph peroxidatic activity using crude extracts . the saturation curves for the reducing substrates nadph and nadh  yielded comparable specificities, with km values resembling their in vivo concentrations . on the other hand, the km values for the oxidizing substrates t-booh  and h2o <dig>  are far above physiologically relevant in vivo concentrations . in fact, the affinity constant for h2o <dig> is  <dig> orders of magnitude higher compared to the km value of ~ <dig> μm for pgdx catalyzed h2o2-reduction  <cit> , likely explaining that this novel nadh:peroxide oxidoreductase activity is of minor importance when assaying the turnover of low micromolar concentration of h2o <dig> by whole hkte- pgdx- h. influenzae rd cells.

for the nadph:peroxide oxidoreductase activity to be a determinant factor for the hkte- pgdx- h. influenzae rd cells remaining as fit under aerobic conditions in rich medium as their isogenic parent, one would expect this peroxidatic activity to be regulated in response to oxidative stress. so, nadph peroxidatic activity was measured in crude extracts derived from wild-type and hkte- pgdx- h. influenzae rd cultures using t-booh as the oxidizing substrate. for the purpose of the present study, monitoring the nadph-dependent turnover of h2o <dig> would be more appropriate, however, the endogenous catalase activity of wild-type cells conflicts with this approach. no induction of nadph-dependent t-booh peroxidase activity was apparent. in fact, from the recorded specific activities of  <dig>  ±  <dig>  nmol/min mg protein and  <dig>  ±  <dig>  nmol/min mg protein for wild-type and hkte- pgdx- h. influenzae rd cell extracts respectively, it seems that nadph:t-booh oxidoreductase activity is slightly repressed as the result of h2o2-stress.

hydroperoxidase-deficient h. influenzae strain eagan is not attenuated in virulence
to determine the involvement of pgdx in the pathogenic sequence leading to bacteremia and to assess the influence of increased h2o2-stress on hib virulence, both a single hib eagan mutant disrupted in its pgdx gene, and a hib eagan hkte pgdx double mutant were created by moving these mutations from the genetically modified rd strains to competence-induced hib eagan cells . growth of wild-type and hkte- pgdx- hib eagan strains in rich sbhi and chemically defined mic liquid medium showed similar trends as described for their rd counterparts . moreover, fig.  <dig> shows that the hkte- pgdx- hib eagan double mutant is completely unable to metabolise low μm concentrations of h2o <dig>  while fig.  <dig> shows that the double mutant cells are sensitised to h2o2-stress due to low-complex nutrient availability. these two phenotypes match those observed for the rd counterparts and conclusions are to be drawn accordingly. to assess virulence, wild-type hib eagan and mutant strains were cultured anaerobically to mid-exponential phase, diluted to ~ <dig> cfu/ <dig> μl, and intraperitoneally inoculated into 5-day-old infant rats. bacteremia was assessed at  <dig> hours by culturing a tail vein blood sample anaerobically on sbhi plates containing the appropriate antibiotics. compared to wild-type hib eagan , both pgdx-  and hkte- pgdx- hib eagan  were not attenuated in virulence.

discussion
a hib mutant defective in lipoamide dehydrogenase is indistinguishable under anaerobic conditions from its isogenic parent, while showing no growth at all in the presence of air  <cit> . because this strain is severely reduced in virulence, it was concluded that hib requires the ability for aerobic respiration in order to complete its pathogenic sequence leading to invasive disease. it thus follows that hib strains are subjected to o2•-/h2o2-toxicity in the course of bacteremia. nonetheless, the fitness of our hydroperoxidase-deficient h. influenzae rd mutant is only marginally affected by aerobic conditions in rich sbhi broth, and hkte- pgdx- hib eagan displays a normal ability to produce persistent bacteremia in infant rats. similar observations are reported for sod-deficient hib  <cit> , suggesting that in the infant rat model of infection, neither phagocytic cells and their respiratory bursts, nor the potentially toxic o2-levels in the blood, play a major role in limiting hib virulence. the pathogenic sequence of salmonella typhimurium – another causative agent of bacteremia in humans – to cause infection when injected into mice by the intraperitoneal route, is also indifferent to the presence of either catalase  <cit> , ahpc or oxyr  <cit>  , while a severe attenuation in virulence is noticeable for a salmonella typhimurium reca mutant defective in dna repair  <cit> . thus, the ability to repair damaged dna appears to be more important than the ability to directly inactivate the mediators of oxygen toxicity, o2•- and h2o <dig>  during the course of invasive infection of pathogenic agents that are able to deceive the host inflammatory system.

acatalasaemic h. influenzae rd does not grow in chemically defined mic medium, because of an abrogated ability to remove h2o <dig>  <cit> . because wild-type growth as well as wild-type h2o2-scavenging activity  is regained simply by adding glutathione to the minimal medium, we envisioned that the remainder of hydroperoxidase activity inside acatalasaemic h. influenzae rd is catalyzed in a glutathione-dependent manner  <cit> . we hypothesized pgdx to be the most likely candidate to catalyze this activity because of its high specificity for h2o2-reduction  and because completion of its peroxidatic cycle exclusively depends on the presence of glutathione   <cit> . this hypothesis is confirmed here given that either a h. influenzae rd or a hib eagan double mutant that lacks both catalase and pgdx can not catalyze turnover of micromolar amounts of h2o <dig> . thus, catalase  and a sole peroxidase  account for the majority of h2o2-scavenging in the h. influenzae cytoplasm. the h2o2-scavenging machinery of e. coli also is embodied by catalase  and a sole peroxidase, in this case ahpc instead of pgdx  <cit> . although being clearly dissimilar with regard to the reductive branch of their peroxidatic cycles, the peroxiredoxins ahpc and pgdx can be regarded as being functionally analogous, since i) their kinetic parameters for either the reduction of h2o <dig> or t-booh are very similar  <cit> ; ii) they both appear to be of most importance during routine exponential growth   <cit> ; iii) they both are among the most abundantly expressed proteins  <cit> ; iv) neither pgdx, in case of hib as reported here, nor ahpc, in case of s. typhimurium  <cit>  as well as in case of the acatalasaemic anaerobe porphyromonas gingivalis w <dig>  <cit> , are required for virulence; and v) they both elicit an immunogenic response when injected into infected models  <cit> . the latter observation also shows that virulence and immunity are not necessarily connected, as has also been reported e.g. for the major secretory protein of legionella pneumophila, which results in strong protective immunity, but is apparently nonessential for virulence  <cit> .

on the basis of the established physiologically relevant affinities for its reducing substrates, nadph  and nadh , the nadh:peroxide oxidoreductase activity, detected here in crude extracts of both hkte- pgdx- h. influenzae rd and its wild-type parent, could be of some relevance for the parasite to control its peroxide levels. the affinities, however, for either the simplest peroxide h2o <dig>  or the organic peroxide t-booh  are so low as to question whether these peroxides are the real in vivo substrates for the nadh:peroxide oxidoreductase activity. moreover, we have shown here in fig.  <dig> that hkte- pgdx- h. influenzae rd as well as hkte- pgdx- hib eagan are totally deprived of h2o2-scavenging activity, meaning that, not only the so-called nadh peroxidase, but also other hydroperoxidases potentially expressed by h. influenzae, such as the thiol peroxidases bcp and tpx  <cit> , are not involved in scavenging endogenously-generated h2o <dig>  in this respect, the determination of the kinetic parameters for bcp and tpx would be of great value to clarify this issue.

a decade ago, coves et al.  <cit>  reported the nadh: h2o <dig> oxidoreductase activity in cell-free e. coli extracts; biochemical evidence was provided that such activity was distinct from h2o2-removal catalyzed by katg and ahpr. the apparent km values of the e. coli nadh peroxidase for its reducing substrates were within 30– <dig> μm  <cit> , which agree well with our measurements for the h. influenzae rd nadh peroxidatic activity. unfortunately, because contaminating catalase activity biased the specific decomposition of h2o <dig>  no estimation of the binding affinity for h2o <dig> of the e. coli nadh peroxidase was provided and no further comparison with the h. influenzae activity reported here is currently possible.

hydroperoxidase-deficient  e. coli progressively grows slower in rich luria-bertani broth and can only grow for two generations in m <dig> minimal medium supplemented with all  <dig> amino acids  <cit> . on the contrary, hydroperoxidase-deficiency  inflicted in either an rd or an eagan background resulted in wild-type growth, generation after generation, in rich sbhi broth, while in chemically defined mic medium supplemented with all  <dig> amino acids, a slight aerobic growth defect is manifested as the postponement of nearly wild-type exponential growth to lower-than-wild-type stationary phase cell densities. these results thus imply that endogenously-generated h2o <dig> is bacteriocidal  to e. coli, while being rather bacteriostatic to h. influenzae. this difference in cytotoxic behaviour of h2o <dig> can not be attributed to quantitative differences, since we have previously reported that aerobically grown h. influenzae rd cells produce h2o <dig> at a similar rate  as has been established for e. coli  <cit> . two plausible explanations, however, can be put forth to address this issue. first, since h2o <dig> by itself is not mutagenic, the rate of formation of mutagenic hydroxyl radicals derived from h2o <dig> adjacent to the genomic dna molecule of e. coli may be higher compared to that nearby the h. influenzae genome. secondly, the h. influenzae dna mismatch repair system may be more efficient in repairing its oxidatively damaged dna than is the e. coli counterpart, either on the basis of pure kinetics or because of a difference in sensitivity towards h2o2-mediated inactivation. in this regard, it is interesting to note that the human dna mismatch repair system for example is highly sensitive to h2o2-mediated inactivation, even at noncytotoxic levels of h2o <dig>  <cit> . the present characterization of hydroperoxidase-deficient h. influenzae rd and hib eagan suggests that the wild-type strains should be highly robust against h2o2-stress. how, then, can it be explained that h. influenzae is more vulnerable to oxygen toxicity compared to other inhabitants of the human nasopharynx  <cit> ? first of all, since we have assessed here cytotoxicity of only one product  of the reaction of oxygen with the cell's redox centers, the possibility remains that growth of h. influenzae is directly affected by oxygen toxicity because of intrinsic vulnerability against o2•-. d'mello et al.  <cit>  indeed reported that growth of h. influenzae is highly affected by o2•--stress, as evidenced by the absence of growth of a sod-deficient hib strain under fully aerated conditions. secondly, taken into account the highly fastidious nature and the highly condensed genome of h. influenzae, o2•-- and h2o2-mediated protein inactivation could result in a number of auxotrophies, which can not be relieved under certain culture conditions. in this respect, we consider the basis and diversity of auxotrophies imposed upon h. influenzae by either o2•-- or h2o2-stress to be important topics for further research.

CONCLUSIONS
by generating mutants of h. influenzae rd and the virulent strain hib eagan defective in both hkte and pgdx, we were able to show that these two hydroperoxidases, a catalase and a peroxiredoxin, account for the majority of scavenging of metabolically-generated h2o <dig>  no other h2o2-removal activities appear to be of physiological significance. yet, in vitro kinetic assays revealed that hkte- pgdx- h. influenzae rd still produce nadh:peroxide oxidoreductase activity. although this may represent a detoxifying activity, the nadh:peroxide oxidoreductase appears to be irrelevant for in vivo h2o2-scavenging because of its high km-value  when considering physiological steady-state h2o2-concentrations . in the absence of hydroperoxidase activity, aerobic growth is fundamentally affected only in case of limiting amino acid/vitamin availability, implying that the continuous stream of h2o <dig> generated during h. influenzae's aerobic metabolism affects biosynthetic functions, while, apparently, causing dna damage which not overkills the cells' dna repair machinery. in agreement with these ex vivo growth studies, in the infant rat model of bacteremia, the double hkte- pgdx- mutation in the hib background did not result in attenuated virulence indicating that hkte and pgdx, and more in general h2o2-scavenging, are not important for virulence in this model of infection.

