BACKGROUND
rna interference  is a powerful method to specifically suppress gene expression and is therefore widely used for experimental as well as therapeutic purposes. since the initial characterization of rnai in the nematode c. elegans  <cit> , the field of rnai has expanded remarkably. the essentials of rnai can be summarized as specific degradation of target mrna mediated by small, double stranded rnas  <cit> . meanwhile, different mechanisms of rnai were discovered in mammalian cells comprising post-transcriptional gene silencing by sirnas, transcriptional silencing by sirnas in the nucleus and the microrna pathway  <cit> . it has been shown that exogenously introduced sirna duplexes and endogenously processed mirna duplexes are taken up by the rna-induced silencing complex . the antisense sirna  directs risc to complementary mrna, while the second passenger  strand is degraded  <cit> .

recently, the interpretation of rnai data has become complicated because several studies reported unintended interactions between the silencing molecules and cellular components, so-called off-target effects  <cit> . off-target effects include the induction of the antiviral interferon pathway machinery and depend on nucleotide sequence similarity between the sirna molecule and short motifs in mrnas of other genes not intended to be knocked-down. a source of sequence-dependent off-target effects in mammals is the high tolerance for mismatches between the sirna and the complementary target mrna outside of the first 2– <dig> bases  of the sirna  <cit> . furthermore, off-target effects can be caused by insertion of the sense sirna strand into the risc complex instead of the antisense strand  <cit> . finally, off-target effects can occur due to seed-sequence-dependent binding  <cit> .

with these off-target effects in mind, we used a commonly used sirna sequence directed against gfp in a series of microarray expression profiling experiments, in which we knocked down four unrelated candidate suppressor genes . we carefully analyzed the resulting data set and could identify a set of genes commonly deregulated in all experiments that were unrelated except for transfection of the gfp sirna used as negative control. these commonly deregulated genes were subsequently identified as off-target effects of the sirna against gfp. further investigation by expression profiling revealed the complete set of genes deregulated by the gfp sirna.

RESULTS
sirna specific for gfp specifically targets endogenous genes in human cells
in a set of functional experiments, we used rnai knock down for the characterization of unrelated candidate suppressor genes in cell lines . our experimental procedure resulted in efficient knock down of up to 87% in hela, 87% in u2os, 72% in hek and 68% in evsat cells . for genome-wide detection of the resulting transcriptional changes, we used oligo-microarrays containing  <dig>  oligonucleotides from  <dig>  human genes. as negative control, a sirna against gfp was transfected into hek and hela cells and the resulting rna co-hybridized in all otherwise unrelated array experiments. due to the issue of off-target effects of sirna molecules that has been raised recently in the literature, we carefully analyzed the resulting data for genes commonly deregulated in all of the experiments. indeed, we found a subset of genes to be consistently deregulated, which we postulated to be in fact deregulated by the negative control used in all experiments the sirna directed against the non-physiological gene gfp. among these off-target genes, cyld and soat were most consistently and strongest differentially expressed . expression levels derived from microarray experiments were normalized as described in methods or from qpcr were normalized to  <dig> housekeeping genes that showed constant expression levels in all microarray experiments . in comparison to these controls, cyld is down regulated in hek and hela cells between  <dig>  and  <dig>  fold, and soat is down regulated between  <dig>  and  <dig>  fold. this statistically significant deregulation  was confirmed by analysis with quantitative pcr  showing a down regulation of cyld between  <dig>  and  <dig>  fold  and of soat between  <dig>  and  <dig>  fold . besides of cyld and soat, we analysed the mrna levels of a set of off-target genes and found the same effect of down regulation by the gfp sirna in several more genes . we analyzed the mrna sequences of cyld and soat for sequence homology to the sense and antisense sirna molecule and found  <dig> and  <dig> potential target sites, respectively . the control sirna against gfp, which we used, is offered by two different distributors . furthermore a  <dig> mer sirna against gfp differing in only one basepair is distributed independently . while the off-target genes might differ between these two gfp sirnas, the differences are likely to be small. we characterized the sirna directed against gfp as it is frequently used as negative control in rnai experiments .

x log <dig> expression ratio, § adjusted p value, s b statistics 

specific off-target effects recur in different cell lines with different sirna molecules
we found specific off-target deregulation of cyld and soat by gfp sirna in 3/ <dig> cell lines derived from different tissues as compared to mock transfections . only evsat cells did not show a reduced expression of cyld and soat, which is probably due to the lower transfection efficiency . in order to exclude that the observed off-target effects are due to our preparation of the sirna, we compared its effects to chemically synthesized sirna directed against gfp. while the sequences of these two molecules are identical, we used in vitro transcription to produce sirna, while the commercially available sirna was produced by oligonucleotide synthesis. however, transfection of either of these sirnas into hek and hela cells resulted in similar decrease of expression of cyld and soat as compared to the mock transfection . we excluded that the observed effects are due to induction of unspecific interferon response by measuring expression of the oas <dig> gene  <cit> , which was not induced after transfection of  <dig> nm sirna molecule . therefore, the off-target deregulation of cyld and soat is not dependent on the methodological origin of the rnai molecule.

distinct off-target effects depend on the concentration of gfp sirna
in order to assess specificity of the observed off-target effect, we transfected increasing amounts of the sirna directed against gfp and measured expression of cyld and soat as off-target genes and of c13orf <dig> and lmnb <dig> as non-regulated, negative controls using qpcr . in addition, in order to detect induction of unspecific antiviral interferon response,oas <dig> was measured in transfected cells. as expected, increasing amounts of transfected gfp sirna did not have any influence on the expression level of the genes c13orf <dig> and lmnb <dig> that were used as negative controls. in contrast, the mrna levels of cyld and soat decreased with increasing amounts of transfected gfp sirna, pointing to targeted down regulation of these genes by the gfp sirna both in hela  and hek cells . furthermore, knock down of cyld and soat mrna correlated with the concentration of the transfected sirna . thus, the off-target effect for cyld and soat is dependent on the amount of transfected sirna against gfp in hek and hela cells, supporting selectivity of the observed effect. in contrast, levels of c13orf <dig> and lmnb <dig> mrna did not correlate with the amount of transfected gfp sirna . transfection of increasing amounts of sirna molecules induced the non-specific antiviral interferon response in hek cells as reported previously  <cit> , while hela cells were unable to mount this response, as expected  <cit> . however, the interferon response in hek cells was only induced using  <dig> ng  of transfected sirna, a concentration at least one order of magnitude higher than the sirna concentration at which we observed the sequence-specific knockdown of cyld and soat.

mrnas deregulated by gfp sirna cannot be functionally attributed to a single cellular process
in general, sirna molecules can impact on target mrnas via two pathways: while imperfect matching mrna molecules are impeded mostly in their translation, perfect matches lead to mrna degradation  <cit> . to determine the mechanism of how the gfp sirna affects the mrna transcript and also to define the set of target genes of the gfp sirna, we transfected hela and hek cells with the sirna directed against gfp and analyzed transcriptional changes on an additional second set of expression microarrays. overall,  <dig> genes were significantly deregulated compared to the mock transfection . intriguingly, a similar number of genes was significantly over-  and underrepresented , which means that a large number of transcripts changed their levels due to secondary indirect effects. next, we wanted to find out whether the majority of mrnas were deregulated indirectly due to direct modulation of a single cellular pathway or transcription factor. as can be seen from the function of deregulated genes , the deregulated mrnas belong to a diverse set of cellular pathways. this excludes that the off-target effects that we see are due to deregulation of a single central biochemical pathway.

down regulation of off-target genes correlates with very short stretches of perfect sequence homology
in order to find common motifs in the sequences of target genes deregulated by the gfp sirna, we looked at the second set of expression profiling experiments that was dedicated only to the characterization of off-target-effects of gfp sirna. to this end, we analyzed the sequences of  <dig> genes that were significantly down regulated after transfection of gfp sirna  for sequence homology to the gfp sirna sense and antisense molecules . since upregulation of genes is probably not due to direct targeting by the sirna via sequence homology but rather likely a secondary effect, we focused in our statistical analysis on genes that were down regulated by the gfp sirna. to this end, we aligned the sequences of the  <dig> down regulated mrnas to the gfp sirna sequence in order to identify likely direct targets. in our set of  <dig> significantly underrepresented mrnas, we found  <dig> mrnas with an  <dig> mer homology to the sense and  <dig> to the antisense gfp sirna . of these mrnas,  <dig> showed homology for both sirna molecules albeit at different sequence positions. in order to find out whether this concomitant binding of both sense and antisense sirna molecules would result in a more pronounced down regulation of mrna molecules with homologies for both sirnas, we tested whether these mrnas would be underrepresented to a greater extent in our microarray analyses. however, no significant down regulation of these  <dig> mrnas could be detected compared to the remaining mrnas with only one sequence homology. this could of course be due to the limitation of scoring only perfect matches and disregarding homologies with single mismatches, which reportedly plays a major role in the sirna silencing mechanism  <cit> . in order to assess whether the homologies detected in our set of underrepresented mrnas could also occur by chance, we performed the same homology searches with shuffled gfp sense and antisense sequences. compared to the proper sequences, we found significantly less homologies using these shuffled gfp sequences .

in order to exclude a bias due to composition of dinucleotides in the sirna sequences, we additionally shuffled the gfp sirna sequence while preserving its dinucleotide composition and also found less sequence homologies as compared to the proper gfp sirna sequence, even though the difference was not as pronounced . therefore, preservation of dinucleotide composition seems to retain a low level of homology to the genes deregulated by the gfp sirna. also we searched for sequence homologies of the proper gfp sirna sequences in a set of mrna sequences that were not deregulated in our experiments or that were randomly picked. with increasing length of homology, relatively more homologies were found with the proper, non-shuffled gfp sirna in the set of actually deregulated genes as compared to all negative controls .

next we wanted to determine whether there was a clustering of sequence homologies in specific regions of the sirna or mrna molecules. in contrast to previous findings  <cit> , we found no enrichment of sequence homology of the sirna sequences neither in the 3'utr of deregulated mrna sequences nor anywhere else in the transcripts. rather, the sirna of gfp shows sequence homology to all parts of candidate target mrnas . also, we did not find enrichment of sequence homology in the 5'seed region of the sirna molecule.

discussion
rna interference is a potent method of gene silencing that has rapidly become important over the past years and that is now widely used for experimental as well as therapeutic purposes. however, the method harbours several pitfalls, one of them being the artefactual dysregulation of non-target genes. this effect can either be due to i) induction of the interferon response in mammalian cells after transfection of rnai molecules or ii) result from the unintended targeting of genes that have only low level of sequence homology to the rnai molecule. while the former unwanted effect is avoidable, the latter artefact cannot be predicted. this means that even sirnas with no predicted physiological target sequences – which are often used as negative controls for rnai experiments – will have specific off-target effects, and these are thought to be caused by sequence similarity of very short seed sequences  <cit> . this has prompted calls for rigorous standards in sirna experiments, especially in large-scale screens  <cit> . here, we show that sirna molecules that are commercially distributed and used widely as negative controls actually target endogenous genes with important roles in several pathways, even though there are only very small regions of sequence homology between the sirna and the mrna molecules.

we used sirna directed against gfp as negative control in a series of unrelated knock down experiments that were analyzed by expression microarrays . due to the ongoing discussion concerning the specificity of rnai molecules, we rigorously screened the data and paid special attention to genes that were commonly deregulated in all of these expression profiling experiments, which were unrelated except for the use of gfp sirna as negative control. indeed, we detected strong dysregulation of the genes cyld and soat in all of these experiments  and in various cell lines . only evsat cells did not show a reduced expression of cyld and soat after transfection of gfp sirna. this is probably due to the lower transfection efficiency of evsat cells compared to hek, hela or u2os cells. furthermore, we show that the strong dysregulation of cyld and soat is independent of the synthetic origin of the sirna molecules . therefore, the commonly used sirna directed against gfp has sequence-dependent off-target effects in human cells, with the genes cyld and soat showing most pronounced deregulation.

are these effects sequence-dependent or caused by sequence-independent effects? in general, unwanted effects like activation of the interferon response are more likely to occur when high concentrations of sirna are used. how low the concentration of transfected dsrna molecules must be to prevent unspecific effects is controversial: while there are reports that sirna concentrations of ≤  <dig> nm usually do not lead to induction of the interferon response  <cit> , others have detected unspecific effects using sirna concentrations as low as  <dig> nm  <cit> . in this study, we transfected increasing amounts of sirna directed against gfp . in hek as well as in hela cells, we could show that off-target knock down of cyld and soat correlates with the concentration of the transfected sirna. already a concentration of  <dig> nm sirna showed the down regulation of cyld and soat as off-target genes. at the same time, the interferon response is activated only after transfection of more than  <dig> nm sirna, pointing to a directed targeting of cyld and soat and not a down regulation which is concomitant to the interferon response mechanism. in order to shed light on this gene-specific mechanism, we performed a genome-wide screen to identify all mrna transcripts deregulated by the gfp sirna. intriguingly, we found a similar number of mrnas overrepresented as mrnas underrepresented after transfection of gfp sirna, which means that at least half of the deregulation that we detected is due to secondary effects. an earlier study could not detect off-target effects for a sirna directed against gfp  <cit> . in the light of the recent progress of the field and several reports on off-target effects, this finding seems highly unlikely since the majority of sirna molecules, even those with a non-physiological target, will be able to pair to a set of mrnas with partial homology. in fact, we reproducibly found a large number of genes specifically deregulated after transfection of gfp sirna.

in order to shed light on the mechanism of action of the gfp sirna, we looked for sequence homologies between the gfp sirna and the deregulated mrnas. in our set of mrnas that were underrepresented after transfection of gfp sirna, we found significantly more hits with the proper gfp sirna sequence as compared to the shuffled sirna sequences for sequence homologies of more than  <dig> bp length. of the  <dig> genes down modulated, we found perfect matches of more than  <dig> bp in  <dig>  of the down modulated genes.  <dig> mrnas showed homology to both the sense strand as well as the antisense strand of the gfp sirna.

in contrast to the current model where binding of several sirna molecules results in more consistent down modulation of the mrna  <cit> , we did not find these  <dig> mrnas to be more underrepresented as compared to the mrnas with homologies to one of the sirna molecules only. this could be due to our scoring of perfect, non-mismatch homologies only due to computational limitations  <cit> . interestingly, in our system both strands of the transfected double-stranded sirna duplex show a significant number of homologies to the underrepresented mrnas as compared to the shuffled control sequences. while there is a bias towards usage of the antisense strand as required, both strands of the sirna are loaded into the risc complex. this could be reduced by proper design of the gfp sirna sequence which would prevent loading of both sense and antisense molecules into the risc complex  <cit> . down regulation of the remaining  <dig>  transcripts without perfect matches to the sirna sequences is probably due to pairing with partial mismatches, whose in-silico prediction is almost impossible  <cit> . additionally, a proportion of these remaining  <dig> % of deregulated mrnas without perfect match to gfp sirna is also likely to be modulated indirectly as secondary effect, just as the  <dig> mrnas that are up regulated after transfection of the sirnas. while the indirect target mrnas may be of little interest for the molecular mechanism, these secondary effects will be just as confounding in experiments using gfp sirna as the direct effects. according to our data, possibly as many as  <dig> % of sequence-specific off-target effects could be avoided by design in order to exclude one of the two strands of the transfected sirna from the risc complex  <cit> . very recently, several vendors introduced a new generation of chemically modified sirnas that are supposed to ensure loading of the sirna antisense strand into the risc complex only, thereby reducing off-target effects.

with increasing length of homology, relatively more hits were scored for the proper, non-shuffled gfp sirna in the set of actually deregulated genes as compared to all negative controls . it is remarkable that preservation of dinucleotides while shuffling of gfp sirna sequence results in a larger number of sequence homologies in deregulated genes. it seems that the dinucleotides in the gfp sirna sequence have a background homology in human genes, which is abrogated by complete shuffling of the dinucleotide composition.

interestingly, in contrast to previous findings  <cit> , homologous sequences were not clustered in the 5' seed sequence of the gfp sirna and they were also not clustered in the 3'utr of target mrnas or any other region of the mrna. in jackson et al.,  <cit> , the authors performed transcriptome-wide time course analyses to identify off-target mrna transcripts, which allowed limiting the number of primary off-target genes to  <dig> only. within these  <dig> genes, the authors could search for regions with only partial and very small homology . in contrast, we could only analyze a single time point and found  <dig> down modulated genes, which is why we had to restrict our homology search to perfect matches only, and this could be a confounding factor.

how to handle sequence-specific off-target effects in sirna experiments? proper design of the sequence of sirnas using in-silico target gene prediction will not avoid down regulation of off-target mrna transcripts as shown here and discussed previously  <cit> . the aim should therefore not be to avoid these effects but rather to identify false positives and exclude them from the set of deregulated mrnas. in order to help identify false positive target genes that really are off-target genes in future knock-down experiments, we here present the endogenous genes that are down regulated by one of the most commonly used control sirna directed against gfp. another strategy to identify off-target genes arising from the control sirna is to use several different control sirnas which are directed against different sites in non-endogenous genes like green fluorescent protein and luciferase in addition to a mock transfected control. also, the sequence of the sirna directed against the gene of interest could be scrambled and the resulting molecule be used as a negative control. however, the most straightforward approach is to employ several different sirna molecules to target the mrna of interest and identify true targets by their property of being knocked-down by all of these sirnas  <cit> . the most comprehensive approach of this kind would be to use esirnas, which should then be produced from the whole target mrna sequence. in this case, while all of the resulting esirna molecules would target the single mrna of interest, the off-target effects of the single esirna that are present only at very low concentrations compared to all other esirna molecules would be minimal and probably below detection level. furthermore, the transfection of shrna plasmids by lenti- or retroviruses is an option for reducing off-target effects, since the level of stable shrna expression is comparatively modest which results in minimal off-target effects. a second more laborious approach is to rescue the observed sirna phenotype by transfecting a recombinant cdna that is mutated at the sirna target sequence and thus rendered non-responsive to the sirna. alternatively, after using a sirna directed against the 3'utr of a certain gene, rescue of expression can be achieved by expression of the mrna lacking its normal 3'utr sequence. ideally, both approaches of i) the usage of several sirna molecules and ii) rescue of the phenotype by non-responsive cdna plasmids should be combined in experimental strategies. only these precautions will allow to definitely exclude that the observed phenotype of the sirna knockdown is due to unwanted artefactual off-target effects.

CONCLUSIONS
our analysis shows that even a sirna frequently used as negative control that is directed against exogenous gfp has off-target effects in mammalian cells. this sirna is distributed by several companies and widely used for rnai experiments. since off-target effects seemingly cannot be avoided, the best strategy is to identify these off-target genes as false positives and exclude them from the set of deregulated mrnas. in addition to proving that a sirna used as a negative control has sequence specific off target effects, we also provide a list of deregulated target genes of the exogenous gfp sirna that can be used as reference for future rnai experiments.

