BACKGROUND
candida species are now among the most important pathogens especially for the immunocompromised host. they are the fourth most common organisms recovered from blood cultures in hospitalized patients  <cit> . candida albicans the most frequently isolated of the species, is a polymorphic organism. it can switch from a yeast form  to a filamentous phase  in response to a variety of external stimuli, including mammalian serum. mutants defective in this serum response, also show a reduced capacity to cause disease in a murine model,  <cit>  suggesting a virulence role for it.

it is widely accepted that the production of the rna components of ribosomes in eukaryotes proceeds through the transcription of large pre-rna molecules by rna polymerase i , that get processed into the final large and small subsegments  <cit> . we have recently reported the unexpected finding that candida albicans polyadenylates some of its 25s ribosomal rna  and the polyadenylation site corresponded to the large subsegment 3'-end maturation  <cit> . we also found that the concentration of the polyadenylated form of 25s was increased transiently by serum just prior to the appearance of filamentous forms, raising the possibility for a role in hyphal transformation. a question raised by these data was whether this event is unique for the large subunit rrna or it represents a wider function. for example, is a dna sequence upstream from the 25s subunit functioning serendipitously as a promoter for rna polymerase ii , allowing transcription by this enzyme complex and subsequent polyadenylation. such a process would not likely be important for ribosomal function. similar involvement of other subunits on the other hand, would increase the likelihood that polyadenylation of rrna plays a wider role in the biology of this yeast. we now report our observations related to the 18s subunit of rrna, that indeed there are other polyadenylation sites located near the 3'end of the 18s subunit. similar to 25s, we found that a polyadenylated 18s transcript, similar in size to a processed mature molecule, is also enhanced early and transiently by serum, further strengthening the possibility of a regulatory role for polyadenylation in the germination process.

RESULTS
cloning of poly a -extended 18s subsegments
we have found polyadenylation to occur both in yeast grown in ypd and in those exposed to serum for  <dig> minutes. in all cloned pcr products the number of adenines in the chain exceeded those in the poly-t primer  used to generate them. furthermore, the anchor sequence assures us that we did not extend an inappropriately annealed primer. unlike our data with the 25s subunit, where the attachment was to one of two thymidines one base apart at the reported maturation site  <cit> , the polyadenylation sites near the 3' end of 18s subunit were congregating either upstream or downstream of the reported maturation site  <cit>   but none were at the reported site. six of seven ypd exposed yeast polyadenylation sites were between positions  <dig> and  <dig>  located  <dig> bases upstream from the reported 3' end, whereas  <dig> of  <dig> polyadenylation sites downstream from the maturation site were from yeast exposed to serum. we were able to amplify a full-length clone from ypd exposed yeast and its site of polyadenylation was at position  <dig>  near the other polyadenylation sites of yeast exposed to ypd.

serum enhancement of polyadenylation
similar to 25s, polyadenylation of 18s subunit was enhanced by serum exposure and this is shown in figure 2a, representing a northern blot utilizing poly-a selected rna, hybridized with an 18s specific probe. by  <dig> minutes the intensity of the 18s band was more than tripled but back to baseline levels at  <dig> minutes. ubi <dig> was also up-regulated by serum but its intensity remained the same at  <dig> minutes, while the 18s band returned to baseline assuring us that the 18s enhancement was not as a result from an error in rna loading. we previously found act <dig>  <cit>  to show the same pattern, suggesting that serum exposure may also up-regulate constitutive genes. as a control for temperature, we also exposed yeast to ypd at 37째c and to serum at 30째c. there was no increase in polyadenylation in ypd at 37째c and there was increase with serum exposure at 30째c  indicating that serum caused this increase. estimates from phoshporimager data indicate that at baseline in ypd less than 1% of the rrna is polyadenylated . polyadenylation of rrna in saccharomyces cerevisiae has recently been described in similar amounts  <cit> .

to further confirm that the 18s increase from time zero to  <dig> minutes is real, we performed real-time pcr reactions and the results are shown in figure  <dig>  as can be seen, amplification can be detected  <dig> cycles earlier when the template is derived from organisms exposed to serum, confirming the increased amount of 18s in the starting material. 5s is detected at the same cycle whether exposed to serum or not.

the 18s band in figure 2a, lane b is slightly up-shifted as compared to lanes a and c, suggesting that likely one or more molecules, whose polyadenylation sites are downstream from the reported maturation sites are up-regulated by serum. this is consistent with our findings above, that  <dig> of the  <dig> polyadenylation sites located in that region were from serum exposed yeast and it suggests that serum up-regulation of polyadenylation may be selective to these downstream sites. when the same filter was hybridized with the 5s specific probe no bands were detected, indicating that our 18s bands were not a result of rrna contamination . figure 2b represents the phosphorimager generated counts of these bands confirming the visual results objectively. northerns that included the polya-minus fractions  continue to show the 18s bands indicating that rrna transcripts with and without polyadenylated extensions are being produced.

discussion
these data indicate that 18s subunit mirrors the large 25s molecule as regards to polyadenylation and its response to serum, suggesting that this is not an incidental phenomenon. they do differ from the 25s subunit in that polyadenylation occurs both upstream and downstream to but not at the reported 3'-end maturation site, while for the 25s subunit, the polyadenylation was found to be exclusively at the maturation site. perhaps the 3'-end of the 18s subunit plays an important role in the recognition of start sites on mrna, and is vigorously protected from modifications. this would also suggest that polyadenylation of 18s has a role outside of the ribosome.

one of the basic questions raised by our original data was whether these polyadenylated transcripts are products of pol i and get polyadenylated following maturation cleavage or are newly transcribed by pol ii. these data do not resolve this question. while finding of multiple polyadenylation sites in 18s with most of them clearly not corresponding to a reported maturation site, might result from transcription by an enzyme other than pol i, it is just as likely that they may represent inappropriate cleavage by the ribosomal rna processing apparatus and these products are being readied for degradation by polyadenylation. the recent report of polyadenylation in saccharomyces cerevisiae that was found to be increased in mutants lacking the degradative function rrp6p  <cit>  favors the latter scenario. rna polymerase switching from pol i to pol ii for rrna transcription has been described for saccharomyces cerevisiae  <cit>  in cells where the gene for one of the components of the pol i transcription factor uaf  was mutated. these mutants gave rise to isolates that were utilizing pol ii for their rrna transcription and this newly switched-on state was heritable even through meiosis. these data indicate that s. cerevisiae has the inherent capacity to utilize pol ii for rrna transcription but that this capacity is suppressed by a mechanism that includes uaf. these mutants though, switched to pol ii transcription exclusively. our data with c. albicans differs in that both polyadenylated and non-polyadenylated forms are produced simultaneously. conrad-webb and butow  <cit>  have described rrna transcripts of various lengths that were polyadenylated, produced by a respiratory-deficient isolate of s. cerevisiae. the template utilized by this strain was an episomal copy of ribosomal dna that contained a pol ii promoter sequence overlapping with the pol i promoter. recently, circular and linear rdna plasmids have been reported in c. albicans  <cit>  for the first time. thus it is possible that one of these episomal elements also contains pol ii promoters allowing it to function as the template for polyadenylated forms of rrnas. with our findings that polyadenylation also involves 18s, such pol ii promoters would have to be present for both subunit genes making pol ii role less likely. polyadenylation of a small percentage of total rna in escherichia coli has been reported  <cit>  including rrna and this polyadenylation occurred even in wild type organisms. hence it appears, that polyadenylation of these stable molecules occurs more widely as a biological phenomenon.

the role of polyadenylation of rrna in c. albicans is unknown. open reading frame analysis of the 18s subunit indicates that translation into protein is unlikely, as it would result in peptides shorter than  <dig> amino acids. multiple polyadenylation sites upstream and downstream from the reported maturation site suggest, that these may be inappropriately processed molecules that are being readied for degradation, though one of the downstream sites may be an a <dig> processing site. the mere up-regulation of polyadenylation by serum prior to germination also does not indicate a role in hypha formation as other genes such as ubiquitin and actin also respond similarly. there are aspects to our new 18s and our previous 25s data that leave the possibility for a role in germination open. these include the transient nature of this up-regulation for both subunits just prior to germination and the possible selective nature of this process involving 18s.

CONCLUSIONS
the ribosome is central to cellular function and the rna component of this organelle assumes critical structural and catalytic roles. our initial unexpected finding of polyadenylation of a portion of the large rrna subunit is now extended to the small subunit. that this modification also involves the other major component of the ribosome points to a biological role for this process. the fact that the transient up-regulation of rna polyadenylation from both subunits just precedes the phenotypic expression of germination, suggests a possible role in regulating candida albicans' polymorphic behavior.

