BACKGROUND
amyloid precursor protein  is a type i glycotransmembrane protein with a large extracellular domain and a short cytoplasmic tail . its role in normal biological processes is poorly defined, but there is mounting evidence that it plays both autocrine and endocrine roles in neurite growth and enhanced memory function in mice  <cit> .

app became the subject of intense investigation when it was identified as a risk factor for alzheimer's disease   <cit> . individuals with an extra copy of the app gene due to trisomy of chromosome  <dig>  also display early onset ad  <cit> . one point mutation in app, referred to as the swedish mutation, results in an early onset familial ad  <cit> .

app can be subjected to combinatorial cleavage by three different intramembrane secretases  to create a number of smaller peptides  <cit> . cleavage by α-secretase, known as a non-amyloidogenic pathway, is responsible for a default secretory pathway and predominates in all non-neuronal cells. cleavage by bace  represents a minor pathway in most cell types, except for neurons. like α-secretase cleavage of app, the bace-mediated fragment of app undergoes further proteolysis by a γ-secretase complex to generate small peptides that typically range between 40- <dig> amino acids, although  <dig> amino acid fragments can be found in skeletal muscles. app cleavage products are enriched in the brains of some ad patients  <cit> , and exposure to the aβ <dig> fragment is highly neurotoxic both in vitro and in in vivo animal models  <cit> .

in addition to its well-documented roles in neurodegeneration, app and its cleaved products have been also implicated in other diseases, most notably sporadic inclusion body myositis   <cit> , the most common skeletal muscle disorder of the elderly  <cit> . it has been reported that muscle biopsies from individuals with s-ibm contain congo red inclusions that are immunopositive for both app  <cit>  and aβ <dig>  <cit> . however, this is not a universal observation  <cit> , and proteomic analysis of ibm samples failed to reveal any app proteolytic products  <cit> . in fact, a fundamental role for app in the pathogenesis of s-ibm has been questioned recently  <cit> .

while the role of app in s-ibm awaits further analysis of clinical samples, it has been demonstrated that ectopic expression of either app  or aβ <dig> is sufficient to induce cell death in skeletal muscle either in vitro  <cit>  or in vivo  <cit> . the biology of muscle makes it a much more tractable tissue to study than the central nervous system. thus, studies designed to examine the effects of app on muscle development and physiology may provide new insights into the general mechanisms that mediate app induced pathogenesis.

to help define the mechanisms that could mediate app toxicity in muscle, and to develop a genetic model for testing genetic and environmental interventions that might reduce app-induced pathogenesis, we generated transgenic flies that express human app in the skeletal muscles. we found that both genetic and environmental factors can interact to enhance or reduce app-induced behavioral defects. these data suggest that the transgenic fly may represent a useful tool for defining the molecular mechanisms that mediate app-induced muscle pathology and for identifying genetic and chemical modulators.

RESULTS
muscle specific expression of human amyloid precursor protein  induces an age-dependent reduction in climbing and flying activity
in order to study the role of human app  on the development and function of skeletal muscles, we took advantage of a transgenic fly line that expresses happ under the control of the upstream activating sequence   <cit> . these flies were crossed to a line that expresses the gal <dig> transcription factor under the control of the muscle transcription factor dmef  <cit> , which expresses in all skeletal muscles and a few circadian neurons within the brain  <cit> .

we employed several controls in each of these studies, including nontransgenic w <dig> flies and transgenic flies expressing bacterial β-galactosidase  under the control of dmef-gal <dig>  the expression of lacz both validated the anticipated expression of happ in muscles  and controlled any effects caused by the competition of gal <dig> promoter for general transcriptional machinery within the cells. ectopic happ expressing flies  eclosed in normal numbers and displayed comparable longevity to the control lines  suggesting that ectopic happ  was non-toxic .

to assess the effects of ectopic happ on behavior, flies were tested for their ability to climb . both nontransgenic  and lacz-expressing  flies displayed comparable levels of climbing activity during the one-month testing period. transgenic flies expressing happ exhibited wild-type levels of climbing activity during the first two weeks of adulthood, but it declined during the subsequent weeks  so that by the end of the fourth week, only about 20% of the transgenic flies could climb. in contrast, 75% of 1-month old wild-type w <dig> control animals could climb. the climbing defect observed in transgenic flies was not due to a loss in their negative-geotropism, but rather, an apparent loss of strength that caused them to fall from the test cylinder before they could reach the test mark.

to evaluate flying behavior, animals were dropped into an oil-coated  <dig> ml graduated cylinder and then scored for their ability to remain near the top. approximately 55% of the happ-expressing flies  fell to the bottom  <dig> ml of the cylinder , while only about 12% of the controls  fell that distance . conversely, about 70% of the controls  remained within the top  <dig> ml , while only 20% of the transgenic flies  were in this category. taken together, the climbing and flying assays suggest that ectopic expression of happ results in an age-dependent defect in motor ability.

electrophysiological analysis of the neuromuscular junction
defects in motor function could reflect aberrations within the central nervous system, at the neuromuscular synapse, or within the muscle itself. to narrow our focus, we performed electrophysiological analyses of control and happ-expressing adult drosophila. intracellular glass recording microelectrodes were placed in the thoracic dorsal longitudinal flight muscle  and tergotrochanteral motor muscle  of 1- and 3-week old adults, and the motor neurons were stimulated via the giant fibers using tungsten electrodes placed in the brain or directly in the thoracic ganglion. both w <dig> control and happ-expressing animals displayed normal dflm muscle responses comprised of an evoked junction potential and a muscle action potential when repeatedly stimulated at 100hz . there was no significant difference in amplitude size between animals recorded at  <dig> week versus animals recorded after  <dig> weeks . this suggests that motorneuron activation reliably results in muscle action potentials that should be sufficient to trigger a behavioral outcome mediated by muscle contraction. consequently, the decay of climbing behavior in  <dig> week old happ expressing flies is not the result of a defect in motorneuron function and thus we focused on potential happ effects on the muscle.

intracellular recordings were performed on the dlfm and ttm muscles following electrical stimulation as described in the materials and methods. data are provided for both wild type w <dig> and dmef/happ flies at both  <dig> week and  <dig> weeks. data is in mv and presented as the mean/standard deviation/standard error of the mean. n = number of flies tested for each condition. no significant differences between  <dig> week and  <dig> week old flies we observed 

anatomical analysis of muscles
to evaluate the effects of happ on muscle development and function, we performed both light and electron microscopy on the indirect flight muscles of control and happ-expressing flies. in figure  <dig> we examined coronal  and sagittal  sections of the thorax to examine both the flight and leg muscles. at the light level, hematoxylin and eosin staining revealed well-developed muscles in both control  and transgenic animals , consistent with their ability to eclose, walk, climb, and fly as adults . fiber number and diameter were comparable in wild-type and transgenic animals. these data support the hypothesis that ectopic expression of happ does not negatively impact myogenesis.

we also performed transmission electron microscopy on the dlfm from 3-week old wild-type animals, which revealed well-developed z-lines, m-lines, contractile apparatus and mitochondria . neither the muscle fibers themselves nor the internal membrane systems were swollen or disrupted. anatomically, the dlfm of 3-week old transgenic animals were also grossly normal, and displayed well-defined sarcomeres . as in the control muscles, dense rows of mitochondria were sandwiched between the bundles of contractile elements perpendicular to the z bands. at the subcellular level, the organization of the ttm muscles differs from that of the dlfm both in terms of sarcomeric structure and the abundance of internal membrane systems of the t-tubule and sarcoplasmic reticulum  . at the electron microscopic level,  <dig> week old wild-type and happ transgenic ttm muscles were grossly indistinguishable .

environmental control of muscle pathogenesis in happ-expressing flies
we performed many replicates of the climbing assay and consistently observed comparable age-dependent defects in transgenic animals. at one point in the study however, we switched from glass to polypropylene plastic vials for rearing the adults. while longevity was unchanged under these different rearing conditions , the severity of the happ-induced climbing defect of flies cultured in the plastic vials was significantly reduced over the course of one month . in order to verify that the rearing container impacted climbing behavior, cohorts of wild-type and happ-expressing animals were separated into glass or plastic vials and then subjected to the climbing assay. wild-type animals displayed statistically improved climbing activity in plastic vials  relative to glass vials   . a much more dramatic effect was observed for the happ-expressing animals. at  <dig> weeks 65% of plastic reared animals  could climb versus 25% for glass-reared animals  . the benefits of plastic versus glass vials were restricted to the leg muscles and did not extend to the flight muscles , since we did not observe any differences in flying activity between these two populations. these data suggest that only muscles that are actively challenged are the ones affected by the type of rearing substrate.

one possible mechanism for the differential effects of the vial composition on the development of muscle weakness is that the smoothness of glass relative to plastic requires more muscle strength to climb. to test this hypothesis, we siliconized plastic vials to make their surfaces smoother, and then tested new groups of control and transgenic animals. survival was comparable in all three types of vials . wild type control flies climbed equally well in all three types of vials until week  <dig>  after that, there was a small but statistically significant decline in climbing ability for flies reared in glass vials  relative to coated  and uncoated plastic vials  . however, the effects of vial type were much more dramatic in the happ transgenic flies . transgenic flies reared in siliconized plastic vials  displayed a rapid loss of climbing activity beginning even after the first week relative to those reared in glass  or uncoated plastic vials . between three and four weeks, there was a dramatic decline in climbing for happ transgenic flies reared in glass vials. these data suggest that the environmental factors  can have a significant impact on app-induced pathogenesis.

coexpression of human parkin rescues a happ-mediated climbing defect
mutations in the ubiquitin e <dig> ligase parkin is the primary cause of autosomal recessive juvenile parkinsonism  <cit> . loss of parkin function endangers some cells, most notably midbrain dopaminergic neurons. however, in vitro studies with muscle cells have demonstrated that expression of ectopic parkin can protect muscle from the toxic effects of accumulation of amyloid peptides  <cit> . to determine if this protein could also protect skeletal muscles in vivo from happ-induced damage, we generated transgenic flies that express human parkin and/or happ in the muscles, and then monitored the ability of the adults to climb . flies expressing happ  demonstrated a significant decline in climbing ability beginning in the third week. co-expression of parkin  rescued this defect and allowed the flies to climb at wild type levels .

app has been the focus of intensive investigation for its possible role in human diseases, most notably alzheimer's disease. numerous studies have demonstrated that ectopic expression of app, or its proteolytic products, most notably aβ <dig>  can trigger synapse loss and neuron death in both in vitro and in vivo models  <cit> . in fly, ectopic expression of aβ <dig> or aβ <dig> results in age-dependent neuron loss  <cit> . interestingly, males were more severely impacted than females, although this may reflect differences in driver expression rather than differential gender sensitivity.

these same proteins have been proposed to accumulate within aggregates in patients with other diseases as well, such as inclusion body myositis  <cit> , although this observation has been controversial  <cit> . nevertheless, experimental studies have demonstrated that ectopic expression of either app or aβ <dig> is sufficient to induce muscle cell death both in vitro  <cit>  and in transgenic mouse models  <cit> . in the nematode caenorhabditis elegans, expression of aβ <dig> results in protein aggregations within body wall muscles that result in paralysis and reduced longevity  <cit> .

the transgenic fly model described in the present study complements and extends some of the data obtained with mouse and worm models, as well as some of the features of s-ibm. in s-ibm patients and animal models designed to simulate the disorder, individuals produce muscles that appear to be morphologically and physiologically normal, but develop progressive age-dependent muscle weakness in mid-to-late adulthood  <cit>  . this loss of muscle strength is not accompanied by detectable changes in neuromuscular synapse activity, suggesting that the defects arise within the muscles themselves. indeed, we did not observe any changes in following frequency or spike amplitude in the muscles of our happ-expressing animals . these data would argue against a negative influence of happ expression in the small subset of circadian neurons in the brain that also express mef <dig>  <cit> 

the fly model described in this study does differ from both s-ibm and other happ transgenic mouse and worm models in that they did not produce protein aggregates within the sarcoplasm that can be detected with either congo red staining  or ultrastructural analysis . it is possible that the level of happ expression was below the threshold required for macro-aggregation, or alternatively, that flies have intracellular mechanisms that limit aggregate formation. it has been noted that flies do not make inclusion bodies in the skeletal muscles with other aggregation prone proteins, like the polyglutamine-rich huntington protein  <cit> . nevertheless, the present fly model may provide insight into the molecular mechanisms that mediate happ induced pathology.

several mechanisms have been proposed for the toxic effects of app on skeletal muscle function including: defective regulation of ryanodine receptor-dependent sarcoplasmic ca2+ release  <cit> , cd8+ cytotoxic t cell invasion  <cit> , an autophagic mechanism  <cit> , and myostatin activity  <cit> .

the observation that ectopic expression of the ubiquitin e <dig> ligase parkin can rescue the happ-associated defects in climbing in our transgenic model agrees well with in vitro results from other groups  <cit> . at least two possible parkin associated mechanisms can ameliorate ectopic app-induced behavioral defects. in mammalian muscle, parkin prevents happ-induced muscle degeneration by inhibiting accumulation of toxic aβs and also protects cells from mitochondrial-specific toxins like rotenone and carbonyl cyanide 3-chlorophenylhydrazone, but not from other toxins like calcium ionophore a <dig> or h2o <dig>  <cit> . loss of function mutations in the parkin gene result in age-dependent defects in flight muscle maintenance in fly and are also associated with mitochondrial defects  <cit> . interestingly, these defects can be prevented by increased mitochondrial fission  <cit> . taken together, these data support the hypothesis that parkin may reduce mitochondrial oxidative stress or maintain respiratory functions to help preserve mitochondrial integrity.

we have demonstrated that environmental factors, such as rearing surface , have a dramatic effect on the timing and severity of happ-induced pathogenesis, suggesting a possible interplay between environmental and genetic factors. to our knowledge, this is the first report of any behavioral activities that can be tied to the material used for rearing flies. the simple manipulation of changing the rearing vessel may represent a valuable tool for genetic screens in fly designed to identify work-associated genes in fly muscle.

only limited data exist on the role of exercise in the progression of myopathies in human  <cit> . interestingly, arnardottir et al.  <cit>  have suggested that moderate exercise may retard the symptoms of s-ibm. rearing flies in plastic vials greatly reduced the timing and severity of symptoms relative to rearing in glass . since the only difference between animals reared in glass versus plastic was the nature of the vessel, we speculated that surface properties accounted for the observed effects. glass vials have a smoother surface than plastic and therefore it is presumably harder for the fly to climb. this extra work would increase the mechanical stress on the muscle fibers and might contribute to damage or generation of reactive oxygen species  by mitochondria. we tried to test this hypothesis directly by setting up devices that would force the animal to walk more, such as placing the vials on a slowly moving rocking table. unfortunately, these efforts to voluntarily increase motor activity did not appear to alter animal behavior, so instead we changed the surface properties of the plastic vials by siliconizing them. this subtle manipulation had a profound effect on the time course and severity of the happ-induced abnormal activities. this effect was specific to the muscles that were forced to work, since this treatment did not alter flying behavior.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study, we generate a transgenic drosophila model that targets the expression of happ to the skeletal muscles in order to understand its effect on muscle development and degeneration in the adult. ectopic expression of happ causes age- and activity-dependent muscle weakness without concomitant structural damage that can be discerned at either the light or electron microscopic levels. the effects of ectopic happ can be ameliorated by hparkin expression. taken together, these data suggest that in drosophila, happ-induced muscle deficits are mediated by not only genetic, but also environmental factors, and that muscle work/stress may contribute to pathogenesis. this animal model is useful to identify additional genetic and environmental modulators and understand underlying mechanisms.

