BACKGROUND
systems biology have advanced far enough that it is becoming possible to gain a comprehensive understanding of a metabolic system, and to use this knowledge for developing rational treatment options for diseases or devising strategies for increasing the productivity of foods and chemicals. while the main hallmark of systems biology is often portrayed as a means for predicting systems responses to external or internal stimuli, a similarly important aspect is its abilities to envisage all relevant information and integrate experimental data into logical and computable structures. as an example, suppose that three metabolites, a, b, and c, form a linear pathway . supposing further that only experimental data for a and c are available and the data show a and c increasing after stimulating the reaction producing a. on the basis of the network structure together with the available data, even though b may not be ably measured, it is logically predictable that b is probably increased as well. on the other hand, supposing that the data for all three metabolites, a, b, and c, are available and the data show that a and c increasing whereas b decreasing. without any information on the structure of pathway, one can only take the data of b at face value and deem them correct. however, if there is an indication showing that a, b, and c, form a linear pathway like the previous case, it becomes immediately clear that there is some inconsistencies. according to the logic of a conceptual or mathematical model of the pathway, either some branches or regulatory signals are missing, or the data are unreliable. to be more precise, if the data behave in a reasonable trend with some biological fluctuations like those in orange dots , one may assume that these data just contain intrinsic biological variations and some missing pathways or regulations make the data inconsistent. in contrast, if some data split out of the trend in an unusual way like those in green dots , one may judge that these data are prone to be errors and probably unreliable. this implies that the logical concepts allow us to assess associated data and possibly identify inconsistencies.

the exploitation of logical concepts for the prediction of probable behaviors of unmeasurable data and identification of uncertainties in datasets becomes much more complicated and important if the pathway systems are large. large-scale datasets, and in particular time series data characterizing metabolic systems, are also becoming more and more commonplace to assist the investigation. to acquire such datasets with reasonable efforts, the high-throughput analytical instruments have been developed in recent times  <cit> . given the nature of experiments, however, it is not even always certain that all information for interested variables can be gained from experiments and not all metabolites in the large-scale pathway can be measured. it also cannot be guarantee that the replicated samples in terms of biological, technical and analytical aspects reproduce the same results, even in a qualitative sense. two major questions thus arise. the first question is whether computational methods of systems biology which are cheap and straightforward may be able to predict or analyze such unmeasurable data with respect to system identification based on our understanding of the system. the second question is how reliable or accurate biological data are, especially if they were obtained from different cellular compartments or from different developmental stages in plants and animals.

it is therefore useful to explore to what degree it might be possible to employ the logic of the pathway to address these issues. such an analysis seems to be feasible in principle, because the biologist executing the experiments usually has a relatively well-supported concept of the topology of the pathway system. the challenge is that even small pathways quickly become too complicated for intuitive assessments, and larger and more complicated pathway systems simply prevent us from testing assumptions or hypotheses without computational support. such computational support of course requires mathematical models, which immediately leads to the challenge of setting up detailed, quantitatively appropriate models with a minimum of input requirements. the goal of such models is not necessarily to provide a quantitatively perfect picture of a pathway or to fit all data with great accuracy. instead, these models should be easy to construct, robust, and merely able to identify how data within a large dataset could probably be.

power-law models within biochemical systems theory  possess two great advantages that can be leveraged toward predicting the unmeasurable data as well as testing the consistency between the measured data and an alleged pathway structure and its regulation. first, symbolic bst models can be designed immediately for a pathway system of any complexity. these symbolic models do not include parameter values, but they do define a model's potential repertoire of responses, rather than addressing specific data fits. second, the estimation of optimal parameter values for large systems is generally fraught with technical difficulties  <cit> . this issue is greatly ameliorated for bst models, because even relatively coarse numerical settings of their parameters are often sufficient to capture the behavior of a metabolic pathway system in a semi-quantitative fashion.

here we capitalize on these two features of bst and propose a coarse test for the prospect of metabolic time-series data and consistency between the data and an alleged pathway diagram. the purpose is not to establish optimally fitting models but to identify how the unmeasurable data of metabolites located in a focused pathway probably behave, which time-series data within the dataset may be inconsistent with the understanding of pathway, as well as which data within a large dataset are probably reliable and which, if any, are most likely imprecise. we use a hybrid between a pure mass action system and a generalized mass action  system in the framework of bst with kinetic orders of  <dig>  which allows for inhibitory and activating effects that are modeled with kinetic orders of - <dig>  and  <dig> . the rate constants are at first set to  <dig>  but may be later subjected to order-of-magnitude adjustments, which obviously improve the model representation of the data. once the parameter values are fixed, their effects are to some degree compensated by adjustments in metabolite concentrations according to the network structure so that we named this simplified method unity -system. the diagram for u-system approach is also exhibited in figure 1b. we begin the demonstration of the u-system approach with artificial "data" from fully known, representative models and show that coarse values for kinetic orders and rate constants retain much of the qualitative behavior of true model responses. these u-system solutions are rather coarse, but can be improved with order-of-magnitude adjustments of flux split ratios at branched points. we then demonstrate the feasibility of the method with actual data describing amino acid synthesis in arabidopsis. this pathway system contains  <dig> metabolites and  <dig> fluxes, which are subject to various regulatory mechanisms. apart from these, we have measurements from two different analytical methods, one comprising  <dig> metabolites, including  <dig> amino acids, and the other one accounting for  <dig> amino acids. as expected, although a large number of data can be measured, it is clear that not all data can be obtained. also, none of the obtained data contain exactly the same values even in the replicated samples, mainly due to high biological variation among samples. in most cases, the measured time series are qualitatively the same, but in some cases they differ. we show that the u-system analysis estimates the probable behaviors of unmeasurable data and identifies at least some of the unreliable data. besides, the u-system model is also applicable to predict metabolic responses when a metabolic reaction is altered.

RESULTS
testing of feasibility of assumptions in u-system
obviously, a system with arbitrary parameter values of  <dig> is quite different from a system with diverse parameter values. the performances and characteristics of u-system approach were simply approved using a simple model of a linear pathway by comparing with the typical model constructed in michaelis-menten format where the enzymatic reaction velocity is usually determined by an in vitro experiment . the result showed that u-system model can produce qualitatively similar results to the original. thus, a simple generic, yet representative model was used to test to what degree the u-system model can produce qualitatively comparable results.

many studies in recent years have used a simple, representative model of a branched pathway with inhibition and activation , for instance, to test new parameter estimation methods  <cit> . we used this same system but slightly modified it to allow a wider range of responses. equations - show the differential equations together with actual parameters for the rate constants and kinetic orders of this system in gma-system format.

  dx1dt=α1x3g13-β11x1h111-β12x1h112=12x3- <dig> -8x <dig> -2x <dig>  

  dx2dt=α2x1g21-β2x2h22=8x <dig> -3x <dig>  

  dx3dt=α3x2g32-β3x3h33x4h34=3x <dig> -5x <dig> x <dig>  

  dx4dt=α4x1g41-β4x4h44=2x <dig> -6x <dig>  

effect of rate constants on metabolic behaviors
effect of kinetic orders on metabolic behaviors
effect of random parameters on metabolic behaviors using monte-carlo simulation
the initial values of metabolite concentrations of x <dig>  x <dig>  x <dig>  and x <dig> were set to 3-, 1-,  <dig> - and 2-fold their steady-state values. the simulated metabolite concentrations for all cases were normalized by their steady-state values for the observation and comparison. to facilitate inspection of the calculated behaviors of the metabolite concentrations, the scales of both axes were adjusted by the maximum and minimum values of each simulation. the result shows that most monte-carlo simulations exhibit qualitatively comparable dynamic responses regardless of the parameter values chosen. each metabolite concentration changes throughout the period of time and returns to its steady-state value in a similar manner. this observation implies that both models provide qualitatively comparable dynamic patterns of changes in metabolite concentrations. furthermore, the gma and u-system responses are surrounded by the monte-carlo simulation results for  <dig> parameter sets.

in summary of this analysis, the u-system approach indicates that metabolic behaviors mainly depend on the network structure of a metabolic system. unlike most of modeling methods, it does not need the process of parameter estimation in model construction, although it cannot offer actual quantitative concentrations of metabolic behaviors. this insight leads to several consequences. first, the u-system approach provides a coarse time-transient behavior of the system regardless of the requirements or dependencies of experimental data. accordingly, it will not confront difficulties in parameter fitting, especially in a large-scale system. second, the u-system approach is simple. plausible parameters for inhibition and activation can be easily set into the model to grasp their possible effects, which makes it possible to design additional experiments. third, the u-system approach is suitable for practical applications because of its simplicity and flexibility. one can simply construct a mathematical model based on only experimental facts regarding the network structure and regulation. if the u-system simulations are inconsistent with experimental data, other possible systems may be simply constructed to find out unknown candidates. as a result, an appropriate experiment may be designed to validate or refute the predictions from the simulation and to characterize biological details. lastly, the u-system approach allows us to acquire tendencies of metabolic behaviors to assess experimental data within the context of their actual network structure.

application to metabolic reaction network of arabidopsis
methionine, lysine and threonine are essential amino acids for non-ruminant animals including humans. the methionine derivative, s-adenosyl methionine , is a major primary methyl-group donor and also a precursor for a plant hormone ethylene and polyamines. to increase the sulfur-containing amino acids methionine and cysteine in crops, numerous researches in the field of genetics and metabolic engineering have been carried out for more than two decades, and the objectives have been partially realized. however, the results are not quite satisfactory yet, because the amino acids and related metabolites in the obtained transgenic crops are not well balanced. one of the major causes for not achieving a good balance is an incomplete understanding of the whole regulatory mechanisms of amino acid accumulation, as well as the regulatory feedback structure of the system, although it is well known that the accumulation of methionine, a member of the aspartate-family amino acids together with lysine and threonine, is tightly controlled by negative feedback by lysine and threonine  <cit> . another cause is an ambiguity in the characteristics of the metabolic flow pattern, which affects productivity and metabolic balance  <cit> . to elucidate their correlations among metabolites, there are various researches focusing on the integrations of in vitro data into kinetic models for specific pathways  <cit>  and the reconstructions of metabolic fluxes at the genome scale  <cit> . however, no large-scale kinetic models including regulatory mechanisms are known for the arabidopsis metabolic system. in this study, therefore, we exploited the u-system approach to construct a large-scale mathematical model based on available metabolic reaction networks  for describing important characteristics of its metabolic system and predicting metabolic behaviors in whole. a perturbation experiment was also conducted with arabidopsis callus by exogenous application of lysine and threonine to obtain metabolic time-series data for validating the u-system model.

modified u-system approach with rough adjustments of rate constants
the mathematical model including nonlinear ordinary differential equations  for  <dig> metabolites was constructed by u-system approach on the basis of only structures of metabolic reaction networks available in databases . fick's laws of diffusion  <cit>  was used for representing the uptake rate of lysine plus threonine from the callus culture medium to the inside of the cells from t= <dig>  and the parameters for uptake rates were estimated using experimental data. for simulations, all odes representing changes of metabolite concentrations inside the cells were calculated together with equations for the supplementation throughout a period of  <dig> h.

evaluation of the modified u-system approach for metabolic responses in arabidopsis
the modified u-system includes various approximations so that it is necessary to validate whether it is practicability and conformable to experimental data. figure  <dig>  shows the time courses after lysine and threonine application of the relative concentrations of four amino acids measured in metabolome analysis. the threonine concentration  exhibited small biological fluctuations among sample replicates, increasing from its steady-state level to a maximum at around  <dig> h, from where it decreased back to its steady-state level. the lysine concentrations  contained more biological fluctuations among the sample replications, but it is still possible to detect a clear pattern over time. the glutamate concentration  increased within  <dig> h and then seemed to be constant. the aspartate concentration  increased slightly, then decreased, and finally tended to increase considerably.

the red lines in figure  <dig>  indicate that the simulated concentrations of threonine  and lysine  agreed with the metabolic behaviors of experimental data obtained by metabolome analysis with significant correlations . however, the simulated concentration of aspartate  was not consistent with metabolome data . it could be that, although the metabolic reaction network used for model construction is correct, the u-system approach might fail to predict the appropriate metabolic behavior. to assess this possibility, a specific measurement only for amino acids using another analytical instrument gas chromatography-mass spectrometry  was performed using the identical samples . the results from amino acid analysis seemed to provide better metabolite trajectories with lower fluctuations. with respect to the concentrations of threonine , lysine  and glutamate , both methods yielded similar results in terms of the metabolic trajectories, although the simulations were in better agreement with the time-courses of metabolite concentrations measured by amino acid analysis. for example, lysine concentration  measured by metabolome analysis  increased and maintained its level from t= <dig> to t= <dig> h before increasing again. the u-system simulation pinpointed that four data at t= <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> h obtained by metabolome analysis may contain errors. actually, the data at t= <dig> and  <dig> h  exhibited high standard deviations. this assumption may be indirectly supported by the results of correlation analysis. for example, the correlation between the u-system simulation and the time-series data obtained by the amino acid analysis  is  <dig> , which is higher than the correlation of the value,  <dig> , between the u-system simulation and the data obtained by metabolome analysis.the result indicates that if a relatively reliable metabolic reaction network diagram is available, the prediction of time-dependent changes in metabolite concentrations using the u-system is beneficial for judging the likely correctness of data measured by metabolome analysis , which is designed to provide massive datasets of metabolite concentrations sometimes at the expense of absolute concentration accuracies for all metabolites. by contrast, if the predicted behaviors are significantly different in some of the metabolites , there may be an unknown metabolic pathway associated with these metabolites or an unidentified regulatory signal. thus, one may attempt to test a possible system by modifying a pathway or regulation, which can provide a consistent result to predict an unknown candidate before performing a next experiment.

as mentioned above, the relative concentrations observed for several amino acids such as aspartate and glutamate were scattered mainly because of biological variability and possibly due to analytical limitations, and it was difficult to precisely capture the time courses of their concentrations . in fact, significant fluctuations in actual metabolite concentrations were observed even in the control samples without lysine and threonine supplementation . however, the computational results suggested that when lysine and threonine were applied as supplements, the aspartate concentration  slightly increased and then decreased to its initial concentration level or steady-state . this estimation can be supported by the previous experiment related to aspartate kinase   <cit> . ak is the first committed enzyme of aspartate-family amino acid biosynthesis and regulated by the feedback inhibition by lysine and threonine . the flux analysis in lemna revealed that the deregulation of ak, i.e., the increase of ak activity, caused accumulation of lysine, threonine, methionine, and adomet and decrease in the aspartate concentration  <cit> . thus, in our study, a reduction in the ak activity through the feedback inhibition by supplementation of lysine and threonine might lead to an initial increase in the aspartate concentration as predicted in modified u-system. the transient increases in glutamate and aspartate concentrations  after lysine and threonine supplementation were also indirectly supported by the increase of proline  observed both in simulation and metabolome analysis . one could assume that if the simulated behaviors of dead-end metabolite concentrations  in this case) agree well with the experimental data, those of intermediate metabolites  and aspartate  in this case) are likely to be correct. this consistency implies that the prediction of metabolic behavior by our approach is reliable even if the quality of the experimental data for some metabolites is not very high.

prediction of dynamic behaviors of unmeasurable metabolite concentrations
the  <dig> out of  <dig> metabolite concentrations measured by metabolome analysis  were included in the u-system model. the  <dig> out of  <dig> metabolite concentrations  showed unclear dynamic patterns changing throughout the period of  <dig> h after the supplementation of lysine and threonine . one may note that these metabolite concentrations showing no significant variations do not change or change only slightly to the extent that cannot be experimentally observed due to biological fluctuations and analytical constraints. thus, although a large number of metabolite concentrations in metabolic pathways can be simultaneously measured, the metabolic behaviors assumed from measured metabolite concentrations may sometimes not be entirely reliable. also, the  <dig> out of  <dig> metabolites incorporated in the u-system model could not be detected by this metabolome analysis. given a computational model, we may be able to predict the dynamic responses of metabolites that cannot be measured reliably nor detected at all. the computational results also have a potential to provide some types of theoretical validation on the accuracy of the experimental data.

moreover, we were able to predict the behaviors of concentrations of aspartate-4-semialdehyde   and o-phospho-homoserine  , which can hardly be detected due to technical limitations. they are not only located at important branched points in the metabolic map but also related to many regulations including both inhibitions and activations . thus, the information of these metabolites could allow us to comprehend metabolic system. again, the aspartate-family amino acid biosynthesis includes various inhibitions and activations, so that these dynamic behaviors will not be reasonably observed by normal mass action equations.

prediction of "unpredictable" metabolic behaviors
the modified u-system enables us to mathematically model a relatively large-scale metabolic system, and hence simulations based on the modified u-system provide predictive dynamic behaviors of metabolite concentrations which are hardly provided by existing methods. the modified u-system model for the arabidopsis metabolic system predicted that the supplementation of lysine and threonine did not affect 4-methoxy-3-indolylmethyl gsl concentration  until t= <dig> h , nor dihydrouracil concentration  in pyrimidine biosynthesis until t= <dig> h . these results suggested that the supplementation of lysine and threonine influenced x <dig> and x <dig> in a delayed fashion due to metabolic flow passing through various reactions in long and complicated pathways . the u-system predictions of the time-transient behaviors of metabolite concentrations were reasonable and this kind of metabolic relationship between distant metabolites on metabolic map cannot be examined by either statistical methods or typical mathematical modeling without delay functions. furthermore, similar predictive simulations of several metabolite located in long and complicated pathways such as xanthine  and ureidoproprionate  in purine and pyrimidine biosynthesis , and aminoadipate , glutarate , and pipecolate  in lysine degradation  reasonably agreed with the experimental results . the results could be an example for a large-scale system to indirectly validate the u-system approach. they also imply that predicted behaviors of unmeasurable metabolites located between detectable metabolites are probably correct, at least, qualitatively.

qualitative predictions of consequences of gene modifications
a challenge in systems biology, in addition to the prediction of metabolic behaviors, is the prediction of metabolic responses of an altered network structure, in which, for instance, gene expression or enzyme activities are modified. to assess whether the modified u-system model is applicable for this kind of prediction, an in silico knockdown for mto <dig> encoding threonine synthase gene of arabidopsis in the biosynthetic pathway of aspartate-family amino acids . when the flux controlled by mto <dig> was 90% reduced in silico, the threonine concentration was predicted to decrease whereas the methionine concentration was predicted to increase. in overall, the  <dig> out of  <dig> amino acids or 85% prediction agreed with the original result from biological experiment using an arabidopsis mto <dig> mutant  <cit> . the prediction was further compared to the result from metabolome analysis  <cit> . figure  <dig> showed that 73% correctness from  <dig> metabolites showing the significant changes comparing with the wide-type whereas the metabolome and amino acid data showed only 50% agreement among  <dig> amino acids. the incorrect prediction might be because of the insufficient information for model input which could be considered to be an unidentified pathway. nevertheless, changes of all unmeasurable metabolites can also be qualitatively predicted using our model. the result suggests that the u-system approach is capable of predicting metabolic levels when the system is modified, even if specific information on complicated regulatory mechanisms is not available. this information can aid the design of next-step experiments.

CONCLUSIONS
the u-system approach is simple, flexible and can be practically exploited to predict the coarse time-transient behavior of metabolites in a large-scale metabolic system. it is also capable of predicting metabolic behaviors when the system is modified. the u-system approach has two major characteristics: 1) the u-system model is presented in a normalized form, and 2) the u-system model constructed only using partial, currently-available metabolic pathways. recent advances in metabolomics technology have enabled us to obtain large-scale semi-quantitative datasets for hundreds of metabolite concentrations. the first characteristic is essential to establish mathematical models for actual metabolic systems consisting of hundreds to thousands of metabolites, whose concentrations cannot be measured practically by existing methods of measurement other than metabolomics. the second characteristic is desirable for the coarse characterization of complicated systems, because metabolic responses mainly depend on the network structure, rather than parameter values, as we have shown in this study. thus, the u-system approach is not only informatively useful for data analysis and model diagnostics but it also can aid the design of next-step experiments.

