BACKGROUND
the hiv- <dig> tat protein is an rna binding protein essential for viral replication  <cit> , which regulates productive and processive transcription from the hiv- <dig> long terminal repeat  by binding to the transactivation response  element  <cit> . tat also affects several cellular functions by inducing angiogenesis  <cit> , cell proliferation and apoptosis  <cit> . moreover, tat regulates cytokine gene expression  <cit> , immune cell activation and may be secreted by hiv- <dig> infected cells, and thus act on neighboring cells  <cit> . furthermore, by interacting with tubulin  <cit> , tat affects mitosis and induces aneuploidies  <cit> .

it has been shown that in both infected and uninfected cells, tat also localizes in the nucleolus  <cit>  and that the nucleolar accumulation of tat occurs via the highly conserved stretch of basic amino acids that acts as a nucleolar localization signal   <cit> .

the nucleolus is a highly structured and dynamic organelle involved in the transcription and maturation of rrna and ribosome biogenesis as well as in apoptosis and in cell cycle control  <cit> . recently, various studies have suggested that the nucleolus plays a role in hiv- <dig> infections. first, lymphocytes isolated from infected patients show abnormal nucleolar structures  <cit> . secondly, nucleolar localization of tar impairs virus progression  <cit> .

a number of proteins encoded by rna viruses, such as protein v of adenovirus  <cit> , protein n of porcine virus  <cit>  and hiv-1-rev protein  <cit> , are known to enter the nucleolus and to colocalize with nucleolar components suggesting that nucleolar localization is an important step in promoting viral replication  <cit> . while it is known that rev multimerizes in the nucleolus and appears to play a role in the nucleoplasmic transport of viral unspliced rnas  <cit> ; the function of tat in this nuclear structure is still unknown.

to gain insight into the functional significance of tat nucleolar localization, we used a drosophila melanogaster tat transgenic strain  <cit>  and analysed the effect of this protein on ribosome biogenesis by expressing it  during drosophila oogenesis. drosophila oogenesis is, in fact, the period of highest ribosome biosynthesis, and the genetic and molecular events  of this process have been extensively studied and described in detail  <cit> . furthermore, recent data indicate that drosophila is a useful complementary system for studying hiv-1-related genes and proteins  <cit> .

here we show that tat localizes with fibrillarin in nurse cell nucleoli, causes death and delayed development of the progeny and decreases the level of the 80s ribosome particles. this decrease appears to result from a tat induced inhibition of pre-rrna processing caused by the interaction of tat with u <dig> snorna and fibrillarin, nucleolar components that are essential for the early steps of pre-rrna processing. the results reported in this paper, provide the first evidence of the action of tat on nucleolar functions and further our understanding of the molecular mechanism underlying tat-mediated pathogenesis.

RESULTS
tat expressed by heat shock treatment, colocalizes with fibrillarin in the nucleolus of drosophila cells
nucleolar localization of the hiv tat protein has been extensively shown using several cellular systems  <cit> . to shed light on the effects of the nucleolar localization of tat, we determined whether it localizes in the nucleolus of tat transgenic drosophila melanogaster cells, where its expressions is driven under the control of the heat shock promoter  <cit> . since it is known that heat shock affects ribosome biogenesis and its effects terminate four hours later  <cit> , we first investigated the time conditions that allow high expression of tat in the absence of heat shock treatment effects . to this end, we analyzed the expression of both hsp <dig> and tat proteins by western blot analysis. results in fig. 1a show that the levels of tat protein rise soon after heat shock treatment and continue for six hours during the ensuing treatment. in contrast, an increased level of hsp <dig> protein appears between  <dig> minutes and two hours after treatment . based on these results, all analyses were carried out by subjecting drosophila flies to three heat shocks and by starting experiments six hours thereafter. further to focusing on tat nucleolar localization, drosophila nurse cells were used since they are relatively large  and each contains several nucleoli. the images in fig 1c show that tat expressed in drosophila transgenic flies localizes, as expected, both in the nucleoplasm and in the nucleolus, where it colocalizes with the nucleolar marker fibrillarin. this result supports the idea that the nucleolar localization signal works in drosophila as well as mammalian cells.

since the nucleolus is the site of ribosome rna synthesis, we investigated whether tat expression gives rise, in drosophila, to phenotypes affecting ribosome biogenesis such as death and delayed development  <cit> . therefore, to test whether the expression of tat gives rise to similar phenotypes, we expressed this protein during drosophila oogenesis and checked the progeny for mortality and developmental time. the data show that the expression of tat causes significant increased mortality at embryonic and larval stages . moreover, developmental stages were delayed  compared with the control strain. these results indicate that tat may affect ribosome biogenesis.

tat reduces the level of 80s ribosomes
based on the above results, we tested whether tat interferes with ribosome biogenesis by analysing the ribosome distribution profiles of both transgenic and control flies subjected to three heat shock treatments. sucrose gradient profiles in figure  <dig> show that, under these conditions, post mitochondrial supernatant  from tat-transgenic flies  contains a significantly lower amount of 80s ribosomes than comparable samples from control flies . as expected, no significant difference was observed in strains not subjected to heat shock . histograms represent the average area, obtained from  <dig> independent experiments, of the 80s ribosome peak. significant differences  were detected only in tat-transgenic flies after heat shock treatment.

tat interferes with pre-rrna processing patways
in order to assess whether tat interferes with ribosome biogenesis at the nucleolar level, we investigated the effect of tat on pre-rrna processing. in drosophila, processing of the rrna primary transcript  proceeds by two alternative  cleavage pathways  <cit> . in the α processing pathway  the initial cleavage step removes the ets, leaving a large molecule encompassing both the 18s and 28s rrna sequences  . in the alternative β pathway, the primary transcript is cleaved inside the its region, at site  <dig>  generating two processing intermediates; the first containing the 18s rrna precursor , and the second containing the 28s rrna precursor  . the effect of tat on pre-rrna processing was investigated by northern blot analysis using total rna extracted from drosophila females of both transgenic and control strains subjected and not to heat shock treatment. the presence of unprocessed rrna precursors in tat-expressing cells was investigated using a dna probe  which specifically hybridizes with the its <dig> 5' region , thus allowing the identification of unprocessed pre-rrna and both the a and d precursors. as fig. 3b shows, hybridization of total rna from tat-expressing and control flies with the its1-specific probe clearly reveals accumulation of type d precursor only in tat-expressing flies. therefore, tat expression in drosophila seems to affect at least cleavage site  <dig>  with the α pathway blocked, pre-rrna processing should proceed mainly through pathway β, generating increasing amounts of intermediate d  <cit> . indeed, hybridization with probe ii shows higher levels of both b and d intermediate forms in the tat expressing strain , suggesting that both pathways may be affected. the observation that tat mainly interferes with site  <dig> cleavage was further confirmed by northern blot experiments using a dna probe  that specifically hybridizes with the 5' ets region , thus allowing detection of accumulated intermediate d forms. as fig. 3d shows, a significant increase of d form rna occurs only in transgenic flies expressing tat, which confirms that tat affects at least cleavage site  <dig> impairing pre-rrna maturation.

tat binds to ets-18s region of pre-rrna
to understand whether tat protein interacts with pre-rrna, we performed emsa using an rna stretch comprising cleavage site  <dig> of ets-18s rrna  as the probe. we incubated nuclear extracts from control and transgenic strains with probe iv after heat shock treatment. in contrast to samples from non-tat expressing flies , incubation with extracts from tat expressing flies resulted in considerable retardation of probe electrophoretic mobility . the shift was abolished after incubation the extracts with anti-tat antibody  before adding the probe. to further confirm the specificity of the interaction extracts were incubated with a random rna probe transcribed from cloning vector sequence  and with an unspecific structured probe  . no shift was observed in any of these cases.

tat in vivo interacts with components involved in the first step of pre-rrna processing
fibrillarin is one of the essential components involved in pre-rrna maturation. it localizes throughout the nucleolus and in the fibrillar region of mammalian nucleoli  <cit> . since tat colocalizes with fibrillarin in drosophila transgenic strains , we next investigated whether tat interferes with pre-rrna processing by interacting with fibrillarin.

to this end, nuclear protein extracts were immunoprecipitated with anti-fibrillarin polyclonal antibodies and challenged with anti-tat polyclonal antibodies . the specific signal was detected in the tat-expressing strain , whereas, as expected, no signal was observed in the control strain . similarly, when nuclear extracts were immunoprecipitated with anti-tat antibodies and then challenged with anti-fibrillarin antibodies , the immunoreactive band was detected only in precipitates from the tat-expressing strain . interestingly the detection was abolished when samples were preincubated with rnase before proceeding with the immunoprecipitation . since fibrillarin is known to participate in rna cleavage in association with u <dig> snorna, we tested whether tat forms immunoprecipitates with u <dig> snorna  <cit> . accordingly, we incubated nuclear extracts with tat-polyclonal antibodies and then monitored the presence of a tat-u <dig> complex by northern blotting using a u <dig> specific oligonucleotide as a probe. results in fig. 5c , clearly show that u <dig> is associated with tat in immunoprecipitates from a transgenic strain expressing tat. specificity of the immunoprecipitation was confirmed performing the experiment with an unrelated antibody . in such case no specific tat signal was detected . on the whole, the results in fig.  <dig> suggest that the association of tat with fibrillarin and u <dig> snorna impairs pre-rrna processing.

discussion
in this study, we show that tat expressed in drosophila colocalizes with fibrillarin in nurse cell nucleoli, produces a significant decrease of cytoplasmic ribosomes and affects cleavage sites during rna precursor maturation.

in jurkat t cells, it has been shown that tat localizes throughout the nucleolus and, by electron microscopy, has been visualized in the dense fibrillar  and granular  nucleolar components  <cit>  where pre-rrna processing mainly occurs. therefore, we surmise that tat affects ribosomal rna maturation by interfering with post-trascriptional modifications and/or interacting with molecules involved in cleavage events. the result in fig.  <dig> indicates that tat immunoprecipitates with fibrillarin and with small nucleolar u <dig> rna. the interaction of tat with fibrillarin seems to be mediated by the presence of rna based components cause it is abolished after rnase treatment. however we cannot exclude that rnase treatment compromise the integrity of the complex, and than impair protein-protein interaction.

fibrillarin  is a component of c/d box small nucleolar ribonucleoproteins  and directs 2'-o-methylation of rrna. in association with u <dig>  u <dig>  and u <dig> small nuclear rnas, it is involved in the first step of pre-rrna processing  <cit> . the processing and modification of ribosomal pre-rna in the nucleoli of eukaryotic cells, is accomplished by a large number of small nucleolar rnas  complexed with proteins in ribonucleoproteic particles  that are essential for rrna chemical modifications, such as methylation and pseudouridylation  <cit> . defects in some of these components have been associated with defects in pre-rrna processing  <cit> . thus, tat can inhibit or delay the processing of the pre-rrna by subtracting fibrillarin-snou <dig> complex from the initial cleavage site. alternatively tat could interact: i) with specific rnas and drag along fibrillarin and other core components of the snornp ; ii) with proteins that interact with snornps ; iii) or directly with the rrna. this should affect fibrillarin functions in cells harbouring tat. interestingly, a similar mechanism has been suggested for nidoviruses, which are able to traslocate the nucleocapside  protein into the nucleolus, where it interacts with fibrillarin, by an rna mediated mechanism and possibly affects pre-rna processing  <cit> .

it is known that in mammalian cells, cell cycle regulation is related to ribosome biogenesis at nucleolar level  <cit> , and that inhibition of pre-rrna processing directs the cells toward apoptosis. data report that mutation in nucleolar components results in pre-rrna maturation defects and apoptosis. it is the case of mutation of minifly gene  in drosophila  <cit> ), and mutation in the gene encoding ribosomal rps <dig> protein in humans  <cit> . therefore, one of the molecular mechanisms by which both hiv infected and uninfected cells undergo apoptosis may depend on the pre-rrna processing inhibition mediated by tat.

modulating cellular protein synthesis and host cell metabolism is a strategy common in many viruses to induce cellular shut-off  <cit> . a mechanism by which hiv- <dig> induces cellular shut-off seems to depend on the binding of the second coding exon of tat to the translation elongation factor 1-delta   <cit> . as we observed, the inhibition of pre-rrna processing mediated by tat leads to a decreased amount of 80s ribosome particles. the decrease of the cytoplasmic ribosomes should result in reduced protein synthesis of the host cell. therefore, the inhibition of pre-rrna processing caused by tat delineates a novel mechanism for hiv- <dig> mediated cellular shut-off.

CONCLUSIONS
in the present work we show for the first time that tat, in the nucleolus, affects ribosome rrna maturation. this suggests that tat manipulates basic cellular processes in order to control ribosomal biogenesis.

an intriguing hypothesis is that tat, secreted by hiv- <dig> infected cells, acts on the nucleolar compartment of neighbouring uninfected cells, inducing apoptosis and consequent loss of immune competence, which is the main cause of aids pathogenesis.

