BACKGROUND
major genome changes can occur during somatic differentiation. in diverse organisms, programmed dna elimination leads to the removal of specific-germline dna sequences during development of somatic cells and thus generates germline and somatic genomes with distinct architectures. this process has been described in a wide variety of animals and in ciliates, suggesting that it has likely arisen independently in different lineages  <cit> . ciliates are unicellular eukaryotes with separate germline and somatic nuclei. in the ciliate paramecium tetraurelia, two small, genetically identical diploid micronuclei  contain the germline genome that is transmitted to sexual progeny after meiosis. a large, transcriptionally active somatic macronucleus  contains a reduced genome streamlined for gene expression. at each sexual cycle, the parental mac is lost, while new mics and macs, destined for the progeny, develop from a copy of the diploid zygotic nucleus. in the new developing mac, the germline genome is endoreplicated to reach its final ploidy of ~ 800n and undergoes massive programmed dna elimination  . large dna regions containing transposable elements and other repeated sequences are eliminated, leading to chromosome breakage and de novo telomere addition. in addition, ~  <dig>  short, unique, internal eliminated sequences  are precisely excised. at least 25% of the ~ 100 mb mic genome is removed  <cit> . the distinctive genome architectures of ciliates make them attractive model systems to study the complex mechanisms underlying programmed dna elimination. meiosis-specific small rna and chromatin modification pathways, similar to those found in plants and animals for the formation of heterochromatin and silencing of repeated sequences, are involved in the epigenetic programming of dna elimination  <cit> .fig.  <dig> nuclear dimorphism and programmed dna elimination in paramecium tetraurelia. left panel. each cell contains two distinct types of nuclei: two diploid germline micronuclei  and one highly polyploid somatic macronucleus . both nuclei develop from copies of the zygotic nucleus after fertilization. right panel. massive and reproducible elimination of germline dna occurs during macronuclear development. imprecise elimination of germline dna containing repetitive sequences such as minisatellites  and transposable elements  is associated with the fragmentation of germline chromosomes into shorter macronuclear molecules healed by de novo telomere addition . in addition,  <dig>  short, non-coding internal eliminated sequences   scattered throughout the germline genome are precisely excised from coding and intergenic sequences, restoring open reading frames and allowing gene expression




comprehensive description of genome changes that occur during programmed dna elimination requires comparison of the germline and the somatic genomes. while the rearranged somatic mac genome was sequenced and assembled  <dig> years ago allowing gene annotation  <cit> , technical difficulties in obtaining pure mic dna  have long been a major obstacle to sequencing the germline genome of p. tetraurelia. pioneering work used percoll gradient centrifugation to separate mics from macs  <cit> . despite high bacterial contamination of the resultant mic dna  <cit> , this led to the discovery of germline-limited sequences  <cit> . more recently, dna enriched in un-rearranged germline-like sequences was obtained from cells rnai-depleted of piggymac , the domesticated transposase required for developmental genome rearrangements  <cit> . deep-sequencing of this dna  enabled genome wide-characterization of  <dig>  iess in p. tetraurelia  <cit> . however, how faithfully pgm dna mimics the true germline genome found in the mic remains an open question.

we report here a new and reliable method to purify mics involving a critical step of flow cytometry. the method also allows isolation of developing macs. complete separation of nuclei was validated by flow cell imaging and by high throughput dna sequencing. we show that pgm dna is in fact not equivalent to mic dna. contigs assembled from the mic dna allowed discovery of new p. tetraurelia transposable element families.

RESULTS
purification of new developing macs
before tackling the purification of the tiny mics, we decided to purify new developing macs from cells undergoing the sexual process of autogamy  . at each sexual cycle, the parental mac disintegrates into about  <dig> small pieces that persist in the cytoplasm, while new mics and macs, destined for the progeny, develop from a copy of the diploid zygotic nucleus. thus, new developing macs coexist with the two mics and about  <dig> small fragments of the maternal mac . we used a published procedure to fractionate the nuclei of pgm-depleted cells  <cit>  . briefly, nuclei from lysed cells were separated from contaminating organelles and cell debris on a sucrose cushion. the nuclear fraction, containing a mixture of different types of nuclei, was then submitted to flow cytometry .fig.  <dig> purification of new developing macs from paramecium tetraurelia by flow cytometry and validation by flow cell imaging and high throughout dna sequencing. a. dapi staining of a cell upon pgm rnai at a late developmental stage of the sexual process of autogamy  is shown on the picture: the two large new developing macs  and the small fragments of the maternal mac are detected. the scale bar is  <dig> microns. b. following gentle lysis and cell fractionation, the nuclei preparation is submitted to flow cytometry after staining with dapi. c. multi-gating flow cytometry strategy used for sorting. sorting is based on size, granularity and dapi staining signal of the new developing macs. an empiric iterative procedure coupled with flow imaging allowed discrimination between developing macs and fragments, identification of the population of interest, and optimization of the sorting strategy. d - e. the amnis imagestreamx imaging flow cytometer is used for quality control. distribution of dapi intensity is shown for each event in the sample before  and after sorting , respectively. representative images are displayed in bf  and dapi. objective × <dig>  f. validation of the sorting strategy by high-throughput dna sequencing. histograms of ies retention scores are shown for control , pgm rnai  and pgm rnai after sorting 




a fully developed mac has a ploidy of 800n  <cit> . therefore, new macs at an advanced developmental stage emit a more intense dapi  signal than the other nuclei present in the cell at the same stage . they are also considerably larger than the other nuclei, to accommodate this large amount of chromatin, and are spherical in shape . taking advantage of these characteristics, we facs-sorted new macs  according to size , granularity , pulse width and dapi signal . purity was measured by flow cell imaging before and after sorting. the developing mac fraction, that represented 54% of the total nuclear sample before sorting, was enriched to 98% after sorting . thus, the sorting procedure conferred considerable improvement over the pre-existing protocol.

to further validate the sorting procedure, we performed high throughput illumina sequencing of dna extracted from  <dig>  sorted developing macs  . to identify the iess in a sequencing sample, we used our previously published pipeline  <cit> . a total of  <dig>  iess was identified in the sorted pgm dna, compared to  <dig>  iess in unsorted pgm dna  <cit> . the fact that 97%  of the iess identified in the sorted pgm dna correspond to the same iess identified in unsorted pgm dna testifies to the reliability of our procedure. the 3% difference lies within the estimated error rate of the method  <cit> .

we then quantified the enrichment of our samples in un-rearranged sequences, by calculating a retention score for each of the  <dig>  ies sequences present in the previously published p. tetraurelia ies reference set  <cit> . retention score values range from  <dig> for no ies retention to  <dig> for complete ies retention, when the ies is retained in all sequenced copies of the genomic locus in question. as expected , retention score distribution in the rearranged mac dna control sample is close to  <dig> , whereas a gaussian distribution is observed for the unsorted non-rearranged pgm dna, with a mean retention score of  <dig> . even if the pgm endonuclease is required for all ies excision events, the mean retention score of this sample can never reach  <dig>  because the un-rearranged dna from the developing new macs is present in the unsorted sample alongside rearranged dna from the fragments of the maternal mac. by contrast, the sorted pgm dna gave a gaussian distribution with a mean retention score of  <dig> . this higher retention score, obtained from the same starting material, reflects greater enrichment in un-rearranged dna, and thus in developing nuclei, providing further validation for the superiority of the sorting procedure over the existing protocol. in conclusion, this experiment establishes the proof of principle that nuclei can be sorted from a complex biological sample to high purity based on their size, shape and dna content.

purification of mics from vegetative cells
we used a similar strategy to sort the small germline mics from vegetative cells . the available mic isolation method, that relies on percoll density gradient centrifugation  <cit> , does not provide a mic fraction sufficiently pure for exclusive mic genome sequencing, owing to contamination from i) the mac dna , and ii) bacteria, on which paramecium cells feed. mic isolation has been achieved in other ciliates  but the same methods were not successful in paramecium. we hypothesized that the contamination issues can be solved by the use of a specific fluorophore that is unambiguously and exclusively associated with the mics. we previously generated transgenic paramecium cells that constitutively express a mic-localized version of the green fluorescent protein  fused to centromeric histone h <dig>   <cit> . transgenic cenh3a-gfp cells have green fluorescent mics, but neither the mac nor the bacteria are gfp positive . we used the same fractionation scheme as the one previously published, with some improvements, to enrich for mics  <cit>  , and submitted the sample to flow cytometry. mics were sorted based on the ssc, fsc, dapi  and gfp signals . the procedure was optimized by flow cell imaging to define the population of interest and refine the sorting parameters . we obtained  <dig>  mics from  <dig> million cells.fig.  <dig> purification of germline mics from vegetative paramecium tetraurelia by flow cytometry and validation by flow cell imaging and high throughout dna sequencing. a. in cenh3a-gfp transgenic paramecium vegetative cells , but not in control cells , the mics are gfp positive. scale bar is  <dig> microns. higher magnification: scale bar is  <dig> microns. b. fractionation scheme used to isolate the mic-enriched fraction. c - d. multi-gating strategy used for sorting the mics. sorting is based on size, granularity and dapi staining and gfp signals in c) cenh3a-gfp transgenic cells and d) control cells. an empiric iterative procedure coupled with flow imaging allowed discrimination between mics and dapi containing contaminants, identification of the population of interest, and optimization of the sorting strategy. e - f. the amnis imagestreamximaging flow cytometer is used for quality control: sample before  and after sorting . g. validation of the sorting strategy by high-throughput dna sequencing. histograms of ies retention scores are shown for control , mic  and mic after sorting 




as previously, purity before and after sorting was measured by flow cell imaging. the mics represented only 3% of the total sample before sorting and 97% after sorting . thus, the sorting procedure is indispensable for effective mic purification. we performed high throughput illumina sequencing of the dna extracted from sorted mics  and from the mic-enriched sample before sorting. as expected, the bacterial dna contamination greatly diminished after sorting  . we identified  <dig>  iess in the sorted sample, but only  <dig>  iess in the unsorted nuclear fraction. calculation of mean ies retention scores indicated that enrichment in mic-limited sequences increased from  <dig>  in mic dna to  <dig>  in sorted mic dna . the fact that 97% mic purity only led to approximately 40% mic dna is explained by the much higher dna content of the 3% mac-derived contaminating fraction. we conclude that flow cytometry sorting is necessary to directly sequence all iess in unperturbed cells. the fact that 97%  of the iess identified in the sorted mic dna correspond to the same iess identified in the sorted pgm dna confirms that the genome-wide set of iess in pgm dna reflects the complete set of mic iess . these data demonstrate that the pgm domesticated transposase is required for the excision of all iess.

a first glimpse of the germline genome reveals new transposable elements
the sequence complexity of the mic assembly is presented in table  <dig>  coverage by mac reads was used to define mac-destined as opposed to mic-limited compartments. the 98 mb assembly consists of 74 mb  of mac-destined sequences and 24 mb  of mic-limited sequences, consistent with the size of the mac reference genome assembly . it is important to realize that the mic assembly we have obtained is highly fragmented . the most fragmented part of the assembly is the mic-limited compartment . with such an assembly, it is possible to annotate germline-limited elements such as iess and transposable elements , but not to analyze long-range features such as chromosome structure. for that, additional information, e.g. from mate-pair libraries or third generation long read sequencing, is necessary to handle repeats and build scaffolds.table  <dig> characterization of mic contigs




the mic assembly consists of all of the contigs assembled using velvet as launched by parties  <cit>  . the mic-limited and the mac-destined parts of the assembly are defined as a function of mac read depth, using the  <dig> mac datasets described in . any nucleotide with a mac read depth <20× is considered mic-limited, else the nucleotide is mac-destined. n <dig> means that half an assembly is contained in contigs larger than the n <dig> value. the mic-limited part of the assembly is thus much more fragmented than the mac-destined part. the number of nucleotides covered by internal eliminated sequences , transposable elements  and tandem repeats  are given. mic-limited sequences contain almost all iess and tes,  <dig> % and 92% respectively. the majority  of tr are found in the mic-limited sequences, however 35%, reflecting wd <dig>  tpr and other repeats, are found in the mac-destined compartment.

the mic contigs were used to identify tes, starting from three previously identified paramecium dna transposons  <cit>  and a partial reverse transcriptase  consensus . tblastn searches using the dde transposases or rt as queries identified a number of distinct elements, and potentially functional consensus sequences were reconstructed in most cases from the alignment of 10– <dig> copies . the majority of tes  are class i non-ltr retrotransposons, while  <dig> belong to the is630-tc1-mariner  super-family of class ii dna transposons. the remaining consensus sequences are putative non-autonomous class i sine or solo-orf <dig> elements. characterization of the elements is provided . this analysis significantly augments knowledge of te in the paramecium germline and presents the first paramecium class i elements.

the non-ltr retrotransposons all have an orf <dig> that contains both apurinic/apyrimidinic endonuclease  and reverse transcriptase  domains, like most known groups of non-ltr retrotransposons  <cit> . they fall in  <dig> groups, the first  <dig> of which also contain an upstream orf <dig> . a phylogeny was built using an alignment of the paramecium rt domains with those of elements belonging to  <dig> previously characterized major clades  <cit>  . the paramecium retrotransposons, along with elements from the ciliate tetrahymena thermophila  <cit> , emerge as a distinct new clade in the tree, with good branch support. the consensus sequences of the first  <dig> groups, which contain an orf <dig>  suggest that orf <dig> translation depends on + <dig> ribosomal frameshifting or translation re-initiation , or on translational read-through of the orf <dig> stop codon . like other non-ltr retrotransposons  <cit> , these elements contain short stretches of variable tri-, tetra-, or penta-nucleotide repeats at their 3′ ends . seven elements  appear to contain only an orf <dig>  ending with a zinc finger similar to that found at the c-terminal end of orf <dig> in groups 1– <dig>  and are likely mobilized in trans by proteins encoded by other elements; a  n repeat was found at the end of the element in  <dig> cases.fig.  <dig> phylogeny of non-ltr elements based on their rt domains. the phylogeny is based on the alignment shown in  of the ~  <dig> aa catalytic rt domains of the elements listed in . the phylogeny is a 50% maximum likelihood tree, rooted with the cre clade. the numbers at nodes represent the percentage of bootstrap values for  <dig> replicates. clade names are prefixed to the element names for the  <dig> major non-ltr clades. the ciliate non-ltr form a new clade. the names of the elements for the  <dig> paramecium groups are colored: blue, group 1; green, group 2; magenta, group 3; red, group 4; pink, group  <dig>  the amino acid divergence scale is indicated. schematic diagrams of orf structure of representative paramecium elements from each group and representatives of the  <dig> major clades identified in  <cit>  are shown next to the phylogeny. the representatives are the same as in  <cit> ; however for tad, tad <dig> from n. crassa is shown; for r <dig>  tras <dig> from b. mori is shown; and for i, the element from d. melanogaster is shown. the domains are rt, reverse transcriptase; ape, apurinic/apyrimidinic endonuclease; rel-endo, restriction enzyme-like endonuclease; rnh, rnase h domain. vertical bars represent zinc-finger domains. the two orfs are shown as offset whether or not they are in the same frame. for group  <dig> and group  <dig>  there is a + <dig> frameshift. for group  <dig>  the two orfs are in the same frame




the  <dig> dna transposons, all of the itm superfamily  <cit> , are unusual in that they contain multiple orfs . in addition to the dde orf common to all itm elements, an orf <dig> of unknown function is found in all paramecium transposons and shares detectable sequence similarity among all of them . the largest paramecium transposons contain  <dig> orfs, orf <dig> being a tyrosine recombinase, a property shared with tec and tbe transposons from distantly related ciliates . as seen in the maximum likelihood tree built using many itm dde domains  <cit>  , the composite paramecium elements with a tyrosine recombinase group together, along with tec <dig> and tec <dig>  a distance of  <dig> aa between the second and third residues of the dde catalytic triad, characteristic of the  <dig> tyrosine-recombinase containing paramecium itm and  <dig> of the  <dig> simpler elements, is among the shortest ever reported for itm.fig.  <dig> phylogeny of itm elements based on their dde domains. the phylogeny is based on the alignment shown in  of the ~  <dig> aa catalytic dde domains of the elements listed in . the phylogeny is a maximum likelihood tree, rooted with bacterial is <dig> elements. the numbers at some nodes represent the percentage of bootstrap values for  <dig> replicates if 50% or greater. clade names are in bold to the right of the tree. as in  <cit> , the names include the distance between the last two catalytic residues. most of the elements in the ciliate clade are d32e, however those with one star are d33e and those with two stars are d34e. the amino acid divergence scale is indicated




repeatmasker was used to identify copies of the tes in the mic contigs. tandem repeat finder was used to identify putative satellite sequences . as shown in table  <dig>  96% of the short unique copy iess and 92% of the te copies are in the mic-limited compartment. however, about one third of tandem repeats were found in the mac-destined compartment and include wd <dig>  tpr and surface antigen repeats.

mic and pgm dna are not equivalent
to compare the sorted mic dna with the unrearranged dna from pgm-silenced cells, used until now to represent germline dna, we calculated the depth of coverage of the mic assembly by the sorted mic dna and the sorted pgm dna sequencing datasets. the calculation was performed for  <dig>  non-overlapping 1-kb windows.

we visualized the comparison between the two datasets by creating dot plots of the depth for each window, and representing the density of the dots using heat map colors. to help interpret the comparison, we simulated pgm and mic datasets, using enrichments in mic-limited sequences of  <dig> and 40% respectively . as shown in fig. 6a left plot, the simulated data present two clouds of points. the larger cloud, with the higher depth of coverage in both samples, corresponds to windows present in both the mic and the mac dna. the smaller cloud, with lower depth of coverage in both samples, represents sequence windows present only in mic dna. the real data deviates from this unbiased profile . the larger clouds representing windows present in both mic and mac dna are comparable . surprisingly, the smaller cloud is now vertically elongated, indicating that genome coverage in the pgm dna is variable and mostly less covered than expected . both pgm samples behave in the same way. the same windows are found to be under-represented in both pgm and unsorted pgm samples .fig.  <dig> coverage of the mic assembly by different sequencing samples. a. global comparison of the sequences in simulated  and real  pgm and mic sequencing samples. depth is calculated by mapping reads to the mic assembly, and counting the reads in 1-kb non-overlapping windows. the graph shows the density of windows as a heat map color, for each combination of mic and pgm normalized depth values. b. representation of the genomic compartments identified by analysis of differential read coverage of the mic assembly . the horizontal bars show the percentage of the mic assembly covered by each sequencing sample, defining three genomic sub-compartments. “mac-destined” is the genomic compartment covered by mic, mac and pgm reads, i.e. windows with no differential coverage according to the deseq <dig> analysis; “mic pgm” is the compartment covered by mic and pgm reads; “mic-only” is the compartment covered only by mic reads. c. barplots of the normalized deseq <dig> read counts, across all windows and all samples  for the “mic pgm” compartment  and the “mic-only” compartment 




to refine this observation and determine which sequences are missing from the pgm dna, we used the uniquely-mapped read counts in the 1-kb non-overlapping windows to identify differentially covered windows, in the same way as rna-seq counts for genes are used to identify differentially expressed genes . the statistical software package we used takes into account the small number of independent samples .

we looked for windows less covered by mac or pgm reads with respect to mic reads . this allowed us to define three genomic compartments : 80% of the mic genome non-overlapping windows are not differentially covered and represent the part of the germline genome that is collinear with mac chromosomes . the remaining 20% of the windows was significantly less covered by mac than by mic reads, corresponding to the germline-limited part of the genome . as anticipated by the previous analysis of read depth, ~ 3% of the windows not covered by mac reads are not well-covered by the pgm reads. we thus subdivided the mic-limited compartment into “mic pgm” and “mic-only” sub-compartments . figure 6c shows barplots of the normalized read counts of the windows for each of the samples, for the “mic pgm” and “mic-only” sub-compartments. as expected, the two sub-compartments are not covered by mac reads and are well-covered by mic reads. interestingly, the “mic-only” sub-compartment, which is poorly covered by pgm reads, is well-covered by dcl2/ <dig> and ezl <dig> reads . these two factors are required for developmental dna elimination and act respectively in small rna and histone post-translational modification pathways upstream of the introduction of dna double-strand breaks by the pgm endonuclease  <cit> .table  <dig> characterization of different sub-compartments of the mic assembly


tir

line

sine



columns from left to right: “mac-destined” is the genomic compartment covered by mic, mac and pgm reads ; “mic pgm” is the sub-compartment covered by mic and pgm reads; “mic only” is the sub-compartment covered only by mic reads. these compartments are represented schematically in fig. 6b. the ies reference set was mapped to the mic assembly and then the iess were assigned to a window. the total complexity of tandem repeats  was calculated using tandem repeats finder. low complexity sequences identified by repeat masker include stretches of poly-purine or poly-pyrimidine and regions of high at  or high gc  content. repeat masker was also used to find te copies, using the te consensus library reported in this study . the mic only sub-compartment, representing germline-limited sequences not present in either of the pgm samples, is thus enriched in satellites and depleted in tes.

different sequence characteristics were calculated for the three genomic sub-compartments . gc content and low complexity content did not vary across sub-compartments. approximately 99% of the ies reference set could be mapped to the mic assembly. since 90% of iess are shorter than 100 bp  it is not surprising that nearly all ies-containing 1-kb windows are covered by mac reads and are thus found in the “mac-destined” compartment.

the te consensus library was used to find te copies in the  <dig> genomic sub-compartments . the important difference between the 16 mb “mic pgm” and the 3 mb “mic-only” sub-compartments is that the latter is significantly depleted in te copies and enriched in tandem repeats i.e. micro- and mini-satellite .

we can suggest two possible, non-exclusive explanations for why 3 mb of sequence complexity present in the mic dna are absent from the pgm dna: i) the pgm domesticated transposase is not needed for the elimination of some mic-limited sequences or ii) pgm rnai is released at the end of development and this release is sufficient for elimination of some mic-limited sequences. consistent with the latter explanation, depletion of other factors involved in programmed dna elimination, and whose function is likely upstream of pgm, did not lead to underrepresentation of mic-limited sequences . whatever the reason of the under-representation of mic-limited sequences upon pgm rnai, it indicates that pgm dna, used up until now as a proxy for mic dna, does not provide a faithful representation of the mic genome.

CONCLUSIONS
we report the development of an efficient flow cytometry-based method to sort nuclei in p. tetraurelia. this method represents a major breakthrough over previously published methods  <cit> , in that it provides  improved reliability;  high purity; and  quality control evaluated by flow cell imaging and high throughput sequencing. our work also provides a clear demonstration that flow cell imaging is a powerful means to detect the population of interest and help refine sorting parameters.

we expect that cytometry-based purification of subpopulations of macronuclei during development may allow kinetic studies of the dna elimination and endoreplication processes. we have shown that our procedure allows high throughput illumina sequencing of the p. tetraurelia germline genome, paving the way for sequencing the germline genome of other p. aurelia sibling species for future comparative genomic studies.

so far, only a few studies have made use of flow cytometry to sort nuclei , mostly in plants and neurons. our work highlights the unique potential of flow cytometry to analyze and sort heterogeneous populations of nuclei. it demonstrates that flow cytometry and sorting provide a powerful way to purify minority subpopulations of nuclei, provided that specific nuclear characteristics or a specific fluorophore can be unambiguously and exclusively associated with the subpopulation of interest.

the contigs assembled from the sorted mic dna have allowed discovery of  <dig> germline tes. the majority are class i non-ltr retro-transposons , never before characterized in paramecium. this library of manually curated te consensus sequences constitutes a precious resource for future automated approaches to te identification and classification in the germline genomes of paramecium species, especially given the relatively large phylogenetic distances to related elements from other taxa.

