BACKGROUND
it is important to differentiate sensory information resulting from one’s own actions from environmental events which are not the result of our own actions. it has been proposed that this differentiation is based on an internal forward model
 <cit> , an idea that relates to the reafference principle
 <cit>  and the concept of corollary discharge
 <cit>  in physiological literature. specifically, when a movement is executed, a copy of the current motor command  is used to make predictions of the sensory consequences of the movement . this sensory prediction is then compared with the actual sensory feedback. if the two correspond, sensory responses are attenuated, thereby enabling a differentiation between the sensory consequences of one’s own actions and the actions of others. such sensory attenuation for self-generated compared to externally-generated sensations - as an index of an internal predictive mechanism - has been widely investigated in psychophysical research
 <cit> .

within this self-generation framework, the n <dig> suppression paradigm has become a popular approach to investigate predictive auditory sensory processing
 <cit> . in this paradigm, participants listen to sounds that are either initiated by their own button presses, or externally initiated. the n <dig> component of the event-related brain potential  is attenuated for the sounds that were self-initiated compared to the externally-initiated sounds. this n1-suppression effect has been explained as the result of an underlying predictive mechanism. in the traditional blocked version of this paradigm, self-initiated sounds and externally-initiated sounds are presented in different blocks, bearing several caveats that obscure an unambiguous interpretation in terms of the predictive coding framework
 <cit> . for example, it seems possible that the participants’ arousal level differs between the active condition in which participants initiate the sound by their own motor behavior and the passive condition in which participants simply listen to the externally-initiated sounds. in a modified so-called mixed n <dig> suppression paradigm self-initiated and externally-initiated sounds are presented within the same block. thus, sustained arousal differences between self- and externally-initiated sounds are eliminated. studies using this paradigm also yielded  n1-suppression effect for self-initiated sounds
 <cit> . this demonstrates that the n1-suppression effect seems to occur selectively for self-initiated sounds and seems not to be caused by different arousal levels in active and passive conditions of the blocked design.

although sustained differences in arousal are well controlled in this mixed design, it is obvious that transient arousal effects cannot be controlled for. even more important, the improved paradigm has not been designed for excluding attentional influences on the n1-suppression effect. in fact, an enlarged p3a to externally-initiated sounds compared to the p3a for self-initiated sounds reported for the mixed design
 <cit>  suggests that externally-initiated sounds received more attention. as the n <dig> is known to increase with attention
 <cit> , it seems well possible that differences in the n <dig> between self- and externally-initiated sounds were in fact caused by a difference in attention directed to self- and externally-initiated sounds. the cognitive psychologist’s silver bullet to test for an attentional confound on an effect of interest  is to vary the allocation of attention over several levels and determine its influence on the effect
 <cit> . therefore, we measured the n1-suppression effect with the mixed designa and manipulated the allocation of attention between blocks comprising three different attention conditions: while participants are performing the self-initiation task, attention is directed either to the sounds, the motor acts or to visual stimuli. less attention should be directed to the sounds when participants attend to the motor act or to the visual stimuli than when they attend to the sounds. if the n1-suppression effect critically depends on an attentional difference, no  n <dig> suppression should occur when equating attention to externally and self-initiated sounds. in contrast, if n <dig> suppression for self-initiated sounds reflects a genuine suppression effect rather than an attentional difference, we expect comparable n <dig> suppression in all three attention conditions, supporting the assumption of an underlying genuine internal predictive mechanism.

moreover, in order to focus on effects that truly reflect attenuation of sensory responses due to a match of incoming stimulation with predicted stimulation in sensory cortex, we will make a more detailed analysis of the auditory n <dig>  separating suppression effects for the n1a, n1b, and n1c components
 <cit> . it is well known that sensory and non-sensory  components contribute to the auditory n1
 <cit> . importantly, only sensory components with sources in auditory cortex are tangentially oriented, showing a fronto-central distribution with polarity inversion at the mastoids. contrary, the unspecific component, which reflects the orienting response, appears slightly later in time than tangential components and shows no polarity reversal at the mastoids, as it does not originate in auditory cortex. if the n1-suppression effect truly reflects attenuation of sensory responses that match internal sensory predictions, then sensory-specific components generated in auditory cortex should be attenuated. if on the contrary the n1-suppression effect mostly reflects differences in the orienting response generated by self- and externally-initiated sounds then the unspecific n <dig> component should be most affected. finally, by comparing the n1-suppression effects due to self-initiation and the n1-attention effects, we can determine whether the predictive modeling  underlying the n <dig> suppression resembles attention effects. indeed, previous research has reported attention in time effects that share characteristics of attention to other feature effects
 <cit> .

RESULTS
behavioral data
table
 <dig> summarizes the behavioral results for the self-initiation task  and the attention task  obtained in the three attention conditions . for the self-initiation task the analysis revealed no main effect of attention for inter-press time intervals , total number of button presses  and timing errors . however, with regard to the attention task a main effect of attention was observed . pairwise comparisons showed lower counting rates for the am condition compared to the av condition . however, the effect size of this effect is low . no differences were obtained comparing as to am  or as to av . taken together, no fundamental differences of task demands were observed between the three attention conditions.

sd is given in parentheses.

electrophysiological data
in figure
1a the grand-average auditory response across all conditions is depicted at central, temporal and mastoid electrodes. the erp waveform shows a negative deflection in the typical n <dig> latency range at cz and a double-peaked n <dig> at temporal electrodes with polarity inversion at the mastoids for only the early peak. voltage maps and scalp current densities  show the corresponding distributions for this deflection over the scalp in the n1b , the n1a  and the n1c  time window, respectively. in the following, modulations of this auditory response caused by self-initiation and attention are reported. statistical results for all time windows are presented in table
 <dig>  most importantly, for all three n <dig> time windows no interaction of the experimental factors production and attention was found  =  <dig> ; p = .407; n1a window: f =  <dig> ; p = .536; n1c window: f =  <dig> ; p = .430). thus, auditory n <dig> effects due to self-initiation and due to the allocation of attention for each time window will be presented separately  of single attention conditions as, am, av). furthermore, no interaction of attention × production was observed for the analysis of the mastoids . thus, effects due to attention and self-initiation will be discussed separately as well.

f values, p values and partial ŋ <dig> for each n <dig> time window are reported.

1f.

2f.

3f.

4f.

5f.

** p ≤ . <dig> 

* p ≤ . <dig> 

self-initiation effects on the auditory n1
in figure
 <dig> grand-average erp waveforms at cz elicited by externally-initiated sounds and self-initiated sounds as well as the self-initiation effect  are shown, separately for the three attention conditions. since comparable self-initiation effects were obtained in all attention conditions  the mean of all three attention conditions was calculated and used for the further analysis. figure
3a shows the grand-average erp waveforms at cz for the mean of all three attention conditions  elicited by externally-initiated sounds and self-initiated sounds as well as the self-initiation effect . furthermore, voltage maps and scalp current densities  show the corresponding distribution over the scalp of the mean self-initiation effect in all three n <dig> time windows . the analysis for the n1b time window revealed a main effect of production . also for the n1c time window a significant main effect  was observed. this main effect of production for both time windows was caused by lower amplitudes for self-initiated sounds compared to externally-initiated sounds. however, for the n1a time window no main effect of production was found , showing comparable amplitudes for self-initiated and externally-initiated sounds. furthermore, for the n1b time window an interaction of production × laterality × anterior-posterior  was obtained. pairwise comparisons revealed lower amplitudes at frontal and central electrodes  for self-initiated compared to externally-initiated sounds, indicating a fronto-central distribution of the self-initiation effect . the scd topography of this effect also shows a pattern pointing at a fronto-central effect . for the n1c time window no such interaction was observed . however, the analysis revealed an interaction of production × laterality , showing a more central than lateral distribution of the self-initiation effect . again, the scd distribution supports a fronto-central effect . contrary, for the n1a time window no interaction with the experimental factor production was found. additionally, at the mastoids no main effect of production was obtained .

comparison of self-initiation and attention effects on the auditory n1
in the following, attention effects are outlined and then compared to the self-initiation effect. in order to simplify the comparison, we focused on effects of attending  vs. not attending  to sounds, pooling the attention effects for the am and av conditions, which were rather similar . thus, we compared effects of attending to sounds  to effects of self-initiating the sounds . figure
4a shows the grand-average erp waveforms at cz elicited when attending the sounds and when not attending the sounds as well as the attention effect  for the mean of self-initiated and externally-initiated sounds. furthermore, voltage maps and scds show the corresponding distribution over the scalp of the attention effect in all three n <dig> time windows . the analysis for all n <dig> time windows revealed a main effect of attention  =  <dig> ; p < .001; n1a time window: f =  <dig> ; p = .001; n1c time window: f =  <dig> ; p < .001). pairwise comparison indicated higher activity for attending the sounds compared to not attending the sounds  = − <dig> ; p < .001; n1a time window: t = − <dig> ; p < .001; n1c time window: t = − <dig> ; p < .001). there was also a significant interaction of attention × laterality for the n1b time window  and the n1a time window . pairwise comparisons for the n1b time window showed higher amplitudes for attended compared to unattended sounds for all laterality levels . for the n1a time window the post-hoc analysis indicated higher amplitudes for attended compared to unattended sounds for all laterality levels except the far right  level . for both time windows the attention effect shows a more parietal distribution  compared to the self-initiation effect .

the scd distribution reveals that the putative sources of this attention effect are located in more parietal areas compared to the self-initiation effect . however, the distribution for the n1b time window shows a more widespread activity than the distribution of the n1a time window . furthermore, there was a significant interaction of attention and anterior-posterior for the n1b  and the n1a  time window. pairwise comparisons revealed higher activity for attended compared to unattended sounds for all levels of both time windows . again, this attention effect shows a parietal distribution  which is supported by a parietal pattern of activity in the scds . for the n1c time window no such interactions were found. however, the analysis revealed an interaction of attention × laterality × anterior-posterior  for this time window, indicating a parietal and left-lateralized distribution of the attention effect which shows a more anterior distribution than the n1b and the n1a time window . this finding is also supported by the scds which point at a more central topography . finally, at the mastoids no main effect of attention was found .

discussion
in the present study we investigated to which extent the n1-suppression effect for self-initiated sounds can be explained by a differential allocation of attention to self-initiated and externally-initiated sounds. to overcome possible limitations of the traditional blocked design self-initiated sounds and externally-initiated sounds as well as the motor control were presented within the same block. the allocation of attention was manipulated block-wise in three different attention conditions , so that attention was directed to the sounds or was directed away from the sounds towards the own motor behavior or the visual stimulation. moreover, we compared effects of self-initiation with attention effects to determine whether the underlying neural processes affect the same or different structures.

horvath and colleagues  have proposed that that n <dig> suppression might possibly be caused by split attentional resources in active conditions compared to passive conditions of the traditional blocked design
 <cit> . we found an attenuation of the auditory n <dig> for self-initiated compared to externally-initiated sounds that was independent from the allocation of attention. that is, the n <dig> suppression was the same, irrespective of whether attention was directed to the sounds, directed to the motor act or directed to the visual stimuli. thus, the n1-suppression effect cannot be explained by attentional differences between self- and externally-initiated sounds. in other words, sensory suppression to self-initiated sounds cannot be explained by the fact that the motor act draws away attention from auditory processing. our finding is consistent with a recent study reporting reduced n <dig> amplitude during self-vocalization using a selective attention task to assess the n <dig> component independent of the attention effect
 <cit> .

similar to forward modeling effects in other species
 <cit> , it has been argued that the n1-suppression effect is a very basic and automatic phenomenon
 <cit> . horvath and colleagues  showed that the auditory input seems to be attenuated for a short period after the motor act, even if there is no contingency between button press and sound. it seems that the sensory processing during self-initiation of sounds is merely affected by the concurrent motor act
 <cit> . our finding that the neural processes underlying the n <dig> suppression are not modulated by attention strongly supports the view that they are rather automatic. in fact, the definition of an automatic  process is that it does not interfere with attention
 <cit> .

as predicted, the allocation of attention to the sounds resulted in an increase of the auditory n <dig>  as compared to the n <dig> elicited by the sounds when attention was directed to the button presses or to the visual stimuli. this finding is consistent with results from previous studies
 <cit> . however, previous studies often obtained a more fronto-central distributed auditory attention effect
 <cit> , whereas we obtained a more parietal distribution. nevertheless, top-down controlled attention has been reported to involve temporo-parietal and superior parietal areas
 <cit> , which is consistent with the distribution of our attention effect.

moreover, the comparison of the self-initiation effect and the attention effect revealed that partly separate n <dig> components
 <cit>  are affected. whereas all n <dig> components  were modulated by attention, only the late part of the n <dig>  was suppressed by self-initiation. thus, we conclude that the predictive modeling underlying the n1-suppression effect is not “only” attention in time
 <cit>  but a mechanism that is separable from a mere attentional mechanism. in the present report, the frontocentral peak of the n1b did not coincide with the time of polarity reversal at the mastoids, which occurred slightly earlier. the n1b component is known to receive contributions from both the tangentially oriented, sensory-specific component and the unspecific component of the n1
 <cit> . because the unspecific component occurs later in time, its contribution tends to delay the peak of the n1b on frontocentral leads
 <cit> . thus, the window of analysis chosen here around the peak of the n1b probably receives its largest contribution from the unspecific n <dig> component. there were no self-initiation effects at the mastoids on the polarity-inverted n <dig> deflection. this finding suggests that a large part of the n1-suppression effect may be due to the suppression of the unspecific n <dig> component rather than the attenuation of sensory responses in auditory cortex as stipulated from internal predictive models theory. thus, it could be speculated that the n1-suppression effect as measured in most erp studies may largely reflect the fact that self-initiated sounds are less arousing compared to externally-initiated sounds. however, the lack of n <dig> suppression on the mastoids and on fronto-central electrodes at the time of polarity reversal at the mastoids in the present experiment does not necessarily imply that sensory responses are not attenuated by self-initiation in auditory cortex at all. indeed, previous meg studies, which specifically measure the activity of tangentially oriented sources on auditory cortex, have found n <dig> suppression for self-initiated sounds
 <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
we could show that the n <dig> suppression was equally large and of equal distribution when subjects directed their attention towards the sound and when the directed their attention away from the sounds, towards the button presses or the visual stimuli. thus, the self-initiation effect can hardly be explained by the differential amount of attention devoted to self- and externally-triggered sounds. instead, the present results support the notion that n <dig> suppression for self-initiated sounds seems to reflect the activity of an internal predictive mechanism. whereas the effects of voluntary attention affect all n <dig> components, the self-initiation effect seems to be confined to the n1b and n1c components. the present mixed design provides a useful tool to measure genuine self-initiation effects.

