BACKGROUND
sequencing of human mitochondrial dna  is performed for a number of purposes in medical, anthropological, population and forensic genetics. in forensics, mtdna typing is most commonly employed when the nuclear dna in an evidentiary sample is too limited or too damaged to develop sufficient nuclear data for forensic comparisons. in this application, mtdna sequencing has historically been limited to the non-coding control region  or portions thereof, where the high concentration of fast-mutating sites presents the greatest opportunity for differentiation of samples representing distinct maternal lineages while minimizing data generation costs and effort. over the past ten years a number of assays have been developed that interrogate portions of the mtdna coding region  to resolve maternal lineages which cannot be distinguished by cr typing alone , and a very few commercial products are available for the generation of data from the codr. however, the existence of these methods has not yet translated into regular development of mtdna codr data in most forensic laboratories. the in-house assays developed by various groups are not commercialized, and thus quality control of primers and reagents represents a substantial barrier to implementation; and the commercially-available products are not well-suited for typing the low dna quantity evidentiary specimens to which forensic mtdna methods are typically applied  <cit> . next-generation sequencing technologies may eventually facilitate development of complete mitochondrial genome  data from even very poor quality forensic specimens  <cit> . yet, before any of these assays and technologies can be routinely applied in forensic casework, complete mtgenome population reference data developed to forensic standards must be on hand to permit generation of the haplotype frequency estimates required for likelihood calculations  <cit> . at present, no such data is publicly available.

the generation of entire mtgenome haplotypes from even pristine quality and high dna quantity samples by sanger sequencing is generally expensive and laborious. a large number of individual sequences are required for sufficient high-resolution coverage across the entire approximately  <dig>  kilobase molecule, and past analyses of published mtgenome data sets have identified various errors  <cit> . and while next-generation sequencing technologies are likely to facilitate the development of entire mtgenome data sets, the fact that these methods have not yet been fully vetted and validated for forensic use means that sanger-based protocols currently remain the only accepted method for the development of complete mtgenome reference data that meet forensic data quality standards  <cit> . a recently published manual sequencing strategy generates high-quality sanger sequence data with redundant coverage across the mtdna codr, and is perfectly suitable for the development of mtgenome reference data when combined with cr sequencing  <cit> . yet to ease the way for more rapid, high-volume generation of the complete mtgenome population reference data needed for forensics, accommodate different sample substrates and thus variable dna quality/quantity, and further decrease the opportunities for human error inherent in manual sample handling, an entire mtgenome sequencing protocol and workflow designed specifically for automated, high-throughput processing is necessary.

to address this need, our aim was to devise a robust amplification and sanger sequencing strategy that could be used for high-throughput production of complete mtgenome haplotypes which meet the highest data quality expectations while accommodating a wide range of dna quality and quantity. we report here on the development of an 8-amplicon, 135-sequence mtgenome data generation protocol that was specifically designed to be performed in 96-well format and implemented on robotic liquid handling instruments. the strategy produces redundant sequence coverage across the entire mtgenome in the first pass of automated data generation, and generates high-quality sequences from a range of dna input quantities and from samples representing diverse mtdna haplogroups.

RESULTS
assay development
amplification of the full mtgenome in eight fragments was targeted to facilitate sample processing in 96-well plate format, a strategy that permits eleven samples  to be pcr-amplified simultaneously . an established primer set which amplifies the complete cr in an  <dig> base pair  fragment  <cit>  was utilized, and the development of seven new overlapping amplicons to span the codr is described below.

given the need for a robust mtgenome assay that could be applied with equal efficacy across samples representing diverse mtdna haplogroups, the potential for primer binding site mutations was given careful consideration in the design of codr amplification primers. to this end, a “global alignment” developed from  <dig> complete or codr only mtdna sequences was used to assess regions of the mtgenome appropriate for primer placement. the alignment consisted of mtgenome sequences from most major named mtdna haplogroups  sampled at random using genbank accession numbers available on the phylotree mtdna phylogeny  <cit> . in addition, published mtgenome substitution rate data drawn from  <dig> complete mtgenomes  <cit>  were used to develop a substitution rate histogram by nucleotide position . in combination, the global alignment and substitution rate graph were used to identify haplogroup-specific mutations and overall highly polymorphic positions and/or regions which could potentially interfere with proper primer annealing during pcr.

initially, twenty-two codr amplification primers employed for earlier mtgenome sequencing at our laboratory  <cit>  were evaluated for use in the new protocol. the global alignment and substitution rate histogram described above were used to assess the potential for primer binding site mutations, and the web-based primer <dig> program  <cit>  was used to examine primer characteristics such as melting temperature, gc content, and self-complementarity. based on the criteria applied all previously used primers were disqualified from further use, most due to potential primer binding site issues. this is not indicative of poor design, but rather reflects the enormous increase in the number of mtgenome sequences available and our general understanding of mtdna diversity today in comparison to the late 1990s when the prior amplification strategy was initially developed.

seven new codr amplicons were designed using the global alignment and substitution rate histogram. within bp ranges deemed acceptable , specific primer sequences were selected using the default settings in primer <dig>  <cit> . amplification primer sequences are given in table  <dig>  the average overlap between amplicons is  <dig> bp, with a minimum overlap of  <dig> bp  and a maximum overlap of  <dig> bp.

amplification primer sequences for the eight mtgenome amplicons. the primers for amplicon  <dig>  which covers the mtdna cr, were adopted from  <cit> . the reverse primer for amplicon  <dig>  was previously designed for use as a sequencing primer  <cit> . all primers except f <dig> , r <dig> , r <dig>  and r <dig>  are also used for sequencing .

sequencing primers for the complete mtgenome, with sources . all primers for amplicon  <dig>  which covers the mtdna cr, were adopted from  <cit> ; these are used in duplicate to produce a total of sixteen sequences for the cr. most amplification primers are also utilized as sequencing primers .

considerations given highest priority in the design of the mtgenome sequencing strategy were 1) the desire to develop high-resolution sequence coverage in both the forward and reverse directions across as much of the molecule as feasible, and 2) a protocol that would be amenable to high-throughput processing on automated liquid-handling instrumentation. for the cr, the sequencing approach described by  <cit>  was adopted. codr primers previously utilized by our laboratory for mtgenome sequencing  <cit>  were evaluated using the global alignment, substitution rate histogram, and primer <dig> software  <cit> , as described above. in addition, the typical quality of the sequence data produced by seventy-four of these primers was assessed by inspection of  <dig> previously-generated sequence electropherograms, and only primers which routinely produced data with sufficient signal and minimal noise were considered for further use. as a result of these examinations, twenty sequencing primers were maintained for use in the new protocol. ninety-nine new primers were selected in the same manner as described above for the amplification primers, with old and new codr sequencing primers spaced at intervals designed to produce overlapping, high-resolution forward and reverse sequence coverage across the genome.

the final, 8-amplicon mtgenome strategy is depicted in figures  <dig> and  <dig>  the number of sequencing primers per amplicon ranges from sixteen to eighteen, and the strategy produces  <dig> sequences from  <dig> unique primers. the resulting redundant sequence coverage across the complete mtgenome is demonstrated in figure  <dig>  sequencing primers and their sources  are listed in table  <dig>  thermal cycling conditions implemented for pcr and sequencing are identical to those previously described for complete mtgenome sequencing  <cit> , with one exception: as the coding region amplicons in this assay range in size from  <dig> to  <dig> bp, a  <dig>  minute extension time was selected to balance pcr product generation and total thermal cycling time. thermal cycling details are included in the methods section.

codr amplification primer pairs were queried against the reference assembly of the complete human genome using primerblast  <cit> , and results which met specific similarity criteria were noted. for these thirteen regions of the nuclear genome which are potentially amplifiable using the codr pcr primer pairs listed in table  <dig>  the nuclear genome sequence was aligned to the rcrs  <cit>  to determine a percentage sequence similarity. the two chromosome  <dig> matches listed for amplicon  <dig> represent slightly different primer binding sites within the same portion of the chromosome.

all steps of the mtgenome protocol described here were designed with high-throughput applications in mind. to this end, plate layouts and programs which permit efficient sample handling and reaction set-up on robotic instrumentation were developed to facilitate highly automated data generation. details of our high-throughput process, including plate maps and strategies for amplification, sequencing, and purification steps, are covered in the methods section.

sensitivity testing
to assess the sensitivity of the amplification protocol, pcr was performed in duplicate for a range of positive control  dna input quantities . the pcr products were quantified using the qiaxcel advanced system  and the resulting values were normalized with respect to amplicon size to enable direct comparison. figure  <dig> displays a box and whisker plot of the normalized amplification product concentrations, reported here in ng/μl per 1000 bp, at each dna input concentration. the long whiskers  at each dna input level reflect the range of sensitivities of the eight primer pairs, however all regions were successfully amplified down to 10 pg of input dna. beginning at 5 pg input dna a few amplification failures were observed, and below 1 pg input successful amplification was sporadic and limited to a few high-efficiency primer pairs.

developmental validation on population samples
to evaluate the performance of the protocol on a variety of haplotypes, eleven anonymous, high-quality population samples from ten distinct mtdna haplogroups  were amplified in duplicate and sequenced using the automated, high-throughput process described in the methods section. the dna input for pcr varied by sample, and ranged from approximately  <dig> - <dig>  ng. trimming and assembly of the raw electropherograms for replicate samples was performed by separate individuals according to laboratory standard guidelines for data quality in terms of background to noise ratio and peak resolution. sequence coverage across the molecule was assessed in terms of a) redundant and bi-directional coverage, b) the degree of additional manual re-processing that would be required to develop complete replicate coverage, and c) the correlation between sequence coverage and sequence distance from the revised cambridge reference sequence   <cit> . the final haplotypes for each sample were compared to control data .

high quality sequence data  was developed from most primers for most samples in a single pass with the automated system. as figure  <dig> depicts, on average  <dig> %  of the mtgenome was covered by at least  <dig> sequences, and  <dig> %  of the mtgenome had both forward and reverse sequence coverage when small regions with unidirectional coverage due to length heteroplasmy in hypervariable regions  <dig> and  <dig> were ignored. the number of manual resequencing reactions that would be required to achieve redundant coverage ranged from zero to two , with approximately one resequencing reaction required for every two complete haplotypes. considering that  <dig> sequences were generated for each sample, this equates to a  <dig> % resequencing rate. a weak but non-significant correlation was observed between mtgenome coverage and sequence distance from the rcrs, with a mere 1-3% of the variance in mtgenome coverage attributed to sequence distance . in all cases the final haplotype matched the haplotype previously developed for each sample.

potential for numt amplification
though amplification of nuclear insertions of mitochondrial dna  is unlikely when sufficient mtdna is present in a sample  <cit> , the reference assembly of the complete human genome was nonetheless queried using primerblast  <cit>  for the seven codr amplification primer pairs. any close sequence matches  that could potentially amplify a fragment similar in size to the authentic mitochondrial target  were further evaluated. for each potentially amplifiable nuclear genome region, the percentage similarity to modern mtdna was assessed by aligning the ncbi reference sequence to the rcrs in sequencher version  <dig>  . when the nuclear genome sequence region could not be aligned to the rcrs due to high dissimilarity, the percentage similarity was noted as being less than 60%.

using the described criteria, thirteen potentially amplifiable regions of the nuclear genome were identified . of these, only three had a sequence similarity to the rcrs greater than 90%. for the two chromosome  <dig> regions with greater than 98% sequence similarity to amplicon  <dig>  and amplicon  <dig> , the chromosome  <dig> sequence differed from the rcrs sequence at thirty-five and thirty-six nucleotide positions, respectively. this region in chromosome  <dig> corresponds to a described numt approximately  <dig> bp in length  <cit> . no numt amplification was observed during protocol development or developmental validation.

sequencing artifacts
sequencing artifacts  due to region-specific sequence motifs were reproducibly observed in both the positive control samples sequenced during protocol development and the developmental validation on population samples. typically, each artifact was observed in a single sequence direction, and the severity of the artifact varied by primer distance from the artifact. an example of a sequencing artifact is shown in figure  <dig> 

the standard sequencing protocol used at our laboratory for high-throughput generation of mtdna population data includes one-quarter the recommended volume of bigdye® terminator v <dig>  ready reaction mix  and replaces 25% of the ditp-containing bigdye® with dgtp bigdye® terminator v <dig>  ready reaction mix . the addition of dgtp bigdye® was originally implemented to assist the sequencing of difficult templates, specifically gc-rich regions or polycytosine tracts, in the reverse direction. for this protocol, dgtp bigdye® was eliminated from forward sequencing reactions to reduce the number of artifacts produced in those sequences . all remaining artifacts  that were consistent and reproducible across multiple samples, and with replicate sequencing, were cataloged. in practice in our laboratory, this catalog is referenced during assembly and analysis of mtgenome sequences, and known artifacts are annotated in the assembled contig.

it is worth noting here that these types of sequencing artifacts are typically only apparent and recognizable as such because the quality of the sequence data produced is generally pristine. with even a small amount of noise in the sequence data, many of these artifacts would not be evident. in general, the artifacts do not confound data interpretation, as they are typically minor and apparent in only one sequencing direction. nevertheless, when previously uncataloged artifacts are encountered during data production, our practice is to note the affected bases as ambiguous and resequence the region to confirm that the authentic sequence is represented in the consensus sequence for the region.

discussion
though the mtgenome amplification and sequencing protocol we have developed can be performed manually , the strategy was specifically designed to be implemented on liquid handling instruments to facilitate high-throughput data generation. in our laboratory, all pre-pcr pipetting steps  are performed in 96-well plate format on a benchtop liquid handling robot; amplification product detection is performed directly from the 96-well plate on a capillary electrophoresis instrument; and, with the exception of the addition of enzymes for post-pcr purification , all post-pcr pipetting steps are performed robotically. the particulars of our automated sample processing workflow are detailed in the methods section.

the high-throughput strategy described here is presently being employed in our laboratory to develop complete mtgenome haplotypes from anonymous blood serum specimens for a national institute of justice funded reference population databasing project. though frequently used for cancer biomarker detection, blood serum is a challenging source for forensic dna typing as the only dna present in these samples is residual  <cit> . using a silica column based extraction protocol, dna concentrations  for a set of  <dig> blood serum extracts averaged just  <dig> pg/μl. when those extracts were amplified for the mtgenome, pcr success was strongly dependent on input dna quantity. overall, however, the amplification results were consistent with those obtained during sensitivity testing of this protocol, where amplification failures were observed at dna inputs below  <dig> pg . with the blood serum specimens typed using this protocol for the databasing effort,  <dig> % of all amplification failures occurred when pcr inputs were less than  <dig> pg; and at dna input quantities equal to or greater than  <dig> pg,  <dig> % of amplifications were successful .

based on the observation of some pcr failures with positive control dna  and blood serum extracts when dna concentrations were low, and given the extent of sample reprocessing necessary at various pcr input dna quantities with the blood serum specimens, we suggest an input dna concentration for pcr of  <dig> pg or greater when possible. further, due to the increased noise  observed in some sequences during the development of this protocol when dna inputs for pcr were high , we recommend that highly concentrated sample extracts be diluted so that pcr input does not exceed  <dig> ng. though high quality data has been developed from higher and substantially lower dna inputs using this protocol, inputs between  <dig> pg and  <dig> ng should ensure consistent amplification success and the production of high-quality sequence data across all amplicons in the first pass of sample processing. following these dna input guidelines will accordingly reduce the opportunities for human error inherent in manual sample reprocessing and minimize the cost to generate each mtgenome haplotype.

regarding the potential for amplification of portions of the human nuclear genome , it seems highly improbable that a numt sequence would be represented in a completed mtgenome haplotype developed using this protocol. amplification of a nuclear genome sequence alone  is extremely unlikely given the abundance of mtdna relative to nuclear dna in human cells, and could reasonably only be expected to occur if mtdna were nearly or completely absent in a dna extract  <cit> . in the unlikely case that a numt were amplified in place of the mtdna target, any close inspection of the data  or attempt to assign a haplogroup to the mtgenome profile would readily indicate a problem. a more likely scenario with an overall low dna quantity sample is co-amplification of a numt with the authentic mtdna, which could occur when by chance the mtdna primers encounter a close-match nuclear dna target during the early cycles of pcr. while we did not encounter this during protocol development, it is possible that it may be observed as more samples – and particularly those with extremely low dna template quantities – are processed with this assay. however, if numt co-amplification were to happen, it would a) likely occur with only one of the eight mtgenome amplicons at a time, and b) present as a clear mixture in the sequence data for that amplicon, as the high number of positions at which two bases would be observed could not reasonably be explained by mtdna heteroplasmy.

in addition to a robust laboratory protocol and, preferably, automated rather than manual sample processing, a well-considered data analysis workflow that includes proper procedures for data interpretation and handling is essential to the generation of high quality, error-free mtdna data for forensic genetic or other purposes. for the development of complete mtgenome haplotypes we recommend adoption of the best practice alignment, nomenclature and reporting guidelines outlined for the production of mtdna cr data for forensics  <cit> . we also recommend review of the raw electropherogram data by at least two scientists and fully electronic data transfer, as described in  <cit> . further, with the use of a multi-amplicon protocol such as the one presented here, and especially if any manual processing must be performed, we suggest additional post-data production checks to confirm that each complete mtgenome haplotype represents data from a single sample.

CONCLUSIONS
we have developed a high-throughput amplification and sequencing strategy that regularly produces redundant sequence coverage across the entire mtgenome in the first pass of automated data generation. the described workflow, especially when implemented on robotic instrumentation, reduces both the cost of mtgenome sequencing and the opportunities for human error by decreasing the extent of manual sample processing/reprocessing required. as the amplification and sequencing primers were carefully selected based on highly conserved regions of the mtgenome, the protocol works equally well on samples originating from diverse mtdna haplogroups, yet minimizes the opportunity for non-specific binding that could result in numt amplification. dna input quantities between  <dig> pg and  <dig> ng are recommended to maximize first-pass data production success, however high-quality data and complete mtgenome haplotypes can be generated from substantially lower dna quantities.

this strategy should facilitate more rapid production of the complete mtgenome population reference data needed for future forensic applications, and, when combined with the adoption of best-practice data review and interpretation strategies, ensure that the data sets are of the highest quality possible. in addition, high-quality data developed using this protocol can be utilized comparatively to evaluate mtdna data produced using various next-generation sequencing chemistries and platforms, an essential first step on the path to eventual implementation of these new technologies in forensics. finally, the amplification portion of the assay also has clear application as a straight-forward method to enrich samples for mtdna for next-generation sequencing studies in any discipline.

