BACKGROUND
the power of the human adaptive immunity is realised throughout the immunoglobulins  and t cell receptors : the highly diverse antigen receptors which recognise pathogens and provide specific immune responses. until recently, studies on the structural composition of immune repertoires, receptor sequence sharing and quantitative estimation of particular b or t cell clones abundance have remained a challenge due to an extremely high diversity of ig and tr sequences: the maximal theoretical diversity of the most variable tr beta chains is estimated as 1 ×  <dig>  <cit>  and 1 ×  <dig> for the heterodimeric t cell receptor consisting of α and β chains .

next-generation sequencing  technologies have opened a new era in the field of ig and tr repertoires research, which includes the studies on adaptive immune system ageing  <cit> , immune repertoire reconstitution after therapy  <cit> , response to vaccines  <cit>  and subpopulation repertoire structure  <cit> . in addition to standard imgt/highv-quest  recent studies provided powerful tools for processing raw ig/tr ngs data: extraction of complementarity determining regions  from reads and generation of clonotype  sets , as well as advanced algorithms for the correction of pcr and sequencing errors  <cit> . however, the interpretation of tr repertoires  in terms of biological relevance requires further downstream analysis of the resultant clonotype sets.

in order to examine tr repertoires of different individuals a number of strategies can be employed such as quantifying the number of shared nucleotide and amino acid sequences between repertoires, comparisons of gene usage frequencies and repertoire diversity estimation  <cit> . only two software tools that apply a limited number of the analysis methods - mitcrviewer  <cit>  and vidjil  <cit>  are available.

here, we introduce tcr: an r package for the analysis of tr repertoires that integrates widely used methods for individual repertoires analyses and tr repertoires comparison: gene usage comparison, customisable search for clonotypes shared among repertoires, spectratyping, random tr repertoire generation, various repertoire diversity measures and other commonly used approaches to the repertoire analysis.

implementation
this section describes the input data format, methods and procedures implemented in tcr. the r package vignette presents a more detailed overview of methods included in tcr.input data and data manipulation: the input data for tcr are tab-delimited files with rows representing clonotypes and columns representing read counts, nucleotide and amino acid sequences of the cdr <dig>  names and borders of the identified v, d and j genes and the number of insertions at gene junctions. this file format is a default output of the mitcr software  <cit>  that is widely used for tr ngs data extraction and raw clonotype set generation . tr repertoires are represented in tcr as r data frames, therefore they could be easily assigned to subsets, filtered and transformed using basic and effective r subroutines.

descriptive statistics: the tcr package provides utilities for computing primary descriptive statistics for tr repertoires, including, but not limited to, counts and percentages of tr nucleotide or amino acid clonotypes, v and j gene usage, clonal count skewness and distribution of cdr <dig> sequence lengths.

shared clonotypes analysis and repertoire comparison: the tcr applies a diverse set of intersection procedures and a set of similarity measures to the compared repertoires: intersection by nucleotide or amino acid cdr <dig> sequences, jaccard index, morisita’s overlap index and sequential intersection of the most abundant clonotypes among repertoires .fig.  <dig> examples of tcr data analysis visualisation. a. heatmap of number of clonotypes with identical cdr <dig> amino acid sequences shared among individuals. b. jensen-shannon divergence of v gene usage for individual s <dig> and other individuals. c. the normalised number of identical trb cdr <dig> nucleotide sequences in the top  <dig> most abundant clonotypes,  <dig> most abundant clonotypes, etc. for each possible pair of individuals. d. v gene usage for individual s1



repertoire diversity and gene usage analysis: for the analysis of the v and j gene usage, the package employs shannon entropy measure, jensen-shannon divergence and principal component analysis. to evaluate the repertoire diversity, the effective number of types , gini and gini-simpson indices, inverse simpson index, chao <dig> index and rarefaction analysis were implemented.

visualisation procedures: the package provides a number of functions for generating plots, including heatmaps of the number of shared cdr <dig> sequences, , histograms of v and j gene usage , radar bar plots of the jensen-shannon divergence of the v gene usage among individuals  and tr length spectratyping.

artificial repertoire generation: the tcr package incorporates a procedure for artificial tr repertoire generation. generative model provided with the package has been adopted from  <cit> .



RESULTS
the rapidly increasing number of b and t cells high-throughput sequencing studies has led to the development of specialised programs able to manipulate with the specific ig and tr sequencing data . the downstream analysis of generated clonotype sets is usually performed by researchers in each lab individually using various algorithms generating diverse results and conclusions. here we made an attempt to collect the most widely used downstream processing applications in a single package to simplify the immune receptors data analysis. the r package tcr is mainly dedicated to two types of users. first, it can be utilised by the beginners in tr repertoire data analysis. we provide two alternative pipelines with automatic report generation similar to that described in  <cit>  for the analysis of either a single repertoire or a group of repertoires. second, it is suitable for needs of advanced users. with the power and flexibility of the r language and the tcr platform providing the common subroutines a user can easily employ his own analysis methods and concentrate on research without spending time on reinventing the wheel.

the existing software is mainly tailored to perform the first stage of the tr data analysis – cdr <dig> sequence extraction and clonotype sets generation. some of these programs include several simple options for downstream data processing. however this set is limited to primary descriptive statistics and restricted visualization . thus we believe that our tcr package will be useful for the researchers working with adaptive immune repertoires data. the development of such software could result in standardisation of data analysis making possible the proper interpretation of results obtained by different groups worldwide.table  <dig> comparison of tcr package with other existing tr data analysis software



case studies
tcr was applied to tr alpha  and tr beta  repertoires analysis in our recent papers. in  <cit>  we have shown distinctive properties of identical twins repertoires such as higher similarity of v and j gene usage  and an increased number of in-frame and out-of-frame cdr <dig> sequences shared among the most abundant clonotypes . in  <cit>  we demonstrate that mother and child have an increased portion of shared clonotypes with identical v genes in the shared clonotypes pool. as this study was applied to the previously obtained data no ethic committee conclusion was required.

future directions
in future we plan to continue adding new methods of repertoire comparisons, diversity estimation, to add parsers for data generated by decombinator, igblast and other software for extracting cdr <dig> sequences and aligning genes, and to optimise the package to efficiently handle large volumes of tr data for the analysis of massive repertoire data . we plan to add more options for the automatic report generation, e.g. for tracking tr repertoires dynamics.

CONCLUSIONS
the r package tcr is a platform designed for the analysis of tr repertoire data, which has two major advantages. first, it consolidates a wide spectrum of possible approaches to tr repertoire analysis in a single package. second, it offers new methods for the comparative analysis of tr repertoires. the package has been applied to the experimental ngs data and allowed to obtain valuable observations of the inter-individual similarity of tr repertoires. the developed package is providing a wide range of new opportunities for the tr repertoire data analysis.

availability and requirements
project name: tcr

project home page:http://imminfo.github.io/tcr/

operating system: platform independent

programming language: r  <cit> , c++

other requirements: r packages data.table, dplyr, ggplot <dig>  grid, gridextra, gtable, igraph, rcpp, reshape <dig>  roxygen <dig>  stringdist, utils.

license: apache v <dig>  license

any restrictions to use by non-academics: none

abbreviations
igimmunoglobulin

trt cell receptor

cdrcomplementarity determining regions

vvariable

jjoining

ddiversity

pcaprincipal component analysis

vadim i. nazarov and mikhail v. pogorelyy contributed equally to this work.

competing interests

the authors declare that they have no competing interests.

authors’ contributions

vin and mvp have written the software code. vin, ms, eak and ivz performed the review and analysis of existing software tools. mvp, eak, dab and ivz tested the package and performed the analysis of experimental data sets. vin, izm, dmc and ybl supervised the software development and prepared the manuscript. all authors read and approved the final manuscript.

this study was supported by state contract  <dig> . <dig> ; mcb program ras; rfbr grants 14-04- <dig>  13-04- <dig>  14-04-01062; mk- <dig> . <dig> and dynasty foundation fellowship to ivz; rfbr 15-34- <dig> and md- <dig> . <dig> to dmc.
