BACKGROUND
among the  <dig> protein-building amino acids, methionine has a special status. it is the first amino acid in all nascent peptides, and often retained in the mature polypeptides. methionine residues in proteins are also involved in catalytic centers  <cit>  and binding of metals, copper in particular  <cit> . however, its major role in the cell is sometimes attributed to the reactivity of its sulfur atom. methionine is highly sensitive to reactive oxygen species  that modify it covalently, yielding methionine sulfoxide in two enantiomeric forms: r- and s-. remarkably, this reaction is reversible and two non-homologous methionine sulfoxide reductases msra and msrb can restore intact methionines from the s- and r- forms, respectively . despite a long interest in this modification and repair, we still lack much understanding about the control of the cognate regulation pathway. a series of thorough analyses have been performed in enterobacteria , but our knowledge is still scarce in gram-positive organisms, despite the obvious importance of ros in pathogenicity  <cit> .

in the genome of b. subtilis, the two methionine sulfoxide reductase genes, msra and msrb , are adjacent in the chromosome and probably form an operon  <cit> . the function of these enzymes and the regulation of their synthesis have not been studied. the only experimental report related to methionine sulfoxide reductase in b. subtilis is the demonstration of msra activity in wild-type spores  <cit> . here, we report an oxidative stress induced regulation pathway of msra and msrb expression in b. subtilis and identify genes that are involved in the regulation of methionine oxidation and repair.

RESULTS
promoter localization of the msrab operon
to identify the promoter of the putative msra-msrb  operon, we mapped the transcriptional start sites of both msra and msrb genes using the 5' race method. the same transcriptional start site was detected in each case. the msra and msrb genes, which belonged to a common transcriptional unit, form therefore an operon in b. subtilis. the transcriptional start site of the msra-msrb operon is located  <dig> nt upstream of the atg translation start codon of msra and regions similar to consensus - <dig>  and - <dig>  boxes separated by  <dig> nt are found upstream of this start point . in addition, the re-sequencing of the msrab region confirmed that msra and msrb are individual genes in b. subtilis. they are separated by a taa stop codon .

the effect of oxidative stress on expression of the msrab operon
the physiological role of msra and msrb in vivo is protection against oxidative damage  <cit> . however, in most of the bacteria investigated so far, the expression of msra has not been shown to be induced by oxidative stress  <cit> . to our knowledge, only two reports show an unambiguous regulatory effect of oxidative stress: the expression of msra from xanthomonas campestris pv. phaseoli  <cit>  and helicobacter pylori  <cit>  is strongly induced by exposure to oxidants. to study the regulation of the msrab operon in b. subtilis in response to oxidative stress, we used lacz as a sensitive reporter of gene expression.

h2o <dig> had no effect on the expression of either a msra::lacz fusion or a msrb::lacz fusion even at a concentration of  <dig> mm, which resulted in growth inhibition, while a 2-fold increase of a peroxide inducible kata::lacz fusion expression was detected here in the presence of  <dig> μm h2o <dig> as previously reported  <cit> . in contrast, the addition of  <dig> μm pq to the culture medium led to a  <dig> -fold induction of the expression of the msra::lacz fusion as compared to the level observed in the absence of the oxidizing agent . another superoxide generating molecule, diamide, had no effect , prompting us to explore in some more depth the pq effect, which was further confirmed by real time rt-pcr assays, with a 8-fold increase of the quantity of the msra mrna after pq treatment . this induction factor is higher than that obtained with lacz fusions, possibly because of the β-galactosidase sensitivity to pq treatment. thus, under the conditions tested in this study, the expression of the msrab operon in b. subtilis was induced by pq but not by h2o <dig>  indicating the existence of a specific pq-responsive regulation in b. subtilis.

the global thiol stress response regulator spx participates in pq-specific induction of the msrab operon
to identify regulators that may be responsible for the pq-induced enhancement of msrab expression, we studied the possible involvement of some previously reported oxidative stress response regulators in b. subtilis.

spx is a global thiol stress response regulator in b. subtilis, and higher msra expression has been observed in a transcriptome analysis when the spx protein was maintained at a high concentration in vivo  <cit> . we tested the expression of the msra gene in a spx mutant by real time rt-pcr assays. in the absence of oxidative stress, the msra expression levels in strain bsy <dig>  and in the wild-type strain were similar . this result was not surprising because spx was barely detectable in the wild-type strain under these conditions  <cit> . however, in the spx mutant, the pq-specific induction of msra expression was reduced to approximately 50% of that observed in the spx wild-type strain  as shown by real time rt-pcr assays. therefore, spx was involved in a part of the pq-specific induction of msra expression. interestingly, compared to the wild-type strain, the spx mutant is extremely sensitive to pq , suggesting that spx participates directly or indirectly in pq response in b. subtilis. as reported previously, while present at a low level in the wild type, the spx protein accumulates to a high concentration in a b. subtilis clpx mutant  <cit> . to substantiate the involvement of spx in the regulation of the msrab operon, we measured the expression of msra in a clpx nullbackground or in a clpx and spx double mutant using real time rt-pcr . the quantity of the msra transcript increased 3-fold in the clpx mutant as compared to that in the wild-type strain. however, the expression of the msra transcript in the clpx and spx double mutant was similar to that in the wild-type strain. this indicates that spx is required for the increased expression of msra observed in the clpx mutant, supporting our finding that the spx protein takes part in pq induced msra expression.

the increased expression of msra observed in the clpx mutant suggested that the pq challenge could lead to an increase of the spx protein concentration in vivo. indeed, our real time rt-pcr experiment showed a 6-fold increased expression of the spx gene after  <dig> μm pq treatment . however, no significant change of the spx amount in the cells was identified after pq challenge when compared to the dramatic accumulation of spx in a clpx mutant by western blotting analysis . this suggests that some other mechanism than simply the quantity of the spx protein is involved in the increase in msra expression.

the cxxc motif of spx is essential for the activation of msrab operon expression following pq challenge
it has been proposed that the transcriptional activation effect of spx on trxa and trxb expression could be due to the formation of an intra-molecular disulfide bond generated by oxidation of the two cysteine residues in the cxxc motif of the protein  <cit> . this prompted us to test the involvement of the spx cxxc motif in the pq-induced activation of the msrab operon.

to this purpose, the msra expression was tested by real time rt-pcr assays in a spx mutant that contained either the wild-type spx gene or the spx gene with a modified cxxc motif expressed under the control of a xylose inducible pxyl promoter . after pq treatment, the msra expression was induced  <dig> -fold in the presence of the wild-type spx gene  . in contrast, the pq induction was reduced to  <dig> -fold in the presence of the spx gene containing an axxa motif   as observed in the spx mutant . with pq treatment, the expression of msra in the presence of spx containing an axxa motif behaved like that of the spx null strain, indicating that the cxxc motif of spx was required for the pq-specific induction of the msrab operon.

the cxxc motif of spx was modified after pq treatment
in many cases, cxxc motifs in proteins are highly sensitive to oxidants and can work as regulatory switches  <cit> . therefore, this motif in spx might be modified after pq treatment to work as a regulatory switch.

to test this hypothesis, we monitored the status of the spx protein following pq challenge. to this purpose, we constructed strain bsy <dig>  which contains a translational fusion between spx and a ha-tag codons expressed under the control of a xylose inducible pxyl promoter. the spx-ha fusion protein was detected by western blotting analysis with an antibody against the ha-tag. similar analysis was performed using strains producing spx-ha proteins modified in the cxxc motif: strain bsy <dig> , strain bsy <dig>  and strain bsy <dig> . to show that the ha tag did not interfere with the function of spx, we verified that the presence of the ha-tag did not modify the spx-dependent regulation of msra expression during pq stress .

in the western blot , two strong signal bands obtained in the  <dig> kda region in each lane were non-specific bands , and three forms of spx-ha proteins  were detected compared to the negative control without a spx-ha tagged protein . the major band corresponded to the predicted molecular mass of spx-ha  while two additional forms named spx-m <dig> and spx-m <dig> appeared in the higher molecular mass region . interestingly, after pq treatment , the amount of spx-m <dig> significantly increased but the amount of the native spx and to a less extend of the spx-m <dig> decreased as compared to the untreated sample . similar patterns were observed with spx10a  and spx13a  proteins. in both cases, pq treatment led to an increase of the amount of spx10a-m <dig> and spx13a-m <dig> forms. in contrast, no spx-m <dig> or spx-m <dig> forms were detected for the spx10a13a protein with and without pq treatment . these results strongly suggested that pq treatment led to a post-translational modification of spx involving the cysteine rich motif  and that at least one cysteine residue of the cxxc motif was required for the pq mediated modification of spx. we then studied the time course of changes in spx in vivo after pq treatment. as shown in fig. 5b, a  <dig> minute treatment led to the highest amount of spx-m <dig>  in vivo. the amount of spx-m <dig> further decreased until it totally disappeared at six hours after treatment while the spx-m <dig> accumulated between four and six hours . in parallel, the amount of the native form of spx decreased to reach the lowest level one hour after treatment , then started to increase . at six hours, it reached a level similar to that detected before pq treatment . therefore, both the modified form of spx and the native spx showed dynamic changes in vivo after a pq treatment.

in many cases, oxidative reagents modify the cxxc motifs of proteins through the formation of disulfide bonds  <cit> . this modification is reversible in vitro after incubation with reducing reagents, such as dtt  <cit> . therefore, we tested whether pq induced modification of the cxxc motif of spx could be reversed by dtt. the total cellular extracts of strain bsy <dig> obtained after a pq treatment were incubated with or without  <dig> mm dtt for different time. interestingly, the spx-m <dig> form of spx did not disappear after dtt treatment under the conditions tested  indicating that this modification is unlikely to be mediated by disulfide bonds formation.

discussion
factors involved in the regulation of msra and msrb genes in bacteria are still largely unknown  <cit> . in the present study, we demonstrated that the expression of the msrab operon in b. subtilis was significantly induced under pq-mediated oxidative stress conditions . pq is an oxidant that is commonly recognized to generate superoxide in vivo. it may also generate other ros, including singlet oxygen. however, in our experiments a msrab mutant was not more sensitive to pq, h2o <dig>  or diamide treatment than the wild-type strain , suggesting that methionine sulfoxide reductases in b. subtilis are not the key enzymesagainst oxidative stresses. remarkably, in our hands, msrab expression was not regulated by h2o <dig> oxidative stress . the finding that the response to pq and h2o <dig> induced oxidative stresses differ is in line with some previous observations in different bacterial species. for example, the oxidant-induced expression of msra in x. campestris varies according to the nature of the oxidants used  <cit> . furthermore, in b. subtilis many genes were reported to selectively respond either to pq or to h2o <dig>  <cit> . similar to the situation of the msrab operon, the expression of cysk and other genes involved in cysteine metabolism is only induced by pq but not by h2o <dig>  <cit> . perr, the specific peroxide responsive regulator in b. subtilis, is not involved in the regulation of the msrab operon, in agreement with previous results indicating that msrab does not belong to the perr regulon  <cit> . in addition, a peroxide induced sigma b-dependent regulation of msrab seems unlikely since no sigma b promoter is found upstream of the msrab operon .

in the present study, we showed that spx, a global transcriptional regulator of the disulfide specific oxidative stress response in b. subtilis plays a central role in the pq-specific induction of msrab expression. surprisingly, diamide, a reagent that causes disulfide stress in organisms, did not induce the expression of msrab in all the conditions tested, while we found a complex involvement of spx, originally identified as a disulfide stress regulator . this finding seems to be in contradiction with the fact of the participation of spx in the pq induced expression of msrab. several reasons might account for that observation:  disulfide bond formation might not involve in this pq induced expression of msrab ;  spx could respond to other oxidative stress beside disulfide stress;  the expression of spx is regulated in a particularly complex way, with effectors that might compensate each other action on msrab expression  <cit> . as a case in point, the spx mutant showed more sensitivity to pq treatment compared to the wild-type stain .

in line with , the spx mediated regulatory effect on msrab is only partial since pq has a residual induction effect on msra in a spx mutant . therefore, besides spx, there were some unidentified pq responding factors regulating msrab expression, or pq could affect msrab mrna stability in vivo. more studies are required to unravel the processes underlying these complex effects.

further experiments indicated that the pq effect on spx occurs at the post-translational level and that the cxxc motif of spx may be a target of pq oxidation because this motif was essential for the pq-induced enhancement of the msra expression mediated by spx . this hinted the possibility that pq activates spx through an oxidative modification of its cxxc motif.

interestingly, pq challenge brought a significantly increased amount of a new form of spx, spx-m <dig>  this form, which has an apparent mass  <dig> da higher than that of the native spx, probably corresponds to a post-translational modification of spx . the spx-m <dig> form is still observed with spx10a or spx13a but disappears in a strain producing the spx10a13a protein. this indicates the requirement for at least one of the two cysteines of the cxxc motif to observe the pq-induced modification of spx. so far, we failed to purify sufficient amounts of spx-m <dig> in b. subtilis to identify the nature of this modification. since the amount of spx-m <dig> only showed a moderate change in all the conditions tested here, extensive studies on spx-m <dig> will be carried out in a further work.

in xanthomonas campestris, a cysteine motif of the ohrr regulator that senses hydroperoxides is modified as cysteine-sulfenic acid which rapidly reacts with another cysteine of the protein  <cit> . the ohrr regulator of b. subtilis has recently been shown to be modified in the same way after oxidative stress with the formation of a disulfide bond  between the cys <dig> of ohrr and a new but still uncharacterized low molecular mass motif of  <dig> da  <cit> . this chemical modification has also been detected in bacillus anthracis  <cit> . in the present report the size increase of spx after pq treatment could correspond to the same sulfenic acid modification followed by reaction with a thiol present in the cytoplasm of b. subtilis, playing the role of glutathione in other bacteria. however, since the pq modified form of spx is resistant to dtt under the conditions tested , a modification by s-thiolation seems unlikely. we cannot exclude that a derivative of pq might have reacted with an activated thiol of spx. finally, we could not completely rule out the possibility that conformational changes brought by pq could be responsible for the different forms of spx detected. in any event, the direct covalent modification or conformational modification of spx seems to be removed in vivo, and the amount of native spx also showed a dynamic change after pq treatment . in more details, with short pq treatment time, the native spx showed no much changes , but longer pq treatment seemed to trigger the degradation of the native spx in vivo , which fits observations reported previously on the effects of oxidative stress on proteins in vivo, which is causing protein degradation  <cit> . it appears that subsequent to a degradative process spx was regenerated in vivo after the cells have adapted to the pq treatment . these facts suggested that spx protein experienced complex processes of modification, degradation and regeneration in vivo following pq treatment.

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, this study reports a spx mediated pq-specific regulation pathway of the msrab operon in b. subtilis. pq induces the expression of msrab partially through its possible oxidation of the spx cxxc motif. more studies are expected to discover the molecular mechanism of pq-induced modification of spx as well as other factors involved in the pq-specific induction of the msrab operon.

