BACKGROUND
the powdery mildew fungus blumeria graminis is an obligate biotrophic pathogen of cereals. it has significant impact on cereal crops that are central for food security such as wheat  and barley  and is an experimental model for powdery mildew fungi in general as well as for other obligate biotrophic plant pathogens
 <cit> . here we research the barley pathogen b. graminis f. sp. hordei. its infection process starts when a spore lands on a leaf, germinates, forms an appressorium and attempts plant cell penetration. the penetrating hypha produces a specialized feeding organ, the haustorium, in the host epidermal cell. the haustorium remains surrounded by a plant-derived extra-haustorial membrane. between the haustorium and the extra-haustorial membrane there is an extra-haustorial matrix, which is the interface between the two organisms. both the plant and the fungus are dedicated to secretory warfare and the extra-haustorial matrix is believed to represent a major battleground
 <cit> . effector proteins are defined as molecules that alter host cell structure or function, and thereby facilitate infection and/or trigger defence responses
 <cit> . effectors are therefore assumed to be secreted by the pathogen. in plant pathogenic fungi, they are broadly divided into apoplastic and cytoplasmic effectors depending on their final destination in the host. apoplastic effectors often exhibit inhibitory activity against extracellular host hydrolytic enzymes  and are typically small and highly cysteine-rich secreted proteins
 <cit> . most cytoplasmic effector proteins have been identified through their avirulence functions, i.e. based on their genotype-specific recognition by matching plant resistance  proteins. little is known about their direct host targets; some have a functional nuclear localization signal  suggesting a nuclear target
 <cit> . godfrey and co-workers recently identified  <dig> effector candidates based on a cdna library prepared from barley epidermis containing haustoria
 <cit> . all these effector candidates share an n-terminal amino acid motif named yxc, consisting of a conserved aromatic amino acid  followed by any amino acid and then a cysteine. seventy-one of these b. graminis effector candidates were verified experimentally in the haustorial proteome present specifically in the epidermis of infected plants, of which  <dig> contain the yxc motif
 <cit> . the observation that only three candidate effector proteins were found in the proteome of isolated haustoria, in the preparation of which secreted proteins are mostly likely to be washed away
 <cit> , provides indirect evidence that these candidate effectors are indeed secreted by the fungus. as one outcome of the recent sequencing of the b. graminis genome, we reported the annotation of  <dig> candidates for secreted effector proteins , de-fined as proteins with a predicted signal peptide, but no transmembrane domain and no homology to proteins outside the erysiphales 
 <cit> . here we provide a global survey of the cseps in the b. graminis genome, transcriptome and proteome. we studied their predicted structures and putative functions, and explored evidence for selection acting on their diversification. based on the results of these analyses we discuss how these key proteins may have evolved in the interplay with the host systems.

RESULTS
genome annotation and family clustering of csep paralogs
initially, we aimed at determining a comprehensive set of all b. graminis cseps. to achieve this, we followed two complementary strategies: we first mined the b. graminis genome by iterative blast searches using previously identified cseps as query sequences
 <cit> . we then performed open reading frame  prediction in combination with signalp analysis based on whole transcriptome shotgun sequencing  data . after three rounds of iteration we identified  <dig> manually annotated cseps including the  <dig> predicted previously
 <cit>  . based on markov clustering  analysis,  <dig> of the predicted  <dig> cseps were grouped into  <dig> families . approximately 50% of the families have two to ten members , and seven families are comprised of eleven or more members . cseps make up a considerable proportion of the large protein families in b. graminis, as this fungus only has a total of  <dig> protein families of ten or more members estimated by mcl-based clustering of the entire theoretically determined b. graminis proteome
 <cit> . most families harboring cseps are nearly exclusively comprised of effector candidates, but the largest csep-containing family encompasses only ~50% cseps. the remaining members of the latter family lack a significant signalp score for a canonical n-terminal signal peptide, suggesting either false-negative predictions or functional diversification within this protein family. in addition to the mcl-based family grouping, we conducted neighbor-joining phylogenetic analysis of the  <dig> cseps and established a circos plot
 <cit>  , which illustrates their relatedness as a dendrogram. owing to the high sequence diversity amongst the cseps this approach does not accurately resolve their phylogenetic relationships, but rather visualizes clusters of similar sequences within the csep superfamily. bootstrap analysis indicates largely reliable family classification, while the relatedness of the families amongst each other is less well determined . the clades resolved by two independent methods  are largely congruent, indicating robustness of the overall family groupings. even though, by the definition used in the context of this study, the cseps do not have evident homologs outside powdery mildew fungi, we inspected their amino acid sequences for signatures of known protein domains. interproscan analysis combined with gene ontology  categorization revealed that  <dig> cseps are similar to proteins with rna binding and/or ribonuclease activity , while nine have predicted coiled coil domains . such similarities to rna binding/ribonuclease activity were found in  <dig> of the  <dig> members of mcl family  <dig> and in  <dig> of the  <dig> members of mcl family  <dig>  the remaining  <dig> of these cseps are scattered across eleven other families . we then searched for csep homologs within the erysiphales by examining the proteomes derived from sequenced genomes of golovinomyces orontii and erysiphe pisi representing two other genera in this order
 <cit> . this revealed that  <dig> of the b. graminis cseps are similar  to proteins encoded by golovinomyces orontii , erysiphe pisi  or both . interspecies amino acid sequence identities of these ranged from 31% to 73% with an average of 48%. these  <dig> b. graminis cseps are mainly unrelated singletons, widely distributed across the phylogenetic tree . this result is consistent with the previous analysis of  <dig> cseps
 <cit> , and it further underscores rapid evolution and diversification of cseps in powdery mildew genomes.

the  <dig> csep families with four or more members. the table summarizes data from gene- and protein expression as well as protein length, conserved cysteines, yxc-motif and detection of positive selection within each family. data of families showing positive selection in the overall z-test are indicated in bold fonts. a table with more extensive details of the csep family analysis is provided in the additional files . 1) indicates the type motif in the n-terminus of the mature protein 2) the presence of a cysteine close to the c-terminus and the distance to the c-terminus is indicated in brackets 3) number of conserved cysteines in the mature protein. 4) length of proteins : the average lengths of the proteins were calculated for each family. 5) gene expression ratio in haustorial samples versus epiphytic samples, calculated as averages for each family. 6) percentages of cseps in each family found only in haustoria-samples by proteome analysis. 7) numbers of pairs with significant positive selection  compared to the total number of pairs within each family. 8) family averages of mean ka/ks-values calculated on the mature proteins.

most cseps are predominantly expressed in haustoria
many  of the cseps are represented in expressed sequence tag  collections available in databases . the est sets with the highest proportion of csep transcripts are derived from cdnas from haustoria-containing epidermis
 <cit>  and  <dig> cseps  were found in these est collections . in order to further characterize the csep expression patterns and validate their annotation, we analyzed rnaseq data obtained from two separate b. graminis tissues isolated at  <dig> d after inoculation:  haustoria-containing plant epidermis and  epiphytic structures
 <cit> . ninety-seven percent  of the csep show clear evidence of expression in one or both of these structures . expression ratios in haustoria versus epiphytic structures revealed that most csep rnas were significantly more abundant in the haustorial samples , including  <dig> out of  <dig> csep rnas that were at least 10-times more abundant in haustoria . by contrast, in families  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> the majority of genes showed similar transcript levels in both fungal tissues. interestingly, the csep rnas not assigned to specific families  were also expressed at similar levels in the two samples. a large-scale mass spectrometry-based proteomics approach allowed us to map peptides derived from expressed proteins on the b. graminis genome, validating orf models through the experimental evidence of protein accumulation
 <cit> . moreover, revisiting the previously analyzed proteomes of haustoria-containing epidermis and epiphytic structures
 <cit> , using updated genomic information, revealed the existence of  <dig> cseps at the protein level . of these,  <dig> cseps  were only detected in the haustoria-containing epidermis.

selection for diversity has operated in the evolution of b. graminis cseps
we analysed nucleotide sequence diversity in coding and non-coding sequences of csep paralogs. unexpectedly, we observed that many cseps diverged more markedly in the coding regions. for example, we noticed that the sequences in families  <dig> and  <dig> are strikingly more different in the two exons than in the intron and the up- and down-stream non-coding regions . we then used three different approaches to test whether positive diversifying or purifying selection has operated during the evolution of related cseps . this analysis assessed which amino acids in a family varied by random drift from those that have been subjected to purifying or diversifying selection. we expected purifying selection in the n-terminal signal peptide domains based on the need to maintain secretion and considered this as a positive control in our analyses. in general, there was good agreement between the three types of approaches. however, in some cases, we only found substantial evidence of positive diversifying selection for a small number of codons, and this was often not sufficient to make the z-test based on the entire orfs significant. overall, we found strongest evidence for diversifying selection in families  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  but also statistically significant diversification in families  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> . in these  <dig> families, representing  <dig> members, diversifying selection was a general trend. however, even in the three largest families, where purifying selection was dominant, there are individual residues that seem to have been under diversifying selection. especially in family  <dig>  there is a stretch of  <dig> amino acids showing signs of positive selection, while family  <dig> has  <dig> codons in several domains with diversifying selection scattered along the protein . we then analyzed the relationships between csep length, the degree of inferred positive diversifying selection and transcript accumulation in haustoria based on the respective average for each family. we found that the csep families form two clearly separated groups: one group contains shorter proteins with a preference for haustorial expression and with most families showing strong evidence of positive diversifying selection. the second group includes longer proteins with less evidence of differential expression and less overall positive diversifying selection . the analyses also demonstrate that there has been purifying selection in all families. this is expected especially in the region encoding the predicted signal peptides and in some conserved motifs or specific amino acids . in some families  we detected only purifying selection. in other examples , the n-terminal part of the mature proteins is highly conserved and has been under strong purifying selection, while the c-terminal region appears to have been under positive diversifying selection. the most conserved amino acids are generally proline, glycine and cysteine . these amino acids confer structural properties to proteins by providing fixed angle bends, sharp angle bends and opportunity for disulphide bonds, respectively.
http://services.cbu.uib.no/tools/kaks. branches in red indicate a significant positive selection. d: 3d protein models of two family  <dig> members are shown and the amino acids under positive diversifying selection are highlighted in red.

protein structural analyses
since by selection the cseps had little sequence similarity  to any protein previously structurally or functionally characterized, we carried out structural annotation using protein fold recognition methods
 <cit> , to search for potential relationships based on predicted structure . the results of this structural annotation indicate that all cseps had comparatively low values for mean lengths, mean proportion disorder, mean maximum length of disorder, mean model quality and mean number of domains . for example, compared with a random set of  <dig> proteins only detected in the epiphytic hyphae, all values are significantly lower in the cseps. when we control for length, all values are lower except for length and number of domains. overall there are no statistically significant differences  model quality) between cseps, proteins found in haustoria and infected epidermis and known fungal effector proteins. ribonuclease template assignments are significantly overrepresented in cseps compared with all other sets apart from proteins found in haustoria and infected epidermis  and in a set of  <dig> proteins selected at random from yeast, where there is no significant difference with this data . furthermore, assignments to hydrolase templates are significantly overrepresented in cseps compared with proteins from hyphae and a random set of yeast proteins . we mapped the position of the residues predicted to be under statistically significant positive diversifying selection pressure onto the predicted 3d models of the proteins. we observed a variety of scenarios exemplified by the following case studies. the highest quality 3d models generated for csep family  <dig>  are all predicted to have approximately similar folds and were generated using ribonucleases as the top identified structural templates. the positions of the residues calculated to be under positive diversifying selection mostly occupy the surface of the globular structures . furthermore, these amino acids are located mostly within the loop regions of the structures, whilst the α-helix and β-strand secondary structural elements  are more conserved and contain residues under purifying selection. in other cases , the more variable regions are located in α-helices and β-strands and residues under diversifying selection are buried in regions more likely to lead to changes in folding . the models generated for other families are shown in additional files
18c-e .

most cseps harbor conserved cysteines, including n-terminal yxc-motifs, and most of these are predicted to form disulphide bonds
we compared the cseps against the known fungal effectors and b. graminis proteins that were found only in haustoria and infected epidermis, as well as the yeast and hyphae controls sets. the parameters measured were: length , amino acid frequency , coiled-coil composition, transmembrane  helix composition , low complexity regions, frequency of helical residues, frequency of strand residues and frequency of loop residues. we found that particular amino acids  and loop residues are significantly overrepresented in cseps, while several other amino acids  are significantly underrepresented . the similarity between cseps, known fungal effectors and b. graminis proteins found only in haustoria and infected epidermis is particularly striking with regard to the significantly higher frequency of cysteine residues. manual inspection of multiple amino acid alignments of the csep families revealed that the cysteines are generally conserved and most families  had an even number of cysteines .

many cseps  contain the previously described yxc-motif within the first  <dig> amino acids of the mature protein sequence 
 <cit> . the frequencies of the three variants of this motif, yxc, fxc and wxc, are 47%, 49% and 4%, respectively. of the  <dig> cseps without an n-terminal yxc-motif, there are  <dig> without any cysteine in the mature protein. in the remaining  <dig> cseps,  <dig> have a yxc-motif further towards the c-terminus. the latter is typical of the longer cseps . most cseps contain a cysteine close to the c-terminus. for example, 83% of the  <dig> cseps with an n-terminal yxc motif also have a cysteine within the last  <dig> c-terminal amino acids. in 65% of those, the cysteine occurred within ten amino acids from the c-terminus, preferably in positions four to seven . of the non-yxc cseps, only 26% have a cysteine within ten amino acids from the c-terminus. the majority  of all cseps have at least two cysteines and thus in principle they have the capacity to form a minimum of one disulphide bond. this overrepresentation of cysteines and their conserved pattern prompted us to predict disulphide bonds using the tool disulfide bonding state and connectivity predictor “disulfind”
 <cit> , which previously has been used for prediction of disulphide bonds in effector candidates
 <cit> . we found that 69% of all possible disulfide bonds are predicted to be formed .

many cseps show relatedness to ribonucleases
the interproscan analysis revealed that  <dig> cseps  show affinity to ribonucleases/ribotoxins . also the intfold structural analysis  indicated that many cseps matched ribonuclease structural templates, particularly those of two well-characterized ribonucleases: t <dig> from aspergillus oryzae  and u <dig> from ustilago sphaerogena . thirty-seven cseps from many different families have top models of medium or high score in this category. thus, two fundamentally different but complementary methods  indicate the relatedness of a considerable subset of the cseps to ribonucleases. based on the two procedures, we found that, across the phylogenetic tree, a total of  <dig> cseps, representing  <dig> different families and seven cseps not assigned to families, show similarity to ribonucleases, of which  <dig> were predicted by interproscan,  <dig> by intfold and  <dig> by both approaches . we aligned consensus sequences obtained from nine of these csep families with the well-described aspergillus t <dig> ribonuclease and a consensus sequence generated from several other ribonucleases. in this multiple sequence alignment, we observed considerable similarity between cseps and ribonucleases at the level of the primary amino acid sequence, and we identified approximately eight to nine positions that are highly conserved . moreover, the intron between the first and second exon of the ten csep families is at the same relative position. the predicted folds of some of the cseps are highly similar to that of ribonuclease t <dig>  showing that, even though their amino acid identities are only about 20%, their predicted 3d structures are well conserved. it is also noteworthy that the native ribonuclease fold includes a disulphide bond as predicted in many of the cseps , further strengthening the degree of similarity between these proteins. overall, this suggests that these families may have a common origin. despite the similarities, it seems likely that the ribonuclease activity was lost in these cseps, since well-known active site residues are absent .
 <cit> . catalytic active site residues in ribonucleases are indicated in red. intron position is indicated by a red vertical dashed line; there is one exception, one member of family  <dig> does not have this intron. amino acid numberings are the ranges for each family. upper case letters indicate highly conserved positions, while lower case letters indicate that the positions are present in some of the family members only. omega  is used for aromatic amino acids , and psi  is used for v, l and i. letters in bold indicate that the positions are under purifying selection. dots indicate non-conserved positions and dashes are gaps. b: 3d models of ribonuclease t <dig> and three cseps and their superposition. arrows indicate the predicted disulphide bonds between the n- and c-terminal cysteines.

csep family members cluster in the b. graminis genome
the existence of discernible csep families suggests frequent gene duplication events during evolution of the b. graminis genome. to obtain clues about the underlying molecular mechanisms, we studied how cseps are organized in the genome. we analyzed in detail the distribution of  <dig> cseps belonging to  <dig> families, including the  <dig> largest families. we found that  <dig> genes  are clustered family-wise on individual genomic sequence scaffolds . in some families most or all genes reside on a single scaffold. for example, six out of the seven genes in family  <dig> cluster on one scaffold, and in family  <dig> we found that  <dig> out of the  <dig> genes cluster on one scaffold within  <dig> kb . the clusters with 2– <dig> members are on average  <dig> kb long and the mean distance between clustered cseps is  <dig> kb. in  <dig> cases gene-pairs are direct neighbors, separated by only 2– <dig> kb. surprisingly, however, the most closely positioned gene pairs do not always encode the most closely related cseps. a comprehensive analysis of the distribution of all cseps showed that they are spread throughout the genome , but two thirds of the  <dig> cseps located on  <dig> major sequence scaffolds were clustered family-wise . the b. graminis genome is very rich in repetitive dna sequences
 <cit>  and two very frequent and widespread retro-transposons, egh <dig> and eg-r <dig>  were previously characterized
 <cit> . during genome annotation, we often noticed that cseps are embedded in regions flagged as repetitive dna
 <cit> . we further studied the three csep families already found to have highly similar  <dig> bp regions upstream and downstream of their exons in order to investigate how far the sequence similarities extend . six of the ten family  <dig> members cluster on the same sequence scaffold as three pairs with more than 99% identity within the pairs, indicating recent gene-duplications. the very high sequence similarity extended only  <dig> kb or less up- and downstream of the coding region. further away, most of the genes were flanked by one of the two sine-type retro-transposons, egh <dig> or eg-r <dig>  but here the similarity is much lower than in the csep coding region and their up- and downstream regions . there is an abrupt change in the level of identity from approximately 97– <dig> % to 90% or below at the point where the sequence of the two retro-transposons starts. this pattern indicated that local duplication events between the retro-transposons are likely to have taken place by unequal crossover, possibly mediated by the repetitive dna sequences including a high-copy repeat previously identified in the wheat powdery mildew fungus . in addition to this case, four highly similar csep gene pairs from families  <dig> and  <dig> were analyzed for the content of the flanking genomic regions and again repetitive dna sequences were present close to the csep genes and the patterns are to some extent conserved between the paralogs. however, in these instances it was not possible to identify an exact breakpoint using the level of sequence similarity as it was for family  <dig> . the flanking genomic regions of several other highly similar csep pairs were analyzed. in general they are surrounded by repetitive dna sequences and regions of high sequence similarity only extended ~ <dig> kb or less up- and downstream of the exons.

discussion
here we report the identification of  <dig> cseps in the b. graminis genome, nearly doubling the number previously described
 <cit> . we explored systematically the evidence that the proteins encoded by these genes have effector-like properties using bioinformatics tools and expression studies. this work will facilitate the future investigation of their functional relevance in the interaction between the fungus and its host barley
 <cit> . the typically short orfs, the unrelatedness of their gene products to known proteins and the tight association of cseps with retro-transposons  render the identification of cseps in the large and highly repetitive b. graminis f.sp. hordei genome a challenging task. although our bioinformatics pipeline converged after three rounds of iteration on a set of  <dig> cseps, suggesting saturation, we cannot exclude the possibility that some cseps escaped our attention and are missing in the present analysis. since we deliberately focussed our csep prediction on genes coding for proteins with no recognizable counterparts outside the powdery mildews, we also cannot exclude that some proteins with n-terminal secretion signal and identifiable sequence similarity to polypeptides in other species  exert an effector function during b. graminis pathogenesis. the clustering of cseps into families of paralogs  suggests that cseps have gone through iterated rounds of gene duplications during evolution, and some of them are now amongst the largest gene families in b. graminis; in fact, overall cseps represent >7% of the protein coding genes in the b. graminis genome. this is a remarkable testimony to the importance of cseps in the powdery mildew fungi, particularly when taken together with the loss of a large number of conventional ascomycete genes and reduction in gene family size observed in this fungus
 <cit> . since very few cseps have recognizable orthologs in the genomes of the two powdery mildew fungi, golovinomyces orontii and erysiphe pisi, representing other genera, we conclude that proliferation of cseps occurred after the separation of b. graminis from the dicotyledonous plant-infecting mildew lineage some  <dig> million years ago
 <cit> . cseps have since undergone rapid evolution and diversification. it will be interesting to correlate the cseps to orthologs in other b. graminis “formae speciales”, for example the wheat mildew fungus b. graminis f.sp. tritici, to relate csep differentiation with the evolution of host specificity and analyse the variation between cseps of extant isolates
 <cit> .

expression of effectors in the interaction between the obligate biotroph b. graminis and its host is expected to occur either in the appressorium and penetration peg or in the haustorium to be able to manipulate the plant. indeed, we found that a large fraction of the cseps showed a significantly higher expression in haustoria compared to the epiphytic tissue isolated at five days after inoculation . this was further corroborated by the observation that expression of more than two thirds of the  <dig> cseps identified as proteins by mass spectrometry was only detected in haustorium-containing epidermis . in general, there was a clear congruence between the est, the rnaseq expression and proteome data. haustorium-specific effector expression is expected in order to suppress defence throughout the fungal life cycle
 <cit> . on the other hand, we also predict that some cseps may be expressed very early during penetration and these might already be present in the germinating conidia and exert their function before haustoria are formed. unfortunately, there is only limited transcript data available from conidia at the stage of penetration, but maybe the larger cseps , belonging to the three largest families and in general showing low transcript levels  have functions at the earlier stages during infection. here a low relative abundance may suffice due to the narrowly focussed area at the tip of the penetration hypha where the protein needs to act.

diversification through positive selection for amino acid changes has occurred in many of the families of paralogs and points to adaptive modifications . these may have resulted in increased virulence and/or avoidance of r-protein mediated recognition. measuring positive diversifying selection is only possible in families where the coding sequences can be aligned with sufficient confidence and many of the cseps have diverged so much that they are too different for a reliable analysis. we may therefore have underestimated the degree of positive selection across the csep superfamily. in any case, the incidence of diversifying selection found here shows that it is a widespread and fundamental process in the evolution of b. graminis cseps as also demonstrated in other plant pathogenic plant pathogens
 <cit> . however, we also find families  showing only purifying selection. in these cases, csep evolution evidently favoured conserved structures to exert their functions. the csep families can be grouped in two main categories based on a number of characteristics . one group includes approximately  <dig> short cseps. these: 1) are typically  <dig> to  <dig> amino acids long; 2) have the strongest preferential transcript and protein accumulation in haustoria; 3) often have codons that show evidence of diversifying-selection, perhaps because they may be functioning in close interaction with plant targets and the r-protein surveillance system; 4) usually have only two or three cysteines and are thus not cysteine-rich as many apoplastic effectors suggesting that they may act inside the host cells. the other group of families comprises about  <dig> cseps, including those in the three largest families  and several smaller families, and shares the following features: 1) they are relatively long cseps ; 2) they do not show high preferential expression in haustoria; 3) they have few codons subjected to positive diversifying selection, but in contrast they have many codons that have experienced pronounced purifying selection; 4) they often have several conserved cysteines predicted to form disulphide bonds in an oxidizing environment. the latter characteristic might indicate that their host targets are localized in the apoplast or extra-haustorial matrix
 <cit> . the structure prediction studies and 3d modelling showed that cseps generally have similar characteristics as known effectors described in other fungi
 <cit>  and the proteins are detected preferentially in b. graminis haustoria in infected epidermis
 <cit> . on average, the global model quality scores for the generated 3d models were in most cases poor or low , which is expected since most cseps had distant or no detectable homology to known template structures. however, a number of the structural models were of medium  and high  confidence, and when the amino acid residues under positive selection were mapped on these models, they are often in the loop regions predicted to be exposed and thus possibly available for interactions with other proteins as part of their effector functions . it will be interesting to discover whether experimental determination of the 3d structure of these proteins confirms these predictions, particularly regarding the relative position of the residues under diversifying-selection.

 the cysteine frequency is higher in cseps than in average b. graminis proteins. however, it is much lower than that found among the cysteine-rich secreted proteins from melampsora larici-populina <cit>  and apoplastic cysteine-rich effectors from cladosporium fulvum <cit> . the highest conserved cysteine frequency in b. graminis cseps, found in family  <dig>  is only  <dig> % and the presence of the cysteine in the yxc motif contributes significantly to the higher frequency of this amino acid in the cseps compared to other b. graminis proteins. it has been suggested that the many cysteines of the m. larici-populina effectors are important for the overall fold topology rather than for resistance towards degradation in the apoplast
 <cit> . however, given the conservation of the disulphide bond in the ribonuclease fold, it is most likely that this motif is important for protein stability
 <cit> . our analysis shows a similar picture although in the cseps it is not only cysteines, but also other commonly conserved amino acids  that are predicted to contribute to structural properties.

the yxc-motif, first found in b. graminis cseps
 <cit> , is a common motif among effector candidates also in rust fungi, such as puccinia graminis f.sp. tritici <cit> , p. striiformis f.sp. tritici <cit>  and melampsora larici-populina <cit> . here we showed that the b. graminis cseps have mostly an n-terminal yxc-motif, but in the longer cseps it can occur over the whole length of the protein. the functional significance of this motif remains elusive. however, a conserved host cell targeting sequence  followed by c-terminal functional regions has been found in other plant pathogens, for example in the oomycete phytophthora infestans <cit> .

using two different approaches  we found that  <dig> of the  <dig> cseps have recognizable relationships to ribonucleases . this is possibly an underestimation as sequence variation in residues that are critical for the assignment to this polypeptide category will probably lead to false-negative predictions. it is interesting to note that the vast majority  of proteins in the b. graminis genome with domain ipr <dig>  are cseps. there are numerous additional proteins encoded by the b. graminis genome that have a relationship to rna metabolism/turnover. these include for example proteins with interproscan domains ipr <dig> , ipr <dig>  and ipr <dig> , but none of them is found in the csep set. the ipr <dig>  domain thus seems to be a hallmark of the csep family, suggesting that it might be important for effector structure or activity, while other rna binding or modifying proteins encoded by the b. graminis genome might have housekeeping functions.

a secreted fungal ribonuclease appears to be the common origin of many cseps in different families, as an alignment suggests that 10– <dig> spaced and moderately preserved amino acids are conserved between ribonucleases and these cseps . these amino acids are likely to play important structural roles in scaffolding the cseps, being located typically in the β-sheets or at the border between a β-sheet and a loop region. meanwhile, we found that the regions with amino acids under diversifying selection are located in the loops and predicted to be exposed on the surface of the proteins. although the ribonuclease-like proteins are unlikely to be functional as rna-degrading enzymes since they lack critical active site residues , we speculate that some of these effectors could still be involved in interactions with host rnas and modulate host immunity via this route. alternatively, as extracellular ribonucleases are very stable molecules, highly resistant to proteolytic degradation, they may have had a rigid structure that could have been an ideal starting scaffold for evolving an effector arsenal, in which the loop regions were subjected to positive selection allowing the cseps to diversify and avoid recognition by host surveillance factors . a similar example of structural conservation among effector candidates has recently been found by win et al.
 <cit> , who showed that rxlr effectors of the peronosporales  often share a wy-domain that is structurally conserved despite high sequence divergence between different plant pathogenic species. the genes encoding the cseps shown in figure
5a have a common relative intron location, further corroborating a common ancestor. moreover, since this intron location is also shared in many other csep genes, it may be that a large proportion of the cseps have evolved from an ancestral microbial ribonuclease similar to ribonuclease t <dig>  a model for csep gene amplification was suggested based on the observation that cseps belonging to the same family are very often clustered in the genome and in several cases separated by less than  <dig> kb . this hinted that they evolved by gene duplication events due to unequal crossovers
 <cit> . also in another biotrophic phytopathogenic fungus, ustilago maydis, genes encoding small secreted proteins with unknown function were found in clusters
 <cit> , even though the spacing between those effectors was much shorter, possibly reflecting the general compactness of that genome compared to that found in b. graminis. illegitimate recombination was found to be the major driving force in gene duplications in plants, for instance in the evolution of multi-locus resistance genes
 <cit> . this clustering is in contrast to the situation for the family of eka genes, encoding another type of putative b. graminis effectors that have spread across the entire genome by means of a transposable element
 <cit> . we found that csep genes often are closely associated with two well-described sine-type retro-transposons, egh <dig>  eg-r <dig> and another high copy repeat  originally found in the wheat powdery mildew b. graminis f.sp. tritici, which are all very abundant in the genome. the genomic regions adjacent to cseps in most cases are flanked by these repetitive dna elements and the pattern is conserved between the closest paralogs. unequal crossover is mediated by highly similar sequences and therefore the retro-transposable elements are very good candidates for facilitating such events. in m. larici-populina tandem repeats of avrm-paralogs are also flanked by transposable elements
 <cit> . powdery mildews including b. graminis have lost the repeat-induced point mutation  pathway
 <cit>  and this may have allowed extensive amplification of transposable elements in the genome. our findings here suggest transposable elements have helped cseps to multiply and proliferate as described for the eka effector gene candidates
 <cit> . if this is true, then the loss of the rip pathway and resulting retro-transposon driven genome expansion could have conferred a selective advantage and facilitated evolution of powdery mildew fungi by potentiating proliferation of effector proteins.

here we have shown that many cseps are likely to have evolved from  ancestral extracellular ribonuclease through a series of gene duplications followed by diversifying positive selection. a number of different models for the evolution of gene duplications have been proposed and they can be classified depending on how gene duplications affect fitness, whether there is positive diversifying or purifying selection and whether there is pre-existing allelic variation
 <cit> . our observation that the transcript level of many cseps was high in planta is consistent with the view that the expression level is important for their function. for example, many effectors work by interacting with proteins where it matters to be present in abundance to inactivate their targets. many effectors are also exposed to proteases leading to a fast degradation, so a high transcript level will be an advantage. a gene duplication resulting in two copies will often lead to a further increase in expression through a gene dosage effect and thereby increased fitness. once duplicated, the genes can be subject to diversifying selection: indeed we have detected pronounced diversifying selection in some families. overall this fits with the “diversifying selection model”, described by innan and kondrashov
 <cit> , explaining how gene families can evolve and result in new functions for the individual members. our work is a further illustration of how a stable structural fold may act as a template for diversification
 <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
this comprehensive analysis indicates that cseps in b. graminis belong to a super-family of proteins, and it has validated the view that they are candidates for important effectors of pathogenicity. the findings from this work provide a solid foundation for proceeding with a systematic functional genomics analysis
 <cit> . furthermore, we propose a model of how these proteins evolved from a gene coding for a secreted ribonuclease by gene duplication associated with repetitive elements generated by retro-transposon activity. subsequent diversification yielded a diverse palette of effector functions. we speculate that powdery mildew fungi benefit from an efficient repertoire of secreted effector proteins able to suppress host defence for the benefit of the fungus.

