BACKGROUND
huanglongbing  is one of the most devastating diseases of citrus, which is characterized by the development of yellow shoots and stunted growth of infected trees combined with a decline in quantity and quality of fruit production  <cit> . hlb-affected fruit are abnormally-pigmented, developmentally flawed, and have a bitter taste- making them unusable for juice production or as table fruit  <cit> . typically, trees with hlb succumb to the effects of infection and die within a few years after showing the first signs of the disease  <cit> .

hlb is associated with three 'candidatus liberibacter' species worldwide: 'ca. l. asiaticus', 'ca. l. africanus' and 'ca. l. americanus'; the nomenclature is based on the presumptive origin of each bacterium in asia, africa and south america, respectively  <cit> . hlb has been known in asian countries since the 1870s  <cit>  and found to be associated with the presence of a fastidious α-proteobacterium named 'candidatus liberibacter asiaticus'. in the western hemisphere, it was reported in são paulo, brazil in  <dig> and in florida, usa in 2005- two of the largest citrus growing regions in the world  <cit> . although 'ca. l. americanus' initially constituted a major proportion of the total bacterial population in brazil, this ratio has changed since  <dig>  and 'ca. l. asiaticus' is now the most prevalent citrus-destroying species  <cit> . both 'ca. l. americanus' and 'ca. l. asiaticus' are transmitted by a psyllid vector, diaphorina citri  in asia, north america, and south america  <cit> . the hlb-associated liberibacters can also be transmitted by grafting propagative material from infected plants onto nursery stock. the continued economic losses associated with hlb are a serious threat to the u.s. citrus industry  <cit> . hlb affects all citrus cultivars  <cit>  and to date there are no known hlb-resistant citrus cultivars.

the genetic structure within a given pathogen population can be a valuable resource for determining the source or origin of the pathogen and risk management of the disease. the availability of a genome sequence for 'ca. l. asiaticus' has provided information on the metabolic features of this bacterium and key insights into hlb pathogenesis  <cit> . in addition, the genome sequence has facilitated the development of dna markers for genetic analysis; these molecular genetic markers are critical for understanding the genetic diversity of global populations and the epidemiology of hlb. dna markers have been used for characterization of microbial populations associated with plant diseases, including rapds, snps, mlst and ssrs   <cit> . molecular genetic markers not only aid in the general characterization of a given population, but can help identify the source of an introduced pathogen  <cit> .

among the three hlb-associated liberibacter species, 'ca. l. asiaticus' is the most widespread and is responsible for increasing economic losses of citrus industries. much attention has been drawn by researchers in the last few years to the importance of understanding the epidemiology and ecology of the disease associated with 'ca. l. asiaticus'. 'ca. l. asiaticus' isolates were characterized in some previous studies; most of these studies focused on the asian continent and utilized conserved genes as genetic markers. for example, southeast asian isolates were characterized by sequencing the 16s rdna and 16s/23s regions, omp, the rpl gene cluster, and the bacteriophage-type dna polymerase  <cit> . the 16s rdna was employed for understanding genetic diversity of 'ca. l. asiaticus' in india  <cit>  and a prophage gene was used to reveal variations in china  <cit> . however, genetic variation within conserved genes has limited discriminatory power to differentiate closely-related isolates within populations.

microsatellite dna markers associated with hypervariable sequence regions can provide sufficient resolution for differentiating closely-related isolates and for tracking genotypes of interest; additionally, these markers may help identify the source of invasive strains. recently, similar types of markers have been used for differentiating 'ca. l. asiaticus' in japan  <cit> . chen et al.  <cit>  studied populations from guangdong province in china and florida in the united states. however, the single variable locus used in that study provided limited characterization of 'ca. l. asiaticus' genetic diversity.

here, we report a panel of seven polymorphic microsatellite markers for conducting genetic analyses of 'ca. l. asiaticus' isolates from asia , north america  and south america . the microsatellite profile for each isolate was compared with all members of the sample set to make predictions on the possible origin and dissemination of hlb in florida.

RESULTS
pcr amplification and characteristic of microsatellite loci
a total of  <dig> 'ca. l. asiaticus' isolates obtained from hlb-affected plants across asia and the americas  were successfully amplified by all seven microsatellite primer pairs. the number of alleles and haploid genetic diversity per locus ranged from  <dig> to  <dig>  and  <dig>  to  <dig> , respectively . in the clone-corrected data set, genotypic linkage disequilibrium was not detected by pairwise comparison of loci across the overall isolates .

lasssr-a-f
lasssr-b-f
lasssr-c-f
lasssr-d-f
lasssr-e-f
lasssr-f-f
lasssr-g-f
ta, annealing temperature of the primer pairs; h, haploid genetic diversity

each forward primer was labeled with fam, ned, vic fluorescent dyes at 5', respectively

allele per locus: average number of alleles per locus

clone corrected data 

genotype and genetic diversity
a total of  <dig> genotypes  were identified . haplotypes identified within the sample population were restricted to the boundaries of their country of origin. the genetic diversity observed in different countries and locations are summarized in table  <dig>  isolates from china possessed the largest number of alleles , followed by india . overall haploid genetic diversities were the highest in asian countries, followed by brazil. the haploid genetic diversity of the florida  isolates was lowest among all the geographic groupings .

genetic structure
a upgma clustering analysis identified three major groups of 'ca. l. asiaticus' . isolates from india were clustered in a distinct group . most of the isolates from china and other asian countries, and brazil were generally grouped in group  <dig>  while some isolates from florida occurred in group  <dig>  most isolates from florida were clustered in group  <dig> .

the structure analysis based on bayesian modeling further assessed the genetic structure of 'ca. l. asiaticus'. this approach utilizes statistical methods to determine the relationships among the isolates without prior population information. in the analysis three different clusters  were identified based on the ad hoc statistic Δk  <cit>  . the membership of each individual isolate obtained from structure analysis, can be estimated as , the ancestry coefficient, which varies on a scale between 0- <dig> , with  <dig>  indicating full membership in a population. individuals can be assigned to multiple clusters  indicating they are admixed. individual samples with q ≥  <dig>   were considered as having single lineage and individuals with q <  <dig>  were considered as admixed lineages as followed by williams et al.  <cit> . the result of structure analysis is consistent with upgma in which isolates from india were grouped in a distinct cluster . brazilian and most east-southeast asian isolates were clustered as a single lineage  . some isolates taken from central florida  shared the same lineage with east-southeast asian and brazilian isolates . most florida isolates, however, grouped in a different cluster . some admixed isolates  were found in florida as well as in baise and nanning of guangxi province in china, and in cambodia.

eburst analysis with user-defined criteria  predicted three founder haplotypes: haplotype- <dig> , haplotype- <dig>  and haplotype- <dig>  . the diagram generated by eburst showed a primary network between haplotype- <dig> and  <dig>  and predicted founder haplotype in china. a primary network was also identified with haplotype- <dig>  and the second predicted founder haplotype in brazil. haplotype- <dig> from tirupati district, andhra pradesh, india) was predicted to be the third founder and hypothesized to be the founder haplotype of 'ca. l. asiaticus' in india.

discussion
characterization of worldwide and regional 'ca. l. asiaticus' populations from hlb-affected plants can facilitate identification of introduction patterns and predict the possible relationships of hlb-associated liberibacters found in different citrus growing regions. multilocus microsatellite marker analysis can provide sufficient resolution for differentiating closely-related isolates and can be useful for tracking genotypes of interest; additionally, these markers may help identify the source of invasive strains.

in this study, seven microsatellite markers successfully genotyped 'ca. l. asiaticus' from global populations. sequence analysis indicated that three of the microsatellites appear to overlap with microsatellites recently developed by katoh et al.  <cit> . various microsatellite length variations were found in 'ca. l. asiaticus' from worldwide collections, with some loci having as many as  <dig> alleles.

historical evidence reviewed by da graça  <cit>  suggested that hlb was observed in guangdong province, china in the late 19th century  <cit> , and later spread to other parts of the country. it is assumed that hlb may have been introduced into china from india along sea trade routes  <cit> . the first record of hlb-like symptoms, referred to as 'dieback', was reported from india in the 18th century  <cit> ; this was later suggested to be hlb  <cit> . as 'ca. l. asiaticus' has been in asian countries over a century, the genetic diversity in asian populations was expected to be high, due to a longer period of mutation accumulation, population differentiation and natural selection. as hypothesized, a higher degree of genetic diversity for 'ca. l. asiaticus' was observed in both china and india within the present study . in contrast, the lower level of allelic and haploid genetic diversity of 'ca. l. asiaticus' in florida and brazil populations are consistent with the hypothesis that 'ca. l. asiaticus' populations in these regions have been derived from recent introductions  <cit> .

human movement of infected plant materials is probably the main cause of long distance dissemination of both 'ca. l. asiaticus'-positive psyllids and hlb-affected plant material. the distributions of haplotypes observed in 'ca. l. asiaticus' in this study did not detect any identical haplotypes from different continents or even from different countries within the same continent . this result does not exclude the possibility of contemporary migration of 'ca. l. asiaticus' among different countries through the movement of infected plant materials or by the migration of vector psyllids as rapid mutation and selection could lead to deviation of populations from their original sources. the vector, d. citri, has been in brazil for over  <dig> years without any sign of hlb until its discovery on  <dig>  <cit> . d. citri was discovered in florida in palm beach, broward and martin counties in  <dig> and has spread throughout the state since that time  <cit> . however, it is not clear when 'ca. l. asiaticus' was introduced into brazil and florida. the rapid spread of hlb in brazil and florida after the first reports in  <dig> and  <dig>  respectively, suggests that hlb was most likely introduced around that time, rather than evolving from an indigenous source.

as suggested by the historical evidence and review of the early literature related to hlb, the most ancient population of 'ca. l. asiaticus' perhaps originated in india. from the 20th century onward, hlb spread through much of the citrus-growing regions of south and southeast asia  <cit> , the arabian peninsula  <cit> , east timor and papua new guinea  <cit> , and the western hemisphere   <cit> . it is difficult to precisely know when the disease entered each country and from where it was introduced. frequent shipment of plant materials and unlawfully importation of plants has increased the risk of disseminating exotic plant pathogens around the world. the exact pathways responsible for introducing hlb and the asian citrus psyllid into the united states and brazil have not yet been determined.

the genetic relationships of the isolates in this study, as determined from the upgma based on nei's genetic distance  <cit>  and individual based clustering analysis by the structure analyses, consistently identified three major genetic groups of 'ca. l. asiaticus', with isolates from india included in a distinct genetic group . the similar genetic makeup amongst most isolates from east-southeast asia and south america  support the hypothesis of the introduction of 'ca. l. asiaticus' into south america from east asia or southeast asia. while most isolates from florida were clustered within a separate group, both upgma and structure analyses showed that some isolates from central florida overlapped with east-southeast asian and brazilian groups. the presence of two genetic groups in florida suggests at least two introduction events are associated with the recent outbreak of hlb in florida.

based on the history of hlb, it could be predicted that populations of 'ca. l. asiaticus' in florida were most likely established following the introduction of hlb-affected plant materials or 'ca. l. asiaticus'-carrying psyllid from asia or other countries through human-mediated transport. the analyses in this study do not support the hypothesis of introduction of hlb into the americas through biological materials sourced from india. only a single isolate from india  overlapped with the east-southeast asian and brazilian group . structure analysis revealed that less-dominant clusters  in central florida  were observed in the same lineage  with east-southeast asian and brazilian clusters suggesting that the origin of members of this cluster in florida might be derived from asia or via brazil. moreover, some admixed  isolates between florida and east-southeast asia also support the hypothesis of introducing 'ca. l. asiaticus' into florida from asia.

eburst analysis provided further insights into the origin of 'ca. l. asiaticus'. founder haplotypes were identified from china, brazil, and india. based on their position within the eburst network, these founders are predicted to have given rise to the three global genetic groups, consistent with prevailing theories of the geographic origins of hlb  <cit> . while one founder type was predicted in brazil, the similar genetic makeup of brazilian and east-southeast asian isolates suggest that this founder could have been introduced into brazil from any of these asian countries. consistent with the structure analysis, the eburst diagram also predicted the introduction of 'ca. l. asiaticus' into florida citrus groves through at least two separate introduction events. while a primary network was detected between a founder haplotype from china and two unique haplotypes in florida, clear differentiation was observed between most isolates from china and florida by bayesian clustering and upgma analyses. differences between the dominant groups found in florida and china were also reported in a recent study using a single vntr locus  <cit> . it is uncertain whether the dominant group of florida isolates were introduced en masse or if a small population of nearly-identical 'ca. l. asiaticus' haplotypes from china were introduced, evolved quickly, and established a large population. the recent discovery and rapid spread of hlb in florida, along with wide distribution of dominant 'ca. l. asiaticus' group observed in the present study suggests that isolates of this group have been directly introduced from an unknown location. another recent study also indicated that some isolates of 'ca. l. asiaticus' from florida may have been introduced through two different events, and sources were unknown  <cit> . the analyses of microsatellites in the present study, however, suggest that the introduction of the less-dominant cluster was likely from a single source either asia or brazil. the low occurrence of less dominant group in some central counties in florida suggests that the members of this group were perhaps introduced more recently . however, it is certainly plausible that these two haplotypes were introduced into florida at nearly the same time. isolates from one of the sources may have spread quickly due to selective advantage under a favorable set of biological or environmental conditions.

our analysis showed that a dominant group of 'ca. l. asiaticus' genotypes are widely distributed in south-central florida . hlb is highly invasive and spatial spread of the disease is rapid compared to other arboreal pathosystems  <cit> . increased diversity of host, pathogen, vector, and environmental conditions likely influence the rates of hlb distribution. moreover, the rates of hlb increase are directly related to increase and spread of the psyllid vector population: in june  <dig>  the asian citrus psyllid was first detected in palm beach county; within two years of this discovery the disease occurred to  <dig> counties in florida  <cit> . the vector is now present in nearly all citrus-growing areas of florida  <cit> . in florida, hlb was first discovered in miami-dade county in august  <dig>  seven years after detection of the vector in the same region  <cit> . by mid-october, the disease was found in many residential properties stretching northwards more than  <dig> km from miami-dade county to st. lucie county and several commercial citrus groves were also affected in palm beach and hendry counties  <cit> . however, no epidemiological survey has clearly demonstrated hlb or 'ca. l. asiaticus'-carrying psyllids being introduced into the southern part of florida and then spreading northward through the continuous movement of psyllid vectors. since  <dig>  hlb has spread to most citrus-producing counties in florida  <cit> . the rapid and widespread distribution of this disease among citrus growing counties in florida is most likely due to the result of the multiple secondary introductions of hlb-associated 'ca. l. asiaticus'. based on the present analyses, it appears that there were at least two 'ca. l. asiaticus' introduction events in florida. moreover, the rapid distribution of hlb within florida after  <dig> is concomitant with the discovery of a dominant genetic cluster within south-central florida. taken together, this suggests that dominant 'ca. l. asiaticus' haplotypes, possibly from different countries may have established a population within florida through multiple introduction events.

CONCLUSIONS
the seven microsatellites developed in this study are useful for detection, isolate differentiation, and genetic analysis of 'ca. l. asiaticus'. our results showed that current 'ca. l. asiaticus' populations in hlb-affected citrus in asia and the americas are comprised of three distinct genetic groups:  indian,  predominantly east-southeast asian and south american  and  predominantly north american . while regional differences were observed from the distribution of dominant clusters, the similar genetic makeup of east-southeast asian and brazilian isolates lead us to hypothesize that 'ca. l. asiaticus' populations in brazilian groves were most likely introduced from east or southeast asia. the precise sources of the dominant genetic group of 'ca. l. asiaticus' retrieved from florida are not clearly resolved from the present analysis. however, less-pervasive groups may have been introduced directly from asia or via brazil. while the results here provide some insights into the origins and genetic structure of hlb-associated 'ca. l. asiaticus', it should be noted that broader population analyses using a larger array of molecular markers will help resolved the questions on the origin and dissemination of hlb-associated 'ca. l. asiaticus.

