BACKGROUND
a key contributor to disability in alzheimer’s disease  besides cognitive deficits is loss of muscle function. recently it has been recognized that abnormalities of muscle may be an intrinsic aspect of ad. studies using mri of brain and dual emission x-ray absorptiometry  detection of body mass showed that loss of lean muscle mass was accelerated in ad and correlated with hippocampal atrophy and cognitive performance, with lean mass independently associated with brain volume  <cit> . reduced motor function and grip strength are found in patients with mild cognitive impairment and are risk factors for later development of ad  <cit> . although several variables including changes in motivation/level of exercise, depression or unrelated muscle abnormalities could influence lean muscle mass in this population, these studies suggest that accelerated loss of lean body mass or development of muscle dysfunction could be a component of ad pathophysiology. a testable hypothesis for the biologic basis of deficits in both muscle function and cognitive function in ad is widespread abnormalities in energy metabolism due to mitochondrial dysfunction.

substantial evidence indicates that mitochondrial function declines with age, a primary risk factor for ad and other neurodegenerative diseases . evidence for deficits in glucose utilization has been demonstrated in ad patients using brain-imaging studies and has been suggested to occur even prior to onset of clinical symptoms  <cit> . mitochondrial-encoded cytochrome c oxidase  mrna levels are reduced in ad postmortem brain tissue and could contribute to reduced brain oxidative metabolism in ad  <cit> . cox, pyruvate dehydrogenase complex and α-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase complex  activities, all critical enzymes for energy metabolism are reduced in brain of ad patients  <cit> . neurons in layers iii and v of the temporal cortex have been determined to be especially deficient in kgdh in ad brain  <cit> .

amyloid deposition, one of the pathologic hallmarks of ad, is found in tissues outside the cns  <cit> . although skeletal muscle was initially not found as a site of amyloid deposition, a later study showed detectable amyloid beta  <dig>  in skeletal muscle in normal elderly, and significant evaluations in autopsy ad muscle  <cit> . skeletal muscle is not the only non-neural tissue where mitochondrial abnormalities have been associated with ad. mitochondrial abnormalities have been well documented in cybrid systems where platelets containing mitochondria from ad patients are fused to immortalized cells in culture  <cit> . whether such abnormalities are widespread among tissues is unclear since mitochondrial function in lymphocytes of ad patients has been reported to be normal  <cit> .

recent studies have also demonstrated mitochondrial abnormalities in transgenic ad murine models that overexpress human amyloid precursor protein  both in cells  <cit>  and isolated mitochondria  <cit> . primary neuronal cultures isolated from tg <dig> mice, a well-characterized app murine model of ad had decreased synaptic proteins and deficits in axonal transport of mitochondria. these deficiencies correlated temporally with accumulation of oligomeric beta amyloid  <cit> . utilizing isolated brain mitochondria from 3 month old mice possessing two human app mutations   <cit>  demonstrate decreased mitochondrial membrane potential and reduced atp levels that correlated temporally with intracellular beta amyloid  <cit> . together, these studies suggest that mitochondrial dysfunction precedes extracellular amyloid deposition.

ad transgenic mice including the well studied strain possessing both a chimeric mouse/human amyloid precursor protein with the swedish mutations   and a mutant form of presenilin  <dig> with deletion of exon  <dig>  appears to express app not only in brain, but in muscle as well . thus, we hypothesized that overexpression of an ad form of app, could result in mitochondrial abnormalities in both tissue types, and testing of this hypothesis could help elucidate the relationship of muscle and cognitive deficits in ad. in addition, we examined the hypothesis that mitochondrial dysfunction is an early event that could exacerbate amyloid toxicity predisposing vulnerable neuronal and non-neuronal cell populations to degenerate.

we now demonstrate in this double transgenic mouse strain that skeletal muscles have differential levels of mutant full-length app depending on muscle type. isolated muscle fibers from young mice  have significantly decreased maximal oxygen consumption capacity compared to non-transgenic, age-matched mice, with similar mitochondrial deficits to those previously described in brain. this is the first study to directly examine mitochondrial function in skeletal muscle from an ad-relevant transgenic murine model. as with brain, these deficits in muscle are an early event, occurring prior to appearance of amyloid plaques.

RESULTS
full-length mutant human app protein levels in both brain and muscle
forebrain homogenates were assessed for relative transgene-derived full-length app expression in both app/ps <dig> and non-transgenic mice . at 3 months of age, there were increased human app levels in the brain homogenates from the app/ps <dig> mice but this increase was not significantly different from their non-transgenic littermates . there was a significant increase  in human app levels present in brain homogenates from 6 month app/ps <dig> mice as compared to 6 month non-transgenic littermates .

although expression of the mutant human gene has been previously reported in muscle of ad-relevant transgenic mice  <cit> , such expression has not been characterized with regard to muscles of varying fiber type distribution or with age. we examined muscle homogenates isolated from soleus, plantaris, gastrocnemius and tibialis anterior muscles in app/ps <dig> and non-transgenic male mice  for transgene-derived full-length app expression as demonstrated in brain tissue from these animals . positive immunoreactivity to 6e <dig> , was evident in the app/ps <dig> mice in all ages  tested . conversely, none of the non-transgenic age-matched mice had positive immunoreactivity to transgene-derived full-length app . soleus had the least app band intensity, plantaris had the greatest, with gastrocnemius and tibialis anterior  app protein levels falling in between . this pattern of band intensities was apparent at all ages tested in the app/ps <dig>  mice. since the 3 month transgenic mice  already have positive immunoreactivity for transgene-derived full-length app as demonstrated by western blotting in both brain and muscle, the remainder of the study focused on this age group.

oxygen consumption rates  in isolated brain mitochondria
to examine the potential relationship between mitochondrial respiratory function and amyloid production and deposition, non-synaptic mitochondria were isolated from the forebrains of male  app/ps <dig> mice and their non-transgenic littermates. there were no significant differences in basal oxygen consumption rates  between the transgenic and non-transgenic mice . however, following addition of adp to initiate state  <dig> respiration, the app/ps <dig> mice had significantly lower ocr  compared to the non-transgenic animals . following oligomycin addition reducing the rate of o <dig> consumption to that of state 4° respiration, there was no significant difference in ocr between the transgenic and non-transgenic mice . further, there was no significant difference in maximal ocr following addition of carbonyl cyanide 4-phenylhydrazone  in the app/ps <dig>  transgenic mice as compared to the non-transgenic animals .

oxygen consumption rates  in isolated single muscle fibers
to begin assessment of mitochondrial respiratory deficits in skeletal muscle, we utilized a technique recently developed  <cit> . individual muscle fibers isolated from the flexor digitorum brevis muscles  of male app/ps <dig> transgenic and non-transgenic mice  were examined for deficits in oxygen consumption. unlike isolated mitochondria, addition of external adp would have no effect on the internal adp levels in the intact fdbs, thus requiring fccp which is membrane permeable, to stimulate respiration. there were no significant differences in basal ocr between the transgenic and non-transgenic mice . further, following oligomycin addition there was no difference in ocr between the two groups . however, the app/ps <dig> had significantly lower  maximal ocr following addition of the uncoupler fccp as compared to the non-transgenic mice. these mitochondrial deficits are present at an age when appearance of amyloid plaques are not yet observed in the brain  <cit>  and recapitulate the respiratory deficits observed in brain mitochondria from these animals .

mutant app and mitochondrial eyfp localization in c2c <dig> cells
as confirmatory studies to examine if mitochondrial respiratory function is affected by expression of the mutant transgenes in our ad mice, we created a construct containing the same mutant app and ps <dig> dna  with a fluorescent gene enhanced yellow fluorescent protein  possessing a mitochondrial targeting sequence and a tetracycline response element. to assess localization of our gene of interest, we transiently co-transfected c2c <dig> myoblasts with our construct plus one containing a tetracycline-controlled transactivator, then performed co-localization studies using mitotracker red  and immunostaining with α-app antibody . the eyfp completely co-localized with mitotracker red confirming its mitochondrial localization . conversely, the app did not co-localize with the eyfp suggesting a cytosolic localization . we then assessed whether transient transfection of the c2c <dig> myotube cultures affected mitochondrial respiratory function. similarly to the isolated muscle fibers , there were no differences in basal ocr or following oligomycin addition between the transfected cells and control cells . however, maximal ocr following addition of the uncoupler fccp was decreased in the transfected cells  when compared to the control cells .

electroporation of mutant app and ps <dig> in wildtype mouse footpads
utilizing the same dna constructs as transfected into the c2c <dig> cells, the footpads of young c57/bl <dig> wildtype mice  were electroporated with either both constructs  or a single construct  as a contralateral control. the single fibers isolated from fdbs were assessed for ocr with those isolated from the right footpads having a decrease in ocr following maximal stimulation with fccp  as compared to the contralateral control fibers . additionally, this decreased ocr recapitulated what was demonstrated in the fibers isolated from our app/ps <dig> transgenic mice .

discussion
in spite of the growing interest in the impact of alzheimer’s disease  on tissues outside the nervous system, our current study is the first evaluation of mitochondrial respiratory function in a non-neural tissue such as muscle in an ad relevant transgenic model mouse strain. we have not only confirmed that the widely utilized app/ps <dig> strain expresses the full length transgene in skeletal muscle, but that this expression is readily detectable at an early age , comparable to that seen in brain.

as with brain, transgenic app expression in muscle increases with age. a recent study by  <cit>  with young mice  possessing a whole body knock-in of human app/ps <dig> is the only previous study where any aspect of app expression in muscle has been previously assessed in an ad relevant transgenic animal. this study detected increased amyloid beta  and c-terminal fragment of app  in brain and quadriceps muscle, and attempted unsuccessfully to lower these levels with a ketogenic diet  <cit> .

muscles containing different degrees of fiber type composition appear to express varying levels of full-length mutant app in our transgenic animals. the lowest band intensity for full-length app was apparent in homogenates from soleus muscles that are comprised mostly of slow twitch fibers, ,  <cit> . conversely, the plantaris, comprised mainly of fast twitch fibers , had the most intense full-length app bands. the full-length mutant app band intensities for the gastrocnemius and tibialis anterior muscles  had intermediate levels.

in the present study, we demonstrate that our app/ps <dig> transgenic mice have reduced mitochondrial oxygen consumption rates  in intact single fibers isolated from their fdbs when challenged with uncoupler . these deficits in ocr were demonstrated in 3-month animals, an age already determined to precede amyloid deposition and plaque formation in brain  <cit> . mitochondrial dysfunction has been reported previously in brain from several strains of ad-relevant transgenic mouse models  <cit> . our examination of mitochondria isolated from brain  in this well-characterized animal model of ad is in agreement with these findings and further implies that mitochondrial dysfunction precedes amyloid deposition. interestingly, differences in ad-relevant transgenic mouse strains may result in altered temporal presentation of mitochondrial deficiencies. utilizing mice overexpressing two human mutant forms of app,  <cit>  demonstrated deficient mitochondrial oxygen consumption in synaptic but not non-synaptic mitochondria isolated from brains of 4 month mice. these deficits in non-synaptic mitochondria became apparent only at 12 months of age. this is not in agreement with our present findings in which we had significant decrease in oxygen consumption in non-synaptic mitochondria isolated from brains of  transgenic mice . this disparity could be due to mutant ps <dig> in our mice that is not expressed in animals in the other study  <cit> . although the majority of evidence suggests that the primary effect of ps <dig> mutation is through the enhancement of amyloid production it does not address the issue of whether this effect  is independent of the effect of ps <dig> on amyloid generation. there are limited studies assessing mitochondrial deficiencies in transgenic mouse strains possessing mutant ps <dig> expression only.

utilizing lymphocytes and liver mitochondria from mice possessing a single ps <dig> mutation  or five distinct mutations related to familial ad  <cit>  determined that ros levels were increased and calcium regulation altered but no changes observed in mitochondrial cytochrome c. a later study  <cit>  utilizing mice with the single ps <dig> mutation  <cit>  determined that lipid peroxidation and mitochondrial ros levels were increased in brains from elderly animals . these deficiencies were not however observed in younger  transgenic mice. since these mice and other ps <dig> strains do not develop amyloid plaques in brain tissue with aging, the authors suggest that abeta is not required to initiate oxidative damage  <cit> . interestingly, differential effects are observed when mouse strains possessing alternative presenilin mutations are utilized. mitochondrial membrane potential was differentially deficient in embryonic fibroblasts and mitochondria isolated from mice with ps <dig> or ps <dig> mutations but all had competent bioenergetic function  <cit> .

although metabolic failure due to mitochondrial dysfunction appears to be an early event in the pathophysiology leading to ad, amyloid toxicity may still play a central role in the neurodegenerative decline associated with ad. currently the relationship of amyloid generation and toxicity to mitochondrial dysfunction in the brain is still unclear, with evidence for both a role of amyloid toxicity leading to mitochondrial abnormalities as well as a role for mitochondrial dysfunction exacerbating amyloid generation and toxicity  <cit> . several studies have demonstrated that both full-length amyloid precursor protein   <cit>  as well as beta amyloid   <cit>  accumulates in brain mitochondria from autopsy tissue of ad patients but not in age-matched controls. app accumulation in mitochondrial import channels of human ad patients was associated with import inhibition of nuclear-encoded subunits of cox with subsequent decrease in cox activity and increased hydrogen peroxide levels  <cit> . app accumulation was especially apparent in ad-vulnerable brain regions including hippocampus and cortex. similarly,  <cit>  demonstrated that intracellular aβ is present in brain mitochondria from transgenic mice with targeted neuronal overexpression of mutant human amyloid precursor protein. the progressive mitochondrial accumulation of aβ was associated with diminished enzyme activity of electron transport chain complexes iii and iv and reduced oxygen consumption. detection of mitochondria-associated aβ was an early event occurring prior to extracellular aβ deposits  <cit> . we now demonstrate that transgene-derived app effects on mitochondrial function occur quite rapidly. in both c2c <dig> myotubes or single fibers isolated from the fdb of young, wildtype mice  even transient transfection of the app/ps <dig> transgenes gives rise to similar ocr deficits as found in our transgenic mice.

although this is the first report of mitochondrial abnormalities in muscle from an ad relevant transgenic mouse model, its result are not unexpected on the basis of related previous studies. amyloid deposits consisting of the aβ <dig> peptide  occur also in muscle in patients with the age related muscle disease inclusion body myositis   <cit> . mitochondrial abnormalities including deficiencies in cytochrome c oxidase activity, structural defects and mitochondrial dna deletions have also been described in muscle from ibm patients  <cit> . askanas et al.,  <cit>  also demonstrated similar mitochondrial abnormalities in normal human muscle cultures following adenovirus-mediated βapp gene transfer. in another effort to model the pathophysiology of human ibm, a transgenic mouse with muscle-specific expression of the app mutation has been created  <cit> . a recent study by boncompagni et al.,  <cit>  demonstrated that muscle isolated from these mice also have mitochondrial abnormalities as determined by electron microscopy, altered tca cycle activity and an altered redox state.

although abnormalities of muscle may be an intrinsic aspect of ad, they have not yet been well explored. a reasonable working hypothesis for the biologic basis of a relationship of muscle function to cognitive function in ad is widespread abnormalities in energy metabolism due to mitochondrial dysfunction. our study supports the hypothesis that overexpression of a pathogenic form of app can result in defects in oxidative metabolism both in brain and muscle, and that these defects are evident at an early stage in the disease, prior to the formation of amyloid plaques in typical brain regions  <cit> .

the known abnormalities in mitochondrial function in ad provide another potential target for disease modifying therapy of ad that is related to, but distinct from, current anti-amyloid based strategies. interest in abnormalities in more accessible non-neural tissues in neurodegenerative diseases such as ad have commonly been motivated by their potential utility as disease biomarkers  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
our demonstration that overexpression of pathogenic app can result in quantifiable abnormalities in oxidative respiration in both brain and muscle of a transgenic mouse model of ad, raises the possibility that similar abnormalities exist in both brain and muscle of patients with even early stages of ad. further studies of ad patient derived cells and tissue will be needed to determine if similar metabolic abnormalities occur as have been shown in this animal model study. a combined approach measuring mitochondrial bioenergetics from brain and non-neural tissue such as muscle from transgenic mouse models of ad, along with non-neural tissue from patients with ad could define and validate these physiologic abnormalities. such an approach could serve an important role in the assessment of promising ad therapeutic agents based on enhancing mitochondrial function.

