BACKGROUND
the experimental characterization of the structure of protein complexes by x-ray crystallography, nuclear magnetic resonance  or electron microscopy  cannot keep pace with the ever-expanding volume of interactome data. moreover, weak or transient interactions are very difficult to crystallize, nmr has clear limitations with regard to the size of the protein complexes that are tractable, and em often does not provide adequate resolution. computational tools, such as protein binding site predictions and protein docking, offer alternatives to describe protein interactions by providing theoretical structural models of protein complexes . indeed, computational and experimental methodologies are complementary rather than mutually exclusive; for example protein binding site predictions can guide mutational analyses aimed at charting protein interfaces.

residues located at protein interfaces present distinct physicochemical properties. hydrophobic residues predominate in permanent complexes, although charged residues often form part of interfaces  <cit> . interface residues also have both higher solvent accessibilities  <cit>  and lower crystallographic b-factors  <cit>  than those seen in exposed residues not involved in protein interfaces. other studies have shown that interface residues are evolutionarily conserved  <cit>  although this has been questioned in several reports  <cit> . finally, interface residues are less prone to sample alternative side-chain rotamers to minimize entropic cost upon complex formation  <cit> .

the features described above can be used individually or in combination to predict protein interfaces . methods used to predict protein binding sites include those based on patch analysis  <cit>  and those based on neural networks, including methods developed by fariselli et al.  <cit> , ofran and rost  <cit> , and porollo and meller  <cit> . the latter includes the neighbourhood or environment of residues as input data, defining the environment as the residues enclosed in a euclidean distance threshold, which results in more accurate predictions. neuvirth et al  <cit>  proposed a method that utilizes secondary structure, hydrophobicity and experimental b-factors among other structural features. a support vector machine integrating six structural and chemical features was proposed by bradford et al.  <cit>  and later refined using bayesian networks  <cit> . a parametric score function based on sequence conservation and structural information has been also proposed  <cit> . more recently, sikić et al  <cit>  proposed a random forest ensemble classifier to predict interface residues using a 9-residue sliding window that includes sequence and structural information.

despite these existing methods, the accurate generic prediction of protein interfaces is not resolved. the lack of a clear understanding of protein-protein interaction hinders the development of more accurate methods, and thus new approaches and ideas are needed. also, as new experimental data emerge, new prediction algorithms can be devised that outperform their predecessors, thus providing better tools for the scientific community. here, we describe a novel, structure-based, computational method: voronoi random forest feedback interface predictor . vorffip is a two-steps random forest  ensemble classifier that integrates a set of input variables accounting for structural features, energetic terms, evolutionary conservation, and crystallographic b-factors. in addition, vorffip uses voronoi diagrams  to define the local environment of exposed residues; this provides a more accurate description of the effect of the neighbourhood than can be provided by either the sliding window or euclidean distance approaches. vds have been used in a number of applications to study atomic packing of proteins  <cit> , define protein interfaces  <cit> , identify residue-residue contacts  <cit> , define pockets in proteins  <cit>  or define molecular surfaces  <cit> . however, vds have not been used in the context of protein binding site predictions to define the environment of exposed residues.

the performance of vorffip has been comprehensively assessed using different combinations of input data and environment definitions, identifying the combinations that lead to the best performance. finally, vorffip outperformed other prediction methods under similar benchmarking conditions.

RESULTS
the aim of this work was to identify which features, environment descriptors and their combinations yielded the best results when predicting protein binding sites. this would highlight the best approach to distinguish exposed residues that are likely to be part of a protein interface from those that are not. to that end, a comprehensive study using vorffip was performed evaluating the results against widely used performance indicators. unless specifically noted, all the results were obtained in a 5-fold cross validation test using the b <dig> dataset. the b <dig> dataset was derived from benchmark  <dig>   <cit>  after discarding antigen-antibody complexes . protein complexes in the b <dig> dataset have two representatives: the bound and unbound conformations. the bound conformation was only used to define interfaces ; however, training and predictions were performed on the unbound conformations. in this manner, it was ensured that no information from the bound conformation was used during the training and prediction.

one step vs. two-steps rf
as described in the introduction, vorffip is a prediction method that relies on a two-step rf ensemble classifier . the difference between the first-step and second-step rf is the use of scores assigned by the first-step rf and the environmental score-derived metrics: esi , csv  and mms  . the logic behind using the second-step rf relates to the observation that residues belonging to the same interface tend to form contiguous patches on the surface. thus, it would be unlikely that residues with high scores would be mainly neighbours to low scoring residues unless located in the boundary of the interface. it would be expected that the second-step rf would harmonize outliers and generate homogenous and high scores for interface residues by using the first-step rf scores together with the quantification of scores of neighbouring residues  and thus resulting in better predictions.

results show that the performance of vorffip is improved when the second-step rf is included. the roc curve obtained on the second-step rf showed higher sensitivity for any false-positive rates  and the difference in auc values was statistically significant . both roc curves were derived using structure, energy, conservation and b-factors together with vd to account for the neighbourhood. however, the same behaviour was observed when using individual sets or combination of features such as structure and conservation and other environment descriptors such as sliding window . in terms of precision , recall , f1-scores and matthews correlation coefficient , the second-step rf also produced better results: first-step rf vs. second-step rf; r:  <dig>  vs.  <dig> ; p:  <dig>  vs.  <dig> ; mcc:  <dig>  vs.  <dig> ; f1-scores  <dig>  vs.  <dig> . thus, second-step rf and score-derived metrics such as esi  corrected false positives and identified missing hits, thus improving the performance of vorffip. unless otherwise noted, the two-step rf was selected as default predictor.

improving predictive power by combining heterogeneous data and using voronoi diagrams
a total of  <dig> combinations of features  and environment definitions  were explored. the predictive performance of single features and  <dig> combinations are presented in table  <dig>  the general trend shows that combining features resulted in a statistically significant increase of auc values. individual features all performed at a similar level, with b-factors being the poorer predictor in terms of auc. however, the best performance was achieved when all features were combined and vds were used as environment descriptor. different combinations of features yielded different results: no clear improvements were observed when structural information was combined with energy information  or when b-factor data were added to structure, energy, and conservation . finally, evolutionary data  did improve predictions in terms of auc.

the test consisted of a 5-fold cross validation using dataset b <dig> where interface residues were defined using dimplot . the first column indicates the combination of features used: structural , energy , conservation , and b-factors . the second, third, fourth, fifth columns contain auc values for voronoi diagram, sphere , 9-residue sliding window, and single residue , respectively.

when evaluating the effect of environment descriptors, in general vorffip achieved the best performance when vds were used. as shown in figure  <dig>  vds and the combinations of structural, energy, conservation and b-factors achieved the best performance in terms of auc values with a higher true positive rate, regardless of the false positive rate when compared to sliding window, sphere or no use of environment information. the difference in auc between vds and other environment descriptors was statistically significant .

a similar trend that a combination of all features and vds gave the best scores was observed with other performance indicators such as mcc, r, p and f1-scores . mcc scores are of special interest due to the ratio between positive and negative cases: the number of exposed residues that do not belong to an interface is much higher than those that do. both mcc and f1-scores improved when all the sources of information were combined and vd was used to account for the environment, thus resulting in better and more balanced predictions. for the sake of completeness, different euclidian distance cut-offs between  <dig> to  <dig> Å  were tested. the optimal performance is achieved between  <dig> and  <dig> Å cut-off agreeing with a previous observation  <cit> . however, vorffip's predictions were still more accurate when vds were used to account for the local environment .

effect of the environment descriptors
as shown above, the inclusion of environment descriptors had a positive effect on the performance of vorffip. in general, any prediction that included environment information was superior that those that did not . however, vds were superior when compared to sliding windows and spheres due to the combination of a lower rate of false positive and a higher rate of true positive cases. a specific case of this effect is depicted in figure  <dig>  in general, when vorffip uses environment information derived from sliding window, sphere and vds, high scores are assigned to the main interface patch. however, using information derived from both sphere and sliding window resulted in either low scores assigned to residues in the interface patch or high scores assigned to residues that are not , whereas vds  yielded a more accurate and balanced prediction, thus resulting in a sharper and more accurate charting of the protein binding site. it is worth noting that while vds and sphere descriptors only considered exposed residues, the sliding window approach, which is sensitive to the structural position of the central residue of the window, can include buried residues which might have a negative effect on the performance of the prediction.

comparing vorffip with previous studies
the algorithm was compared against three recently published methods: sppider  <cit> , whiscy  <cit>  and the method developed by sikić et al.  <cit> . in each case, vorffip was trained and tested following the same procedure described in the previous studies and using the same datasets. also, the definition of interface residues was the same as described in the original publications .

sppider implements a neural network and includes several structural and sequence features as well as information about neighbourhood or environment, considering a residue to be part of the neighbourhood if located within a  <dig> Å radius sphere centred on the residue of interest. for training and testing, porollo and meller  <cit>  derived two non-redundant and independent sets referred to here as the s <dig> and s <dig> datasets; vorffip was trained using the s <dig> set and tested using the s <dig> dataset. the comparison between sppider and vorffip  shows that vorffip achieved higher scores for each of the metrics used to evaluate predictive performance: mcc, q <dig>  r, p and auc values .

 matthew correlation coefficient,  second quartile,  recall,  precision,  area under the roc curve. vorffip values were obtained using the default predictor. sppider values taken from  <cit> .

whiscy  <cit>  relies on sequence conservation and was benchmarked using the w <dig> dataset. the so <dig> dataset, generated from o <dig> by removal of any protein complexes whose scop  <cit>  superfamily is represented in dataset w <dig>  was used to train vorffip. this ensured that no evolutionary relationship, however remote, existed between the training set so <dig> and the testing set w <dig>  comparing to whiscy, vorffip performed better in terms of r, p and mcc scores as shown in table  <dig>  individual predictions for each individual protein complex in w <dig> dataset are also shown in additional file  <dig>  table s <dig> 

 recall,  precision,  matthew correlation coefficient. vorffip values were obtained using the default predictor. whiscy and whiscymate values taken from  <cit> 

finally, sikić's method  <cit>  relies on a 9-residue sliding window that includes sequence, secondary structure and several structural features as input variables to a rf classifier. sikić's method was benchmarked using the o <dig> dataset on a 3-fold cross validation test. additional file  <dig>  figure s <dig> shows a precision versus recall plot, similar to the one reported in the original publication  <cit> . as shown, vorffip achieved a higher precision at any recall rate .

CONCLUSIONS
in this work we present vorffip, a novel computational tool for the prediction of protein binding sites. several studies of protein complexes with known crystal structures have shown that residues at interfaces present unique properties . these properties, which provide information that is specific to structural features, energy terms, evolutionary conservation and crystallographic b-factors of individual residues, have predictive power. however, combining this range of individual features by means of a rf ensemble classifier clearly improved prediction; the combination of information is more powerful than the individual pieces of information. moreover, the second-step rf further enhanced the performance of the method. the results show that all statistical measures used to gauge the performance of the method showed improvement from the first-step to the second-step rf, and thus incorporating the score values obtained by the first-step rf led to better predictions, probably because of the nature of protein binding sites formed from the contiguous surface patches.

accounting for the environment of residues also enhanced the accuracy of the prediction. although this observation is not new, the use of vds in the framework of protein binding site prediction is novel. vds not only provide a better approach to define protein interfaces  but also sharper and more accurate definition of the local environment of exposed residues as shown by the results presented here. vorffip and vds delivered the best predictions in comparison to other approaches to define the local environment of residues, such as euclidean distances  or sliding window. moreover, there are clear advantages in using vds, including no requirement for cut-offs  and given its nature, it is easy to implement a weighting system based on the number of contacts . thus, vds offer a more natural and rational approach for defining the structural environment of residues.

significant differences were observed between the precision and recall values in the sppider and whiscy tests. while sppider was trained and tested using a set of protein complexes, i.e. proteins in bound conformation, whiscy used protein complexes from benchmark set version  <dig>   <cit>  and version  <dig>   <cit> . benchmark sets have two representations for each protein complexes, unbound and bound; predictions were performed only on the unbound version to ensure no bound information was used during prediction. it was found that crystallographic b-factors were very good predictors on the sppider dataset whereas their performance seriously decreased when using the whiscy dataset. this observation highlights the need for reliable datasets, such as the benchmark series  <cit> , to properly and fairly benchmark computational methods.

in summary, this paper describes a new computational tool for the prediction of binding sites. vorffip is a two-step rf ensemble classifier that relies on a set of input variables that accounts for several aspects of residue and environment-based information. vorfipp compared favourably against other reported methods. vorffip is accessible at http://www.bioinsilico.org/vorffip.

