BACKGROUND
streptococcus mutans is an oral pathogen, which along with other closely related streptococci called the mutans streptococci, plays an important role in the formation of caries and tooth decay in humans. this is attributed to its ability to form biofilms which are generally difficult or impossible to eradicate by antibiotic therapy because biofilm cells are resistant to antibiotics  <cit> .

recently, it was shown that carolacton, a secondary metabolite from the myxobacterial species sorangium cellulosum has a high inhibitory activity against actively growing s. mutans biofilm cells resulting in changes in cell morphology, elongation of cell chains, membrane damage and death of a part of the population. carolacton was also found to induce a dose-dependent damage of s. mutans biofilms over a wide concentration range resembling a sigmoid dose–response curve  <cit> . carolacton inhibits s. mutans biofilms even at nanomolecular concentrations  <cit>  implying that it primarily targets molecular entities which are present only as a few copies per cell. in this regard, carolacton is very similar to compounds which target cellular signaling networks  <cit>  rather than directly targeting particular enzymes in pathways associated with vital processes such as protein, dna/rna synthesis, cell division etc.

to decipher the genes whose expression is affected by carolacton, a time resolved transcriptome analysis of s. mutans biofilms after carolacton treatment was carried out by reck et al.  <cit> . results from the study indicate that carolacton affects changes in the expression of genes related to biofilm formation, autolysis, pyrimidine and histidine metabolism, cell shape and cell division in addition to two component systems . among the tcss, the vicrk system shows an immediate strong downregulation, while the comde system controlling competence development through quorum sensing  <cit>  is upregulated. a deletion mutant for the histidine kinase encoding gene vick which responds instantaneously to carolacton treatment together with all the vicr-coexpressed genes, was similarly tested for carolacton-sensitivity, but since the vick mutant showed very poor biofilm growth, further inferences could not be made. vicr is an essential gene and cannot be deleted in s. mutans <cit> . meanwhile, the s. mutans eukaryotic-like serine-threonine protein kinase pknb whose ortholog has been shown to be a master regulator of virulence in s. pneumoniae <cit>  displayed no observable changes in transcription  <cit> . however, when pknb is knocked out, it results in a carolacton-insensitive mutant  <cit> . these data show that even though the physiological and genetic responses of carolacton-treated s. mutans biofilm cells are known, the underlying network which orchestrates the expression of affected genes in response to carolacton still remains a mystery. this calls for an effort to uncover the effect of carolacton at the network level. although reck et al.  <cit>  have already measured the temporal progression of the s. mutans transcriptome in response to carolacton, their dataset is characterized by a small number of sampling points  and large time intervals, which does not allow for a reliable network inference. hence, an extended time-series transcriptome is required encompassing a higher number of sampling points with relatively short intervals and was carried out in the current study.

reverse engineering based network reconstruction methods have widely been used to infer genetic networks from gene expression data measured most commonly using cdna microarrays. excellent reviews about genetic network reconstruction from expression data have been published  <cit> . in order to capture the network level events of biological systems upon exposure to various stimuli, reverse engineering methods have been developed to infer underlying networks from time series expression data in addition to static data  <cit> . for instance, methods such as time series network identification  were used for inferring co-expression networks and compound mode of action from time-series gene expression data following interventions  <cit> . although the inferred co-expression network using tsni involved only nine genes of the e. coli dna-damage response pathway, it is seen as one of the first attempts in network reconstruction for determining the compound mode of action from a time series transcriptome. further tools and algorithms were also developed to deal with whole genome network inference  <cit> , but the gene-gene interactions in such inferred networks were either undirected  or carry only a statistical probability of causality. despite lacking directionality, undirected co-expression networks have nevertheless been used to infer critical genes and networks involved in t cell functions  <cit> .

meanwhile, whole genome directed networks were inferred by using combinatorial methodologies  <cit>  incorporating gene-gene interactions from reverse engineering algorithms with biological information such as data on binding motifs and promoter elements  <cit> , functional genomics  <cit> , genome annotation  <cit>  and transcription factor activities  <cit> . although non-exhaustive due to the lack of sufficient biological information, genome wide transcriptional regulatory networks have nevertheless been constructed from heterogeneous data for a few organisms such as escherichia coli <cit> , saccharomyces cerevisiae <cit> , bacillus subtilis <cit> , candida albicans <cit> , streptomyces coelicolor <cit> , halobacterium nrc- <dig> <cit> , pseudomonas aeruginosa <cit>  and others. despite the advances made in the field of genome-wide regulatory network reconstruction, most of these attempts have been carried out for model or standard organisms  such as e. coli, s. cerevisiae, b. subtilis, p. aeruginosa <cit> . some progress has also been made in the case of human cells as shown by basso et al. where human b cell gene regulatory interactions were inferred  <cit> . hence, one of the major current challenges in the field is the network inference for less-studied organisms which are either pathogens or are industrially important.

even though genetic networks have been inferred under drug treatment conditions for some organisms, most of them have either been limited to compounds and molecules whose targets and mode of action were already known and/or limited to model organisms and certain human cell lines. to the best of our knowledge, reconstruction of a contextual genome-scale regulatory network for the human caries pathogen s. mutans has not yet been carried out although studies focusing on genome-wide transcriptome profiling have been reported . a workflow based on a combinatorial strategy was executed in an attempt to infer a genome-wide network for s. mutans biofilms under conditions of treatment with the biofilm inhibitor carolacton. the trend correlation method which has been used to construct co-expression networks of human t cells  <cit>  was used for inferring the s. mutans co-expression network under carolacton treatment conditions using microarray data generated in this study. this was followed by the construction of a transcriptional regulatory response network  by incorporating binding site information. from the trrn, we detected sub-networks whose activation or repression could be related to the biological effect of carolacton. a key regulator was identified based on its connectivity in the regulatory network and when knocked out, rendered s. mutans biofilms insensitive to carolacton. furthermore, tested interactions from the inferred regulatory response network were confirmed using in vitro interaction detection assays.

RESULTS
dynamic genome-wide transcriptome profiling
a high resolution transcriptomic time-course experiment with s. mutans biofilms  was performed to capture the temporal response over an extended period of time. our time-series data included results from a sample taken at 5 min post carolacton treatment and is expected to identify genes whose expression patterns were immediately affected by carolacton. a total of  <dig> gtaas  or differentially expressed genes were identified at a log-fold change > = <dig> .

enrichment analysis with respect to various categories such as biological functional classes and kegg metabolic pathways was performed for the up- and downregulated gtaas at every time point in order to gain an overview of the various categories of genes affected by carolacton . the results from the enrichment analysis of upregulated gtaas indicated that transcripts from the pyrimidine ribonucleotide biosynthesis , nucleosides, purines and pyrimidines’ transport , and metabolism of alanine, aspartate and glutamate  were most significantly over-represented at both  <dig> min and  <dig> min but not at  <dig> min. these observations suggest a possible specific role of pyrimidine biosynthesis and metabolism in the initial response of s. mutans biofilms to carolacton. at later time points however, many more categories were found to be over-represented among the set of upregulated gtaas due to probable cascade effects.

enrichment analysis of the downregulated gtaas at  <dig> min revealed categories such as glutamate biosynthesis, tca cycle, anaerobic energy metabolism, glyoxylate and dicarboxylate metabolism, nitrogen metabolism as well the signal transduction related two component systems . tcss impart various virulence characteristics to s. mutans by sensing and responding to various signals related to stress, thus enabling it to survive and tolerate unfavourable conditions  <cit> . the transcriptional downregulation of tcs genes could indicate a possible effect of carolacton having a repressive effect on the signaling mechanisms of s. mutans. in general, downregulated gtaas in the early part of the response were enriched with categories corresponding to the processes of signaling, energy and amino acid metabolism. the set of downregulated gtaas in the later phases after  <dig> min was also found to be enriched with many categories over the course of the experiment. interestingly, the alanine, aspartate and glutamate metabolic pathways were found to be over-represented in both the up- and downregulated gtaa sets at the time point of 20 min after carolacton treatment suggesting a dual regulation of such pathway enzymes in the initial response to carolacton. the information from our transcriptome data largely agrees with those from a previous study by reck et al.  <cit>  where only five sampling points with large intervals were used.

contextual co-expression network
in order to identify co-expression relationships among genes immediately affected by carolacton, the co-expression network was confined to statistically significant optimal correlations which started either from  <dig>   <dig> or  <dig> min after carolacton treatment . the contextual co-expression network inferred according to the workflow shown in figure  <dig> consisted of  <dig> gene-gene co-expression relationships .  <dig>  of the  <dig> edges were characterized by time lagged co-expression relationships.  <dig>  of the total number of co-expression relationships could be described as being inverted  whereas the remaining were described as being positive .figure  <dig> 
workflow to capture the network level effects of the biofilm inhibitor carolacton on
s. mutans
biofilms. the directions of the arrow marks denote the flow of data processing and sequential steps. shapes of boxes have no particular significance while the descriptions within the boxes represent the steps corresponding to data generation, algorithms, data processing, network and experimental analyses. *indicates the reference  <cit> .



regulator-target gene binding site map of s. mutans ua159
the edges of the carolacton-context co-expression network derived from the dynamic transcriptome data are undirected. in other words, the mere presence of an edge between two genes does not necessarily represent a transcriptional regulatory relationship between them. although time-lags between the co-expressed regulator and target gene could possibly serve as a preliminary proof of direct/indirect transcriptional regulation  <cit> , further evidence is required for at least assigning putative biological causality and for pursuing precise experimental validation of transcriptional regulatory relationships.

among the more than  <dig> known or predicted transcriptional regulators in the s. mutans ua <dig> genome, only a few have been studied experimentally and characterized with respect to their dna binding site. we compensated for the non-availability of experimentally verified transcriptional regulatory binding sites for the s. mutans transcriptional factors by applying comparative genomic approaches . binding site data for  <dig> transcriptional regulators were recovered from different sources such as experimental data from s. mutans itself or information from comparative genomic analysis. in cases where the collective number of binding sites inferred for a transcriptional regulator were fewer or equal to three, respective regulogic  <cit>  sites from other species within the streptococccus genus were retrieved. these were then used to construct pssms  with improved predictive capacities. pssms were also constructed from regulogic sites available in the regprecise database  <cit>  and from phylogenetic footprinting studies. an online regulatory sequence analysis tool  termed matrix-quality <cit>  was used to objectively determine the optimal p-value for every pssm . the pssms were then used to predict binding sites  in the upstream regulatory regions of all the genes in the s. mutans ua <dig> genome. a total of  <dig> unique regulator-target gene relationships  based on binding site data alone corresponding to 44 s. mutans ua <dig> transcriptional regulators were thus compiled . after integrating operon structure information,  <dig> regulator-target gene relationships were found to comprise the final regulator-target gene binding site map. the global regulators ccpa  and cody  together accounted for ~ <dig> % of the  <dig> regulator-target gene relationships based on binding sites.

s. mutans transcriptional regulatory response network  under carolacton treatment
combining inferred correlation relationships from the co-expression network and the regulator-binding site map resulted in  <dig> transcriptional regulatory relationships with predicted direct biological causality . after operon oriented adjustment , the transcriptional response regulatory network   comprised  <dig> relationships among  <dig> genes, of which  <dig> were found to be transcription factors. based on the predicted transcriptional regulatory connections, the trrn genes could be organized into  <dig> co-regulated gene groups or sub-networks. a co-regulated gene group is defined as a set of genes which are putatively regulated by a common transcription factor.  <dig> of the  <dig> regulators were associated with predicted incoming connections only and were contained within the  <dig> sub-networks with different size distributions. the largest sub-network was that putatively modulated by cody  and comprised  <dig> genes. the second largest sub-network consisted of  <dig> genes under the putative control of cysr  followed by two sub-networks each containing  <dig> genes and predicted to be modulated by the essential tcs response regulator vicr and the global regulator ccpa, respectively.figure  <dig> 
topological view of the transcriptional regulatory response network  of
s. mutans
biofilms upon carolacton treatment. the trrn was inferred by overlaying the regulator-target gene binding site map onto the co-expression network. it consisted of  <dig> co-regulated gene groups or subnetworks each under the control of a transcription factor and comprised  <dig> regulatory interactions involving  <dig> genes. some of the co-regulated gene groups overlap with each other as a result of genes modulated by more than one transcription factor. the  <dig> regulators with outgoing connections  along with  <dig> other regulators only with incoming connections  found to be among target genes within the sub-networks are indicated as well as non-regulator target genes . if the upstream regulatory regions of the target genes or their corresponding operons harbored multiple putative binding sites of its predicted regulator, then they are indicated by orange circles). in addition, the regulators with outgoing connections are also marked with their gene names above their respective nodes. blue arrows indicate a positive  relationship whereas red arrows stand for a negative  effect. connections always flow from top to bottom. spatial positions of transcription factor nodes are manipulated so as to pictorially depict the possible hierarchies. the carolacton context trrn shown herein is observed to be organized as a double layered hierarchy. the network was visualized using cytoscape.



the trrn  represented a “waterfall-like” model with respect to its global topological structure and hierarchy  <cit>  with some regulators apart from modulating their own sub-networks also exerting indirect control over other sub-networks by putatively modulating the expression of the corresponding transcription factors. for example, it can be seen from the inferred trrn  that the global regulator cody putatively regulated the expression of two distinct genes encoding the tcs response regulators vicr and come, thus potentially exerting an indirect influence on their sub-networks as well. although global hierarchical organization was observed in the inferred trrn, it was nevertheless confined only to a double-layered hierarchy compared to multi-layered hierarchies reported in the regulatory networks of well-studied organisms  <cit> . this could primarily be due to the lack of biological connectivity data, firstly as a result of the limited experimentally verified binding site information of s. mutans transcription factors. secondly, the functional and/or evolutionary divergence of s. mutans transcription factors from their corresponding orthologs in standard organisms has a certain limiting influence on the comparative genomic based extrapolation of binding sites  <cit> .

the overlap between co-regulated gene groups, which was previously observed in bacteria  <cit> , is also a characteristic of the inferred trrn. 13% of the  <dig> trrn genes were found to be under the putative control of more than one transcriptional regulator . from a local network structure point of view, the nodes putatively controlled by just one regulator resemble single input motifs  whereas the nodes co-regulated by several regulators form multiple input motifs   <cit> . besides mims, overlap between co-regulated gene groups could be the manifestations of more complicated network motifs such as the feed forward loop  in which a regulator encoding gene is modulated by another regulator, both of which control the expression of a common gene  <cit> . if multiple genes are controlled by a single ffl, then it is termed as a multi-output ffl   <cit> . additional file  <dig> lists the various types of significant motifs identified  in the carolacton context dependent trrn among which were found ffls including other motifs such as regulatory bi-fans  <cit>  and their derivatives  <cit> . local network topologies such as the motifs found here were consistent with previous observations in other organisms  and could be important for eliciting quick and flexible responses to stimuli  <cit> . although the exact biological mechanisms which give rise to such motifs remain to be understood, these observations demonstrate not only the relevance of the constructed network but can also be further used for detailed dynamic quantitative modeling of smaller sub-systems.

biological context within co-regulated sub-networks in the trrn
the  <dig> co-regulated groups or sub-networks contained statistically significant over-represented  functional categories such as biological functional classes, kegg metabolic pathways and gene ontology terms . figure  <dig> visualizes the trrn enrichment data shown in additional file  <dig>  put together,  <dig> enrichment events involving  <dig> kegg metabolic pathways,  <dig> biological functional classes and  <dig> gene ontology terms were collectively identified within the  <dig> sub-networks. at least  <dig> cases were found in which the transcription factor or regulator belonged to the same functional category as that found to be over-represented in its target gene group, confirming that the constructed regulatory network is biologically meaningful. for instance, the sub-network co-regulated by the glutamine synthetase repressor glnr known to control glutamine metabolism  <cit>  in s. mutans was enriched with genes belonging to the functional categories “amino acid biosynthesis” and “nitrogen metabolism”. on closer observation, most of the genes within the glnr co-regulated sub-network were related to glutamine metabolism. genes belonging to the biological functional class of cell envelope metabolism were over-represented in the sub-network co-regulated by the tcs rr mbrc associated with cell envelope stress response  <cit> . similarly, the genes putatively modulated by the pyrimidine regulatory protein pyrr contained an over-representation of pyrimidine metabolism genes. several instances were also observed in which the functional category to which the regulator belonged to was different from that found to be over represented within the given sub-network . besides the above described intra- and inter categorical relationships between regulators and their sub-networks, the trrn also contained regulatory relationships which were already verified by others .figure  <dig> 
categorical enrichment within the sub-networks comprising the
s. mutans
biofilms trrn upon carolacton treatment. the co-regulated groups or sub-networks within the trrn were found to be enriched with functional categories such as kegg metabolic pathways, biological functional classes and gene ontology terms thus lending biological meaning to the inferred regulatory response network. co-regulated groups denote sets of genes predicted to be commonly modulated by a transcription factor . the regulatory response network also includes other transcriptional factors with only incoming connections  and found to be among the co-regulated groups. some of the co-regulated groups were found to be enriched with functional categories such as kegg metabolic pathways , biological functional classes  and gene ontology terms  whereas others  did not display any enrichment. black edges with ellipsoid target edges represent relationships with dual regulation  expression patterns and others by inverted  expression patterns between the regulator and the target gene). the meanings of all the other arrow symbols are as described in the legend of figure  <dig> 



trrn sub-networks co-regulated by global transcription factors
the sub-networks of the global transcriptional regulators affecting central metabolism namely cody and ccpa  <cit>  were among the top three sub-networks in terms of the number of genes. ccpa is reported to modulate sugar uptake and metabolism, carbon catabolite repression and expression of virulence related genes in s. mutans <cit> . the treatment of s. mutans biofilms with carolacton caused an immediate downregulation of ccpa modulated genes . the ccpa sub-network consisted of genes encoding components of two mannose specific phosphotransferase systems -smu_ <dig> and smu_1960c-smu_1961c) , as well as three atp dependent transporter complexes  among others. while msmefg is reportedly involved in the energy dependent transport of multiple sugars  <cit> , the substrate specificities of the other two clusters are unknown. sub-networks of other sugar-specific transcription factors such as the repressors galr and frur of galactose and fructose metabolism respectively were also found to be downregulated. sugars serve as substrates for the synthesis of glucans and associated by-products required for adherence to the tooth surface, biofilm formation as well as for the formation of organic acids which aid cariogenic disease progression . the sub-network co-regulated by cody  meanwhile was found to be enriched with genes belonging to the metabolism and biosynthesis of amino acids, particularly the branched chain ones such as leucine, valine and isoleucine. the control of the metabolism of these amino acids by cody has already been reported  <cit> . hence, from the preliminary analysis of the regulatory response network, it can be stated that carolacton has an inhibitory effect on the central metabolism of sugars and amino acids by downregulating genes co-regulated by the global transcriptional factors ccpa and cody.

immediate induction of the pyrimidine metabolism
peptidoglycan is an important constituent of the gram positive cell-wall. it is expected that cell membrane damage and biofilm inhibition would have a substantial effect on pathways and genes related to cell wall synthesis and metabolism. udp-n-acetylglucosamine, a key intermediate in the biosynthetic process of the cell wall component peptidoglycan, is produced by glycolysis, sugar metabolism as well as the pyrimidine metabolic pathway  <cit> . expression data indicate the absence of immediate modulation and at later time points the downregulation of the glycolytic pathway as well as of the pathways related to the metabolism of various sugars such as fructose, mannose and galactose. on the contrary, two pyrimidine biosynthesis gene clusters  belonging to the pyrr sub-network and coding for the enzymes of the pyrimidine metabolism pathway  were upregulated by about  <dig> to  <dig>  log2-fold at 5 min post treatment . it is of note that most of the genes in the pyrimidine metabolism pathway were not transcriptionally altered with the exception of the two strongly upregulated pyrefdz and pyrrpba-carb operons. these operons encode enzymes catalyzing the biochemical steps leading to the production of ump and udp  suggesting that this part of the pathway is specifically activated. an upregulation of the pyrimidine metabolism pathway would produce pools of udp-n-acetlyglucosamine  for peptidoglycan synthesis compensating carolacton-induced membrane and cell wall damage. the upregulation of pyrimidine biosynthetic steps was also observed in an s.aureus strain harboring a mutation of a two component system essential for cell wall metabolism  <cit> .figure  <dig> 
heat map representation of the transcriptional response of the
s. mutans
pyrimidine metabolic pathway upon carolacton treatment. genes from the pyrimidine metabolism pathway were among the first to be modulated upon carolacton treatment. the log2-fold expression change of pathway genes at  <dig> min post treatment were used for the heat-map representation. green indicates upregulation and red downregulation. the scale is indicative of the corresponding changes in normalized gene expression. pathway genes encoding enzymes catalyzing reactions leading up to ump were strongly upregulated while most of the other pathway genes exhibited relatively weak modulation. enzymes marked in black bold rectangles indicate the corresponding strongly upregulated transcripts of the pathway. white cells correspond to pathway enzymes not found in the genome of s. mutans ua <dig>  if a particular enzyme corresponds to multiple transcripts , then the transcript with the highest amplitude of log2-fold change was used. graph generated using the mayday visualization tool version  <dig> .
normalized expression profiles of genes modulated by selected transcription factors in response to carolacton treatment.  the normalized expression profiles of the genes co-regulated by the pyrimidine biosynthesis regulatory protein in the carolacton treatment context trrn of s. mutans. two operons containing genes encoding enzymes involved in the biosynthesis of pyrimidine ribonucleotides were upregulated sharply by about  <dig>  to  <dig> log2-fold 5 min post carolacton treatment.  the expression dynamics of the genes co-regulated by the glutamine repressor glnr in response to carolacton treatment.  the normalized expression profiles of the genes commonly regulated by the downregulated essential tcs response regulator vicr in response to carolacton. vicr modulated genes include those encoding virulence attributing products such as glucosyltransferases b and d, cell wall protein wape among others.  temporal behavior of the  <dig> genes found within the co-regulated group/subnetwork commonly modulated by smu. <dig> encoding the cysr cysteine metabolism regulatory protein. co-regulated gene groups were constructed by overlaying predicted regulator-binding site maps onto the co-expression network as shown here  specifically for the network confined to cysr. the node corresponding to the lone regulator  in the gene group co-regulated by cysr is marked in grey.



carolacton affects glutamine metabolism
genes in the trrn predicted to be co-regulated by the glutamine synthetase repressor glnr along with glnr itself were associated with a sharp downregulation initially . it is known that glutamine is an important source of nitrogen for s. mutans <cit> . some of the glnr-modulated genes in response to carolacton treatment included a glutamine transporter gene-cluster , the glutamine/glutamate biosynthesis operon , as well as an operon consisting of the putative ammonium transporter coding gene nrga and the nitrogen regulatory protein coding gene glnb. other glutamate and glutamine metabolism related genes such as citzh and idh <cit> , whose modulation was also reported to be mediated by glnr  <cit> , were downregulated initially until 20 min post carolacton addition. the protein products of the citzh and idh genes catalyze the steps leading to the formation of alpha-ketoglutarate from oxaloacetate   <cit> . the expression pattern of the genes predicted to be controlled by glnr suggests an activational  rather than an inverted  relationship. but glnr is known to function as a repressor protein. however, this does not seem to be a conflicting observation since glnr orthologs have been known to have dual activator-repressor functions  <cit> . hence, the s. mutans glnr could also be a dual regulator given that several transcriptional regulators with dual functions have been reported earlier in s. mutans.

glutamate is known to play a role in the acid tolerance response  mechanism of s. mutans which is crucial for the survival and adaptation of s. mutans. carolacton has the maximum effect in terms of membrane damage and cell death in actively growing biofilm cultures at low ph. but the transcriptional changes  of glnr and its target genes occurred at a neutral ph  thus ruling out atr as a cause for the intial modulation of glnr mediated genes. at later time points which correspond to a low ph, the upregulation of the glnr-modulated genes occurred although a downregulation should have been the expected trend to enhance the atr. this suggests that carolacton directly or indirectly diminishes the atr thereafter. alternatively, the upregulation of the glutamine metabolism genes comprising the glnr co-regulated gene group after the initial downregulation could possibly be explained as a means to provide precursors for peptidoglycan biosynthesis. thus, it is plausible that the pyrimidine metabolism is induced to feed the peptidoglycan biosynthesis during the initial phase  followed by the upregulation of the glutamine metabolism related genes during the later phase.

trrn genes co-regulated by the essential response regulator vicr
the microarray data show that vickr, one of the earliest responding tcss upon carolacton treatment, was downregulated. the vickr tcs plays a major role in the biofilm formation, competence development, oxidative stress tolerance, acid tolerance, autolysin production, glucan and fructan metabolism of s. mutans. in addition, the response regulator vicr has also been identified as being essential for the survival of s. mutans, i.e. it is an essential gene which cannot be deleted  <cit> . the gene group co-regulated by vicr  in the trrn consisted mostly of downregulated genes including those encoding surface structure and cell wall proteins such as glucosyltransferases  b and d, glucan binding protein b , and the sortase-anchored cell wall protein wape <cit>  among others. this is consistent with the previous study  <cit>  whereby all the genes including the ones described here and co-expressed with the downregulated vicr had reduced transcript abundances. the evidence put together suggests that carolacton could interfere with the signalling mechanisms related to the activity of this essential response regulator thereby exerting its biofilm inhibitory and membrane damaging effects. some of the genes such as gtfb, gbpb and comc in the vicr co-regulated gene cluster were already known to be direct transcriptional regulatory targets  <cit>  of the vicr protein thus contributing to an independent verification of our network prediction based on time-series microarray data and binding motif information.

modulation of genes co-regulated by the cysteine metabolism controlling transcription factor cysr
genes connected by edges to cysr  in the co-expression network had both inverted and positive expression patterns compared to that of cysr . after combining the cysr binding motif information  <cit> , directionality was assigned to the edges after which all of the cysr co-regulated genes were having only positive expression patterns  in relation to cysr. cysr was found to modulate  <dig> trrn genes  making it the transcriptional regulator with the second highest degree  in the carolacton context trrn. some of the genes transcriptionally modulated by cysr include smu_ <dig> encoding a putative-40 k cell wall protein precursor, smu_ <dig> encoding a putative glycosyltransferase-n-acetylglucosaminyltransferase and smu_ <dig> whose gene product has been predicted to be an uncharacterized autolysin among others. besides, smu_ <dig> whose gene product is a rgg family  <cit>  regulator protein was also observed to be among the cysr sub-network as were genes encoding putative nif proteins related to nitrogen metabolism and those such as the smu_1074-smu_ <dig> operon involved in cysteine metabolism. statistically significant enrichment for various functional categories was not observed within the cysr sub-network and this might be attributed to the low number of genes from any given category. nevertheless, the functional relevance of the individual genes  within the cysr sub-network as well as its connectivity in the trrn point out the importance of cysr in the response of s. mutans biofilms to carolacton.

experimental verification of the predicted regulatory interactions between mbrc  and the murmn-smu_ <dig> operon
by combining gene expression and binding motif information, mbrc was predicted to regulate four so far unidentified target genes  in the carolacton treatment context trrn. the autoregulatory response regulator mbrc -also known as bcer- is encoded within a four-gene operon  and has been shown to regulate cell envelope stress response mechanisms in s. mutans <cit> . ouyang et al. demonstrated that mbrc transcriptionally regulates the genes smu_ <dig>  smu_ <dig>  smu_ <dig> and smu_ <dig> by binding to their promoter elements via a conserved binding motif. the binding motif consensus consists of a conserved pair of inverted repeats separated by  <dig> variable nucleotides   <cit> .

among our predicted mbrc target genes, smu_718c codes for a hypothetical protein with a haloacid dehalogenase-like domain, and smu_ <dig> and smu_ <dig> encode two different enzymes, murn and murm respectively. these enzymes catalyze the last steps of the peptidoglycan biosynthesis pathway and also play an important role in imparting resistance to cell wall-acting antibiotics . figures 6a and b illustrate the coexpression of mbrc with the murmn-smu_718c operon genes and the presence of the potential mbrc binding site  upstream of the putative target murmn-smu_718c operon respectively. this potential binding site differs from the motif consensus identified by ouyang et al.  <cit>  by the presence of two substitutions in the inverted repeat and is located upstream  of the transcriptional start site of the murmn-smu_718c operon.figure  <dig> 
experimental verification of the predicted transcriptional regulation of the
murmn-
smu_718c operon by the response regulator mbrc. the predicted transcriptional regulatory relationship was based on a well correlated  expression profile between mbrc and the murmn-smu_ <dig> operon as well as the presence of a  putative mbrc binding site  in the upstream regulatory regions of the murmn-smu_ <dig> operon. the alignment among the mbrc binding sites in other experimentally verified targets  reported by ouyang et al.  <cit>  and the putative site upstream of the predicted target  murmn-smu_ <dig> operon is shown. the signature repeats of the mbrc binding motif are italicized, underlined and shown in bold.  binding of mbrc to the promoter region of the gene smu_ <dig>  was verified using electro mobility shift assays , as already reported by ouyang et al. <cit> .  emsa also provided the verification of the in-vitro binding of the mbrc protein to the promoter region of the predicted target murmn-smu_718c operon via the putative binding site thus confirming that the latter is a transcriptional regulatory target of mbrc. the triangles indicate increasing concentrations of mbrc in the binding reactions. black triangles followed by ir indicate target dna fragments lacking the mbrc binding site.



to verify this predicted regulatory relationship, electro mobility shift assays  were carried out. the promoter region of smu_ <dig> served as a positive control as the binding of mbrc to it was reported previously  <cit> . an unrelated dna fragment  was added in all the samples to prove the specificity of the binding reaction. as shown in figure 6c, the results confirmed the binding of mbrc to the smu_ <dig> promoter as well as the necessity of the consensus motif for the binding of mbrc to its target. when an unrelated transcriptional regulator vicr was used instead of mbrc in the binding reaction as a control to test the specificity of the assay, no shifting of the dna band was found while with increasing mbrc concentrations, a clear shift was observed . no significant shift was observed upon deleting the binding motif from the smu_ <dig> promoter. similarly, mbrc also bound to the promoter region of smu_718c as indicated by a band shift at mbrc concentrations higher than or equal to 5pmol . with increasing amounts of mbrc  present in the binding reaction mixture, a shift from 250 bp  to around  <dig> kbp was observed. no shift was observed in the control lane corresponding to the reaction mixture containing an unrelated transcriptional regulator vicr  confirming the absence of non-specific binding. furthermore, the deletion of the mbrc binding site from the murmn-smu_ <dig> promoter also abolished the binding of mbrc to its dna target. thus the observations from the emsa studies have confirmed that the murmn-smu_ <dig> operon is a direct target of the mbrc response regulator as predicted from the regulatory response network. the two substitutions present in the mbrc binding site upstream of the murmn-smu_718c operon could reflect a less stringent binding of mbrc. accordingly, the shift of the smu_718c target dna occurred at a higher mbrc protein concentration  than that  observed for the corresponding smu_ <dig> target dna.

our finding that mbrc directly controls the expression of two enzymes involved in a central step of cell wall synthesis further highlights the importance of this response regulator for the cell envelope stress response and for maintaining cell wall homeostasis. the reconstitution of the gram positive bacterial cell wall during growth is intricately linked to the synthesis of peptidoglycan polymer chains  <cit> . both murm and murn encode alanine adding enzymes involved in the branched peptide peptidoglycan biosynthetic pathway and have also been reported to be primary determinants of the peptidoglycan stem peptide structure  <cit>  which in turn affects various virulence properties such as antibiotic resistance  and pathogenesis  <cit> . thus, although the transcriptional induction of the murmn-smu_ <dig> operon and the mbrc gene is relatively weak following carolacton treatment, it might still be significant since only a few copies of the enzymes might potentially be required to catalyze the peptidoglycan biosynthetic reactions. post transcriptional regulation of enzymes involved in cell wall synthesis and cell division might also significantly contribute to a quick and efficient adaptation of the cell to maintain cell wall homeostasis. thus small transcriptional changes might result in strong changes of enzyme activity. induction of the mbrc regulon by carolacton is reminiscent of the previously observed  <cit>  bacitracin induced cell envelope stress response mediated by this regulon in s. mutans. this finding further points out the influence of carolacton on cell wall synthesis as reported previously  <cit> .

deletion mutants of “key” transcriptional regulators
based on the inferred trrn and co-expression networks, single gene deletion mutants corresponding to five different transcriptional regulators  were constructed. we chose these potential key genes for experimental evaluation based on the following criteria. next to that of cody, cysr  was identified as the regulator with the highest connectivity in the regulatory response network. cody is a well-known global master regulator  <cit>  and its deletion has been shown to have obvious phenotypic effects such as the reduced capacity to form biofilms  <cit> . since biofilm growth is a pre-requisite for the inhibitory action and membrane damage caused by carolacton, cody was not chosen as a deletion candidate. rgg  was identified as the only transcriptional regulator encoding gene among the cysr co-regulated genes and hence was chosen as a candidate for deletion. alterations in the cell wall metabolism could play a critical role in the response of s. mutans biofilms to carolacton due to the observed membrane and cell wall damage  <cit> . glnr was chosen as a possible knock-out target due to its importance in peptidoglycan biosynthesis and cell wall metabolism via many of the glutamine-metabolism and transport genes which it modulates as observed in the trrn. spxa  and fabt  were identified as the top two nodes purely based on connectivity in the co-expression network and hence chosen for further testing. the other genes from the co-expression network were not chosen in this work.

the susceptibility to carolacton treatment of 20 h-old static biofilms of the corresponding key regulator gene deletion mutants was tested using live/dead viability staining. as shown in figure 7a, carolacton only marginally reduced the viability  of the biofilms of the cysr gene deletion strain, while complementation of cysr in trans fully restored the carolacton sensitive phenotype of the wildtype . it was previously shown that carolacton exclusively damages growing biofilms  <cit> . the observed strong loss in sensitivity of the cysr gene deletion strain to carolacton was not biased due to poor or significantly slower growing mutant biofilms since the final growth yield and doubling time of the cysr gene deletion mutant was only slightly reduced in comparison to the wildtype . strikingly, the spxa gene deletion strain displayed impaired ability to grow under acidic conditions  <cit> , a condition known to be essential for the carolacton induced membrane damage in s. mutans <cit> . however, all the tested strains with the fabt or cysr deletion showed similar susceptibilities to carolacton relative to the wildtype . for the fabt deletion mutant though, no final conclusion regarding its sensitivity to carolacton treatment could be drawn since the mutant strain grew very poorly under the tested conditions and formed very thin biofilms. since growth is a prerequisite for the membrane damage caused by carolacton treatment  <cit> , the results of the live/dead staining for the fabt mutant should be interpreted with caution. however, the membrane integrity of the fabt deletion mutant was highly compromised , as determined by live/dead staining. the importance of fabt for maintaining membrane integrity in s. mutans biofilms might also be indicative of its involvement in the membrane damage caused by carolacton treatment. furthermore, fabt was identified as a top structural hub of the inferred co-expression network, indicating its essential physiological role, and the deletion of which is therefore expected to have a high chance to cause poor growth.figure  <dig> 
effect of deleting five “key” transcriptional regulators and sensitivity of the
cysr
deletion mutant to carolacton treatment.  inhibition of viability caused by carolacton treatment was tested for the biofilms of gene deletion mutants of  <dig> key transcriptional regulators identified from network analysis. the inhibition of viability was determined by live/dead staining of 20 h-old static biofilms of mutant, wild type and cysr complementation strains under carolacton treatment and is expressed as inhibition of the green/red fluorescence ratio. the bars show the mean of three independent biological replicates.  the effect of carolacton treatment on the number of colony forming units  of biofilms of the s. mutans ua <dig> wildtype and cysr gene deletion mutant was also investigated. the cfu experiment was repeated in two biological replicates. the sequences of primers used for generating the deletion mutants are given in additional file  <dig> 



the role of cysr in the response of s. mutans biofilms to carolacton
from our initial susceptibility studies of mutant biofilms under carolacton treatment, cysr could be identified as being essential for the sensitivity of growing s. mutans biofilms to carolacton treatment. the almost complete loss of sensitivity of the cysr mutant to carolacton treatment was independently confirmed by the determination of colony forming units of carolacton treated and untreated biofilms of the wild type and cysr gene deletion strains. while the wildtype showed a reduction of cfus of approximately 75%, the carolacton treated and untreated mutant cells showed almost no difference in the amount of colony forming units . thus the experiment clearly confirms the essential role of cysr in the response of s. mutans biofilms to carolacton treatment, as predicted from the trrn. the genome of s. mutans encodes  <dig> lysr-type transcriptional regulators, of which  <dig>  are phylogenetically linked and control the supply of sulfur amino acids  <cit> . cysr is known to modulate the expression of genes involved in cysteine metabolism in s. mutans <cit> . here, we provide data showing that apart from its role in cysteine metabolism, cysr is essential for the response of s. mutans biofilms to the biofilm inhibitor carolacton. this implies a potential role of cysr in cell wall maintenance, as this trait was shown to be impaired in carolacton treated biofilm cells and cell wall changes are most likely responsible for cell death caused under acidic conditions  <cit> .

the inferred transcriptional regulatory targets of cysr, as identified after the integration of contextual coexpression correlation and binding motif information, indeed comprise genes involved in maintaining cell wall homeostasis. genes smu_ <dig> and smu_ <dig> encode two autolysins which were not characterised so far. interestingly, both genes were immediately  and constantly upregulated after carolacton treatment and belong to the strongest regulated genes of our time-resolved transcriptome study. smu_ <dig> encodes a 40 k cell wall protein which was shown to exhibit murein hydrolase activity using a peptidoglycan zymogram assay and is likely linked to the cell surface via the sortase system  <cit> . as cell wall synthesis during growth depends on a balanced interplay between build-up and breakdown of the cell-wall, enhanced autolysin activity might promote cell lysis  <cit>  and thus explain the influence of cysr on cell death. however, deletion of smu_ <dig> and smu_ <dig> did not cause a carolacton insensitive phenotype . another cysr regulated gene, rgpg , encodes a putative udp-n-acetylglucosamine undecaprenyl-phosphate glcnac 1-phosphate transferase. this enzyme catalyses the first membrane localized step of the biosynthesis of various polymers of the bacterial cell wall. the other potential target genes include the gene cluster smu_1074-smu_ <dig> which encode putative metabolic enzymes belonging to the pathways related to cysteine metabolism and is concurrent with the known role of cysr in cysteine metabolism  <cit> .

it should also be noted that cysr and its paralog cpsy are located in close vicinity to the genes of the de novo pyrimidine biosynthesis pathway on the genome of s. mutans. the pyrimidine biosynthesis genes were shown to be the strongest upregulated genes 5 min post carolacton treatment. the functionality of pyrimidine metabolism, especially of the pyr gene clusters upregulated specifically under carolacton treatment, could possibly be linked to the availability and synthesis of cell wall precursors. in prokaryotes, genes encoding products involved in the same or related biological functions are often located in close neighbourhoods on the genome .

moreover, for the s. iniae cysr ortholog cpsy, it was shown that this lysr type transcriptional regulator  induced cell wall changes essential for the intracellular survival of this invasive pathogen in neutrophils  <cit> . interestingly, in the study of allen et al. <cit> , it was determined that deletion of cpsy alters the cell surface charge, muropeptide composition and susceptibility to lysozyme treatment. this is fully in accordance with the current understanding of the mode of action of carolacton  <cit> . however further experiments are necessary to verify the targets of cysr experimentally  and to fully address the role of cysr in cell wall metabolism e.g. by knocking out the cysr regulated autolysins. altogether, our data strongly suggest a so far unidentified role of the cysr transcriptional regulator in cell wall homeostasis.

a highly interesting aspect of the network prediction is the finding that cysr potentially regulates another transcriptional regulator . as the carolacton specific regulatory response network contains albeit only two levels of hierarchy, cysr can thus be considered as a potential global regulator. rgg transcriptional regulators associated with small hydrophobic peptides  were identified to represent a part of a novel quorum sensing mechanism in streptococci  <cit> . rgg proteins have been identified and conserved in nearly all streptococci  <cit> . this mechanism works independently of a tcs, but senses the signalling molecule inside the cell after its internalisation via an oligopeptide permease  <cit> . but the rgg knockout strain showed comparable susceptibility to carolacton treatment as the wildtype strain  thus excluding the possibility of rgg being a critical regulator mediating the observed effects of carolacton.

with respect to cysr however, its deletion mutant displayed a loss of sensitivity to carolacton as a result of a reduction in the inhibition of viability caused by carolacton. nevertheless, cysr might not represent the primary target of carolacton as the treated biofilm cells of the cysr gene deletion mutant still exhibit an inhibition of about 10%. moreover, phenotypic differences between carolacton treated and untreated cysr mutant biofilm cells were observed, indicating that carolacton can still bind to its target and induce changes in the cellular morphology. nevertheless, the lethal effects of carolacton treatment apparently rely to a large extent on the presence of an intact copy of the cysr gene. another interesting question is the link of cysr to the pknb controlled regulon, as pknb was also shown to be essential for carolacton mediated cell death  <cit> . with pknb being a global regulator of cell division  <cit>  and virulence attributes  <cit> , the regulons of pknb and cysr might converge at the level of the modulated autolysins. the cysr coregulated genes smu_ <dig> and smu_ <dig> were  <dig> of the  <dig> strongest modulated genes in the transcriptome analysis of an exponentially growing pknb deletion strain  <cit> . however, as the deletion mutants of smu_ <dig> and smu_ <dig> are still susceptible to carolacton treatment, this potential overlap of the regulatory systems does not provide an explanation why both the pknb and cysr deletion mutant biofilms exhibited almost no sensitivity to carolacton treatment.

since lttrs show a high degree of sequence conservation, control important metabolic pathways of sulfur containing amino acids, and since sulfur is essential for the active sites of many enzymes, the transcriptional regulator cysr might also be an attractive drug target. co-factor binding is required for its transcriptional activation, and the likely cofactor could be o-acetylserine   <cit> . thus, small molecule inhibitors could potentially be designed to compete with the co-effector molecule for the binding site on this lttr and to finally block its biological function. to conclude, we have shown here strong evidence that the role of cysr may be much more diverse and important than previously expected. traits essential for survival like cell wall metabolism and sulfur amino acid supply are controlled by this lttr. thus cysr might represent an attractive novel streptococcal drug target.

linkage between the pknb and cysr regulons
deletion of cysr almost completely prevents cell death in carolacton treated biofilms, a finding previously reported for the gene deletion strain of the serine threonine protein kinase  encoding gene pknb as well  <cit> . this instantly raises the question whether the regulons of these two proteins overlap or if pknb is located upstream of cysr in the regulatory cascade and thus controls the latter’s activity. both regulators putatively modulate the expression of the two carolacton responsive autolysins smu_ <dig> and smu_ <dig>  which might explain the shared insensitive phenotype to carolacton of their mutant strains.

however, in this study, we focus only on the transcriptional network analysis, while pknb modulates its target genes via protein phosphorylation at the post-transcriptional level  <cit> . thus the question whether and on which level the modulated networks of pknb and cysr converge and if they represent the essential pathway for the carolacton mediated cell death cannot be fully answered from the transcriptional regulatory network analysis. to quantitatively understand the effects of carolacton on cell metabolism and to determine the missing layers in the regulatory cascades of cysr and pknb, it is necessary to consider the regulatory effects of small non-coding rnas  <cit>  and other post-transcriptional and post-translational modifications  <cit>  including modulation by other signalling pathways  <cit> . transcriptional network analysis is generally lacking in information about these important regulatory mechanisms which have been shown to be essential for cellular metabolism and homeostasis  <cit> . nevertheless, we have demonstrated here the high merit of transcriptional network prediction and analysis to identify a key regulator mediating cell death in s. mutans biofilms in response to the biofilm inhibitor carolacton.

CONCLUSIONS
we have used a combination of transcriptional network prediction and experimental verification to analyse the response of s. mutans biofilms upon treatment with the biofilm inhibitor carolacton. according to our knowledge, this is the first study inferring a genome-wide transcriptional regulatory response network for s. mutans using heterogeneous data including a time-series transcriptomic dataset and transcription factor binding site information. based on the inferences from the regulatory network, we experimentally verified important predicted transcriptional regulatory interactions between the cell envelope stress modulating tcs response regulator mbrc and the operon harbouring the murmn genes encoding cell wall metabolism associated enzymes. cysr, a regulator known to modulate cysteine metabolism, was predicted and experimentally verified to be an essential key regulator for the mode of action of the biofilm inhibitor carolacton. our data strongly suggest a role of cysr in cell wall metabolism, cell division and cell surface biogenesis, apart from its already known role in cysteine metabolism and sulfur supply in s. mutans, thus highlighting its potential as an attractive novel streptococcal drug target. we here also demonstrate the high predictive power of the network construction and analysis strategy used in this work.

