BACKGROUND
rapid, accurate and sensitive detection of bio-threat agents requires a broad-spectrum assay capable of discriminating between closely related microbial or viral pathogens. in cases where a biological agent release has been identified, forensic analysis demands detailed genetic signature data for accurate strain identification and attribution. identification of genetic signatures for detection coupled with identification of pathogenic phenotypes would provide a robust means of discriminating pathogens from closely related but benign species  <cit> .

current forensics methods based on bacteriological, serological, biochemical and genomic strategies have been used to detect pathogens using serological methods  <cit> , pcr  <cit> , real time pcr  <cit>  and multi-loci vntr  or mlva  <cit> . although bacteriological culture of brucella spp. from blood, milk, fetal fluids and tissues, or other host tissues remain the 'gold standard' for diagnosis, bacteriologic culture has reduced sensitivity, is labour intensive, time consuming, typically requiring two weeks, and is a risk for laboratory personnel  <cit> . serological assays, such as rose bengal, a rapid plate agglutination diagnostic test, is currently used for diagnosing infection with brucella species in the field  <cit> , however serological tests frequently have reduced specificity due to cross reactivity with other bacteria. specific antibodies are required to be present at sufficiently high level and may require several weeks to develop before they are detectable. pcr based methods are used for epidemiological trace back and strain specific identification  <cit> . although rapid in nature, specific primers are required for specific genes from these genomes or 16s rrna genes or vntr  in a given genome. real time pcr based methods have been used to identify brucella species using is <dig>  bcsp <dig> and per target genes  <cit> . in addition, assays based on single-nucleotide polymorphisms have been developed for identification of brucella isolates at the species level. these snps have been used to classify isolates into known brucella species  <cit> . recently mlva or multi-loci vntr  a genotype-based typing method and has been used as an epidemiological classification and snp identification method for brucella isolates in a field population  <cit> . mlva method is used to understand the genetic diversity in polymorphic loci and to establish taxonomic relationships between different biovars of brucella. it is used for microbial typing and epidemiologic studies by amplifying loci which are specific to a given genome and sequencing these regions. this is a powerful approach and is being used to create phylogenetic relationships and discovery of single nucleotide polymorphisms in independent loci from different brucella isolates  <cit> .

array based approaches for forensic detection utilizes genome specific ribosomal rna genes, genome specific pcr markers or oligonucleotide probes. arrays from rrna are derived from a combination of rrna genes from a given set of organisms of high priority. universal pcr is used to amplify one or more universal genes, including 16s, 18s and 23s as well as screen for pathogen-specific polymorphisms  <cit> . one of the challenges of this approach is the frequent and unexpected amplification of contaminating template dna, as observed in control reactions. another potential problem with targeting 16s rrna pathogen specific sequences is unexpected polymorphisms. hence, naturally occurring variants may not be represented on the microarray, and failure to detect the variants would represent false negatives  <cit> . another common pcr based approach detects pathogen type by amplification of a specific set of genetic markers that are measured on an array that has several probes for genes from a set of organisms. such tests have been used for food-borne bacteria such as e. coli o157:h <dig>  <cit> , viruses  <cit>  and mixtures of pathogens  <cit> . the drawback of using this approach with multiplex pcr primers sets is the generation of spurious products  <cit> . array based technologies using 70-mer oligonucleotide probes derived from pathogen specific genes have similar factors that require consideration. for instance, viral detection using a microarray composed of  <dig>  unique viral oligonucleotides  derived from  <dig> distinct viral genomes has been previously demonstrated  <cit>  as a powerful viral detection mechanism, but the drawback of this strategy is that only the group of known pathogen-specific genes will be queried.

given the enormous spectrum of genetic possibilities, only a highly parallel field deployable technology that is universal in nature has near-term potential to address these needs. the initial vision for a universal dna microarray was a matrix of oligonucleotide containing features with unique n-mer probes  <cit> . this matrix could in theory be used to query a biological sample for the presence of any nucleic acid sequence. this technique requires constructing an array that contains 4n features. larger values of n infuse greater specificity into the arrayed probes, but as n increases the number of required features grows rapidly. this universality is obtained by synthesizing a combinatorial n-mer array containing all 4n possible sequences of length n  <cit> . the key issue is to find a value of n that is large enough to afford sufficient hybridization specificity, yet small enough to be practically fabricated and analyzed.

we have previously demonstrated the utility of a genome sequence-independent microarray for identifying genetic differences  <cit> . the initial prototype of universal arrays used oligonucleotide probe lengths of  <dig> and  <dig> bases. from  <dig> possible probes, a subset of  <dig>  probes was synthesized using in situ synthesis technology and digital optical chemistry   <cit> . fluorescently labelled genomic dna was hybridized to produce unique informative patterns  on a test set of pathogens and host . in addition, we have shown that a custom microsatellite microarray can be used to demonstrate global differences between species by measuring hybridization intensities for every possible repetitive nucleotide motif from 1-mers to 6-mers  <cit> . further we have used genome sequence independent microsatellites to identify global differences in the genomes of  <dig> cancer, cancer-free and high risk patient cell line samples  <cit> . this paper describes a larger high density oligonucleotide microarray with  <dig>  elements, called universal bio-signature detection array , designed by our laboratory and commercially produced by roche-nimblegen  using light-directed photolithography  <cit> . the platform design which consists mainly of probes, that are tailored to be genome independent, is mathematically derived and therefore unbiased .

this strategy exploits the unique signature of a sample in the form of a pattern generated from hybridization of any unknown genome  to a very high-density species-independent oligonucleotide microarray. brucella species and several other pathogens were used as examples to demonstrate this forensics technology platform. hybridization patterns are unique to a genome, and potentially to different isolates or a mixture of organisms. these techniques may be especially useful in evaluating and differentiating species whose genome has not yet been sequenced.

RESULTS
ubda array sensitivity and specificity of probe hybridization
dna microarrays using oligonucleotides are widely used in biological research and are usually sequence specific. two primary types of parameters are required to evaluate the robustness and sensitivity of dna microarray experiments- labelling and hybridization  <cit> . sensitivity of a given array platform is often defined as the minimum signal detected by the array scanning system  <cit> . in our case we have used labelling controls, where specified dna molecules  are spiked into experimental human genomic dna samples prior to fluorescent labelling. a set of six synthetic 70-mer oligonucleotides  was designed to be spiked into each labelling reaction and hybridized to a constellation of  <dig> probes that were replicated five times on the array. we compared signal intensity values from control probes on the array hybridized with human genomic dna and 70-mer oligonucleotides spiked into a separate sample of human genomic dna. each spike-in concentration was added on an individual array. we measured sensitivity of the array as a decrease in the correlation coefficient r <dig> value in the signal intensity from human genomic dna spiked with 70-mer oligonucleotides when compared to the unspiked human genomic dna sample. the sensitivity of the ubda was examined by the addition of 70-mer synthetic oligonucleotides to the labeling reaction of human genomic dna sample . spike-in control synthetic 70-mer oligonucleotides were added at varying concentrations;  <dig>  picomolar,  <dig> picomolar,  <dig> picomolar and  <dig> picomolar respectively. figure  <dig> elucidates that the sensitivity range of detection for the ubda is between  <dig> picomolar and  <dig> picomolar as seen by the decreased r <dig> values of  <dig>  and  <dig>  respectively for perfect match probes for these two concentrations when compared to the un-spiked human genomic dna sample. the sensitivity of detection is estimated between a concentration of  <dig> picomolar and  <dig> picomolar. at concentrations lower than  <dig> picomolar, the r <dig> value for perfect match probes is  <dig>  which is within the ability to resolve samples statistically and confirms that there was no detectable variation at the lower oligonucleotide spike-in at these concentrations. this evaluation demonstrates the variability of signal intensities contributed by differences in oligonucleotide concentrations spiked into the human dna sample compared to the un-spiked human dna sample. regression analysis of probe signal intensity values from the mis-matched probes in the data set are in additional file  <dig>  figures s1a-s1d. we have assessed array variability over several arrays using a common human dna sample in the reference channel. we obtained an r <dig> value of  <dig>  +- <dig> .

the specificity of the computationally derived 9-mer probes on the ubda array was studied using the selectivity of the middle nucleotide in each probe. we hypothesized that dna strands generally will not hybridize efficiently to any probe for which there are multiple mismatches in proximity to the center-most base. the array design was based upon the prediction that the use of relatively short probes  would result in the middle approximately  <dig> bases dominating hybridization kinetics. probes on the ubda that contained the stui site  were located and classified by the nucleotide position of the cut point, relative to the center of the probe on the microarray by a custom computer code. dna was digested to completion with stui, and compared to matched dna that was not digested. each of the 9-mer probes with stui restriction enzyme sites were binned depending on the nucleotide position of the stui restriction site relative to the center of the probe. thus probes with the stui restriction enzyme site were binned in terms of base location according to the position of the stui restriction enzyme cut site with respect to the center of the probe. as expected, probes with restriction enzyme site in the center of the probe displayed the highest degree of specificity demonstrated by a reduction in signal. a log <dig> fold change of - <dig>  was obtained when comparing digested dna to undigested dna, averaged over microarray probes with the restriction enzyme site at the center of the probe. microarray probes with the stui site located at the center demonstrated reduced intensity, confirming specificity of genomic dna to hybridize to the center of the probe. the trend of the log <dig> fold change increased as the stui restriction enzyme site moved away from the center of the probe with the average results increasing towards zero . thus, confirming that the center nucleotide is the most selective in the hybridization complexes.

identification of synthetically mixed pathogen sample
to establish the ability to decipher a synthetically mixed sample on the ubda array, lactobacillus plantarum  and streptococcus mitis  <cit>   genomic dna were mixed in a ratio of 4: <dig>  for a total of  <dig> μg of dna, and thus adjusted for copy number of each of the two genomes and hybridized to the array. in addition, pure genomic dna samples from l. plantarum and s. mitis were also hybridized individually on separate arrays. the minimum amount of sample required to be detected by hierarchical clustering was determined by an assumption that the mixed sample would cluster under the same node with known samples. as seen from figure  <dig>  the mixed sample comprising of lactobacillus plantarum and streptococcus mitis groups with pure samples from l. plantarum and s. mitis . these results show that if 25% of the sample is from a second genome, it will group with the higher copy genome on the dendogram heat map generated from the hierarchical clustering algorithm. a sample with lactobacillus plantarum and streptococcus mitis genomic dna in a 4: <dig> ratio  was spiked-in with  <dig> ng  of pbluescript plasmid   <cit> . however the node for this sample  did not cluster with pure samples from lactobacillus plantarum and streptococcus mitis, instead it clustered closest to a pure sample of pbluescript . spike-in from a low complexity plasmid genome with a high copy number genome such as pbluescript can dominate the signature pattern. the alteration of the signature pattern is so great that the sample cannot be distinguished on the dendogram from pure bacterial genomes. therefore, we are in the process of developing algorithms which will produce a similarity score for a given genome in a mixed genome sample by comparing it to a wide spectrum of species in our genome signature repository.

identification of genetic signatures from closely related brucella species
the spectrum of organisms chosen for hybridization on this array, were primarily bio-threat zoonotic agents infecting farm animals. our initial studies were based on the ability of the 9-mer probe signal intensities to distinguish between different brucella species. currently, there are nine recognized species of brucella based on host preferences and phenotypic preferences. six of those species are brucella abortus , brucella canis , brucella melitensis , brucella neotomae , brucella ovis  and brucella suis   <cit> . all of these species are zoonotic except b. neotomae and b. ovis. raw signal values from the pair data files for the cy <dig> channel were background corrected and quantile normalized  <cit> . signal intensities related to the 9-mer data set were parsed from the data file using a perl script. these files were imported into the genespring gx  program. data from these files was clustered using the hierarchical clustering algorithm to generate a heat map and identify a pattern within the underlying data.

the dendogram of this heat map which runs vertically along the left side of the heat map in figure  <dig> shows the unique bio-signature patterns from 9-mer probes obtained from brucella suis  <dig>  brucella abortus rb <dig>  brucella melitensis  <dig> m, brucella abortus 86-8- <dig> and brucella abortus  <dig>  normalized data from the 9-mer data set were filtered for intensity signals greater than the 20th percentile. only intensity signals with a fold change of  <dig> or greater were included. these  <dig>  elements were subjected to a hierarchical clustering algorithm with euclidean distance being used as a similarity measure. centroid linkage rule was applied in the clustering algorithm. the signal intensity values were represented as a log <dig> scale. one of the array features was pathogen specific probes designed for independent validation. these probes are species specific to a small set of pathogens including avian influenza virus, rift valley fever virus, foot and mouth disease virus, brucella melitensis  <dig> m, brucella suis  <dig> and brucella abortus biovar  <dig> strain 9- <dig> .

the genomes of b. melitensis and b. suis have been completely sequenced . comparative genome analysis for these genomes shows that the two genomes are extremely similar. the sequence identity for most open reading frames  was 99% or higher  <cit> . we computationally evaluated the published genome sequences for b. suis  <dig>  <cit>  and b. melitensis  <dig> m  <cit>  to determine the specific instances in the genome sequence of each  <dig> base core probe sequence from the array. normalized signal intensity for each of the  <dig>  9-mer probes represented on the array were divided by the corresponding counts of 9-mer probe occurrences for both b. suis and b. melitensis. the resulting values for a set of  <dig>  probes were then plotted as illustrated in figure  <dig>  with b. melitensis and b. suis  on the ordinate and abscissa, respectively. pearson's correlation coefficient was subsequently calculated . this correlation value indicates that the 9-mer probe signal intensities are in agreement with 'known' genome sequence similarity scores for b. melitensis and b. suis.

taxonomic phylogenetic relationships between organisms hybridized on the ubda array
phylogenetic trees are used as a tool in comparative sequence analysis to illustrate the evolutionary relationships among sequences. to create a phylogenetic tree based on 9-mer signal intensities, genomes listed in  were compared pair-wise, using the pearson correlation measure . in this study, we demonstrate the use of signal intensities generated from 9-mer probe data to clearly cluster hosts and pathogens into to their 'known' phylogenetic relationships. we have previously shown that a custom microsatellite microarray can be used to demonstrate global microsatellite variation between species as measured by array hybridization signal intensities. this correlated with established taxonomic relationships  <cit> . data obtained from the ubda arrays  and computational analysis , for all  <dig>  9-mer probes, were treated identically for the purposes of tree building. all  <dig>  9-mer data points for each sample were first normalized using genespring . a pearson's correlation matrix was subsequently produced and then converted to a taxonomic tree using the neighbour-joining program within the phylip software suite and treeview program  <cit> . trees were not rooted to any specific organism. the lower branches of the phylogenetic tree as shown in figure  <dig> display the segregation and differentiation of the various brucella species. the mixed sample comprising of l. plantarum and s. mitis  was found to be closer to the l. plantarum  versus s. mitis  on the phylogenetic tree since there was a higher copy number of this genome in the sample . the tree illustrates that the 9-mer probe intensities can be used in species differentiation. the taxonomic tree is an approximate visualization estimation, using a distance matrix which successfully separated mammalian, bacterial and viral clades.

samples subjected to dna amplification are comparable to unamplified samples
in preparation for the ubda becoming not only a detection assay but also a diagnostic test for the identification of numerous pathogens, it was recognized that pathogens may be present in a given sample at very low copy numbers and may be further diluted by genetic material recovered from the host. microarrays require  <dig>  -  <dig> μg of high-purity genomic dna, which may be difficult to obtain from all samples. to overcome this limitation the potential for dna amplification, artefacts that may significantly alter hybridization to the microarray were examined. to analyze for this possible limitation, a  <dig> ng  aliquot of francisella tularensis lvs strain genomic dna  was amplified using the whole genome amplification method . a total of  <dig> μg of the resulting amplified dna was hybridized to the ubda array and compared to the hybridization pattern resulting from the hybridization of  <dig> μg of unamplified dna from the same source. figure  <dig> shows a linear regression of the two samples  which resulted in an r <dig> value of  <dig> , well within the r <dig> =  <dig>  +-  <dig>  reproducibility found for the custom microsatellite microarray  <cit> . this confirms that whole genome amplification of pathogen material in small amounts is comparable to the unamplified genomic sample. we obtained these results using the standard protocol with  <dig> ng of starting material without optimization. we are targeting a 1- <dig> nanogram sample size as a starting amount of material in an optimized robust, field sample evaluation.

discussion
this is a new forensics array based technology to identify any species. this unique strategy of using patterns generated from hybridization of any unknown genome  to a very high-density species independent oligonucleotide microarray and comparing those patterns to a library of patterns of known samples can be used to identify unknown organisms. figure  <dig> shows the grouping of the different genomes into bacterial, viral and eukaryotic genomes. further the brucella species grouping pattern obtained from the phylogenomic analysis using the pearson's correlation matrix shown in figure  <dig> are in agreement with brucella species showing hierarchical clustering represented as a similarity matrix shown in figure  <dig>  the ubda hybridization patterns are unique to a genome, and potentially to different isolates and to a mixture of organisms. in the future, this forensics method will work by comparing signal intensity readout to a library of readouts established by interrogating a wide spectrum of species which will be available at our website http://discovery.vbi.vt.edu/ubda/. the phylogenetic tree illustrates the ability of 9-mer probes to differentiate among brucella species. pair-wise comparisons between different genomes can be used as a measure to classify bacterial, viral or mammalian genomes into their respective clades. we have begun to amass a library of 'signatures' to facilitate accurate identification and classification of "unknown" samples. we are currently expanding the repository of available bio-signatures to several hundred genomes including field isolates from bacteria, viruses, host genomes and vectors infected with pathogens. some of the genomes in this repository are classified in the select agent category. ubda forensics application has the potential to be compatible with micro-machine based front end sample processing and preparation platforms, thus enabling the production of a highly automated, fast and accurate field-deployable detection system.

other diagnostic techniques such as pcr or rt-pcr require several primers to be designed which are specific for each genome- bacterial, viral or host. there may be spurious products for primers binding at low specificity. the processing costs should also be taken into consideration for these methodologies. the current cost for the ubda array is approximately $ <dig> per sample which includes reagents and processing costs. the current turnaround time for this forensics technology is less than  <dig> hours. this is a single experimental procedure compared to other technologies which involve a series of methods such as serological, biochemical and genomic based. genome specific arrays are in the similar price range as the ubda array; however researchers can only assay a single genome or a small subset of them. currently the ubda platform requires a turnaround time approximately one day from hybridization on the array to data analysis. a diagnostic laboratory in the field requires proximately two weeks before the identity of a given infectious agent can be determined. these methods usually require several standard serological and biochemical tests that are usually selected and based on the clinical symptoms observed in the field. serology test results are usually available after  <dig> hours. although each of these tests is cost effective in nature, they must be fine tuned to be pathogen specific.

the ubda approach can be applied to any genome, even in the presence of background contamination  for which, the unique pattern will be known. the patterns generated from an unknown sample  with minimal specimen processing can be identified or at least the most similar related species will be predicted by comparison to a library or a repository of patterns. these techniques may be especially useful in evaluating and differentiating species whose genome has not yet been sequenced. along with a repository of unique hybridization signatures from the genomes of pathogens and their hosts, this array has the ability to rapidly and adequately identify biological threat agents and newly emerging infectious pathogens that are high risk priorities in bio-defense. application of this technology has the potential to extend to other areas such as food and environmental microbial monitoring and basic research including,  speciation and evolution,  human/animal disease biomarker discovery,  measurement of the genomic response to a chemical, radiation or other exposure, but most important,  pathogen forensics and characterization of natural or engineered variants that may confound other species-specific approaches.

CONCLUSIONS
genetic signature discovery and identification of pathogenic phenotypes will provide a robust means of discriminating pathogens that are closely related. this array has high sensitivity as demonstrated by the detection of low amounts of spike-in oligonucleotides. hybridization patterns are unique to a specific genome and these can be used to de-convolute and thus identity the constituents of a mixed pathogen sample. in addition it can distinguish hosts and pathogens by their divergent phylogenomic relationships as captured in their respective 9-mer hybridization signatures. this platform has potential for commercial and government agency applications as a cost effective reliable platform for accurately screening large numbers of samples for bio-threat agents in forensic analysis, screening for pathogens that routinely infect animals and humans, and as a molecular diagnostic of micro-organisms in a clinical environment. this platform is highly attractive, because it has multiplex capacity where knowledge can be drawn from the array hybridization patterns without prior explicit information of the genomes in the samples. these hybridization patterns are being translated into a knowledge base repository of bio-signatures so that future users of this technology can compare and draw inferences related to the sample under study. the data from these experiments and the array design are located on our web site at http://discovery.vbi.vt.edu/ubda/.

