BACKGROUND
many genes originated via gene duplication in both prokaryotes and eukaryotes. evolution after gene duplication can follow several scenarios
 <cit> . subfunctionalization leads to gene copies evolving specialized functions, all of which are necessary for performing the original gene function. in the neofunctionalization scenario, one gene copy is preserved by purifying selection, while the other copy may evolve a novel function through rapid adaptation. finally, in a process known as pseudogenization, one gene copy will lose its function due to accumulation of mutations. another possible evolutionary fate for gene duplicates is gene conservation. conserved gene copies can be easily detected based on their high levels of sequence similarity, which typically occurs for genes whose products are needed in high concentrations. all gene copies are strongly expressed in such cases. gene duplicates can maintain their identical function in two ways: by purifying selection which prevents the duplicates from diverging, or alternatively through concerted evolution where frequent gene conversion maintains sequence identity within the genome
 <cit> .

gene copy number variants have been frequently found and studied in humans
 <cit> , but are also known to exist in other eukaryotic organisms, such as mouse
 <cit> , maize
 <cit> , and yeast
 <cit> . studies on human copy number variants revealed that multiple gene copies are often associated with diseases
 <cit> , but can also have positive effects as has been shown for salivary amylase genes
 <cit> . less is known about consequences of protein coding gene copy number variations in prokaryotes. though there have been studies on variation of ribosomal rna gene copy numbers and possible consequences
 <cit> . bacteria exhibiting multiple rrna gene copies seem to respond faster to resource availability
 <cit> . accelerated growth rate has been conjectured to be a result of high ribosomal copy numbers
 <cit> . in e. coli it is known that more than one rrna operon has to be functional to express sufficient ribosomes and achieve maximum growth. bacteria generally possess fewer than  <dig> rrna gene copies
 <cit> , though some proteobacteria and firmicutes may have as many as  <dig> copies of rrna operons
 <cit> . furthermore, ribosomal rna copy numbers have been suggested to be phylogentically informative
 <cit> . phylogenetic positions of organisms and the amount of rrna operon copy numbers they possess are generally associated.

although potentially important effects of ribosomal copy numbers have been suggested in various studies, protein coding gene copies are less considered. this could be due to the assumption that selection for faster cell replication leads to genome reduction in prokaryotes
 <cit> , which would reduce the likelihood of survival of multiple gene copies. indeed, a tendency towards genome reduction has been observed in endosymbiotic bacteria, and in free living prokaryotes including unicellular marine cyanobacteria
 <cit> . however, conclusions that contradict this have been made by kou and colleagues
 <cit>  who suggest that a lack of large prokaryotic genomes could be the result of selection acting on an upper limit of genome size. thus, if there is no selective genome reduction in prokaryotes, multiple gene copies might be more widely distributed and of greater importance for prokaryotes than is believed so far.

among prokaryotes cyanobacteria depict one of the morphologically most diverse phyla. several of their morphotypes seem to exist for over two billion years as indicated by a well preserved fossil record
 <cit> . cyanobacteria inhabit diverse environments. they had  an exceptional influence on the planet due to their ability to conduct oxygenic photosynthesis and fix nitrogen. according to their morphology, cyanobacteria have been classified into five different sections
 <cit> , though molecular data indicate that probably none of the five groups is monophyletic
 <cit> . section i and ii consist of unicellular cyanobacteria. section ii species can be distinguished from all other cyanobacteria based on their reproduction via multiple fission. cyanobacteria belonging to section iii to v exhibit filamentous growth. across the five existing morphotype sections cyanobacteria exhibit several patterns of differentiation. the majority of extant cyanobacterial species control gene expression using a circadian clock. additionally, several multicellular cyanobacteria developed mechanisms to differentiate not only temporarily, but also spatially. trichodesmium is the only section iii genus known, able to produce specialized cells  in the middle of a filament
 <cit> . the principal form of terminal cell differentiation is observed in section iv and v cyanobacteria. given the morphological variety found in this phylum, we ask whether gene dosage  is associated with adaptive morphological strategies such as cell differentiation in cyanobacteria. variation in 16s rrna gene copy sequences and numbers has been reported previously for cyanobacterial genera
 <cit> , but no phenotypic correlations were found. little is known about protein coding gene copy numbers in cyanobacteria.

in this study we searched for both ribosomal rna and protein coding gene copy number variation in diverse species of cyanobacteria for which full genome sequences were available. ribosomal rna gene copies were examined since it is known that they might occur in multiple copies and exhibit gene dosage effects
 <cit> . segments of genes within the rrna operon are strongly conserved because of their functional relevance
 <cit> . these unique features have made 16s rrna gene sequences a favored taxonomic marker for prokaryotes
 <cit> . although rrna sequence variation within a genome is low for most species
 <cit> , considerable intragenomic differences have been reported in some non-cyanobacterial species
 <cit> . this has led to the questioning of the reliability of 16s rrna genes as a taxonomic marker. we examined sequence identity of rrna genes within species of cyanobacteria by conducting phylogenetic analyses and calculating phylogenetic distances. results for cyanobacteria were compared to data from the prokaryotic phyla chroroflexi, spirochaetes, and bacteroidetes. paralogs of 16s rrna genes are almost identical in cyanobacterial species and suggest a deviation from divergent evolution of gene copies. investigating variation in copies of the internal transcribed spacer region , located between the 16s and 23s rrna genes, suggests that both concerted evolution and purifying selection are viable hypotheses for the evolution of 16s rrna in cyanobacteria. furthermore, we observed an exceptionally strong sequence conservation in 16s rrna orthologs within the cyanobacterial phylum. a level of conservation that could not be observed in any of the eubacterial phyla studied here.

RESULTS
identification of conserved gene copies and their phylogenetic relevance
aside from ribosomal rna genes, we identified  <dig> protein coding genes which possess multiple conserved gene copies in at least one cyanobacterial species . from this total of  <dig> genes, only six showed significant correlations to morphological characteristics. ribosomal rna genes were the main class of genes exhibiting conserved gene copies that were significantly correlated to the cyanobacterial sections iv and v. species capable of terminal cell differentiation exhibited four or five copies of ribosomal genes. furthermore, gloebacter violaceus and a thermophilic synechococcus species share a distinct pattern of gene copy numbers which adds independent support to previous studies that have grouped these species separately from the rest of cyanobacteria, closer to an eubacterial outgroup
 <cit> .

we investigated conserved gene copies that exhibited ≥90%, ≥95% and ≥98% amino acid sequence identity within a genome. results varied mainly in numbers of transposase gene copies detected. therefore, results of gene copies with an identity of ≥98%within a genome and ≥50%between species are presented here. for these genes, we mapped copy numbers in relation to the phylogenetic position within cyanobacteria . the highest number of gene copies  was found for a transposase encoding gene in microcystis aeruginosa. transposases are enzymes that catalyze the movement of transposable elements. previous studies have estimated that genes encoding for transposases are the most widespread genes, and often occur as multiple copies
 <cit> . almost half of the conserved gene copies identified in this study were transposase encoding genes. the frequency of transposase genes varied between different species. microcystis aeruginosa possessed various transposase genes, whereas strains belonging to the genera synechococcus and prochlorococcus, and cyanobacterium sp. ucyn-a seem to exhibited fewer transposase gene copies.

synechococcus sp. ja-3-3ab, a unicellular cyanobacterium isolated from a hot spring in yellow stone national park
 <cit> , exhibited a pattern of gene copy numbers that generally deviated from the pattern observed in other synechococci. it shared identical copy numbers of protein coding genes with gloeobacter violaceus. these included a series of not yet annotated genes missing in all other cyanobacteria. this pattern of almost identical conserved gene copy numbers supports other phylogenetic and phylogenomic studies that place these two species close to each other at the base of the cyanobacterial phylogenetic tree
 <cit> . in a previous study using 16s rrna sequences, schirrmeister et al. <cit>  observed a close phylogenetic relationship of gloeobacter violaceus and another synechococcus strain
 <cit>  isolated from the same source as synechococcus sp. ja-3-3ab. similar results have been found elsewhere
 <cit> . the phylogenetic distance of gloeobacter violaceus to other extant cyanobacteria has been pointed out before
 <cit> . major differences involve the light harvesting machinery. gloebacter violaceus lacks thylacoid membranes
 <cit> , and various genes from photosystems i and ii.

furthermore, we identified several genomes with more than one ribosomal gene copies. cyanobacterial taxa used in this study exhibited one to four conserved rrna gene copies . position of ribosomal gene copy numbers across the bayesian tree were phylogenetically non-informative . however, four rrna copies could only be observed in terminally differentiated species. additional data on 16s rrna copy numbers shown in the rrn-database, confirmed these findings and furthermore reported five copies for several cyanobacterial species belonging to sections iv and v. aside from 16s rrna data, no further information was obtained, because these taxa have not been fully sequenced, yet
 <cit> .

d1: largest distance between gene copies within the genome. f: coordinates for the 16s rrna genes on the forward strand of the chromosome. r: coordinates for the 16s rrna genes on the reverse strand of the chromosome.

correlation of copy numbers to terminal differentiation
to confirm possible associations of ribosomal rna copy numbers to species capable of terminal cell differentiation, we visualized the distribution of ribosomal gene copy numbers and tested for possible correlations to morphotypes . we additionally calculated potential correlations of all protein coding gene copy numbers identified in this study with morphotypes. therefore, we divided cyanobacteria into four morphological groups according to their mode of differentiation. group  <dig>  exhibits no mode of differentiation and contains solely unicellular species. group  <dig>  consists of species from section i to iii which control gene expression via a circadian rhythm, but lack any other form of differentiation. group  <dig>  is formed exclusively by the genus trichodesmium which is able to form temporarily differentiated cells for nitrogen fixation. the last group  contains species from section iv and v which are able to produce terminally differentiated cells.

using spearman’s rank correlation coefficient  and pearson’s correlation coefficient , we estimated a potential correlation of copy numbers to the defined morphological groups. both tests indicated significant correlations to morphological groups for all ribosomal genes and two transposase coding genes. furthermore, spearman’s ρattested a significant correlation to morphology for photosystem ii reaction center d <dig> protein , and a weaker correlation to gas vesicle protein gvpa  coding genes. a significant pearson’s correlation was found for a gene coding for a hypothetical protein . in figure
 <dig> distributions of ribosomal rna gene copy numbers across morphological groups are presented as boxplot graphics with correlation coefficients, and p-values shown. all taxa capable of terminal differentiation exhibited four copies of ribosomal rna genes. correlation coefficients for 16s and 23s rrna genes were ρ= <dig> /r= <dig> , in both cases, and ρ= <dig> /r= <dig>  for the 5s rrna genes. including additional data from the rrn-database
 <cit>  , resulted in an even stronger correlation of 16s rrna gene copy numbers to cyanobacterial species capable of terminal differentiation . cyanobacteria belonging to section iv and v form terminally differentiated cells  in the absence of fixed nitrogen. in these cells oxygen sensitive nitrogen fixation can take place while neighbouring cells conduct oxygenic photosynthesis. these heterocystous cells undergo various structural and physiological alterations to protect nitrogenase from oxygen in a ‘microanaerobic’ environment. as a result they lose their ability to conduct photosynthesis and to divide. multiple rrna gene copies could have positive effects during heterocyst formation, the same way as they help e.coli to achieve maximum growth
 <cit> , and increases responses to changing environmental conditions
 <cit> . an increased amount of functional ribosomal operons likely depicts an advantage in the process of cell differentiation, during which expression of various genes is upregulated
 <cit> .

strong conservation of 16s rrna copies
previous studies have sometimes questioned the potential of 16s rrna gene sequences as a taxonomic marker due to variation that has been observed between gene paralogs in some non-cyanobacterial organism
 <cit> . we explored sequence variation of 16s rrna genes in cyanobacteria by reconstructing phylogenetic trees with bayesian inference. we evaluated the divergence of 16s rrna gene copies within and between cyanobacterial taxa. the inferred bayesian consensus tree is displayed in figure
 <dig>  investigated cyanobacteria, exhibit one to four 16s rrna copies per genome. unicellular species partition in two major groups: species belonging to the marine pico-phytoplankton genera synechococcus and prochlorococcus, and members of the genera synechocystis, cyanothece and microcystis which show a closer relation to multicellular cyanobacteria. all multicellular species studied here are closely related, and species capable of terminal differentiation form a monophyletic group. comparisons of our study to previous findings show high similarities. our results agree with a comparative phylogenomics approach used by swingley et al. <cit> , a consensus tree of concatenated sequences presented by blank and sànchez-baracaldo
 <cit> , and, are highly similar to 16s rrna analyses conducted by schirrmeister et al. <cit> . using a larger taxon set
 <cit> , we previously inferred polyphyletic groupings of undifferentiated multicellular species belonging to section iii. this however is not deducible from the taxonomically more limited full genome data set used in the present study.

in cyanobacteria 16s rrna sequences were highly conserved within a genome. three species showed minor nucleotide differences. the two 16s rrna copies of microcystis aeruginosa differed by four ‘single nucleotide polymorphisms’ , in cyanothece sp. pcc  <dig> one snp was detected, and in nostocpunctiforme one 16s copy possessed two snps. the differences are visualized in a molecular distance matrix in figure
 <dig>  16s rrna copies within species were identical for the majority of taxa  and can be clearly distinguished from gene copies belonging to different species. furthermore, using the whole dataset we calculated mean distances within strains  and between strains . results are presented in table
 <dig>  significance of differences in sequence distances found within and between cyanobacterial strains were estimated using bootstrap re-sampling of the original data set. distributions of the resulting mean distances are displayed in additional files
 <dig> and
 <dig>  for each distribution, an overall mean distance was calculated . mean distance of 16s rrna sequences within species  is significantly smaller than between species . 95% confidence intervals of distributions obtained by re-samplings do not overlap. although previous studies have claimed that variation within 16s rrna sequences might affect reliability of this gene as a taxonomic marker
 <cit> , this was not found for genera used in this study. rather, the extreme sequence conservation of 16s rrna gene copies from the same species supports 16s rrna as a reliable genetic marker for the taxa analyzed here.

comparison of mean distances in the different eubacterial phyla and the 95% confidence intervals of  <dig>  mean values calculated from bootstrap samples. confidence intervals do not overlap between cyanobacteria and the other eubacterial phyla. distances of 16s rrna sequences are significantly smaller in cyanobacteria compared to the other prokaryotes.dw and db: mean calculated from the original dataset including all distances.
db∗ and
dw∗: mean of  <dig>  means calculated using bootstrap sampling.

in order to verify the significance of our results for cyanobacteria, we compared phylogenetic and distance results from the cyanobacteria to three eubacterial phyla . figure
 <dig> presents the bayesian consensus phylogenetic tree and the distance matrix reconstructed for the phylum chloroflexi. trees and distance matrices for the phyla spirochaetes, and bacteroidetes are shown in additional files
 <dig> 
 <dig> and
 <dig>  within the phylum chloroflexi, species contain one to five 16s rrna genes per genome. the phylogenetic tree is well supported by posterior probabilities. previous phylogenetic studies have divided the phylum chlorophlexi into several subdivisions
 <cit> , the majority of which is supported by our inferred tree. distances of the 16s rrna sequences within genomes and between species of chloroflexi were significantly higher than found for cyanobacteria . mean distances of species belonging to the phylum chloroflexi were dw= <dig>  within species, and showed a 10-fold difference compared to distances between species . chloroflexus auranticus and chloroflexus sp. were the only species among the taxa analyzed in this study where 16s rrna orthologs were more similar than their paralogs. further comparison of mean distances for 16s rrna sequences including phyla spirochaetes and bacteroidetes confirmed the significantly lower sequence variation in cyanobacteria. a comparison of the distributions of mean distances calculated from the bootstrap re-sampling show no overlap of the 95% confidence intervals of cyanobacteria and any of the other phyla . furthermore, within all studied phyla, mean distances for 16s rrna gene copies within a genome  were smaller by at least one order of magnitude compared to mean distances for 16s rrna sequences between species . our results support 16s rrna as an adequate taxonomic marker for the species analyzed in this study and agree with previous findings of limited heterogeneity in 16s rrna
 <cit> .

evolution of 16s rrna gene copies in cyanobacteria
two mechanisms may conserve sequences of gene copies: purifying selection and concerted evolution. these two can be distinguished by examining variation patterns in non-coding regions
 <cit> . in the case of purifying selection, non-coding regions are thought to evolve neutrally, accumulating mutations over time due to genetic drift. if concerted evolution shapes gene copies, the entire gene sequence including non-coding regions and synonymous sites are homogenized. during this process, genes evolve in ‘concert’, which is commonly observed in plants and fungi
 <cit>  . subsequently, paralogs show stronger similarities than orthologs, as a result of intragenomic homologous recombination
 <cit> .
 <dig> chance of replacing the other. once gene copies are identical homologous recombination cannot reverse the process. hence if this process is repeated recursively at a population level, one gene copy will eventually get fixed.

the strong conservation of 16s rrna sequence copies in cyanobacteria and eubacteria examined here suggests that 16s rrna in these species is shaped by strong purifying selection and/or concerted evolution. generally, it is assumed that ribosomal genes in archaea and eubacteria are shaped by concerted evolution
 <cit> . 16s rrna genes can be subdivided in strongly conserved and more variable regions. one would expect that if purifying selection acts as the major force for conservation of gene copies within a genome, some neutral variation should be detected in these variable regions. the extraordinary conservation of 16s rrna in cyanobacteria seems to indicate that concerted evolution is a more likely explanation. to verify this suggestion we examined variation in the internal transcribed spacer region, located between the 16s and 23s rrna gene. though previous studies have suggested conservation of some regions in the its sequence, several regions should not be affected by selection and evolve neutrally. if the entire its sequence showed the same degree of conservation as does the 16s gene sequence, then purifying selection —which would only act on the functional parts— could be rejected as a driving force. however, the strong conservation found in cyanobacterial 16s rrna gene sequences could not be confirmed for the its-regions of four cyanobacterial taxa . for cyanobacteria and the eubacterial phyla studied here, both concerted evolution and strong purifying selection, appear to be the main contributing factors.

although, cyanobacteria are assumed to be an ancient phylum which presumably raised oxygen levels in the atmosphere more than  <dig>  billion years ago
 <cit> , variation in 16s rrna copies is extremely low. indeed, phylogenetic tree reconstructions for 16s rrna result in relatively short estimated branch lengths within this phylum, compared to other eubacterial phyla . short evolutionary distances for 16s rrna sequences are consistent with a pattern that has been found for morphological characters in cyanobacteria before. in  <dig>  j.w. schopf compared the tempo and mode of evolution in cyanobacteria from the precambrian, to evolutionary patterns observed in fossils during the phanerozoic. the latter have been described by g.g. simpson in his book “the tempo and mode of evolution”
 <cit> . schopf found that evolutionary predictions which simpson made for metazoan fossils from the phanerozoic, can also be applied to cyanobacteria. morphologically, cyanobacteria seem to evolve not only at a “bradytelic”, but “hypobradytelic” mode, meaning at exceedingly low evolutionary rates. fossils from the precambrian strongly resemble present morphotypes. the oldest undisputed cyanobacterial fossils date back circa  <dig>  billion years
 <cit> . morphological appearance of these microfossils already suggests the presence of at least four of the morphological sections described by castenholz
 <cit> . it seems that cyanobacteria reached their maximum morphological complexity two billion years ago, and many of today’s species could be described as so-called ‘living fossils’. it remains to be seen whether the low evolutionary rates as seen in 16s rrna sequences and morphological features, is also seen at the genomic and metabolic level. this question can be further resolved as further genomic sequences become available for the cyanobacteria.

CONCLUSIONS
among  <dig> fully sequenced cyanobacterial taxa that were carefully chosen according to phylogenetic position and morphological characteristics, we identified  <dig> protein coding genes that occur as multiple highly conserved copies in at least one cyanobacterial species. copy numbers of ribosomal genes show a significant correlation to cyanobacterial species that are capable of terminal differentiation. the formation of heterocysts, morphologically modified cells for nitrogen fixation, requires a strong increase in gene expression, for which an accumulation of ribosomes could be of potential advantage. further testing would be required though, to make causal conclusions for increased rrna operons in cyanobacteria belonging to section iv and v. furthermore, phylogenetic analyses revealed a high conservation of 16s rrna copies within eubacterial species. though this is true for all phyla that have been analyzed, cyanobacteria exhibit an exceptionally strong conservation. comparison to variation in its regions point to concerted evolution via homologous recombination and purifying selection as the forces behind 16s rrna sequence evolution. comparison of interspecific genetic distances within several prokaryotic phyla, showed significantly lower variation of cyanobacterial 16s rrna gene sequences. this suggests that 16s rrna gene sequences evolve by a ‘hypobradytelic’ mode of evolution, previously suggested for morphological characteristics in cyanobacteria
 <cit> .

