BACKGROUND
translational research is a complex and information-intensive endeavour, involving numerous actors, tools, workflows and data types. several recent reports have defined the translational research cycle as the bidirectional translation of knowledge and evidence between the “bench” and the “bedside”. within this translational cycle, sung and colleagues  <cit>  have defined two critical blockages that exist between basic science discovery and the design of prospective clinical studies , and subsequently between the knowledge generated during clinical studies and the provision of evidence-based care in the clinical or public health settings . a commonly cited phenomenon contributing to the aforementioned t <dig> block is the lack of tools capable of enabling the systematic discovery of meaningful relationships between biomarkers and phenotypes  <cit> . this issue is particularly pressing given the dimensionality and scale of information generated by modern sources such as electronic health records  and laboratory instrumentation . unfortunately, generalizable approaches for creating integrative, multi-dimensional networks spanning a range of granularities from bio-molecules to clinical phenotypes are largely absent in the current literature, with the exception of a few notable cases  <cit> . it is this gap in knowledge and practice that motivates the studies and resultant models that we will report upon in this article.

given the preceding motivation, in the following sub-sections we will: 1) review the experimental context for our work; and 2) introduce three methodological approaches used in our study to induce and reason upon multi-dimensional networks of genes, clinical features, and conceptual knowledge:

experimental context
the experimental context for our work stems from a collaboration with the nci-funded chronic lymphocytic leukemia research consortium . the cll-rc coordinates and facilitates basic and clinical research on the genetic, biochemical and immunologic bases of chronic lymphocytic leukemia , which is the most common adult leukemia in the united states  <cit> . the cll-rc specifically focuses on the identification of phenotypic ↔ bio-molecular relationships that may improve clinical diagnosis/staging and assist in designing personalized treatment plans and evaluating resultant patient responses. the consortium utilizes a shared data management platform, known as the cll-rc integrated information management system , in order to collect, store and analyze longitudinal bio-molecular and clinical data. such data sets are derived from a cohort of over  <dig>  patients spanning a time frame of up to eleven years at the time of this submission. of note relative to this experimental context and the methods and results described in this report, we have utilized three well-known markers for cll diagnosis and staging to verify and validate our findings. specifically, the markers zap <dig>  and cd <dig>  are used, given their previously demonstrated ability to predict igvh  mutational status, a clinical phenotype commonly associated with differentiating between diagnoses of aggressive versus indolent cll  <cit> .

gene co-expression network induction
gene co-expression networks are established by linking genes with similar expression profiles in data sets derived from subjects that demonstrate a shared clinical phenotype of interest. the similarity of such expression profiles are often measured by parameters such as the pearson correlation coefficient , with ρ =  <dig> implying perfect correlation and ρ = - <dig> being a perfect negative correlation  <cit> . analyses of such similarities in gene expression are usually employed to identify networks of genes that may serve to predict disease prognosis or treatment outcomes  <cit> .

clinical feature co-expression network induction
similar to the induction of gene co-expression networks, clinical co-expression network induction involves the discovery and quantification of significant motifs of clinical attributes in large-scale data sets  <cit> . the general methodological pattern for such approaches involves a multi-step process of:

• selecting a set of potentially interesting clinical variables within a large-scale data set, and normalizing or “binning” their values;

• aggregating variables into a composite data table;

• calculating correlation ranked parameters  spanning all potential variable pairings within the data set;

• designating thresholds for correlation metrics to identify potentially significant correlation motifs;

• visualization and expert validation of the resulting clinical feature co-expression networks  <cit> .

these methods are intended to facilitate the identification of clinical features that exhibit similar co-occurrence motifs within multi-dimensional data sets, thus providing the impetus for the retrospective and/or prospective analysis of such patterns and their statistical significance. of note, we represent such clinical features as a network construct in order to provide for a computationally tractable representation. such a structure can incorporate both atomic features and the probabilistic relationships that serve to link such features together. this approach has been described frequently in the published literature  <cit> .

knowledge discovery in databases
conceptual knowledge can be defined as a combination of atomic units of information and the meaningful relationships among those units  <cit> . the work described in this report utilizes a conceptual knowledge acquisition approach known as conceptual knowledge discovery in databases . such ckdd methods focus on the utilization of automated or semi-automated computational methods to derive knowledge from the contents of databases  <cit> . the use of domain-specific knowledge collections, such as ontologies, is necessary to inform this knowledge induction process since commonly used database modelling approaches do not always incorporate semantic knowledge corresponding to its contents. this overall approach is the basis for a specific ckdd methodology known as constructive induction , as is illustrated in figure  <dig>  the network-constructs that serve to link together variable of interests using ci are referred to in the remainder of this report as conceptual knowledge constructs .

RESULTS
in the following sub-sections, we will present the results generated during the course of our multi-methodology study. these results are organized per the phases of our overall research design, and their interrelationships are explicitly represented in the illustration of our study design provided in figure  <dig> 

phase 1a: cke-based network induction
a corpus of  <dig> data elements was extracted from the cims data dictionary, of which  <dig>  and  <dig>  corresponded to phenotypic and bio-molecular variable types, respectively. those data elements were then mapped to concepts found in snomed-ct  and the nci thesaurus ontologies, using the umls  knowledge source server lexical search tool. the initial  <dig> data elements mapped to  <dig>  ontology concepts, of which  <dig>  and  <dig>  corresponded to the initial phenotypic and bio-molecular concepts respectively. using the previously described ci method,  <dig> ckcs were generated. five subject matter experts  with expertise in the cll domain evaluated the validity  and meaningfulness  of a random sample of  <dig> ckcs, indicating that  <dig> %,  <dig> %, and  <dig> % were completely valid, partially valid/invalid, and completely invalid, respectively. the smes further evaluated those ckcs designated as completely valid, and concluded that 90% were meaningful and could be used to formulate a novel hypothesis for further testing.

phase 1b: gene co-expression network induction
the gds <dig> and gds <dig> data sets were retrieved from the gene expression omnibus  database, comprising  <dig>  probe sets. the results for correlation  and intersection analysis as applied to these data sets are summarized in table  <dig>  for zap <dig>   <dig> genes were present in both gene lists, and similarly,  <dig> genes were obtained for cd <dig>  using the codense  algorithm  <cit> , we identified  <dig> highly connected co-expression networks. using iterative analyses, a particularly promising network with  <dig> genes, including zap <dig> and cd <dig> was identified. for the genes in this co-expression network, we compared their expression levels between the  <dig> patients without igvh mutation and the  <dig> patients with igvh mutations as found in the gds <dig> data set. of note and as introduced earlier, igvh mutation status is one of a small number of well-characterized and prospectively validated biomarkers for predicting cll disease progression  <cit> . the genes with significant differences between the two groups were further tested for their capacity of predicting igvh mutation status using a supervised linear classifier and a cross validation with 20% sample holdout. these analyses indicated that the genes that share the same co-expression network with zap <dig> identified using the preceding approach are enriched with genes that show significant differential expression between the igvh unmutated and mutated groups.

phase 1c: clinical feature co-expression network induction
as is described in our methods, we calculated a 125x <dig> correlation matrix using a data set corresponding to a random sample of  <dig> patient encounters recorded in cims . in order to focus on the highly correlated attributes, we set a threshold of ρ≥  <dig> , and generated a clinical attribute network from those attributes satisfying such criteria. a histogram representing the distribution of such values was created and fitted by a straight line in log-log scale, implying that the induced network is scale-free . we examined the top ten nodes in our network that exhibited the highest degree of connections. interestingly, seven of them are related to common cll-related laboratory measurements, including: hemoglobin, billirubin, creatine, albumin, calcium, red blood cell count, and alkaline phosphate. the remaining three nodes are all prognostic markers, including: igvh homology and zap <dig> gene expression. when this network was visualized using pajek , and examined by an sme, it was determined that within the core network, the majority of the attributes corresponded to clinical phenotypes, cytogenetics, and participant demographics. in contrast, at the boundary of the core network, the majority of variables corresponded to prognostic markers that served to interface core nodes with the peripheral nodes. another interesting observation is that all but one of the attributes related to quantitative immunophenotyping measurements were in the peripheral areas of the visualization.

phase 2: heuristic evaluation and model formulation
an sme with over ten years of cll-related research experience reviewed and annotated the possible interrelationships between the networks generated in phases 1a-c using the methods previously described, notably including an inspection of an energy-minimized graph visualization of the composite network created by the semantically-anchored union of the three preceding networks . this analysis indicated the following two characteristics:

1) of the variables included in the random sample of ckcs from phase 1a that were considered both valid and “meaningful”, there was 100% overlap between the initial or terminal concepts included in those ckcs and the concepts included in the top ten clinical nodes identified in phase 1c; and

2) for each gene identified as part of the same ckcs identified as being novel and “meaningful”, there was at least one or more linkages between those genes and analogous genes included in the co-expression network generated during phase 1b.

based upon these findings, our sme hypothesized that multi-dimensional and clinically relevant complexes of biomarkers and clinical phenotypes could be generated through the valid, semantic linkages spanning the three networks. an exemplary instance of such a “vertical linkage” is shown in table  <dig> 

* network path; ** ckc 

discussion
as was stated at the outset of this report, the ability to identify and reason upon complexes of biomarkers and clinical phenotypes is prototypical of the information needs incumbent to both translational research and personalized healthcare. in this report, we have described the application of three different methods for addressing such needs, spanning levels of granularity from bio-molecules to domain knowledge sources, all within a shared experimental context. we have also presented preliminary findings, and a heuristically derived model, for the “vertical” integration of such networks. such an integrated network can ultimately be employed to identify and evaluate higher-order bio-marker-to-phenotype systems that may have basic science and/or clinical significance . however, despite these promising results, a number of critical limitations should be noted, including: 1) the demonstration of our methods and findings relative to a single, disease-focused data set; 2) the continued absence of automated methods to instantiate “vertical” linkages, spanning bio-marker and clinical phenotype networks at various levels of granularity; and 3) the limited number of smes engaged in the validation of our initial results. of note, relative to the first of these limitations, is the non-domain specific nature of the computational methods employed in our studies. we believe that such methods can be readily applied to a broad variety of disease areas, such as current efforts by the authors to verify and validate our approach to multi-network analyses in a number of immunologic and musculoskeletal diseases. in light of the remaining limitations, as part of future efforts in this area of research, we plan to: 1) implement and evaluate a semi-automated knowledge-anchored “vertical” network integration pipeline; and 2) engage a broader audience of smes in systems-level evaluations of our results.

CONCLUSIONS
given the results described in this report, we believe that our initial findings provide the basis for a new, multi-dimensional approach to the discovery of knowledge-anchored biomarker and clinical phenotype complexes. these complexes have the potential to increase our understanding of critical disease domains at a comprehensive and systems level. ultimately, the derivation of these types of systems-level models on a regular basis is critical to realizing the anticipated benefits of translational research and personalized medicine.

