BACKGROUND
mesoamerica is considered one of the largest and most important biodiversity hotspots in the world, based mainly on the global proportion of vertebrate endemism and the loss of the original primary vegetation cover  <cit> . nonetheless, the processes influencing the evolutionary history and diversification within the region are not well understood in most taxa. the mesoamerican region has been a key land bridge for biotic migrations between north and south america , and a significant pulse of avian interchange and further radiation occurred in concert with the isthmus of panama uplift  <cit> . geographic barriers, by promoting and maintaining population divergence, are expected to have influenced historical patterns of diversification and the evaluation of such patterns can provide guidance for the preservation and management of genetic diversity and endemism in the region  <cit> . the mesoamerican highlands have featured recently in vertebrate mitochondrial dna phylogeographic studies  <cit> . these studies observed a point of divergence at the isthmus of tehuantepec, most noticeably in the rodents and birds that inhabit the mesic highlands. the isthmus of tehuantepec, a geologically complex zone that has undergone continental uplift and sea level oscillation since the late miocene  <cit> , has been considered a major biogeographic barrier  <cit> . the temporary isolation of populations from either side of the isthmus owing to oceanic incursions, and the emergence of the sierra de los tuxtlas in the late pliocene -a volcanic massif 200- <dig> km away from the sierra madre oriental- along with changes in local environmental conditions that accompanied late pleistocene glacial cycles, may also explain patterns of biotic diversification in this region.

the wedge-tailed sabrewing , a sexually monochromatic, size dimorphic hummingbird species complex commonly found in montane cloud forests and humid tropical forests  <cit> , offers an excellent system for addressing questions about historical biogeography and speciation of mesoamerican biota. it is one of the few hummingbird species known for both the lowlands and montane region with a geographical disjunction at the isthmus of tehuantepec  <cit> : populations in the foothills of the atlantic slope of the sierra madre oriental  , and the tuxtlas region  and a small area on the isthmus of tehuantepec  , are separated from those found from northeastern chiapas to central-south of the yucatan peninsula    <cit> . across their geographic range, they display subtle variation in plumage coloration and bill and body size, which has lead taxonomists to name three subspecies: campylopterus curvipennis curvipennis , c. c. excellens  and c. c. pampa   <cit> . wedge-tailed sabrewings are remarkable among hummingbirds both because they are one of c.  <dig> out of  <dig> extant hummingbird species known as lek breeders  <cit> , and because of their elaborate singing displays  <cit> . in addition, there are marked regional differences in their vocalizations, most noticeably in the introductory syllable and syllable repertoire  <cit> . their complex syllable structure exhibits geographic variation that ranges from differences between neighboring males within a lek to differences between lek members separated by several kilometers  <cit> .

geographic regions correspond to three disjunct areas along the sierra madre oriental, the tuxtlas region and yucatan peninsula . asterisk indicates populations on for acoustic recordings were made.

species with highly differentiated populations may represent the early stages of the speciation process. in these populations, drift, ecological selection or both can induce changes in traits involved in mate choice, promoting reproductive isolation between allopatric populations that can eventually lead to speciation  <cit> . the sole action of drift and mutation can promote phenotypic differentiation or reproductive isolation  <cit> . in contrast, ecological speciation can occur when divergent selection pressures act generally on the morphological or behavioral characters of species distributed on heterogeneous habitats, where gene flow among locally adapted populations is reduced  <cit> . for acoustic traits, microclimate and vegetation structure can be important selective pressures on the transmission of acoustic traits of birds living in different habitats  <cit> . another possibility is that within populations, stochastic changes in traits driven by processes such as sexual selection promote reproductive isolation between geographically isolated populations where divergent natural selection is not acting  <cit> .

to better understand the patterns of diversification and endemism in mesoamerica, we use mitochondrial  and nuclear  dna data to infer the processes behind the evolutionary history of c. curvipennis. the use of both bi-parentally inherited molecular markers with different mutation rates is important because it allows us to make inferences at different temporal scales and provides more reliable insight into the historical processes involved in the evolution of taxa than studies based on the analyses of a single marker do. in addition to genetic data , we used morphological and acoustic data along with information about the habitat  to examine the relative roles of drift and selection in driving population divergence. the specific goals of this study were to:  examine the patterns of genetic variation and demographic history of c. curvipennis populations,  infer the processes behind its evolutionary history, specifically assessing the role of the isthmus of tehuantepec as a barrier, and  evaluate the role of drift and selection in driving phenotypic  divergence in wedge-tailed sabrewings. patterns resulting from intraspecific geographical variation in phenotypic traits and genetic markers should provide insights into the factors driving population differentiation and ultimately speciation in mesoamerica.

RESULTS
sequence variation and phylogenetic analyses
from  <dig> wedge-tailed sabrewings we obtained mtdna sequences that contained  <dig> polymorphic sites  of the  <dig>  bp of the genes analyzed. no insertions or deletions were present; therefore, variants were identified based solely on nucleotide substitutions. sixty-three haplotypes were identified for the  <dig> wedge-tailed sabrewing populations. haplotype and nucleotide diversity are summarized in table  <dig>  haplotype proportion relative to the number of samples per population was more than 50% in most cases, indicating high haplotype diversity. no differences between populations were evident. nucleotide diversity was low, indicating little variation between sequences from the same population.

estimates based on ten microsatellite loci, and  <dig> bp of the control region and atpase 6- <dig> mtdna genes. n = sample size, observed  and expected heterozygosity , h = number of haplotypes observed, s = number of polymorphic sites, hd = haplotype diversity, and π = nucleotide diversity. asterisks indicate significant departure  from hardy-weinberg equilibrium for locus cacu13- <dig> and † for locus cacu13- <dig> 

the consensus tree obtained from bayesian inference clustered the haplotypes into two main well-supported clades , corresponding to disjunct western  and eastern  groups on either side of the isthmus of tehuantepec . haplotypes of the excellens group from the tuxtlas region were clustered in a well-supported clade nested within the poorly resolved smo clade.

assuming a constant molecular clock and rates of  <dig> and 5% divergence per my, for the atpase coding region beast estimated that the smo and tux clades diverged from the yuc clade  <dig>   and  <dig>   mya, respectively. these results suggest that the split between the sierra madre oriental and yucatan peninsula clades may have occurred during the mid-pleistocene. with respect to smo, for the tux clade the constant clock tmrca estimated divergence times of  <dig>   and  <dig>   years ago for  <dig> and 5% substitution/my, respectively. this implies that the split between the tux and smo clades may have occurred more recently in the late pleistocene.

phylogeographic and genetic structure
the haplotype network showed a strong phylogeographic structure among three groups , but not among populations or areas within the smo  . of the  <dig> haplotypes obtained,  <dig> were private to smo populations. the most frequent haplotype was shared by samples from all of the smo populations, and the rest were low frequency haplotypes . seven haplotypes were private to the tuxtlas region, and are separated from the smo haplotypes by five mutational steps. the remaining haplotypes  were exclusively found in populations from the yucatan peninsula, and formed a separate network .

the amova results revealed significant genetic differentiation at every hierarchical level. when grouped by geographic areas  most of the variation  was explained by differences among areas, whereas variation among populations within areas  and variation within populations  only explained a small percentage of the total variation . the same pattern was observed when grouped by subspecies  with the highest percentage of the variation being explained by differences among groups  and the lowest by differences among populations within groups . Φct values for both analyses were very high  indicating high levels of genetic differentiation among areas and groups. pairwise comparisons of fst among sampling localities ranged from  <dig>  for aqm/ama to  <dig>  for ug/gar and were significant in most cases between sampling localities from the tux region and the other localities, and for the yuc region and the other localities . comparisons between sites located in the same geographic area  were not significant .

data were grouped by geographic area and subspecies. the five areas are nsmo, csmo, ssmo, tux and yuc. groups are curvipennis , excellens , and pampa . ** p <  <dig> .

microsatellite markers
across all sampling localities, the number of alleles per locus varied from  <dig> to  <dig>  and within localities across all loci this number varied from  <dig> to  <dig>  . observed heterozygosity values did not consistently deviate from h-w equilibrium. only four localities were not in h-w equilibrium after bonferroni corrections at locus cacu13- <dig> and one locality at locus cacu13- <dig>  probably due to the presence of null alleles. no significant linkage disequilibrium was detected in any of the population-loci comparisons after bonferroni corrections.

significant genetic subdivision was detected among sampling localities , but not among sampling localities within the fragmented areas of the smo . pairwise fst and rst were quantitatively similar but we only report rst values because the stepwise mutation model implemented in this estimate is more appropriate for microsatellites . pairwise rst values among sampling localities ranged from  <dig>  for xil/ord to  <dig>  for risc/nov. as with the pairwise fst values for the mitochondrial genes, estimates of rst were significant for almost all comparisons between localities from tux versus the rest of the localities and comparisons between localities from yuc versus the rest after bonferroni corrections. values from comparisons between sampling localities within smo were not statistically significant. comparisons between samples from bec and gar  versus the rest were not significant in most cases after bonferroni corrections probably due to sample size, affecting statistical power.

the phenogram constructed with pairwise rst, recovered sampling localities from the yuc group clustering together in a basal position followed by the tux and the smo groups . within the smo group, samples from the northern limit of the distribution  are clustered together, as are samples from san luis potosi . however, localities from the southern distribution  are scattered throughout the tree .

results of the structure analysis corroborated population substructure. using all genotypes together the log likelihood was highest for k = 6; however, when Δk is calculated the break in the slope of the distribution of l was at k =  <dig> . one cluster includes populations from the yucatan peninsula , and the other includes samples from populations from the tux and smo groups . however, in the clustering pattern at k =  <dig>  samples were assigned with high probabilities to three clusters, corresponding to the yuc, tux and smo groups, which is congruent with the sequence mtdna data results. in further analyses of these data from which the yuc samples were first excluded, structure assigned samples to two groups ; in the analysis where the tux samples were excluded two clusters were detected for the smo samples with no evidence of genetic clustering at this level. these results suggest a hierarchical clustering pattern where yuc samples are highly divergent and samples from tux are sub-structured in a cluster that contains samples from smo.

among-group comparisons of gene flow  from the migrate analysis ranged from  <dig>   to  <dig>  , however, all comparisons were less than or not significantly greater than  <dig>  . none of the comparisons among genetic groups indicate contemporary gene flow, suggesting that the isthmus of tehuantepec is preventing gene flow between populations on either side of the isthmus, and that the more recently divergent populations from the tuxtlas region and smo also have interrupted gene flow. estimates of m among populations were only significantly greater than  <dig>  between those within the smo  and the direction of gene flow was asymmetric in most cases. the direction was mainly northwards from ssmo to csmo, and only in few cases did gene flow reached populations on the northern limit of the distribution . estimates of gene flow between populations of different genetic groups were not significantly greater than  <dig> .

donor populations are in the first column. estimates given are followed by 95% confidence intervals and none of the comparisons was significantly greater than  <dig> 

our simulations to test whether genetic groups might have originated in the face of gene flow were consistent across replicates, and produced confident posterior probability peaks for the parameters estimated. when testing for migration following the split between the smo and tux groups, migration rates were higher than  <dig> in the smo-tux direction ,  <dig> - <dig> ) and close to  <dig> in the opposite direction tux-smo , suggesting that divergence took place in the presence of gene flow from the smo to the tuxtlas region. in contrast, low migration rates following the split were estimated for populations east and west of the isthmus of tehuantepec , indicating that the population split occurred in the absence of gene flow, i.e. this geographic barrier was not permeable to migrants. assuming a mutation rate for microsatellites of  <dig>  × 10- <dig>  estimates of effective population size indicate that the ancestral population was significantly larger  than the populations after divergence. the tux group had the lowest population size  followed by yuc  and smo .

morphological and acoustical variation
the manova showed significant lineage differences in male morphology , and these differences were significant for each morphological variable . the relationship between culmen length and wing chord  was further examined for possible allometric effects using the residuals of this relationship, and the differences between lineages were maintained . for females the manova also showed significant lineage differences , and the results of the univariate anovas were all significant . overall these results are congruent with previous subspecific designation based on bill and body size  <cit> , indicating that individuals from the excellens group  are significantly larger than those of the curvipennis  and pampa  groups, and that pampa individuals have shorter bills.

a total of  <dig> syllable types were detected across populations. songs were very versatile and no successive syllable repetitions were detected except for vocalizations recorded in the yuc region from the c. c. pampa lineage, where individuals commonly repeated one of the syllables three times in succession . based on vocal similarity measures , individuals from each sampling locality were clustered accordingly . in addition, the analysis showed individuals from the yuc lineage group together in a basal position followed by individuals from the tux and smo lineages . on average populations from smo shared a lower proportion of syllable types with the tux and yuc lineages , than within any other locality from the smo . despite the great syllable diversity observed across populations and regions, there were some syllables shared by all recorded individuals, whereas other were shared only by members from populations from the smo. regarding acoustic measurements of the common syllable, the first three pcs accounted for 53% of variation . one-way anovas yielded significant group differences in the first pc , but not in the second and third . pc <dig> was mainly explained by minimum and peak frequency of note  <dig>  duration of note  <dig>  and frequency range, peak frequency and duration of note  <dig> 

comparisons between morphological, acoustic, habitat-related, and genetic distances
mantel tests showed a strong positive correlation between genetic  and morphological distances for males , even when controlled for geographic distance . however, the relationships between pairwise rst and morphology were not significant. in the case of females none of the relationships were significant. regarding acoustic distances, mantel test showed a strong positive correlation between genetic and song sharing distance , and also for the genetic and common syllable distance . these relationships were maintained when geographic distance was accounted for . these analyses indicate that more genetically divergent lineages shared fewer syllable types, and differed acoustically in the common syllable, independently of distance. lastly, we did not find a significant relationship between morphological and acoustic distances versus habitat-related  distances for either males or females.

the role of drift and selection: a coalescent test
coalescent simulations  <cit>  of morphology and mtdna sequence data from three populations with large sample sizes of sequences corresponding to the three genetic groups in which morphological characters are fixed  were used to differentiate the roles of selection and genetic drift in morphology evolution. if morphological characters, assumed to be encoded by nuclear genes, have sorted significantly faster than mtdna haplotypes, then the hypothesis of divergent selection rather than that of drift is supported. the observed s value for reconstructed trees was equal to  <dig> when considering three populations for morphology characters. the upper 95% cl for time since population divergence was 3ne generations assuming a dichotomous branching model of divergence and  <dig> ne generations assuming a simultaneous model. when branch lengths were reduced four times to mimic nuclear genes, an s value of  <dig> occurred in one third of the simulated trees for dichotomous branching, and in one fifth of the simulated trees for simultaneous branching. there is a high probability  that nuclear genes would be fixed in these populations under neutrality, suggesting that drift cannot be rejected as a possibility for morphological divergence .

the coalescent simulations of the song and mtdna sequence data from four populations with large sample sizes of sequences in which song characters are fixed  were used to differentiate the roles of selection and genetic drift in song evolution. the observed s value for reconstructed trees was equal to  <dig> when considering four populations for vocal characters. the upper 95% cl for time since population divergence was  <dig> ne generations assuming a dichotomous branching model of divergence and  <dig> ne generations assuming a simultaneous model. when branch lengths were reduced four times, an s value of  <dig> occurred in none of simulated trees, suggesting that there is a very low probability  that nuclear genes would be fixed in different populations under neutrality . in this case the hypothesis of divergent selection rather than that of drift is supported.

discussion
phylogeography and evolutionary history
phylogeographic analyses on mtdna sequence data and microsatellites were highly congruent identifying three wedge-tailed sabrewing lineages: the pampa group in the yucatan peninsula, the curvipennis group along the sierra madre oriental, and the excellens group in the tuxtlas region. the patterns of genetic differentiation inferred here for c. curvipennis are consistent with the results for other codistributed avian species in montane cloud forests of the sierra madre oriental and the tuxtlas region such as chlorospingus ophthalmicus  <cit>  and buarremon finches  <cit> . even though the tux mtdna haplotypes formed a clade nested within the more diverse haplotype clade of the sierra madre oriental, these haplotypes are not shared with individuals from any other population, and are separated by several mutational steps from the smo haplotypes. this suggests that not enough time has elapsed for lineages to sort out the formation of two reciprocally monophyletic clades  <cit> . similarly, the cluster analysis with microsatellites identified the pampa group when k =  <dig> and excellens when k =  <dig>  indicating a lesser degree of divergence between the tux and smo genotypes in comparison to those of yuc. consistent with the lack of haplotype sharing and high pairwise rst values, the results of gene flow measures based on microsatellites indicate that the smo, tux and yuc populations exchange no migrants. both mtdna and biparentally inherited microsatellite loci are spatially structured between allopatric populations of wedge-tailed sabrewings suggesting that gene flow is restricted and that c. c. curvipennis, c. c. excellens, and c. c. pampa constitute genetically unique populations.

it is possible that allopatric fragmentation has affected the genetic structure of wedge-tailed sabrewings. although the existence of several mutational steps in a haplotype network is indeed indicative of allopatric fragmentation, it could also result from non-sampled haplotypes from intermediate populations. the latter is not the case here, as we sampled populations covering the entire geographical range of the species complex . in addition, the possibility that allopatric fragmentation has been a historical process causing the pronounced mtdna divergence between the pampa and the curvipennis-excellens groups is consistent with the hypothesis that the isthmus of tehuantepec was a major vicariant event and has been a significant habitat barrier to dispersal, as observed in previous mtdna phylogeographical studies with montane bird species  <cit> ; however, our study is the first to document the impact of this barrier in a species complex with lowland populations on either side of the isthmus. the isthmus, formed by the superposition of three distinct tectonic episodes, has been exposed to continental uplift and sea level oscillation since the late miocene , periodically encroaching upon or retreating from the coastal plains, with the peak in sea level occurring at the end of the pleistocene  <cit> . the phylogeographic breaks in our genetic data suggest a split between the smo-tux and yuc clades in the mid-pleistocene  toward the end of the isthmus of tehuantepec's process of formation. despite the variability in date estimation using the coalescence approach, our divergence time estimates point to the pleistocene epoch, and these estimates are consistent with the timing of one of the two pulses of diversification proposed by barber and klicka  <cit>  across the isthmus for a community of montane bird species. our results from gene flow and isolation with migration  support the role of the isthmus as an effective barrier in which no migration occurred during genetic divergence.

regarding the most recent divergence between the smo and tux populations, the oscillations in climate during the pleistocene caused a considerable expansion in the range of highland habitats and their descent to lower elevations  <cit> . these repeated altitudinal up- and downslope migrations of montane forest during glacial periods probably connected the cloud forests of the smo with the tux montane region, and as temperatures increased, the redistributed forested habitat caused the isolation of the tux populations. this idea is supported by our results from ima, which suggests that this vicariant event occurred in the face of gene flow, from populations of the smo to those of the tuxtlas region, but not in the opposite direction, indicating that the connection of the forests allow individuals to disperse towards the tuxtlas region. however, estimates of contemporary migration rates indicate that contemporary gene flow is restricted between these two groups. the current distribution of coastal plain along the gulf of mexico, which surrounds and isolates the tuxtlas region from the sierra madre oriental, could be a dispersal barrier between wedge-tailed sabrewing populations. because microsatellites have a faster mutation rate than mitochondrial genes and therefore these markers have very different temporal scales of inference, our measures of gene flow based on microsatellite loci indicate that contemporary gene flow is prevented by both barriers . the absence of suitable habitat on the coastal plains along with the presence of pastures and savanna-like habitats in the isthmus region likely prevents population expansion that could result in secondary contact between the smo, tux and yuc populations. hence, gene flow would require long distance dispersal for wedge-tailed sabrewings to overcome these barriers.

morphological and acoustical variation: the role of drift and selection
morphological data for both males and females indicated that individuals from tux were significantly larger than those from smo and yuc, and individuals from smo and tux had longer bills than those from yuc. the lack of correspondence between climate and topographic conditions and morphological traits suggests that weak habitat selection pressures have been shaping morphological divergence. this inference should be made with caution, considering that habitat structure was characterized using only ground-based interpolated climate and topography data. information about vegetation structure obtained using satellite and airborne remotely sensed images would offer a more powerful way for testing adaptive and nonadaptive hypotheses concerning the evolutionary processes that operate across the environmentally heterogeneous space occupied by wedge-tailed sabrewings. however, these data require substantial processing for applications in spatial analyses and are sensitive to cloud contamination  <cit> ; these data may not be useful for regions with cloud forest and rainforest.

when conducted a coalescent-based test using mtdna sequence data to evaluate whether the observed phenotypic differentiation can be attributed to drift or some form of selection, we could not reject the possibility of drift in driving morphological differentiation of the smo , tux , and yuc  populations. besides, independently of geographic distance, a significant positive relationship between genetic and morphological distances was found highlighting the idea that drift might facilitate phenotypic divergence when acting in concert with selection  <cit> . the increase in body size in small peripheral populations can be driven by random genetic drift  <cit> . in addition, the effective population size of wedge-tailed sabrewings in the tux region is one-third and one-half smaller compared to the smo and yuc groups, respectively. another possible explanation for the increased body size of the tux individuals is the relaxed competition for resources that is expected on islands  <cit>  or in isolated populations such as those in the tux region, which are competing for resources with fewer hummingbird species. if so, this would suggest that individuals from the tux region have evolved independently and unconstrained by the evolutionary events that occurred in the other regions  <cit> .

the increase in culmen length in the smo and tux regions may indicate selection-driven divergence, and the effect of adaptation to local resources  through natural selection. differences in culmen length are congruent with the differences in habitat characteristics of the yucatan peninsula  compared to the higher altitude and wetter habitats of the sierra madre oriental and the tuxtlas region, suggesting that populations adapted to different ecological conditions, including perhaps the presence of flowers with longer corollas. differences in environmental variables provide the potential for ecological differentiation where different selection pressures might act to shape the relationship between pollinator and plant species  <cit> . however, a comparative study involving traits of flowers with hummingbird pollination syndrome occurring in each region and the culmen characteristics of hummingbirds using those resources need to be done.

the divergence of mating-related acoustic signals has been described as being shaped by habitat-dependent selection in many bird species  <cit> , because sounds with certain features are better transmitted in some environments than others. in wedge-tailed sabrewings, some populations live in different habitats with divergent environmental conditions, most markedly in the pampa lineage from the yucatan peninsula whose individuals live in deciduous tropical forest at a lower altitude and much drier conditions than populations from the other lineages, which inhabit cloud or tropical forests at higher altitudes that have wetter conditions. however, we found no significant correlations between acoustic and habitat-related distances , which suggest that these conditions play a minor role in shaping song divergence.

in contrast, we found a strong acoustic divergence pattern in syllable sharing between smo populations and also between geographic areas, the latter corresponding to the genetic differentiation among the three lineages of wedge-tailed sabrewings. each lineage had an exclusive assemblage of syllable types, and song sharing was lower between than within lineages. also, the acoustic traits of a common syllable were more divergent between than within lineages. the coalescent analysis to evaluate whether vocal differentiation can be attributed to drift or selection, suggested that the fixation of song types assumed to be encoded by nuclear genes, has occurred faster than expected by genetic drift, providing evidence that selection is driving song evolution in wedge-tailed sabrewings. in lek-breeding systems where male birds are exposed to strong sexual selection pressures, the use of certain song types over others could increase their adaptation to social conditions and/or reproductive success. although song could potentially play a role in increasing genetic polymorphisms and generating reproductive isolation and speciation through sexual selection  <cit> , further evidence of female preference for local male signals over foreign ones is needed to fully demonstrate that sexual selection is causing speciation in wedge-tailed sabrewings . an alternative cause of divergence of songs in wedge-tailed sabrewings is reinforcement selection against maladaptive hybridization, being song a sexually selected mechanism to maintain reproductive isolation in case of secondary contact  <cit> . however, it is unlikely that the wedge-tailed sabrewings from these populations come into contact owing to the lack of contemporary gene flow shown in this study, which indicates a historically low potential for hybridization.

the positive relationship between genetic and acoustic distances suggests that independently of geographic distance, the most genetically distant lineages shared fewer vocal elements and differed in the acoustic traits of the common syllable. this relationship is expected under a drift model of song evolution, where acoustic divergence is higher between populations that have been genetically isolated for the longest time  <cit> . as in songbirds, song is learned in hummingbirds  <cit> . likely song traits are culturally transmitted through imitation, and learning errors or innovations  across generations can provide an important source of variation  <cit>  affected by processes similar to those driving genetic variation, such as drift or selection  <cit> . in the case of drift, dialects or song variation at spatial scales could arise from a process of cultural diversification where random song mutations are produced by copy errors  <cit> . it has also been suggested that song learning may increase the rate at which genetic predisposition to learn or prefer certain songs evolves in allopatry  <cit> . our data suggest that besides the role of selection in song divergence, these long time isolated lineages may have limited acoustic contact, probably resulting in a low level of repertoire syllable sharing. despite the long isolation, individuals of the three lineages share some syllable types suggesting that their complex songs have conservative vocal elements retained through generations, and that non-shared syllables were gained or lost during the isolation and selection process.

conservation recommendations
the information generated by our study allows us to make the following conservation recommendation. the genetic differentiation among the three genetic groups revealed from the mtdna analyses suggests that these groups have been genetically isolated for a long period of time. this genetic isolation and the lack of contemporary gene flow among these groups were also supported by the microsatellite data. in addition, the ancestral effective population size was larger than the size of either genetic group after splitting as revealed by ima analysis. because smo, yuc and tux are distinct genetic groups with no genetic connection among them, conservation plans should consider the sites within each of them as independent, and future management plans should focus on conserving the genetic diversity of the three genetic groups.

conservation of the tuxtlas region is particularly important due to the restricted distribution of the excellens group, the relatively small effective population size , and because the accelerated deforestation rates in the tuxtlas region  <cit>  is a threat to the unique genetic diversity of this group and possibly that of other endemic forms. although populations within each of the genetic groups showed similar levels of genetic diversity, erosion of genetic variation is more likely to occur in the tux group and thus conservation plans are of particular relevance for this geographic area. the mountains of this region, isolated from other mountain systems, arose from volcanic activity in the oligocene, where oceanward orographic uplift produced one of the wettest climates in mesoamerica  <cit> . this region contains one of the most diverse avifaunas in the northern neotropics and, due to physical isolation it has been considered an important region of endemism  <cit> . considering the alarming rate of deforestation in the neotropics, the preservation of the montane and tropical forest in this region is urgently needed. to this end, the study of other co-distributed taxa to cover the phylogeography of mesoamerica is warranted. this would shed light on any shared patterns of colonization and isolation in mesoamerica and contribute to our understanding of the processes and responses of organisms to the environmental changes that drive population differentiation in this region.

CONCLUSIONS
the genetic and phylogeographic analyses of this study, based on mtdna and microsatellites, uncover the presence of three lineages of mesoamerican wedge-tailed sabrewings that exhibit no contemporary gene flow. these correspond to the disjunct distribution of populations at the sierra madre oriental, the tuxtlas region, and the yucatan peninsula. our results highlight the importance of the isthmus of tehuantepec in generating population divergence c.  <dig>  million years ago without gene flow during the process of divergence, as well as more recent climate events during the pleistocene in driving isolation and population divergence of wedge-tailed sabrewings with gene flow from the smo to the tuxtlas populations. coalescent analyses of the evolution of phenotypic traits suggest that the fixation of song types has occurred faster than would be expected by genetic drift, suggesting that the action of selection is driving song evolution in wedge-tailed sabrewings. however, the role of drift in driving morphological divergence could not be rejected. finally, considering the accelerated deforestation rates in the neotropics the conservation of the montane and tropical forest in this region is needed, and special attention must be paid to small isolated areas with genetic uniqueness such as the tuxtlas region.

