BACKGROUND
disruptive selection occurs in a population when two or more modal phenotypes have higher fitness than the intermediate phenotypes between them  <cit> . disruptive selection has long been viewed as important in maintaining and increasing variation within natural populations  <cit> ; favoring the evolution of alternative phenotypes  <cit>  and sexual dimorphism  <cit> ; and even initiating speciation  <cit> . nevertheless, compared to the other main modes of selection—directional selection and stabilizing selection—disruptive selection has traditionally received much less attention.

despite this relative lack of attention given to disruptive selection, recent meta-analyses suggest that disruptive selection may be at least as common as stabilizing selection  <cit> . indeed, an increasing number of studies have documented disruptive selection in natural populations  <cit> . yet, although these data imply that disruptive selection may be widespread, we still do not know how prevalent it can be within individual systems where it has been found to occur  <cit> .

additionally, the actual causes of disruptive selection have been relatively understudied. longstanding theory suggests that disruptive selection arises from negative frequency-dependent interactions, such as those stemming from intraspecific competition, predation, mutualism, and parasitism  <cit> . to illustrate how intraspecific competition generates disruptive selection  <cit> , consider first that—owing to functional trade-offs  <cit> —individuals with certain phenotypes are generally better adapted than are individuals with other phenotypes at utilizing specific resource types  <cit> . yet, as any one of these modal phenotypes becomes common, it will tend to suffer from resource depletion, as these individuals compete more against themselves than against other resource-use phenotypes in the same population  <cit> . consequently, the less common modal phenotype will be favored, because they will experience reduced competition for their resources  <cit> . in this way, intraspecific competition acts as an agent of frequency dependent disruptive selection, which favors two or more modal resource-use phenotypes in the same population  <cit> .

empirical studies largely support this theory. indeed, intraspecific competition has been shown to cause disruptive selection in natural populations of three-spine sticklebacks  <cit> , spadefoot toad tadpoles  <cit> , and eurasian perch  <cit> , and it has been implicated as causing disruptive selection in various other systems  <cit> . moreover, several studies have shown that competition generates negative frequency-dependence among different resource-use phenotypes  <cit> , which  is a hallmark of competitively mediated disruptive selection  <cit> .

nevertheless, relatively few comprehensive surveys of natural populations have sought to identify the ecological conditions that are associated with disruptive selection  <cit> . for example, the relationship between spatial variation in the strength of intraspecific resource competition and the occurrence and intensity of disruptive selection has been little examined in un-manipulated wild populations. this relationship has likely been difficult to evaluate because doing so requires evaluating selection in replicated populations, some of which experience weak resource competition and some of which experience strong resource competition.

we sought to fill these gaps in our knowledge concerning the prevalence and correlates of disruptive selection in natural populations. we specifically tested two predictions: first, that disruptive selection may be common within certain systems, and second, that disruptive selection would be more intense under conditions of greater resource competition. we tested these two predictions in natural populations of mexican spadefoot toads .

spadefoot toad tadpoles are well-suited for such studies, because they express a remarkable range of trophic phenotypes in the wild  <cit> . the extremes of this variation are represented by two ecomorphs that comprise a resource polymorphism: an “omnivore” morph—a round-bodied tadpole with a long intestine, small jaw muscles, numerous rows of keratinized denticles, and smooth keratinized mouthparts that feeds primarily on the pond bottom, and a “carnivore” morph—a narrow-bodied tadpole with a short intestine, greatly enlarged jaw muscles, few rows of keratinized denticles, and notched, serrated keratinized mouthparts that feeds mostly in the water column  <cit> . omnivores are generalists, which feed mostly on microscopic detritus, algae, and small crustaceans, whereas carnivores are specialists, which feed mostly on anostracan fairy shrimp  <cit> .

although carnivore development is induced by consumption of fairy shrimp  <cit> , heritable variation for morph development exists within natural populations  <cit> . the degree to which a population expresses this resource polymorphism varies across ponds, and is, in part, associated with variation in conspecific density and ecological opportunity . specifically, bimodality in trophic phenotypes is greatest in ponds where conspecific density and ecological opportunity are highest  <cit> .

previous research suggests that intermediate phenotypes are disfavored by disruptive selection in this system  <cit> . in particular, compared to tadpoles with intermediate phenotypes, omnivores and carnivores are larger, more developmentally advanced, and more likely to survive to metamorphosis  <cit> . furthermore, previous experiments have shown that this disruptive selection reflects negative frequency-dependent interactions driven by ecological specialization and resource competition  <cit> .

however, it is unclear how prevalent disruptive selection is among populations of s. multiplicata or how ecological variation impacts the mode and strength of selection in this system. we therefore addressed these issues by measuring the mode and magnitude of phenotypic selection, as well as the strength of intraspecific competition within natural populations. we focused on populations of mexican spadefoot toad tadpoles  in the san simon valley of southeastern arizona and southwestern new mexico, usa . these populations are ideal for addressing the above issues because the s. multiplicata in these populations express a resource polymorphism that is thought to have arisen from disruptive selection  <cit> . moreover, previous research suggests that disruptive selection may be widespread in these populations  <cit> . finally, the s. multiplicata in these populations experience a wide array of ecological conditions over a small geographic area  <cit> .

we made a priori predictions based on theory as well as the prior work on this system . specifically, we predicted that disruptive selection on tadpole trophic morphology would be widespread in our surveyed populations. we also predicted that this disruptive selection would be strongest in ponds where intraspecific competition is the most intense .

RESULTS
evaluating the prevalence of disruptive selection
disruptive selection was the predominant mode of quadratic selection on tadpole trophic morphology . indeed, disruptive selection, identified by a significantly positive γ  and a fitness minimum , occurred at least once in 73% of the unique ponds sampled  and in 59% of our total collections . in contrast, stabilizing selection, identified by a significantly negative γ  and a fitness maximum , occurred in 13% of the unique ponds sampled  and in 14% of our total pond collections . additionally, a significant directional component of selection favoring carnivore-like phenotypes was present in 80% of the unique ponds sampled  and 82% of total pond collections .

the pond name, map id corresponding to figure  <dig>  and year of collection are given for each population, along with the regression terms , estimated selection differential for each term, its standard error , t-statistic and probability of rejecting the null hypothesis that the estimated differential is zero. for quadratic regressions, positive selection differentials signify disruptive selection and the quadratic regression coefficient is doubled to calculate the quadratic selection differential  and the associated standard error  is also doubled. bolding signifies statistical significance.

evaluating whether competition predicts the strength of disruptive selection
as predicted, disruptive selection was more intense in ponds with greater intraspecific competition .

discussion
interest in disruptive selection arises from its potential role in maintaining and accentuating variation within populations  and in promoting speciation  <cit> . despite this longstanding interest, the prevalence of disruptive selection in natural populations, and therefore the relative importance of disruptive selection in generating biological diversity, remains unclear. we sought to determine the prevalence of disruptive selection among natural populations of spadefoot toads. we also sought to establish whether the strength of disruptive selection was positively associated with the intensity of intraspecific competition within individual populations.

disruptive selection favoring extreme resource-use phenotypes, as measured here by using larval body size to estimate tadpole fitness , was widespread in the spadefoot toad populations surveyed in this study. indeed, we documented disruptive selection on tadpole trophic morphology in  <dig> of  <dig> populations surveyed . these results, together with those of previous studies  <cit> , strongly support the role of disruptive selection in the evolution of resource polymorphism in spea tadpoles  <cit> , and add to the evidence that disruptive selection can be widespread within certain systems  <cit> .

although disruptive selection was prevalent in our surveyed populations, we also found considerable variation in both the mode and magnitude of quadratic selection . this variation correlated predictably with the intensity of intraspecific competition within individual populations. specifically, disruptive selection was strongest in ponds with the highest conspecific density and lowest per capita resource density . in contrast, stabilizing selection favoring intermediate resource-use phenotypes was found in ponds where intraspecific competition was weak . these results therefore confirm theory suggesting that intraspecific competition can drive disruptive selection . furthermore, our results suggest that disruptive selection is likely to occur in habitats relatively free of predators, heterospecific competitors, or other ecological factors that depress population size and that therefore potentially weaken intraspecific competition.

interestingly, the two extreme ecomorphs do not appear to be equally favored by disruptive selection. previous studies found that carnivores achieve greater survival and are generally  larger at metamorphosis than either intermediates or omnivores  <cit> . we similarly found that a directional component to selection favoring carnivores may be widespread . yet, if one extreme morph  has higher fitness than the other extreme morph , how is resource polymorphism maintained in this system?

several factors examined in previous studies may help maintain both omnivores and carnivores within the same population. first, as carnivores become increasingly common in any given pond, and as competition among carnivores for the limited shrimp resource thereby becomes more intense, negative frequency-dependent selection favors omnivores  <cit> . in support of these earlier findings, we found evidence in this study for pure disruptive selection  in two ponds, and disruptive selection with a directional component favoring omnivores in another . moreover, although carnivores benefit by gaining access to the more profitable shrimp resource , additional experiments have shown that carnivores also experience greater competition with other carnivores than omnivores do with other omnivores  <cit> . in this way, negative frequency-dependent selection maintains both morphs within the same population  <cit> . second, fitness trade-offs are associated with each of these phenotypic alternatives. compared to carnivores, omnivores invest more into abdominal fat bodies, which increases post-metamorphic resistance to starvation  <cit> . thus, although carnivores may often have higher survival before metamorphosis , omnivores may have higher survival immediately after metamorphosis, possibly balancing their lower pre-metamorphic survival  <cit> . generally, frequency-dependent selection, coupled with fitness trade-offs, likely contribute to the evolutionary maintenance of many resource polymorphisms  <cit> .

a deeper problem requiring explanation, however, is why intermediate phenotypes persist in the face of widespread disruptive selection against them . although morph determination is environmentally triggered—carnivore development is induced when a tadpole consumes fairy shrimp  <cit> —considerable heritable variation in the response to this cue exists in natural populations  <cit> , suggesting that the propensity to produce intermediate phenotypes could, in principle, be eliminated by natural selection. a possible resolution to this problem is that sexual selection may lead to random mating in regard to larval phenotype, recreating tadpoles likely to develop as intermediate phenotypes in each generation. specifically, in our populations, female s. multiplicata prefer to mate with males in good condition, irrespective of the females’ own condition  <cit> . therefore, female s. multiplicata will tend to mate with males of good condition, potentially regardless of either the male’s larval phenotype or the female’s own larval phenotype . this directional selection on male condition  might thereby oppose disruptive selection acting on the larvae. indeed, directional sexual selection may often oppose disruptive natural selection in many populations  <cit> , which may explain why an increasing number of cases have been reported in which assortative mating by resource-use phenotype was expected but not found  <cit> .

spatial and temporal variation in the mode of selection may also help explain the persistence of intermediate larval phenotypes. for example, stabilizing selection favoring individuals with intermediate phenotypes was detected in some ponds , specifically those lacking strong intraspecific competition . stabilizing selection was also detected in ponds in which s. multiplicata co-occurs with a congener, spea bombifrons  <cit> . such mixed-species ponds may be within a few kilometers of pure s. multiplicata ponds in the san simon valley of southeastern arizona  <cit> . thus, s. bombifrons migrants may occasionally colonize nearby pure s. multiplicata ponds, thereby changing the selective regime within the pond to one in which intermediate phenotypes are favored. indeed, s. bombifrons occurred along with s. multiplicata within some of the ponds sampled for this study as recently as 30 years ago  <cit> . thus, because the mode and direction of selection is spatially and temporally variable, intermediate phenotypes may persist in the population.

finally, limits in the ability of tadpoles to respond appropriately through phenotypic plasticity to variation in both fairy shrimp density  <cit>  and their competitive environment  may explain the persistence of intermediate phenotypes in natural ponds. for instance, spatial and temporal variation in the density of fairy shrimp within a pond could give some individuals a head start in carnivore expression early in development. once tadpoles increase their mobility as they grow and develop, tadpoles encountering fairy shrimp later may begin to develop as carnivores, but these late-developing carnivores might end up being outcompeted by earlier-developing carnivores. if these individuals are deprived of fairy shrimp, their carnivore-like features begin to regress, and they assume an intermediate phenotype  <cit> . generally, intermediate phenotypes may be difficult to eradicate via disruptive selection when limits exist in the ability of individuals to assess and respond adaptively to their competitive environment though phenotypic plasticity. further studies are needed to test these ideas.

CONCLUSIONS
although disruptive selection has long been viewed as a potential generator of biological diversity, it has received relatively little attention, and, consequently, little is known regarding its prevalence or causes within specific systems. using spadefoot toad tadpoles as a model system, we found that disruptive selection can be prevalent in the wild, and that its occurrence is predictably associated with a specific ecological factor: strong intraspecific competition. given that intraspecific competition is common in many natural populations—and frequently strong  <cit> —our results therefore imply that disruptive selection may be a more important force contributing to the origin and maintenance of biological diversity than is currently appreciated.

