BACKGROUND
genetic engineering has emerged as a powerful tool to obtain commercial crops with improved agronomic characteristics, and in many plant transformation systems the availability of selectable markers is essential to recover transgenic plants. genes conferring resistance to selective chemical agents, such as antibiotics and herbicides, are used routinely  <cit> . however, tissues transformed with these genes and/or with those encoding for desirable traits could harbour both transformed and non-transformed cells. as a result, the regenerated plant will be a chimera for the transgenes. the problem of chimerism seems to be more frequent than originally thought and it has been reported in several herbaceous species, including tobacco  <cit> , soybean  <cit> , potato  <cit> , rice  <cit> , flax  <cit>  and strawberry  <cit> . chimeras were also recovered frequently from woody fruit trees such as apple  <cit> . very high frequencies have also been reported in citrus, for which escapes and chimeras account for 90% of regenerated lines  <cit> .

the occurrence of chimerical plants can be explained most plausibly by the multicellular origin of shoot organogenesis  <cit> . additionally, the development of chimeras and escapes may result from the transient expression of the marker gene during early stages of the regeneration process or the presence of persistent agrobacterium cells in infected tissues. chimeras may also be a consequence of the protection of non-transgenic cells by the surrounding transformed cells  <cit>  or of the ineffectiveness of selective agents in species with an endogenous tolerance  <cit> .

because it is extremely important that the transgenes remain stable in time and space throughout the lifetime of the plant, chimeras should be identified and discarded or dissociated, to leave fully-transgenic plants. several methodologies have been described to monitor the recovery of uniformly-transgenic plants. in combination with the selectable marker gene nptii, they are based on the use of reporter genes that allow selection and visual detection of transgene expression, and are used extensively to maximise transformation efficiencies. the most common are based on β-glucuronidase  staining  <cit>  or green fluorescent protein  expression  <cit> . however, these methods have serious drawbacks because gene expression can be affected by several factors, including the developmental stage of the plants. moreover, in many plant species, gfp is hardly detectable in green tissues due to autofluorescence interference  <cit> . the difficulties found with the use of these visual marker genes led some authors to suggest a consistent, positive southern as proof of the uniformity of transformation  <cit> .

real-time pcr has emerged as a robust methodology for biological investigations because it can detect and quantify very small amounts of specific nucleic acid sequences. it has been used widely in clinical applications, but recently it has also been reported as a useful tool for estimation of the number of integrations in transgenic plants  <cit> , determination of zygosity  <cit>  and quantification of transgene expression  <cit> . real-time pcr detects pcr products during their accumulation. it is commonly based on either non-specific or specific reporters such as sybr green or taqman chemistry, respectively  <cit> . in the former case, a probe labelled with a fluorescent reporter dye at the 5'-end and a quencher at the 3'-end is hybridised to an internal sequence between the forward and reverse pcr primers. when the probe is intact, reporter fluorescence is absorbed via fluorescent resonance energy transfer by the quencher, and no reporter fluorescence can be detected. due to 5'-exonuclease activity of the taq polymerase, reporter fluorescence accumulates with each successive round of amplification and can be detected. this fluorescent signal is proportional to the amount of pcr product generated and, subsequently, to the initial dna template in the sample during the exponential phase of pcr, making it suitable for accurate quantification of the starting amounts of nucleic acid in the pcr reaction, without further analyses.

we have developed a new strategy based on the use of quantitative, real-time pcr to allow quantification of the transgene in order to identify chimeras. moreover, this quantitative method seems to be suitable for monitoring their dissociation.

RESULTS
validation of the method
the method used throughout this study is based on the ΔΔct or comparative ct method, because it permits higher throughput than the absolute quantification method. we carried out, first, a validation experiment to demonstrate that the reaction efficiencies for the transgene and the internal control are approximately identical  <cit> . transgenic apricot and tobacco lines transformed with the binary vector pbin19-35sgusintron, and which carry the nptii gene, were obtained and their dnas were serially diluted to obtain a standard curve for both the endogenous β-actin and nptii genes. the correlation between the ct value and log  was around  <dig>  for nptii and actin in both apricot and tobacco . this linear relationship indicates that a ct value is suitable for estimation of the relative amount of the transgene. in addition, the efficiencies of amplification of the transgene and the internal control were very close  and were not significantly different from a 100% efficiency according to the statistical analysis proposed by yuan et al.  <cit>  to check quality data and amplification efficiency. for apricot, when regression analyses were run individually for each dna extraction, amplification values were rep1: - <dig>  and - <dig> , rep2: - <dig>  and - <dig> , rep 3: - <dig>  and - <dig> . for tobacco results were similar and efficiencies for the individual regressions were rep1: - <dig>  and - <dig> , rep2: - <dig>  and - <dig>  rep3: - <dig>  and - <dig> .

all ct values obtained throughout this work are within the linear range of each target gene.

comparison of gus staining, southern analysis and real-time pcr for detection of chimeras in tobacco
the expression of visual marker genes such as gus has been used extensively to detect chimeras in order to discard them  <cit> . however, in apricot plants, gus expression seems to be very dependent on the plant developmental stage and, although its expression is uniform and strong in young regenerated buds, it is only expressed in the petioles and veins of leaves from micro-propagated shoots . therefore, it is difficult to use the expression of this gene to discriminate chimerical from uniform plants, since differential expression may be found in different tissues or with plant development. to further demonstrate this point, we used tobacco, a model plant with very-well-established transformation protocols  <cit> . several lines transformed with the binary vector pbin19-35sgusintron, which carry both nptii and gus genes, were obtained and three of them were selected with different degrees of gus staining in apical leaves of a similar age and developmental stage . one line  exhibited a weak gus staining, while the other two  showed uniform gus staining. when these lines were evaluated for the relative amount of the nptii transgene using quantitative real-time pcr, a positive correlation was found between gus staining and the amount of nptii determined in dna extracted from the apical or basal leaves. however, the amount of transgene in dna extracted from apical and basal leaves was significantly different in all lines , including those in which a uniform gus staining of the apical leaves was observed . a consistently higher amount of transgenic dna was found in basal leaves from all lines, suggesting that the three lines are chimerical.

we also attempted to determine the reliability of southern blot analysis for monitoring the uniformity of transgenic lines. when the same dna extractions, used for real-time pcr, were digested with bamhi  and subjected to southern blot analysis using nptii as a probe, differences in the pattern of insertion were not observed within the same line, whatever the position of the leaf. however, clear differences in the patterns obtained could be observed among the three lines . taken together, these results indicate that regeneration of chimeras did not result only from the fusion of different transformation events, as was reported in citrus  <cit>  and cabbage  <cit> , but rather from the fusion of transgenic and non-transgenic events.

other authors attempted to dissociate chimerical plants by mean of in vitro culture-based methods and used southern hybridisation to demonstrate that the recovered transgenic tissues were uniform  <cit> . however, our results demonstrate that a positive southern blot signal will be obtained if the amount of transgene is over the detection threshold, but this does not necessarily mean that all, or even most, of the plant cells are transformed.

detection of chimeras in apricot using real-time pcr
transformation experiments were also carried out with apricot plants using the pbin19-35sgusintron and several transgenic lines were regenerated  <cit> . quantification of nptii from the apricot line hn507- <dig>  using real-time pcr, revealed that the amounts of the transgene assessed from the dna extracted from basal and apical leaves of micro-propagated shoots were significantly different , indicating that this line was a chimera. in addition, when relative amount of transgene was compared between dna extractions from roots and apical leaves of several shoots of two different apricot transgenic lines , significant differences  were found between roots and leaves in the relative amount of transgene for both lines . as with tobacco, the amount of the transgene varied greatly according to the position in the shoot, being very high in roots growing within the selective medium, intermediate in basal leaves and lower in the apical leaves. these results indicate the existence of a gradient for the strength of the antibiotic selection. the antibiotic effect is stronger in those plant parts closer to the selective medium. the chimera is then potentiated as the plant grows and the selection became weaker in distal areas of the plant, located far from the medium.

it is unlikely that this chimeras originated from different events of integration because, in most woody trees, the efficiency of transformation is very low  <cit> .

monitoring dissociation of chimera in tobacco and apricot using real-time pcr
transgenic chimerical line t <dig> in figure  <dig> was multiplied in vitro by subculturing single-node explants in selective root-inducing medium. shoots with a good rooting system and dark-green leaves were selected and maintained during  <dig> subcultures. then the nptii content in apical and basal leaves was evaluated in three different shoots  and there were not significant differences in the nptii content between apical and basal leaves. furthermore, there were neither significant differences between independently selected s <dig> and s <dig> shoots, indicating that dissociation of chimera occurred.

we have compared the reliability of southern blotting and real-time pcr with respect to following the dissociation of chimeras. in tobacco, most chimeras can be dissociated easily by in vitro propagation on a selective, root-inducing medium and by phenotypic selection of the best micropropagated shoots  as shown in figure  <dig>  to validate this visual observation, chimerical line t <dig> was selected and shoots were separated, based on a phenotypic classification, into shoots with lower  and higher  rooting ability, as well as on the absence/presence, respectively, of bleaching symptoms in the leaves . real-time pcr and southern blot analyses were carried out with dna extracted from the apical and basal leaves of t17a and t17b shoots. the first method  confirmed that t17b is transformed uniformly, as the amount of the transgene determined in the apical leaves did not differ significantly from that measured in the basal leaves, unlike t17a for which significant differences  were found. moreover, significant differences  were found in the nptii content between t17a and t17b shoots. however, a consistent, positive southern was observed in both t17a and t17b, whatever the position of the leaf . this result reinforces the view that this technique is not sufficient to discriminate chimerical from uniformly-transformed plants or to monitor the dissociation of chimeras.

dissociation of chimeras was almost impossible to achieve within the whole apricot plant using in vitro micropropagation and an iterative regeneration/selection method  <cit>  may be necessary. we decided to check the validity of real-time pcr for the monitoring of dissociation in transgenic apricot callus tissues. a transgenic callus line, selected randomly, was used to determine the amount of nptii after three successive rounds of sub-culture  . the amount of the transgene did change significantly over this period , and dissociation occurred after two months  in selective medium. significant differences were not observed between the last two sub-culture times, but the amount of the transgene significantly differed  between callus from the third and first subculture. the easy dissociation of chimeras observed in chimerical callus could be explained by the fact that these disorganised tissues are growing in close contact with the selective medium, supporting our assumption that a gradient for the antibiotic effect exists in the entire plant.

CONCLUSIONS
the methodology described here is unique in allowing a quick and easy discrimination of chimerical from uniformly-transformed plants with a very high sensitivity. this methodology is not based on gene expression, which may vary due to a number of different reasons, or to positive/negative results  that may depend on the transgene amount being higher than the detection threshold of the technique. it is based on a comparison between relative amounts of transgene in several dna extractions from the same transgenic line that should be identical in a uniformly transformed plant. work is in progress to develop an iterative regeneration method that may allow dissociation of chimeras in apricot plants. also, the factors affecting the initial transformation steps and selection are being optimised, to avoid the production of chimeras.

