BACKGROUND
the effects of estrogens and androgens on the immune system in mice have been extensively studied. for example, b and t lymphopoiesis in bone marrow and thymus is suppressed by treatment with both estrogens  <cit>  and androgens  <cit> .

submandibular glands  are sexually dimorphic in rodents. the secretory activity of these glands is mainly localized to the acinar cells and the granular convoluted tubular  cells. the gct cells are under hormonal control involving androgens, resulting in larger gct in males compared to females  <cit> .

signals from estrogens and androgens are transmitted into the target cells by the two known estrogen receptors , erα and erβ  <cit> , or by the androgen receptor , respectively.

postmenopausal hormone replacement therapy  has beneficial effects on the skeleton, but is associated with well-known side effects. this has lead to an increased focus on finding synthetic estrogen-like substances that only reproduce the beneficial effects of estrogen. 4-estren-3α,17β-diol  is a synthetic compound with structural similarities to e <dig> that has been suggested to signal through both ers and the ar  <cit> .

the aim of the present experiments was to investigate the estrogenic and androgenic effects of estren on lymphopoiesis in thymus and bone marrow, and on smg. we show here that estren has similar effects on these organs as the androgen dht, and that the effects are independent of ers, supporting the previous studies showing that estren is able to signal through the ar <cit> .

RESULTS
experiment 1: estren does not affect thymus, bone marrow b cells or submandibular glands through ers
we wanted to investigate the estrogenic effects of estren on lymphopoiesis and submandibular glands  in female mice. in order to do this, 3-month-old female c57/b <dig> mice were ovariectomized and treated during 18– <dig> days with daily subcutaneous  injections of the estrogen receptor antagonist ici  <dig>   or vehicle miglyol  <dig>  simultaneously, both the vehicle and the ici groups were given daily s.c. injections of e <dig> , estren  or control miglyol  <dig> oil.

the inhibitory effects of e <dig> on thymus weight  and frequency of cd19+ cells in bone marrow  in vehicle-exposed mice were blocked by the er-antagonist ici  <dig> . in contrast, treatment with estren resulted in lower thymus weight  and lower frequency of cd19+ cells in bone marrow , in both vehicle and ici exposed mice.

the granular convoluted tubules in smg are sexually dimorphic in rodents, being larger in males than in females. in eosin-hematoxylin stained tissue sections of smg, the degree of the androgen phenotype was scored from  <dig> to  <dig>   <dig> represents no androgen phenotype and  <dig> is the highest score for androgen phenotype. representative pictures for the different scoring points are presented in fig.  <dig>  treatment with e <dig> did not affect the smg weight  or score for androgen phenotype  in either vehicle or ici mice. furthermore, both the smg weight  and the smg score for androgen phenotype  was increased by estren in both vehicle and ici mice.

taken together, results from this experiment indicate that estren affects lymphopoiesis and smg through er-independent pathways.

experiment 2: estren and dht affect the frequency of b220+ cells in bone marrow, and submandibular gland phenotypes, through er independent pathways
since previous studies have shown that estren has the ability to signal through both ers and ar <cit> , we wanted to investigate the estrogen-, and androgen-like effects of estren in female er knock-out mice. in order to do this, 11-month-old female wt and derko  mice were ovariectomized and given daily s.c. injections of e <dig> , dht  or estren  during four weeks. control mice received olive oil.

as expected, the e2-mediated reduction of the frequency of b220+ cells in bone marrow of wt mice was lacking in derko mice . e2-treatment did not dramatically affect the weight  or the androgen phenotype of smg in either wt or derko mice .

we have previously shown that estren-treatment results in decreased thymus cellularity in both wt and derko mice indicating an effect through er independent pathways <cit> . we now also show that treatment with dht or estren resulted in lower frequency of b220+ cells in bone marrow of both wt and derko mice . furthermore, fig.  <dig> shows that the smg score for androgen phenotype was high for both dht- and estren-treated mice, of both wt and derko genotype, when compared to control mice. interestingly, the smg weight was significantly increased in dht-treated mice compared to controls, but not in estren- or e2-treated mice .

altogether, results from this experiment show again that estren affects b cells in bone marrow, and the phenotype of smg, through er-independent pathways in a manner similar to dht-treatment. this indicates estren-signalling through the ar.

experiment 3: dht treatment results in decreased thymus cellularity and an androgen phenotype of submandibular glands
in order to study how e2- and dht-treatment affected male er knock-out mice, 9-month-old male wt and derko mice were orchidectomized and treated for  <dig> weeks with e <dig>  or dht , administered by s.c. silastic implants in the cervical region <cit> . vehicle animals received empty implants.

the e2-mediated reduction of thymus cellularity seen in wt mice could not be detected in derko mice . however, e2-treatment did not affect the weight  or androgen phenotype of smg in either wt or derko mice .

treatment with dht resulted in dramatically reduced thymus cellularity independent of er genotype . furthermore, fig.  <dig> shows that the smg score for androgen phenotype was increased in dht-treated mice of both wt and derko genotype. the smg weight was also significantly increased in dht-treated mice of both er genotypes compared to control- and e2-treated mice .

in conclusion, these data show that also in male mice dht affects both thymus cellularity, and smg weight and phenotype, independently of ers.

experiment 4: aged erko mice have increased salivary gland weight that displays an androgen phenotype
finally, untreated 18-month-old wt, erko, berko, and derko mice were investigated. we found that aged non-ovariectomized female mice lacking erα  displayed an increased smg weight, size and an androgen histological phenotype . we have previously shown that female erko mice have higher serum levels of testosterone compared to wt mice <cit> . therefore, these results indicate that high levels of testosterone in erko mice are responsible for the increased smg weight, size and androgen phenotype in aged female erko mice.

discussion
postmenopausal hormone replacement therapy  has beneficial effects on the skeleton but is associated with well-known side effects. this has lead to an increased focus on finding synthetic estrogen-like substances that only reproduce the beneficial effects of estrogen. estren is a synthetic compound that we have recently shown to have er-dependent suppressive effects on inflammation, but er-independent inhibitory effects on t lymphopoiesis  <cit> . the aim of the present experiments was to investigate the estrogenic and androgenic effects of estren on lymphopoiesis in thymus and bone marrow, and on smg. our study is the first to show that estren has similar effects on these organs as the androgen dht, supporting the hypothesis that estren is able to signal through the ar.

in genomic signalling pathways, estrogen binds to intracellular or – possibly - membrane bound ers, ultimately activating transcriptional activity in the target cell. however, reports have shown that a variety of cell types respond rapidly, within seconds or minutes, making the genomic signalling pathway unlikely and suggesting instead non-genomic signalling pathways. in previously published papers, kousteni et al  <cit>  proposed that sex steroids affect reproductive tissues by classical genomic signalling, while the bone sparing effect of sex steroids is mediated through a non-genomic pathway. it was suggested that erα, erβ or ar can activate the non-genomic signalling pathway irrespective of whether the ligand is an estrogen or an androgen. they also showed that treatment with estren increases bone mass in ovariectomized mice without affecting reproductive organs, suggesting that estren is a "mechanism specific" compound that only reproduces the non-genomic signalling of estrogen, and thus can affect target cells also through the ar.

in constrast to the findings by kousteni et al, we have previously shown that estren has the capacity to affect both bone and reproductive organs through classical genomic signalling via ers <cit> .

furthermore, centrella et al <cit>  found that estren activates osteoblasts in a genomic and ar-dependent way. interestingly, they also showed that estren can be metabolized into 19-nortestosterone by action of 3α-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase, and that 19-nortestosterone binds to ar with an affinity that was approximately 40% of that of dht.

in a recently published paper, krishnan et al <cit>  found estren to be a potent ar ligand with the ability to translocate ar into the nucleus, and possess full ar agonist activity. in conclusion, results from these studies show that the er-independent effects of estren may be mediated through the ar.

we have recently demonstrated that estren affects peripheral immune functions through ers, while the inhibitory effects on t lymphopoiesis is er-independent <cit> . since also ar stimulation is known to down-regulate both t and b cell development  <cit> , the non er-mediated effects of estren on thymus may results from activation of ar.

in the present report we have studied the estrogenic and androgenic effects of estren on thymus, b cells in bone marrow and on smg. we show here that blocking of ers with ici  <dig>  does bot affect the estren-induced inhibition of thymus weight . we have previously shown that exposure to estren results in decreased thymus cellularity independently of ers <cit> . in this study we also show that treatment with dht results in decreased thymus cellularity in both wt and derko mice .

similarly, we show here that blocking of ers with ici  <dig>  does not affect the frequency of cd19+ b cells in bone marrow , and independently of ers, both dht- and estren-treatment results in lower frequency of b220+ b cells in bone marrow .

smg are sexually dimorphic in rodents, resulting in larger granular convoluted tubules in males compared to females  <cit> . in this study, the smg sections were scored according to their androgen phenotype  and the results show that blocking of ers with ici  <dig> , does not affect the increased score of androgen phenotype  or increased smg weight  seen after exposure to estren. we also show that treatment with estren or dht of both ovariectomized female and orchidectomized male mice, results in an androgen phenotype  in both wt and derko mice. interestingly in experiment  <dig>  estren-treated wt and derko mice did not display increased smg weight in correlation to their increased androgen phenotype. the reason for this is not clear, but one possible explanation could be that a longer treatment period is necessary to induce the increase in smg weight of aged female mice.

in experiment  <dig>  we demonstrate that aged untreated female mice lacking erα have an androgen smg phenotype . this is very likely due to the increased testosterone levels found in these mice  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
we have recently demonstrated that estren affects peripheral immune functions through ers, while the inhibitory effects on t lymphopoiesis is er-independent <cit> . since ar-stimulation is known to down-regulate both t and b cell development  <cit> , and it has been shown that estren has the ability to signal also through the ar <cit> , the non er-mediated effects of estren may result from activation of ar. in this study we show that estren has similar non er-mediated effects on lymphopoiesis as the androgen dht in both thymus and bone marrow, and on the phenotype of smg. this strongly supports the hypothesis of estren having the capacity to signal through the ar.

