BACKGROUND
mining disease-causing genes and elucidating their pathogenic molecular mechanisms are of great importance for developing effective diagnostics and therapeutics  <cit> . along with many genetic and genomic studies aimed at identification of disease genes , several computational methods have been proposed to prioritize candidate genes based on various information including sequence similarity, literature annotation, and molecular pathways  <cit> . given a set of genes known to be involved in disease, these methods typically score similarities between candidate genes and known disease genes in terms of various genomic features.

recently, accumulated knowledge about molecular interaction networks in human cells such as protein-protein, and protein-dna interactions has been utilized to predict disease genes  <cit> . the previous studies have incorporated topological characteristics of known disease genes such as degrees in networks  <cit> , the overlap between interaction partners of candidate genes and those of known disease genes  <cit> , the probability of candidate genes to participate in the same protein complexes with known disease-causing genes  <cit> , or the distribution of distances from candidate genes to known disease genes  <cit> .

despite their successful performance in general, for some specific diseases of our interest, such as acute myeloid leukemia , the performance is not satisfactory . we hypothesized that integrating molecular networks with mrna expression profiles from patients might help delineate disease-specifically dysregulated molecular subnetworks containing disease-causing mutation genes. chuang et al. supported this hypothesis showing the identified subnetworks included significantly enriched known breast cancer mutation genes  <cit> . mani et al. proposed another method predicting oncogenes in b-cell lymphomas integrating both molecular interactions and mrna expressions  <cit> .

here, we identified molecular subnetworks dysregulated in aml patients which were associated with key leukemogenic processes such as myeloid differentiation. we also evaluated the enrichment of known aml-causing mutation genes within the subnetworks, and found that the subnetworks contain significant fraction of known aml genes  embedded among the interconnections of differentially expressed genes. in addition, several characteristics of aml genes in the subnetworks were reported in this study, which can be utilized to build prediction models for unknown aml genes.

RESULTS
identification of subnetworks perturbed in aml
the method to find subnetworks of aml is similar to that of our previous work  <cit> , and visualized in figure  <dig>  we overlaid the gene expression values of each gene on its corresponding protein in the protein-protein and protein-dna interaction network and searched for subnetworks whose combined activities across the patients have high perturbation scores  starting from each node in a greedy fashion. the gene expression profiles used cdna platforms where each expression value of gene gi in patient pj  is the mean log ratio of intensities from cy5-labeled mrna of the patient and cy3-labeled reference mrna. expression values were normalized for each gene across patients to have mean  <dig> and standard deviation  <dig> . we took absolute values of expression levels to measure perturbation effect regardless of the direction of changes . the perturbation score was defined as the mean over standard deviation of an activity vector across samples where each activity value was the averaged expression level of genes participating in each subnetwork mk and is denoted as s in figure  <dig>  subnetworks with higher mean and smaller variance of activity levels are considered more perturbed in aml samples.

aml subnetworks associated with key leukemogenic processes
through the search for sutnebworks perturbed in aml patients, we identified  <dig> subnetworks  comprising of  <dig> genes whose functions are associated with aml development processes such as myeloid differentiation, cell signaling of growth and survival, cell cycle, cell and tissue remodeling. within the significant aml subnetworks, we found many of already known aml-causing mutation genes. figure  <dig> shows examples of subnetworks containing known aml genes such as jak <dig>  jak <dig>  pdgfrb, and crebbp, and their representative biological processes. especially, a severe block in myeloid differentiation is known to be the hallmark of aml.

aml subnetworks enriched for known aml causing genes
we have evaluated the enrichment of known aml genes in significant subnetworks in a systematic way. we compiled  <dig> genes known to be causally mutated in aml from sanger cancer gene census.  <dig> out of  <dig> subnetworks included at least one aml gene, and  <dig> subnetworks included two or more aml genes. as shown in figure  <dig>  subnetworks were much more significantly enriched for aml causing mutation genes than the conventional gene-expression analysis alone without considering molecular interactions .

characteristics of aml genes in the subnetworks
+des means the degree of change in its mrna level for each gene.

genes with the absolutedes ranked within top 5% are marked with **, and genes within top 10%  are marked with *.

we examined whether aml genes captured in subnetworks might have high degrees in the network because that property has been used to predict unknown disease genes in other diseases previously . the figure shows that all known aml-causing genes  and aml genes captured in subnetworks  have significantly more interaction partners than all genes in the network . aml genes found in subnetworks have slightly higher degree than aml genes not captured in subnetworks . the mean and median degrees of all genes in the network are  <dig> and  <dig>  while those of  <dig> aml genes are  <dig> and  <dig>  though this result supports that known aml genes have tendency of high network degrees, low degree aml genes such as rpl <dig>  and trip <dig> also appeared in the subnetworks.

finally, we investigated the differential expression of aml genes in mrna levels . there was no significant difference between each group of genes, and all known aml genes and those found in subnetworks except flt <dig>  and jak <dig> did not show mrna level aberrations. this result shows that gene expression alone does not provide enough information to predict unknown aml-causing mutation genes. however, our integrative approach could capture non-differentially expressed aml genes in subnetworks if they were entangled with differentially expressed neighbour proteins yielding subnetworks with high perturbation scores.

CONCLUSIONS
we have demonstrated that integration of condition-independent molecular networks extracted from various types of cells and experiments under different conditions, and disease-specific mrna expression profiles of aml patients enables the dissection of pathogenic modules of interacting proteins reflecting key leukemogenic processes. in addition, the dissected modules are enriched for aml-causing mutation genes most of which are not detectable with gene expression analysis alone due to minor changes in their mrna levels. identification of subnetworks perturbed in aml patients can provide novel molecular hypotheses underlying aml etiology, and investigated characteristics of known aml genes appearing in the subnetworks can be exploited to predict unknown aml-causing genes.

