BACKGROUND
the phylum apicomplexa contains a diverse range of parasites including plasmodium, cryptosporidium, babesia, toxoplasma and others that cause disease in both humans and animals. the genomes of several apicomplexans have been extensively studied 
 <cit>  in an attempt to understand these organisms and to gain insights into potential new methods of control and treatment. although a few common features have emerged, the apicomplexan genomes studied to date have presented a remarkable diversity of genomic organization and gene content, with each genome having its own unique, and often unusual, characteristics. the genus eimeria, belonging to the family eimeriidae within the order eucoccidiorida  represents the last major group of apicomplexans to be analyzed in detail. because it is homoxenous, eimeria can be propagated to high numbers in a single life-cycle with relative ease, making it a potential model for aspects of apicomplexan biology that are difficult to study in other genera.

eimeria is also significant in its own right, as the causative agent of the intestinal disease coccidiosis in poultry 
 <cit> . eimeria species are both site- and host-specific, and are transmitted through the ingestion of sporulated oocysts - resistant, hardy, thick-walled spores that contain infective sporozoites 
 <cit> . seven species infect chickens and eimeria tenella is among the most pathogenic 
 <cit>  causing weight loss, reduced feed efficiency, reduced egg production and death. the total loss including the costs of control and prevention worldwide is estimated at around usd <dig>  billion per annum, making this one of the most economically important diseases of domestic livestock 
 <cit> .

the desire for a better understanding of the parasite and its interaction with the chicken, and a need for better disease control, had driven the e. tenella genome sequencing project 
 <cit> . a draft genome assembly  of ~ <dig> -fold sequence coverage contains  <dig> contigs, ranging from thousands to half a million bases in length. the total size of these contigs is 47 mb corresponding to ~78% of the estimated 60 mb genome. a further assembly, incorporating second-generation sequencing data, was produced in  <dig>  but much of the genome remains unrepresented by large contigs.

the completion of eukaryotic genome sequencing projects depends heavily on having good genome maps to position contigs, give information on large-scale genome structure, and reveal errors in sequence assembly 
 <cit> . such a map has hitherto been lacking in the case of e. tenella. the available genetic linkage map, which relies on polymorphic loci, is low in resolution and does not reflect the genome physically 
 <cit> . furthermore, large insert clones are difficult to produce for eimeria species as they are often unstable due to repetitive sequences 
 <cit> , eliminating an effective method for physical mapping.

happy mapping 
 <cit>  is an in vitro physical mapping technique which analyses markers’ co-segregation amongst a pool of sub-genomic samples . markers that are close together tend to co-segregate strongly amongst the aliquots. each marker will be typed by pcr to detect its presence in each aliquot and the probability of linkage between two markers is given as a logarithm of odds  score. based on the lod scores, a genome map can be constructed. this technique was successful in assisting the assembly of e. tenella chromosomes  <dig> and  <dig> with individual maps constructed respectively by ling et al. 
 <cit>  and paul h. dear .

mapping also provides an opportunity to examine genomic variation. comparisons between different strains of e. tenella have found only limited sequence variation 
 <cit> . recent studies in several species  have shown that structural variation  contributes more diversity than sequence variation 
 <cit> , but there have been no efforts to look into structural variations in eimeria or other apicomplexa. happy mapping can be extended to allow molecular copy-number counting , determining copy-numbers by counting the molecules present 
 <cit> . mcc has been used to screen variations in copy-number due to its speed, flexibility and sensitivity 
 <cit> .

as happy maps for e. tenella chromosomes  <dig> and  <dig> have previously been constructed, we demonstrate in this study the construction of an integrated map for the remainder of the genome in order to give an overview of genome organization and to aid sequence assembly. we managed to improve and validate the map by integrating bac-end and contig sequences. we find that the striking segmentation of the genome into feature-poor  and feature-rich  regions  is present throughout the genome, and that the p- and r-segments correspond to unique and non-unique regions, respectively. investigation of copy-number variation using mcc has highlighted further structural perspectives on the e. tenella genome.

RESULTS
whole genome happy map of eimeria tenella
markers were generated from the draft genome assembly  obtained from the wellcome trust sanger institute . contigs similar to chromosome  <dig> 
 <cit>  and  <dig>  were filtered prior to marker generation. a total of  <dig> of the largest contigs, representing 70% of the assembled sequence, were selected. in total,  <dig> markers were developed and typed. of these,  <dig>  markers failed to show amplification and therefore were discarded. a total of  <dig>  multi-copy markers  were also set aside while  <dig>  low-copy markers were further analyzed to screen for significant linkage. overall, a total of  <dig>  good markers were obtained . this low proportion of usable markers was due largely to the presence of sequences which, though unique in the assembly, were present in multiple copies in the genome. there are  <dig> contigs that carry only non-multicopy markers  while  <dig> contigs contain only multi-copy markers . in these latter cases, up to nine unsuccessful attempts were made to identify unique sequences elsewhere in the contigs. the multi-copy contigs are up to 196 kb in length.

together with  <dig> low-copy markers which showed significant linkages, a total of  <dig> markers were used for the construction of the happy map. of these,  <dig> fell into  <dig> linkage groups of three or more markers, while  <dig> formed pairs of linked markers, at lod ≥  <dig> , leaving  <dig> markers as singletons . the relative physical size of the map was calculated to be  <dig>  mb, or almost half of the estimated 60 mb genome. the happy map linked  <dig> contigs with a total size of  <dig> ,408 bp, meaning that approximately 9 mb of gaps between contigs were bridged by happy linkages alone.

data integration
to produce a more comprehensive map, we integrated bac-end sequences. the bac clones of e. tenella have been end-sequenced in the wgs project, but were not used in the  <dig> sequence assembly. we have also noticed that linkages by bac clones alone can be unreliable, since many bac-end sequences do not map uniquely to the genome, and some bacs show possible size discrepancies when both ends map to a single contig. however, the combination of bac data with happy map data is more robust.

analysis of  <dig> bac-end sequences found a total of  <dig> clones that aligned to different contigs of the assembly, including  <dig> linkages supported by at least two bacs . five new linkages  were identified by these clones, between the happy linkage groups and large contigs that do not have any good markers. most of the happy linkages were supported by at least one bac clone. furthermore,  <dig> groups of multi-copy contigs were linked by bac clones. the number of bac clones that fall within these multi-copy contig groups often exceeds the number of clones within the happy linkage group. the total size of all the contigs within the group ranged from about 100 kb to 400 kb. two groups were found to have one of their end-markers originating from a contig that contains a good marker in one of the happy linkage groups. the good markers are also situated at the ends of happy linkage groups. small contigs  are believed to lie in the gaps between contigs in the map, based on what was observed in the bac-clone integration.

because the happy map is limited to a range of about 100 kb , marker-pairs from the ends of contigs longer than this are not linked by the happy data, but are of course joined by the contig itself. contig information was thus integrated to help further improve the map. although the  <dig> assembly contains larger contigs, we find conflicts between the assembly with happy map  and bac linkage data. therefore, we utilize contigs from the  <dig> assembly for this purpose. twenty pairs of markers are linked in this way. after integration, an additional nine linkages between linkage groups and  <dig> linkages to singletons were added to the map .
 <cit> . the diameter of the inner “spindle” indicates a/t content , and colored bands indicate blocks of repeats of cag , the telomere-like repeat unit aggttt  or other simple-sequence repeats ; sequence gaps are grey. the outer transparent “shell” indicates the information content  of the sequence  – wider regions correspond to a higher information content, narrower regions to more repeat-rich sequence; the blue-tinted regions are r-segments, whilst the untinted regions are p-segments.

simultaneous validation of contig quality and happy map reliability
to monitor the quality and reliability of the happy map, markers were designed at 20 kb intervals along the two largest contigs of the draft assembly. all the good markers from these two contigs were used in the subsequent map-making process and were successfully arranged into two linkage groups that correspond to their respective contigs , and the happy map arrangement of these markers corresponds well with their locations in the contigs. similarly encouraging results come from happy markers designed at opposite ends of contigs smaller than 100 kb : in all cases, these pairs of markers are linked, and the distance between them as estimated from the happy data corresponds well with the contig length.

the bac-end sequences also suggested that happy mapping has correctly ordered the contigs, as most of the happy linkages are supported by at least one bac clone. all these results strongly suggest that both the happy data and the  <dig> assembly are of good quality.

chromosomal assignments of happy linkage groups
fifteen chromosomally-assigned genes representing ten chromosomes were used to help assign linkage groups to chromosomes . eleven of these genes provided good markers and, of these, ten showed linkage to other markers and were incorporated into the map. together with the position information of the genes in the current assembly, we have successfully assigned eight linkage groups to eight different chromosomes. among them, the largest linkage group was found to belong to chromosome  <dig>  none of the chromosomes is fully covered by linkage groups, but in most cases a small number of linkage groups represent each chromosome .

*tabares e and tomley f, unpublished.

s - successfully mapped.

ns - not successfully mapped.

*based on pfge of the eimeria tenella genome 
 <cit> .

the integrated happy map
as a result of incorporating bac-end and contig sequences, an integrated happy map was constructed [figure 
1; additional file 
4]. the map consists of  <dig> linkage groups that range from 100 kb to  <dig>  mb in size, covering ~ <dig>  mb. eight of these groups are chromosomally assigned.

segmentation of the genome into p- and r-regions
we also examined whether the segmentation of the genome into feature-rich  and feature-poor  segments, as noted on chromosome  <dig> 
 <cit> , could be seen on the whole genome map. an algorithm  was used to partition larger contigs into p- and r-regions, and to identify smaller contigs as either p or r, based on their content of simple-sequence repeats. the overall pattern of large, alternating p- and r-segments seems to be preserved throughout the genome [figure 
1; figure 
 <dig>  with about three or four r-segments per mb, interspersed with p-segments of roughly similar size. deviations from this pattern are probably due to the difficulty in accurately assigning small contigs as p or r, and in defining p/r boundaries which fall close to the ends of contigs. most of the linkage groups and most of the larger sequence contigs end in r-regions, consistent with the expectation that most of the unmapped and unassembled parts of the genome are repeat-rich r-type sequence.

from earlier analysis of chromosome  <dig> 
 <cit>  and from analysis of markers on the largest two contigs of the  <dig> assembly, it is obvious that p-regions have a higher density of good markers than r-regions [figure 
1; figure 
 <dig>  this is due largely to the non-unique nature of much of the r-region sequence , and probably also to abundant simple-sequence repeats, which we find interfere with amplification of adjoining non-repetitive sequence.

the  <dig> happy markers which fall into linkage groups cover ~ <dig>  mb of the genome, giving an average spacing on mapped regions of ~ <dig>  kb. there are  <dig> singletons  in the integrated map. assuming that these are distributed evenly across the unmapped areas, their average spacing is approximately 276 kb. this is more than double the range of the mapping panel , explaining why they do not link to other markers.

copy-number variation between strains of e. tenella
although happy mapping reveals an abundance of multi-copy sequences , the exact copy-numbers of these sequences in the genome is still unknown. in humans, multi-copy regions tend to vary in copy-number between individuals 
 <cit> . furthermore, structural variations have never been studied in the e. tenella genome. hence, we set out to investigate the happy markers for variation in copy-number between strains of e. tenella using the molecular copy-number counting  method. we randomly selected  <dig> of the happy markers for this analysis.

of  <dig> markers tested on the reference houghton  strain, one marker failed to amplify for unknown reasons. twelve markers  were detected to be present in multiple copies  in the genome [figure 
3]. four of these twelve markers are present in more than two copies per haploid genome.

the analysis carried out on the weybridge  strain also revealed eleven of the markers to be multi-copy while analysis on the wisconsin  strain showed only nine multi-copy markers. although the wey strain had almost the same number of multi-copy markers as the h strain, most of them were lower in copy-number. the wis strain has the lowest number of multi-copy markers but one of them  is present in triple the normal copy-number. one marker, marker  <dig>  did not show amplification in the wis strain.

overall, four markers were multi-copy in all three strains while sixteen markers were found to have differences in copy-number between the strains. we therefore estimate that, within any one strain, about 20% of sequences  are present in multiple copies , if our selection of markers is representative. moreover, about a third of sequences  differ in copy-number between strains. further work is needed to clarify the extent of the duplicated sequence blocks, and their possible relation to genes.

discussion
the analysis of the chromosome  <dig> sequence 
 <cit>  showed a striking segmentation, with feature-poor  regions alternating with feature-rich  regions. the p-regions are slightly longer, have a higher and more uniform at content than the r-regions and are almost free of simple repeats. in contrast, r-regions contain an abundance of simple repeats including tandemly repeated trinucleotides, the telomere-like agggttt heptamer, the tgcatgca palindromic octamer , and also line transposons. it was speculated that the rest of the genome of e. tenella was organized in a similar segmented fashion.

the integrated map described here has revealed the structure for about half of the e. tenella genome based on the relative physical size of the map in comparison with the estimated genome size . our analysis suggests that this half consists mainly of p-type sequence, largely because markers in r-regions are usually multicopy and therefore unmappable. if most r-regions are larger than 140 kb , then this would explain the inability of the map to connect across most r regions by means of happy linkage or bac clones.

regarding the accuracy of the integrated map, we do see some conflicts in marker order when compared with the sequence assembly . for the most part, these are local inversions in line with the expected resolution of the happy map; others, particularly where they involve small isolated sequence contigs, are likely to represent errors in the sequence assembly. as with all complex genomes, mapping and sequencing are iterative and interdependent processes, and there is no universally agreed metric for measuring the goodness of a map, nor agreement on how to weight common local errors against rarer large-scale errors. however, it is generally agreed that maps which integrate several datasets  are more robust than those which depend on a single method.

if we are correct in assuming that most of the unmappable multicopy markers originate from r-regions, this suggests that the r-regions are rich in repeated sequences , and that a segment from an r-region on one chromosome may be duplicated at an r-region of another chromosome. about 20% of genome may be repeated in this way, in addition to the 14% made up of simple-sequence repeats . this may account for the fact that the draft sequence assembly represents only about 78% of the genome.

comparisons between e. tenella strains are scarce but have generally shown moderate variation at the sequence level. for instance, the recent comparison of the ~9 kb glucose-6-phosphate isomerase genomic locus between the h, wis and wey strains revealed  <dig> snps and  <dig> indels 
 <cit> , or a variation of around half of one percent of nucleotides. in contrast, our preliminary study based on cnv analysis showed the possibility of much more widespread structural variation between these three strains.

CONCLUSIONS
the integrated happy map has revealed the probable structure of the e. tenella genome, and explains why the ongoing sequencing program has encountered difficulties. it suggests that the genome is architectured segmentally, alternating between p- and r-regions, with an average of about four or five p-regions per mb. r-regions are likely to contain tracts of repeated sequence amounting to >20% of the genome, as well as a further 14% of simple-sequence repeats. this segmental structure and the repetitive nature of the r-segments probably explain both the gaps in the integrated map and the incompleteness of the draft sequence assembly.

there are also indications that much of the genome displays copy-number variation between e. tenella strains. given that parasites must constantly adapt to oppose emerging resistance in the host, it is tempting to speculate that the segmental architecture contributes to a structurally dynamic genome, lubricated by the repeat-rich r-regions. this, in turn, may play an important role in the rapid emergence of drug resistance which is known to be a feature of eimeria.

