BACKGROUND
parkinson's disease  is a neurodegenerative disorder afflicting millions of people especially in the growing aging population. patients with pd are typically debilitated with symptoms of muscular rigidity, impaired movement, loss of balance, and tremor at rest. there is no medical cure for pd. current therapies are mainly targeted at masking or reducing disease symptoms; however, such measures are only temporary. a desirable approach for intervening or slowing down the course of neurodegeneration in pd would be the search for alternative strategies that either protect against neuronal loss  or rejuvenate the defective cells . exercise and balance training in the early disease stage have been reported in a number of clinical studies showing overall improvement in muscle strength, balance, daily activities, motor performance, and ambulation in pd patients  <cit> . however, the effect of exercise on neurological and behavioral manifestations has not been consistently presented in human pd or in laboratory models of pd. therefore, more research is necessary for validating the long-term benefits of endurance exercise in pd.

since its discovery in the early 1980's, 1-methyl-4-phenyl- <dig> , <dig> -tetrahydropyridine  has been extensively used by researchers to produce animal models of pd  <cit> . while humans and non-human primates are most susceptible to mptp in developing pd-like symptoms  <cit> , mouse models are widely used for studying the neurological and pathological mechanisms underlying the degeneration of nigrostriatal dopaminergic neurons. our laboratory has developed and characterized a chronic mouse model of parkinson's disease  in which mice are treated with mptp and probenecid over a  <dig> week period  <cit> . probenecid inhibits the urinary and neuronal clearance of mptp and its metabolites, which causes a potentiated loss of neurons in the substantia nigra and persistently impairs dopamine  transmission for at least  <dig> months  <cit> . in contrast to the most commonly used acute and subacute mptp mouse models of pd in which neurological and behavioral deficits are short-lived and spontaneously reversed soon after the treatment, the chronic mpd has long-lasting neurological deficits showing many features resembling that of the parkinson's syndrome, which include significant loss of cells, da content and terminal da uptake in the nigrostriatal neurons, detection of early neuronal apoptosis and delayed α-synuclein-positive inclusion bodies in the substantia nigra pars compacta  <cit> .

an important dimension of different mptp mouse models is the manifestation of behavioral deficits that resemble parkinsonian signs and symptoms making them useful for testing potential therapeutic agents. given the multitude of models varying in the amount of mptp administered and dosing schedules, published reports have delineated an inconsistent picture of animal behaviors relevant to parkinsonism, especially when mice are observed in the open field. while a majority of studies have shown reduced locomotor and rearing activities in the mptp-treated mice, other studies have reported either no change in behavior or a development of hyperactivity  <cit> . the discrepancies existed in behavioral results could also be contributed by the differences in the duration of observation or the time points after mptp treatment at which the assessment is made. diminished cognitive abilities such as slowed responses and dementia in human pd have not been replicated in mptp rodent models. there is a paucity of studies exploring potential cognitive deficits in mptp-treated mice using tasks that relate to nigrostriatal function. however, following mptp or 1-methyl-4-phenyl-pyridinium treatment, behavioral tasks such as passive and active avoidance, t-maze have been utilized to detect memory/recognition skills that are associated with the function of hippocampus, frontal cortex or olfactory bulb  <cit> .

in the present study, we first examined the motor and cognitive skills in the chronic mptp/probenecid-treated mpd by monitoring their gait pattern, their performance on the challenging beam and grid apparatus, in the cued and spatial versions of morris water maze , as well as in the open field. we then exercise-trained the chronic mpd and compared the outcome of endurance exercise on their behavioral performances with that of the sedentary chronic mpd.

RESULTS
exercise effect on neurological deficits in the severe chronic mpd
when mice were treated with  <dig> injections of a near maximal regimen of mptp hydrochloride  and probenecid  over  <dig> weeks, there was a persistent loss of substantia nigra tyrosine hydroxylase immunopositive cells and depletion of striatal da at least for a survival span of 3– <dig> weeks  <cit> . relevant to the present study, which focused on animal behavioral monitoring and analyses, for instance at  <dig> weeks after chronic mptp/probenecid treatment, the striatal da level in the chronic mpd was  <dig>  ±  <dig>  ng/mg tissue , which was significantly depleted when compared with the level found in the chronic probenecid-treated controls,  <dig>  ±  <dig>  ng/mg tissue , p <  <dig> . continuous exercise training for  <dig> weeks after mptp/probenecid treatment did not significantly raise the level of striatal da . likewise, immunohistochemical and stereological analyses revealed a 72% loss of the tyrosine hydroxylase positive neurons in the substantia nigra pars compacta of the severe chronic mpd and exercise training did not significantly reverse the cell loss.

exercise effect on gait pattern consistency
the animal step length and gait pattern consistency in the control , sedentary , and exercise-trained mpd  were measured and compared. as shown in fig.  <dig>  the statistical omnibus f indicated that there was a significant difference in the averaged step length between the three groups of animals . the post-hoc analyses revealed that the sedentary chronic mpd had a significantly shorter step length than the chronic probenecid-treated control group . continuous exercise training for  <dig> weeks after mptp/probenecid treatment in the chronic mpd group effectively reversed the step length deficit; thus, the averaged step length exhibited in the exercise-trained chronic mpd was significantly longer than that of the sedentary chronic mpd group  and was not different from that of the control group of animals.

the chronic mpd animals demonstrated a noticeable loss of gait pattern consistency . the statistical omnibus f showed that there was a significant difference in the gait pattern consistency over the entire period of recording among the three groups of animals . the post-hoc analyses indicated that the sedentary chronic mpd mice had a more inconsistent gait pattern  than that of the probenecid-treated control animals . when the chronic mpd group was exercise-trained for  <dig> weeks after mptp/probenecid treatment, their consistency of stepping pattern returned to normal; thus, the gait pattern as expressed in mean apen for the exercised chronic mpd was significantly lower than that of the sedentary chronic mpd  and was not statistically different from that of the control group of animals. these data suggest that the chronic mpd mice characteristically display a shorter step length and an inconsistent gait pattern associated with severe dopaminergic neurodegeneration. long-term exercise training restored the gait performance in the chronic mpd.

exercise effect on the cued version of morris water maze
one day after the last injection of mptp/probenecid, the chronic mpd  demonstrated a significant impairment in acquiring the cued version of the water maze task showing significantly longer latencies when compared with that of the control group of animals ,  . similar results were found when the test was given to the chronic mpd group  <dig> weeks after the chronic mptp/probenecid treatment ; thus, they showed a significant deficit in learning the task when compared to the control group ,  . continuous exercise for  <dig> weeks after mptp/probenecid treatment in the chronic mpd  did not significantly improve the animal's performance in the cued version of the mwm when compared with the sedentary chronic mpd mice   . these findings suggest that the chronic mpd exhibits an immediate as well as a long-term deficit in habitual learning that is linked to the severe nigrostriatal neurodegeneration. long-term exercise training does not reverse the habitual learning deficit in the chronic mpd.

exercise effect on the spatial reference version of morris water maze
in contrast to the cued version of water maze task, no significant difference in the spatial reference version of water maze learning was detected between the control and the chronic mpd either short-term   or long-term after the mptp/probenecid treatment  . exercise training for  <dig> weeks after mptp/probenecid treatment in the chronic mpd did not significantly modify this behavior  . these results indicate that chronic mptp/probenecid treatment does not affect the hippocampus in a manner that would impair the animal's ability to acquire the spatial reference learning task. thus, the baseline hippocampal function which has been shown to be critical for accomplishing this task  <cit>  appears to be intact in the chronic mpd and is not affected by exercise training.

in order to exclude the possibility that chronic mptp/probenecid treatment might influence the overall ability of swimming in mice, we further compared the swimming speed in the two groups of animals. briefly, a narrow  path was created with two wooden planks along the diameter  of the water maze without an escape platform. the time latency for each mouse to swim across the entire path based on two trials  was averaged and statistically analyzed. the mean time for the control group  and chronic mpd group  to swim across the path were  <dig>  ±  <dig>  s and  <dig>  ±  <dig>  s, respectively, which were not statistically different. this observation confirms that mptp/probenecid treatment in the chronic mpd does not significantly impair the animal's physical ability for swimming that might interfere with their ability to locate the escape platform in the water maze.

exercise effect on challenging beam and grid tasks
we used the challenging beam and grid tasks in this study to examine the animal's balance and motor coordination skills. two weeks after mptp/probenecid treatment, the chronic mpd group  displayed a significantly higher number of foot slips on the challenging beam than that of the control group ,  . same results were obtained from the chronic mpd  <dig> weeks after treatment , which had significantly more foot slips on the challenging beam than the probenecid-treated control group   . continuing exercise training for  <dig> weeks after mptp/probenecid treatment , these animals had significantly less foot slips on the challenging beam when compared with the sedentary chronic mpd   

using a grid walk test, we also observed that the chronic mpd  had a significantly higher percentage of foot slips through the grid openings than that of the control mice  <dig> weeks  , and  <dig> weeks   after chronic mptp/probenecid treatment . however, continuous exercise training for  <dig> weeks after mptp/probenecid treatment did not significantly improve their grid walk performance  .

the data from the challenging beam and grid tasks together demonstrate that the chronic mpd mice have impaired balance and motor coordination skills, which persisted for at least  <dig> weeks after mptp/probenecid treatment. exercise training improves the balancing skill but fails to restore the motor coordination skill in the chronic mpd.

exercise effect on open field behaviors
we further recorded the locomotor behaviors in mice in the open field  <dig> weeks after chronic probenecid or mptp/probenecid treatment. to obtain the basal levels of activity, control and chronic mpd were injected with saline and their ambulation was observed for  <dig> hours. the total distance traveled  by the chronic mpd under basal conditions  was significantly lower than that of the chronic probenecid-treated control animals ,  .

three days after monitoring the spontaneous movement, each animal received a single dose of amphetamine  and the drug-induced locomotor activities were recorded for  <dig> hours. the amphetamine-challenged ambulatory activity detected in the chronic mpd  was also significantly lower than that of the probenecid-treated control mice ,  . continuous exercise training for  <dig> weeks after mptp/probenecid treatment  did not significantly change the amphetamine-stimulated movement when compared to the sedentary chronic mpd ,  . our data that showed diminished spontaneous and amphetamine-stimulated behavioral responses in the chronic mpd would implicate a long-term locomotor dysfunction corresponding to the neurological dopaminergic deficit in the nigrostriatal tract. exercise training effectively reverses the spontaneous movement deficit but does not significantly reverse the depression of amphetamine-stimulated movement as exhibited in the chronic mpd.

discussion
behavioral manifestations in the chronic mpd
the present study examined and compared the cognitive and motor skills in the chronic mpd with severe nigrostriatal neurodegeneration shortly after and beyond  <dig> weeks of parkinson's syndrome development. in association with marked loss of nigrostriatal dopaminergic cells and da content, we observed that the chronic mpd showed significant deficits in  gait consistency pattern;  the learning capacity when challenged with the cued version of water maze;  balance and motor coordination skills on the challenging beam and walking grid;  the spontaneous and amphetamine-stimulated locomotor behaviors in the open field. noticeably, these diminished behavioral responses lasted for at least 8– <dig> weeks after mptp/probenecid treatment. the inhibited behavioral manifestations were apparently associated with the severe loss of nigrostriatal transmission, since the function of the hippocampus remained unaffected as shown by their unaltered ability to learn the spatial reference version of the water maze.

one of the clinical features of advanced pd is truncal rigidity that creates difficulty for affected patients to maintain an upright posture and a normal gait; thus, while walking they tend to take small steps in a hasty pace, which would result in frequent falls  <cit> . totally replicating the pd-liked postural and gait deficits in quadrapedal rodents is not expected to be physiologically feasible. at best, a gait analysis technique that measures and compares the variability of stride length and stepping pattern may be applied to rodent models of pd  <cit> . indeed, as demonstrated in the present study, the gait analysis revealed that the severe chronic mpd has a relatively shorter stepping length and a less consistent gait pattern certainty than the non-parkinsonian mice. therefore, this technique does provide a reliable approach for assessing the experimental outcomes and for predicting the severity of neurological lesions comparable to the clinical gait variability as reported in human pd  <cit> .

human studies through several neuropsychological tests have reported that pd patients without dementia have a reduced ability for acquiring cue-based probability learning tasks with no impairment in the process of recollective memory; these findings suggest that neostriatum plays an important role not only for learning and performing motor skills but is also essential for processing the gradual, incremental learning of associations known as habitual learning  <cit> . in the rodent literature, the cued version of the mwm is a stimulus-response or habitual task, which requires an intact network of the basal ganglia in order for successfully acquiring the task  <cit> . therefore, lesions present in the basal ganglia would suppress the learning ability of rodents to associate a unique cue located on the platform as a visual sign with a safe landing place in the water maze. in the present study and to our knowledge for the first time, we tested and confirmed that a deficit in the cued version of the mwm could be demonstrated not only shortly after mptp/probenecid treatment but could also be associated with long-term and severe nigrostriatal neurodegeneration in the chronic mpd  <cit> . considering that various attempts for behaviorally characterizing different mptp mouse models of pd have produced inconsistent results so far, the findings of this study indicate that the cued version of the mwm would be a useful test for assessing short-term and long-term habitual learning deficit associated with mptp-induced lesions in the basal ganglia of mice.

as mentioned earlier, the spatial reference version of the mwm requires the rodents to use various cues from the environment in the close vicinity of the maze for locating the escape platform and this skill is dependent on the integral function of the hippocampus. several dissociation studies have clearly distinguished the two cognitive learning systems independently involving the hippocampus and the basal ganglia  <cit> . when mptp was administered centrally or through nasal inhalation, rats developed short-term impairment in their learning of the cued version but not the spatial reference version of the mwm task  <cit> . this notion is substantiated by the observations of the current study, in which we detected no change in the performance of the spatial reference version of the mwm in mice  <dig> week or  <dig> weeks after mptp/probenecid treatment. hence, there is no evidence suggesting that chronic mpd mice have developed learning deficits linked to the hippocampus, and we have not found published reports describing a direct toxic effect of mptp on the hippocampus that would dysregulate the cognitive function.

in this study, we strove to determine whether the order of administering the two different versions of mwm to the same animal would impact the outcome of learning the respective task. we therefore randomly altered the sequence for conducting the two versions of mwm in the chronic mpd. the results were consistent regardless which order of the task that we used first, because it is apparent that they are functionally regulated by two distinctive neuronal network systems. furthermore, we performed a control experiment illustrating that the chronic mpd mice did not have physical impairment that would hinder their ability for swimming, since the amount of time for them to swim across the maze without visual cues was indifferent from that of the control mice.

the extrapyramidal system of the basal ganglia has long been recognized for its control and refinement of motor performance and coordination  <cit> . we examined the short-term and long-term motor and balancing skills in the chronic mpd animals by monitoring their walk on a challenging beam and a wired grid. the challenging beam task has been successfully used for demonstrating motor deficit in a transgenic mouse model of pd that overexpresses α-synuclein  <cit> . the grid walk task has been widely used for testing animal models for spinal injury, ischemia and traumatic brain injury  <cit> . both tests confirmed that the chronic mpd mice exhibited motor and balance deficits not only within  <dig> weeks but also persisted for at least  <dig> weeks after the mptp/probenecid treatment when compared to the control animals. the prolonged motor dysfunction displayed by the chronic mpd mice appears to resemble the movement disability and imbalance in the human pd.

the gradual loss of nigrostriatal neurons and depletion of the neurotransmitter, da have been considered as the basis of locomotor deficit in parkinson's disorder, which can be demonstrated in laboratory animals by monitoring their ambulatory movement in the open-field. in the present study, we measured both the spontaneous and the amphetamine-stimulated movement in the chronic mpd and we found that these animals exhibited a long-term deficit in horizontal movement whether the striatal da system was unstimulated or stimulated. these observations support the concept that the level of da in the striatal terminal vesicles is considerably depleted as demonstrated in the chronic mpd  <cit> ; thus the normal release and stimulated release of the stored vesicular da through the indirect action of amphetamine are both diminished. recently, similar abnormalities in amphetamine-challenged horizontal movement in the open field that correlate with increasing levels of striatal da depletion in an acute mptp mouse model of pd have also been reported implicating that the amphetamine-stimulated assessment of movement in pd models can be validated  <cit> .

following an acute single injection with a moderate dose of amphetamine, it is known that the drug is taken up by the terminal dopaminergic transporter before it triggers the release of stored da from vesicles. nevertheless, the amphetamine effect is not specific to the dopaminergic neurons. it can be taken up by other monoamine terminal transporters in the same fashion and the involvement of norepinephrine and serotonin release may further modify the ambulation of the animal  <cit> . it is also possible that amphetamine exerts its effects on locomotion via the terminal da <dig> autoreceptors  <cit> . mptp is shown to reduce the da <dig> receptor mrna expression  <cit>  and mice with knockout da <dig> receptors have exhibited reduced spontaneous locomotion  <cit> . taken together, the reduced spontaneous and amphetamine-stimulated ambulatory movement detected in the chronic mpd could be contributed by either or both the depletion of da content in the storage vesicles and a down-regulation of the da <dig> receptors. the latter possibility involving the da <dig> receptors requires further investigation in the chronic mpd mice.

effect of endurance exercise on behavioral deficits in the chronic mpd
following the investigation of behavioral deficits in the chronic mpd, we further studied the effect of endurance exercise on their behavioral deficits. although continuous exercise for  <dig> weeks after mptp/probenecid treatment did not significantly reverse the neurological deficit in the nigrostriatal dopaminergic system in this severe animal model of parkinsonism, we are gratified to detect that endurance exercise training significantly invigorated the spontaneous movement and restored the gait pattern consistency and balance in the chronic mpd. however, exercise training did not have the same positive impact on the motor coordination and cognitive learning deficit that are also associated with the severe nigrostriatal neuron degeneration.

behavioral assessment of exercise effect has been reported in several animal models of parkinsonism. in the rat model of parkinsonism induced by 6-hydroxydopamine, either voluntary running or treadmill paced exercise attenuated da loss in the striatum with or without significant recovery of behavioral deficits  <cit> . the neuronal recovery in 6-hydroxydopamine-treated rats triggered by exercise is associated with an increase of the striatal glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor  <cit> . in an acute mouse model of parkinsonism induced by mptp, treadmill exercise ameliorates behavioral deficits and reverses several striatal dopaminergic indices including the loss of da, th-immunoreactivity, and da transporter levels when compared to the sedentary parkinsonian animals  <cit> . in another study, high-intensity treadmill exercise in acute mptp-treated mice leads to behavioral recovery; however, the striatal expression of da transporter is down-regulated and the expression of th is not changed  <cit> . differences in the exercise results obtained from animal models of parkinsonism could be due to experimental variables such as the age and species of the animal, the method and severity of the induced nigrostriatal lesion, and the type and intensity of the exercise regimen.

the chronic mpd that is induced by mptp/probenecid and used in this study affords a neurodegenerative model for pd. with  <dig> doses of mptp  plus probenecid , the chronic mpd attains a severe level of neurodegeneration showing neurochemical, histological, behavioral and pathological characteristics resembling that of pd at advanced stages  <cit> . offering exercise training to the severe chronic mpd animals does not appear to produce neuroprotective or neuroregenerative effect to the dopaminergic neurons. it is not expected that exercise or other pharmacotherapeutic approaches would deliver such promises in the severe chronic mpd or advanced pd, in which the majority of neurons and neurotransmitters are already irreparably lost. however, it is so encouraging to learn based on the observations of this study that exercise training can effectively reverse certain behavioral deficits, like impaired movement, imbalance and inconsistent gait pattern that are associated with the parkinsonian syndrome in spite of the existing severe loss of dopaminergic neurons and neurotransmitter. it is not clear why other behavioral abnormalities, like the impaired cognitive learning and motor coordination skills, are not recovered by exercise training. it is possible that intact nigrostriatal system and adequate level of striatal da are obligatory for maintaining these behaviors, like in the case of open field study with amphetamine that its pharmacological action is dependent on the undamaged da tract for eliciting movement hyperactivity. additional studies are necessary for exploring and substantiating such a hypothesis.

CONCLUSIONS
the results of this study demonstrate that the severe chronic mpd mice exhibit a wide range of behavioral phenotypes that represent symptoms comparable to that of the advanced pd. it is noteworthy that these behaviors persist and allow for several months of study. combined with the neurochemical and pathological characteristics that we have previously reported in this chronic mpd, these behavioral tests would afford confirmation of dopaminergic neurodegeneration without requiring additional animal sacrifice for neurochemical and neuroanatomical analyses. the long-term neurological and behavioral deficits that are characterized in this chronic mpd would make this model more useful for exploring novel therapeutic targets for treating pd.

endurance exercise has been widely advocated for maintaining healthy life in general, and for slowing down aging and neurodegenerative processes. the benefit of exercise on cardiovascular adaptation has been well studied and recognized; however, the information about exercise effect on neurological improvement and associated behaviors is still limited. this study demonstrates that in the severe chronic mpd with behavioral deficits comparable to the advanced parkinsonian syndrome, exercise training can bring anomalous movement, balance and gait pattern back to the state of normalcy, even though the neurological indicators remain severely impaired. therefore, exercise has a beneficial impact on reversing certain behavioral deficits associated with parkinsonian-like neurodegeneration.

