BACKGROUND
the type iii secretion system  is an essential mechanism for host-pathogen interaction during the infection process and is found in many gram-negative bacteria pathogens and eukaryotic cell symbionts  <cit> . examples include yersinia spp., salmonella spp., burkholderia, pseudomonas and chlamydia  <cit> . the t3ss machinery is a highly conserved multi-protein apparatus that mediates the delivery of bacterial effector proteins into the host cell  <cit> . t3ss effector  proteins act as virulence factors within the host and are able to alter and manipulate vital host cell functions, such as signal transduction  <cit>  and innate immune response  <cit> .

due to the key role of t3se proteins in the establishment and maintenance of bacterial pathogenicity, there is considerable research interest in the identification of t3ss effectors. however t3ses display high level of sequence diversity, due largely to horizontal gene transfer among evolutionarily distant species and subsequent bacterial adaptation to different host cell environments  <cit> . to date, while quite a number of t3ses have been identified by both in vitro and in silico methods, the rising number of effector sequences being discovered each year suggests that this represents only a small proportion of all effectors, with many more yet to be discovered.

there is a need to collate and annotate these known effector sequences to enable systematic analyses of these sequences for development of models for screening and selection of putative novel effectors from bacterial genomes/proteomes that can be validated by a small number of key experiments. there is no publicly available specialized database of t3ses, although databases exist for the t3ss machinery, such as the database of type  <dig> secretion system   <cit> . herein, we present t3sedb, a specialized database of annotated t3ss effectors, web-accessible at http://effectors.bic.nus.edu.sg/t3sedb. by using the reported annotated repertoire of effectors in the database, we have built a reliable t3ss effector prediction model that may be useful for predicting t3ss effectors expressed in a broad spectrum of bacterial species.

RESULTS
t3sedb data
t3sedb contains  <dig> cross-referenced and manually annotated effector records , of which  <dig> are experimentally verified ,  <dig> hypothetical  and  <dig> unknown , originating from a total of  <dig> bacterial species. nine bacterial species  had more than  <dig>  both experimentally verified and hypothetical effector sequences, with escherichia coli having the most reported.

t3sedb records are built on effector sequence records retrieved using various keywords from the ncbi entrez protein database. the original records were manually checked to remove irrelevant records and the retained records were processed to customise the data for the specialised t3sedb by keeping only fields of interest . a t3sedb record is assigned a unique five character identifier, which consists of a single letter "t" followed by four numeric digits. the experimental status of each record  was defined following the comprehensive annotation procedure that we defined http://effectors.bic.nus.edu.sg/t3sedb/annotationpolicy.php, which involved manually scanning through the literature via pubmed  <cit> , cross-referencing functional annotations in corresponding records of the effectors in the uniprot/swiss-prot database  <cit> , and performing blast  <cit>  search against the non-redundant  sequences database.

features of t3sedb
users can dynamically browse and string match search the database via the dynamic ajax/jquery data request calls to the server. advanced specific queries are also supported: users can query the database via the ncbi accession number, perform domain or general keyword search, which can also be restricted to the experimental status of the sequences or to a specific field in the sequence record . search results are presented in a tabular form, displaying t3sedb accession number, effector name, hyperlinked ncbi entrez protein database accession number, source organism of the effector, sequence length, experimental status, last sequence update, name and accession of the primary/source database that the effector was retrieved from, sequence data, literature references  and t3sedb curation comments  . sequence similarity search function against the experimental and hypothetical sequences using the blast tool is also provided. users can batch retrieve sequence data of experimentally confirmed and hypothetical effectors. for curated input to the database by users, a web-interface for submission of new t3ses is provided with submission and curation review policy indicated http://effectors.bic.nus.edu.sg/t3sedb/usercurationpolicy.php. a policy on regular update of t3sedb existing and new records is also defined http://effectors.bic.nus.edu.sg/t3sedb/updatepolicy.php. statistics are dynamically updated providing up-to-date general information on the records in the t3sedb, such as the number of records, the rate of deposition of new effector records into the ncbi entrez protein database over the years , the list of source species for the effector sequences and the number of experimentally verified and hypothetical sequences classified according to each species.

diversity of t3ss effectors
t3ss effector sequences have been reported to be highly diverse  <cit> . the latest up-to-date collection of experimentally verified effector sequences in t3sedb enabled assessment of the sequence diversity among them. clustering of the t3ses by amino acid difference between the sequences showed that there is a core set of  <dig> clusters/groups that remained remarkably stable between 10% to 40% identity, as indicated by the clear plateau in figure  <dig>  this means that there are as many as  <dig> clusters with amino acid difference of ~60% within clusters and at least ~91% between clusters. this corroborates reports that t3ses may represent a functionally diverse set of effectors that have a correspondingly wide range of effects on the target host cell  <cit> . the high level of sequence diversity among t3ss effectors highlights the need for the application of other more conserved functional metadata inherent in the sequences for the construction of models for prediction of novel effectors.

prediction of effectors using machine learning algorithms
machine learning approaches have been used to create tools for prediction of diverse t3ss effectors based on physico-chemical properties, such as hydrophobicity and polarity, in their n-terminal region  <cit> , suggesting that these properties are conserved in this region and encode key functional signals to discriminate effectors from non-effectors. thus the n-terminal region and the inherent physico-chemical properties together with complex machine learning approaches represent attractive avenues for strategies to design and develop t3ss effector prediction models. t3sedb provides a large number of experimentally known effector sequences with wide species representation for creation of effector predictors which may be useful for scanning of genomes of broad spectrum of bacterial species for discovery of novel t3ses. we created an effector prediction system to demonstrate the application of the database for such endeavours.

we focused on the  <dig> amino acids  region of the n-terminal of the experimentally known effectors  and non-effector protein sequences  for the development of the predictor using machine learning methods in the waikato environment for knowledge analysis   <cit> . three physico-chemical properties, namely hydrophobicity  <cit> , polarity  <cit>  and β-turns  <cit>  were studied and their scores were ascribed to the overlapping peptides of window size  <dig> within the 100aa region for both the positive and negative datasets. the application of the physico-chemical property β-turn has not been reported elsewhere and was included because proline residues, which suggest presence of β-turns, are reported to be significantly enriched in effectors of animal pathogens  <cit> , and we also observed enrichment of proline in the n-terminal region of many of the known effectors in the database. proline residues represented ~ <dig> % of the amino acids over the 100aa n-terminal region of experimentally validated effectors, which is higher than the uniprot/swiss-prot database statistics  <cit>  of ~ <dig> % for proline.

the performance of several binary classifiers , naïve bayes and bayesnet) available in weka was evaluated via 10-fold cross-validation. the naïve bayes classifier  was the best among the other classifiers for the selected feature set of the three physico-chemical properties analysed, with an excellent cross-validation aroc of ~89%. testing of the naïve bayes model with experimentally validated effectors  and non-effector protein sequences  that were not part of the training data returned an aroc of ~93%, demonstrating the utility of the model for prediction of effectors. the model has been integrated in t3sedb as prediction tool http://effectors.bic.nus.edu.sg/t3sedb/predict.php enabling users to scan sequences of interest against the model for presence of functional signals indicative of a t3se. the predictive ability of this model is comparable to those developed by others in the field   <cit> .

se, sp and ppv refer to sensitivity, specificity and positive predictive value measures, respectively. aroc is the area under the receiver operator characteristic curve and is commonly used as a measure to assess the quality of a prediction model. the testing aroc, se and sp were done with a balanced dataset of  <dig> effectors and non-effectors that were not part of the training. the ppv was computed using an unbalanced dataset representing the approximate proportion of effectors and non-effectors in a bacterial genome.

the model was also tested for its usefulness in scanning bacterial genomes for novel effectors. however, the test against a dataset approximately proportionate to the ratio of effectors and non-effector protein sequences in a bacterial genome  returned a low positive predictive value  of ~17%. ppv is a more relevant measure for researchers working in the wet-lab validating predictions because a model with a high ppv would directly result in a significant reduction in effector discovery cost. though the low ppv for our model is expected given the small proportion of effectors in the bacterial genome, it highlights the challenges facing researchers in the field to develop more sophisticated prediction tools utilizing assemblage of voting of combinations of additional metadata as prediction features to discriminate effectors from non-effectors for practical application in the scanning of bacterial genomes for novel effectors. examples of such metadata for development of metapredictors may include additional features/criteria such as lower rate of evolution and aggregation propensity, which are characteristics of substrates of chaperones  <cit>  , clinical phenotype, host type , quality of experimental methods used to identify the effectors and blast search score of known effectors against bacterial genomes, among others. the t3sedb represents an excellent platform for inclusion of annotations of such metadata for future developments of sophisticated effector prediction tools applicable for genome scan.

CONCLUSIONS
we have created t3sedb, the first reported specialised database of t3ss effectors enriched with annotations that facilitated systematic construction of a reliable prediction model for identification of novel effectors. it represents a platform for future developments of sophisticated metapredictors for practical application in the scanning of bacterial genomes for novel effectors.

