BACKGROUND
signal perception in lov domains is achieved via a blue-light  absorbing flavin mononucleotide  or, in some cases, via a flavin adenine dinucleotide  chromophore, that in the dark is non-covalently bound within the lov domain  <cit> . blue-light absorption triggers the formation of a transient adduct between the fmn-c4a atom and the sulfur atom of a strictly conserved cysteine residue in the lov domain active site  <cit> . once illumination has ceased, this covalent bond is broken thus concluding the photocycle. while the initial photochemical reaction and the adduct formation occurs on a timescale of microseconds  <cit> , adduct decay can take seconds to hours depending on the lov protein  <cit>  . the longest living intermediate, the fmn-cysteinyl-thiol adduct, has been proven to represent the structural signaling state of lov photoreceptors  <cit> . the majority of lov photoreceptors are multi-domain sensory systems, where light-signal perception by the lov domain influences the “activity” of fused effector domains such as kinases, anti-sigma factors, helix-turn-helix dna binding domains, phosphodiesterases and cyclases  <cit> .

based on this modularity, lov photoreceptors in turn control or influence a multitude of cellular light responses in plants, algae, fungi and bacteria  <cit> . in plants, the biological function of lov photoreceptors is well-established, including plant phototropism, chloroplast relocation, light-induced leaf movement and regulation of stomatal opening  <cit> . in contrast, the understanding of regulatory functions of their counterparts in bacteria is still limited, some examples were described recently . the best characterized bacterial lov photoreceptor is ytva from the soil bacterium bacillus subtilis  <cit> , which is part of the stressosome, involved in the σb-mediated general stress response of this organism  <cit> . recently, additional regulatory functions of bacterial lov proteins were described such as control of cell-adhesion in caulobacter cresentus  <cit> , virulence in brucella abortus  <cit> , motility of pseudomonas syringae  <cit>  and in the counteraction of plant immune response during citrus canker in xanthomonas citri  <cit> .

remarkably, in addition to the multi-domain lov photoreceptors, a large subset of lov photoreceptors exist in bacteria and fungi that do not possess fused effector domains and are thus called “short” lov proteins. functionally and structurally characterized examples include the fungal photoreceptor vvd  <cit> , the lov proteins ppsb1-lov and ppsb2-lov of pseudomonas putida kt <dig>  <cit>  and the recently characterized rslov protein of rhodobacter sphaeroides  <dig> . <dig>  <cit> . physiological studies on neurospora crassa vvd and recent data for rslov indicate that despite the lack of a fused effector domain, short lov proteins can act as genuine blue-light receptors, probably transducing the signal via interactions with a partner protein.

all short lov proteins structurally characterized so far possess n- and/or c-terminal helical extensions  outside the conserved lov core domain suggested to be involved in signaling  <cit> . in multi-domain lov photoreceptors, these extensions often link the sensor lov and associated effector domains and are suggested to act as signal-transducing linker elements or spacers providing flexibility  <cit> .

another feature common to most lov domains is their dimerization propensity. in particular, a light-dependent alteration of the monomer-dimer equilibrium represents a feasible mode of signal-relay for short lov proteins, where one of the two quaternary structural states selectively mediates the interaction with downstream signaling partners  <cit> . for short lov proteins crystallized as full-length constructs, dimerization is mostly mediated by either the n-terminal a´α-helix  and/or, if present, the respective c-terminal jα-helices  <cit> . the presence and structure of n- and c-terminal extensions largely determine the mode of dimerization and hence the corresponding light-dependent conformational change. thus, the study of short lov proteins with unusual lov-core extensions might provide further insights into the diversity of lov-protein dimerization and signaling.

here, we report on the identification of an unusual short lov protein dslov from the marine phototrophic α-proteobacterium dinoroseobacter shibae dfl12t. combining crystallography and biochemical methods, we investigate the molecular mechanism of photoexcitation in dslov, which displays a recovery on the timescale of seconds. furthermore, we demonstrate that the fast recovering dslov is a key regulator for light mediated triggering of photopigments bacteriochlorophyll a and spheroidenone formation in d. shibae.

RESULTS
dinoroseobacter shibae harbors three putative lov photoreceptor genes
the gram-negative α-proteobacterium dinoroseobacter shibae is a member of the roseobacter clade, a bacterial lineage that is globally abundant in different marine habitats. light is an important environmental factor for d. shibae because it can produce atp via aerobic anoxygenic photosynthesis  <cit> . sequence similarity analysis of the published d. shibae dfl12t genome revealed the presence of three genes encoding putative blue-light photoreceptors of the lov family , possessing all the sequence features necessary for fmn binding and photocycling  <cit> . the predicted lov proteins encoded by the genes dshi_ <dig> and dshi_ <dig> show either one single histidine kinase domain or four domains with homologies to pas, histidine kinase and response regulator protein domains, which are fused to the respective c-termini of the predicted lov domains . in contrast, the gene dshi_ <dig> codes for a short lov protein that lacks fused effector domains. among bacterial short lov proteins, dslov appears exceptional as it harbors an n-terminal cap domain but lacks a c-terminal extension and is thus architecturally very similar to fungal vvd  <cit> .figure  <dig> 
dslov domain architecture and photochemistry.  domain architecture of the three d. shibae lov proteins. locus tags and accession numbers  are given in front of each protein. the length of each protein and the type and relative location of all predicted pfam domains are specified. lov: light, oxygen voltage; hk: histidine kinase; pas: per-arnt-sim; rr: response regulator.  absorbance spectra of dslov in the dark and light state. in the dark, dslov displays the characteristic uv/vis absorbance bands with a λmax of about 449 nm . to sufficiently populate the light state, the dslov protein was exposed to blue-light for 30 seconds at 4°c , resulting in a decreased absorbance at 447 nm and the concomitant formation of a new absorbance maximum at 390 nm. the inset shows the light–dark difference spectrum of dslov.  dark recovery of dslov measured at 20°c. lov protein dark recovery was monitored by recording time traces for the absorbance recovery at 485 nm after blue-light illumination. the data  was fitted using a mono-exponential decay function.



dslov exhibits fast recovery kinetics
the soluble photoreceptor protein dslov was expressed in e. coli bl <dig>  as c-terminal his6-tagged protein and was purified via immobilized-metal affinity chromatography . in the dark, dslov exhibits the characteristic absorption bands of the lov dark state with λmax = 449 nm . remarkably, formation of the dslov photoadduct  after blue-light illumination, reflected by the loss of its absorption within the blue-region of the spectrum could only be observed when the sample temperature was reduced to 4°c  suggesting a rapid dark recovery which was determined as τrec =  <dig>  ±  <dig>  s at 20°c .

crystal structure of dslov reveals a unique n-cap region
overall structure
monoclinic crystals of the dslov protein were obtained in the dark, which diffracted to a resolution of  <dig>  Å. the statistics of x-ray data collection and refinement are documented in table  <dig>  the final monomer model  comprises residues 20– <dig> of the protein and the chromophore riboflavin  . residues 1– <dig> could not be traced in the electron density map and are likely to be disordered. also, no electron density was observed for the c-terminal residues 139– <dig> that comprise the his6-tag. according to ramachandran plot generated with molprobity  <cit> , the model exhibited good geometry with none of the residues in disallowed regions.table  <dig> 
data collection and refinement statistics


dslov “dark”
dslov “photoexcited”

astatistics for the highest-resolution shell are shown in parentheses.
crystal structure of dslov. ribbon representation of the dark state of dslov  colored according to secondary structure elements with helices in light blue; β-strands in light green, and loops in yellow). the chromophore riboflavin  is shown as stick model and is colored by element: carbon, yellow; nitrogen, blue; oxygen, red.



the residues 36– <dig> comprise the conserved lov core domain with a typical α/β-fold pas topology. the core domain is made up of a five-stranded antiparallel β-sheet comprising aβ , bβ , gβ , hβ  and iβ , and four α-helices cα , dα , eα  and fα . in addition, a noncanonical structural element designated as the n-cap is present that includes a n-terminal turn , helix  and a connecting loop  .

dimer interface
the dslov crystal structure has one molecule in the asymmetric unit even though the protein exists as a dimer in solution as revealed by sec and small angle x-ray scattering experiments described below. the most probable higher-order assembly proposed by pisa analysis  <cit>  is a dimer, where the n-terminal a´α helix is part of the dimer interface that is unique amongst lov protein structures . the buried surface area of ~950 Å <dig> involves a set of interchain interactions between charged residues  , hydrogen bonds  and several hydrophobic interactions between residues in the n-terminal cap  and the β-scaffold of the opposite subunit  . residues constituting the dimer interface are i <dig>  l <dig>  i <dig>  l <dig>  g <dig>  i <dig>  d <dig>  p <dig>  e <dig>  m <dig> and f <dig> from the two-fold related monomers.figure  <dig> 
dimer interface and photoexcited state of dslov.  the dimer of dslov  showing the n-terminus  mediated dimer interface, based on pisa analysis  <cit> . the secondary structure elements are colored with helices in light blue; β strands in light green, and loops in yellow. the chromophore riboflavin  is shown as stick model and is colored by element: carbon, yellow; nitrogen, blue; oxygen, red. the intersubunit hydrogen bonds are shown as broken lines between the residues shown as stick models and colored by element. specifications on the hydrogen bond distance and the atoms involved are provided in the text. side chain conformations of r <dig> and r <dig> in photoexcited state are shown superimposed in coral. position of l <dig> and e <dig> are indicated by arrowheads.  superposition of dark and photoexcited crystal structures. side chains of residues shown as stick models are colored by element for dark state as in a, and in coral for photoexcited state. a shift seen in the respective iβ backbone  is highlighted in the oval area. for clarity, rest of the region is shown as ribbon representation in transparent grey. note the additional h-bond between q135-ne <dig> and n <dig> of rbf molecule in the photoexcited state. the view in this figure is of the monomer  of the dimer shown in panel a, which is rotated ~ 180° around the horizontal axis.



structural comparison with other lov domains
although the lov core domain is structurally well conserved, diversity is seen for the noncanonical n- and c-terminal elements  <cit> . these regions adopt the helical secondary structure in the previously published lov protein structures . an n-terminal turn-helix-turn motif has been previously reported  <cit>  in the crystal structure of aslov <dig> . in dslov, the n-terminal extension shows similar secondary structure elements with a turn, helix and a long connecting loop . however, superposition of the core domains  shows different positioning of the corresponding n-terminal elements. in contrast to monomeric aslov <dig>  the noncanonical n-terminal element of dslov is involved in dimer formation. we next compared dslov to fungal vvd  <cit>  as both proteins consist of the conserved core domain with an n-terminal extension. surprisingly, despite the differences in n-cap length  and secondary structure, superposition of the vvd dark state  shows the highest similarity, where residues 43– <dig> and 67– <dig> follow the trace corresponding to the n-cap residues of dslov. moreover, n-cap mediated dimerization is globally similar in both structures. functional implications of this similarity are discussed below in the section ‘light-induced conformational changes’.

flavin binding pocket
as seen in previously reported dark state lov protein structures, a flavin chromophore molecule is noncovalently bound within a tight pocket formed by the β-scaffold and the surrounding eα- and fα-helices . surprisingly, the chromophore bound in the dslov structure is rbf and not fmn; where both are identical except for the terminal phosphate group that is absent in rbf. prior to crystallization setups, purified dslov protein was denatured and the released chromophores were analyzed by hplc demonstrating that it predominantly binds fmn  and fad  whereas no riboflavin could be detected . we suspect that the fmn bound to the dslov protein in solution got hydrolyzed to rbf during the crystallization time period of several weeks in acidic conditions  <cit> .

the mode of protein-chromophore interaction is conserved amongst the lov protein family, where rigid coordination of the chromophore molecule in the binding pocket is mediated by a network of hydrogen bonds, van der waals and electrostatic interactions. mainly, residues in the  <dig> eα-helix , hβ-strand , and iβ strand  constitute most of the hydrogen bonding interactions with the rbf molecule. residues forming hydrophobic contacts with the isoalloxazine ring are v <dig>  c <dig>  i <dig>  r <dig>  l <dig>  l <dig>  i <dig>  f <dig>  a <dig> and g <dig> 

in all lov proteins, two conserved arginine residues make contact with the phosphate group of the chromophore. in dslov, the corresponding arginines are r <dig> and r <dig>  where only r <dig> forms a hydrogen bond  with the ribityl chain. please note that the interaction between the terminal end of chromophore ribityl chain and the protein is most likely disturbed due to presence of rbf  in the dslov crystal structure, hence preventing any conclusions with regard to the fmn-phosphate coordination in dslov in solution, where fmn is the predominant chromophore .

light-induced conformational changes
the photochemistry of lov domains is reversible in solution as well as in crystals  <cit> . we thus solved the structure of dslov in the photoexcited state after illuminating crystals grown in the dark . the difference electron density map  does not show the presence of a covalent bond between residue c <dig> and flavin c4a atom . the interatomic distance between the c72-sγ and rbf-c4a is  <dig>  Å, marginally smaller than  <dig>  Å observed in the dslov dark state structure. the presence or absence of a covalent adduct in lov protein crystals has been used in previous studies to define either the ‘light’ or ‘dark’ state, respectively. the absence of a covalent adduct in the photoexcited crystal structure of dslov can be due to two reasons:  fast dark recovery of the protein  prevents adduct stabilization, and/or  radiation damage with radiolysis of the cys72-rbf thioether bond caused by the high-energy x-ray beam. the latter has been previously observed for other lov proteins  <cit> . additionally, comparison of the spectra obtained from single crystal microspectrometry confirmed typical dark state  and light state  absorbance spectra for the dslov crystals grown in dark, and after blue-light illumination, respectively . in order to verify that spectral changes observed in the crystal are not the result of irreversible photobleaching, dark grown dslov crystals were transferred to the microspectrometer under constant blue-light illumination in the cryo stream  and an absorbance spectrum was recorded. subsequently, the cryo stream was blocked and the light was switched off to allow dark recovery of the protein at room temperature. the corresponding spectra shows full recovery of the flavin specific absorption band in the blue-region of the spectrum within 5 minutes . in contrast, no dark recovery occured within 1 hour at cryogenic temperatures . taken together, the data demonstrates that the protein in dark grown dslov crystals is capable of reversible photocycling, suggesting that the structural changes observed in photoexcited crystals are most likely the result of illumination and are not related to irreversible photobleaching.

several distinct conformational differences between dark and photoexcited dslov structures were observed, even though direct evidence supporting an adduct formation in the electron density map is absent in the latter :  several residues primarily localized at the boundary of the chromophore binding pocket show different side chain conformations in the photoexcited state; these include v <dig>  v <dig>  m <dig>  e <dig>  v <dig>  r <dig>  r <dig>  f <dig>  r <dig>  r <dig>  r <dig>  i <dig> and e125;  due to absence of electron density, residues 29– <dig> located in the a´α-aβ loop could not be traced in the photoexcited state;  a significant shift is observed in the cα backbone of the iβ strand  , the aβ strand , and the connecting loop  ;  the hydrophobic pocket around the dimethyl-benzene ring of the chromophore is also rearranged; for example, a <dig> and g <dig> no longer make hydrophobic contacts as in the dark state. an interesting observation is that the side chain conformation of f <dig> which is aligned parallel to the flavin ring system in the dark rotates towards the flavin ring in the photoexcited state . notably, we observed similar side chain orientations for this structurally conserved phenylalanine residue in previously published crystal structures of c. reinhardtii phot lov <dig> , b. subtilis ytva lov , r. sphaeroides rslov  and p. putida ppsb1-lov . mutation of the corresponding phenylalanine residue in ytva-lov to histidine accelerated the dark recovery of the protein 25-fold  <cit> . this hints a possible involvement of f <dig> in photoactivation, signaling and adduct state stability in lov proteins and further suggests that the structural differences observed between dark and photoexcited structures of dslov are a consequence of photoactivation.

despite the increased flexibility in the n-terminus  in the photoexcited state, residues 20– <dig> were still traceable . the position of the n-cap, in particular, is stabilized by hydrogen bonding interactions between dimer-interface residues d20-y122´, and a22-y122´, that exist in both the dark- and photoexcited-states. it should be noted that the photoexcited state structure was obtained upon illumination of dark-grown crystals, which is not sufficient to cause large conformational changes of functional relevance that would require breaking of the crystal lattice constraints. interestingly, the side chain conformation of r <dig>  involved in the dimer interface differs in both the states, facing towards and away from the dimer interface in the dark and photoexcited state, respectively . as a result, interactions between r <dig> and d20´, r <dig> and l <dig>  and r <dig> and e <dig> are absent. energetically, this might increase the flexibility of the n-terminus as seen in the photoexcited state . another major structural change is observed for the side chain conformation of r <dig> in the photoexcited state. here, r <dig> forms a salt bridge with n <dig> on iβ . in the corresponding dark state structure, the side chain of r <dig> is flipped towards the n-terminal cap  breaking the interaction with n <dig>  residue q <dig>  that forms a single hydrogen bond with the rbf isoalloxazine ring – o4…ne2-q <dig>   <dig>  Å, shows two possible hydrogen bonds o4…ne2-q <dig>   <dig>  Å, and n5…ne2-q <dig>   <dig>  Å in the photoexcited state  . hydrogen bonding between the conserved glutamine and the newly protonated n <dig> atom of the flavin ring has been observed in other light state crystal structures  <cit> . this light-induced structural change of q <dig> is one of the initial steps in lov photoactivation that probably contributes to the observed displacement of the iβ strand in the photoexcited state of dslov.

in vvd, structures of dark-grown crystals are monomeric  <cit> . both, solution studies and light state crystal structure  show homodimer formation  <cit> . structural rearrangements in the latter include release of the n-terminal ‘latch’, which then binds to the symmetry equivalent molecule allowing dimer formation. in contrast, the n-terminus is packed against the β-sheet of the lov core domain in structures obtained from dark-grown crystals. an important role in the process is played by the hinge region that connects the n-terminus and the core domain, and shows structural changes as a result of fmn-cysteinyl-thiol adduct formation. interestingly, the corresponding region in dslov  shows no electron density upon photoexcitation. considering the analogy between dslov and vvd that show n-cap mediated dimer interface, it is possible that the mode of interaction as well as signal transfer are globally similar in both proteins where an illumination-triggered relay of structural changes occurs from the chromophore binding pocket towards the n- and c-terminus, gated via residues on the central β-scaffold . these might involve change in conformation of the a´α-aβ loop in the n-cap region, which could consequently enable signal-transduction to an as yet unknown downstream partner protein of dslov within the cellular context.

structural basis of the fast dark recovery of dslov
most positions in the vicinity of the flavin chromophore known to influence the adduct decay such as v <dig> , n <dig> and n <dig>  which form hydrogen-bonds to the isoalloxazine c = o and c = o atoms, as well as n <dig> on the aβ-bβ loop  are conserved between dslov and other lov proteins, and are thus less likely to be involved in accelerating the dark recovery of dslov compared to other lov proteins. additionally, it has been previously suggested that adduct decay can be influenced by surface exposed histidine residues by base-catalysis via a proposed hydrogen-bonding network of the base, the chromophore and intraprotein water molecules  <cit> . while dslov possesses one surface exposed histidine  about 18 Å away from the rbf-c4a atom , no direct or indirect proton relay network can be identified in the structure, ruling out a significant impact of the respective residue on the fast recovery of dslov.

one major structural difference in the vicinity of the flavin chromophore between dslov and other plant and bacterial lov domains is the presence of a methionine residue  on bβ at the dimethylbenzene side of the flavin isoalloxazine ring. in other lov domains, the corresponding position is either occupied by an isoleucine   <cit>  or leucine   <cit> . for aslov <dig>  ytva and vvd, mutation of the respective isoleucine residue strongly influences the adduct-state lifetime. here, the mutations i427v , i39v  and i85v  accelerated the recovery of the respective proteins 8-, 5- and 23-fold  <cit> . several structural interpretations have been proposed for the observed mutation-induced kinetic effects. for aslov <dig>  i427v was proposed to be in van der waals contact with the sulfhydryl group of the photoactive cysteine   <cit> . the authors suggested that structurally, i <dig> provides steric support to the active site region near the photoactive cysteine and that removal of this support by introducing a valine at the respective position destabilizes the adduct state and hence results in a faster dark recovery. moreover, different imidazole-base dependent adduct-decay rate accelerating effects were observed for vvd and the corresponding i85v mutant. in particular, the adduct-decay rate acceleration was more pronounced for vvd-i85v than for the wild-type protein. this suggests better access of imidazole to the active site of vvd-i85v where it acts as a base to abstract the proton from n <dig> proton in the light state, hence accelerating the photocycle dark recovery  <cit> . taken together, residue-alterations at the respective position on bβ seem to influence the dark recovery of lov proteins by both steric effects acting on the photoactive cysteine and by controlling solvent/base access to the active site, which drives adduct scission by n <dig> deprotonation.

in the dslov dark-state crystal structure, m <dig> possesses two conformations , one where the δ-sulfur atom of the methionine side-chain is facing towards c72-sγ  and a second mirrored conformation where the δ-sulfur is facing away from the photoactive cysteine . the double occupancy of m <dig> is indicative of structural flexibility of the respective residue in the dark. even though we do not directly observe c72-sγ - fmn-c4a bond formation in photoexcited crystals of dslov, adduct formation would result in a movement of c72-sγ towards the rbf-c4a atom and hence away from m <dig>  for reversal of the reaction, the c72-sγ – rbf-c4a bond has to be broken and c <dig> has to move back towards m <dig>  consequently, this back movement might be eased by the flexibility of m <dig> in the dark state of dslov, whereas it would be more restricted in the presence of a branched amino acid such as isoleucine in aslov <dig>  vvd and ytva, thus resulting in a slower dark recovery of the latter proteins compared to dslov. likewise, m <dig> might act as a “gate-keeper” restricting/enabling the solvent/base access to fmn-n <dig> hence influencing adduct decay by n <dig> deprotonation as suggested for vvd  <cit> .

small angle x-ray scattering reveals dimeric dslov in solution
we performed saxs measurements to determine the oligomeric state and envelope of the molecule in solution. the molecular mass determined from the porod volume and ab initio modelling was  <dig>  kda and  <dig>  kda, respectively. the calculated molecular mass from the amino acid sequence of monomeric dslov is  <dig>  kda. analytical size-exclusion chromatography  revealed an apparent molecular mass of  <dig>  ±  <dig>  kda for dslov, corresponding to the calculated mass of the dimer  . therefore, both sec and saxs results demonstrate that the protein forms a dimer in solution. next, theoretical scattering curves were calculated for the monomer and the dimer of the crystal structure, and fitted against the experimental saxs data. as shown in figure 4a, the theoretical curve of the monomer is a poor fit that yields a large χ2-value of  <dig>  a better fit with dimer results in a reduction of χ2-value to  <dig> , however, this is still significantly large. notably, the dimer fits well in the small scattering vector range up to  <dig>  Å− <dig> whereas deviations become visible at larger q-values. scattering in the small angle region is sensitive to the molecular mass and to the global shape, whereas the large q-region is more sensitive to the tertiary structure of the protein. the positions of the first 19 n-terminal residues and the c-terminal his6-tag are not resolved in the crystal structure. disorder and flexibility of the missing regions was thus accounted for by modelling these regions in the crystal structure of dslov dimer using the eom program  <cit> . the resulting theoretical curve produces the best fit with a reduced χ2-value of  <dig>  . the discrepancy of the theoretical curve calculated from the dimer structure is thus related to the missing terminal regions.figure  <dig> 
solution behavior of dslov measured by small angle x-ray scattering.  experimental data , calculated curves of the crystal structure of the monomer , the crystal structure of the dimer , and the crystal structure of the dimer including flexible ends . the inset shows the zoom in on the low q-range, where a small fraction of aggregated particles cause the slight uptick at q <  <dig>  Å− <dig>  the lower panel shows the same experimental data and the fits in a kratky-plot.  the distance distribution function p of dslov as calculated for the range of q >  <dig>  Å− <dig>  where effects of protein aggregation are negligible. 
ab initio model of dslov  determined by saxs and aligned crystal structure of the dimer .



the envelope of dslov was determined by ab initio modelling. the distance distribution function p is shown in figure 4b. the ab initio model obtained using program gasbor combined with the aligned crystal structure of the dimer is shown in figure 4c. the general shape of the envelope confirms the dimeric state of the protein and overlaps the dimer structure. in fact, the non-filled parts of the envelope correspond to the locations of the crystallographically non-resolved residues in the n- and c-terminus.

dslov is involved in the upregulation of photopigment synthesis in the absence of blue-light
the facultative phototrophic bacterium d. shibae can grow either heterotrophically in the dark or photoheterotrophically in the light by using a photosystem that contains the photopigments bacteriochlorophyll  a and the carotenoid spheroidenone  <cit> . in contrast to anoxygenic photosynthetic α-proteobacteria, d. shibae synthesizes its photopigments in the presence of oxygen  <cit> . however, since photoexcited bchl a efficiently transfers energy to molecular oxygen which in turn leads to the formation of toxic reactive oxygen species , d. shibae down regulates the synthesis of photopigments upon illumination  <cit> .

we first analyzed the effect of blue-light on the accumulation of bchl a and spheroidene in d. shibae to determine if the photoreceptor dslov is involved in light-dependent control of photopigment formation. for this, we comparatively cultivated d. shibae cells heterotrophically in the dark as well as photoheterotrophically using three different light sources for illumination, namely  daylight emulating neon tubes emitting broad spectrum light of wavelengths from 400 nm to 720 nm;  infrared-light  leds exhibiting a maximal emission at 855 nm  and  blue-light leds maximally emitting at 462 nm . these specific emission wavelengths were chosen because they are suitable for the excitation of bchl a  and spheroidenone . after cultivation, differences in photopigment accumulation were analyzed .figure  <dig> 
characterization of a dslov-deficient
d
.
shibae
mutant strain.  influence of different light regimes on pigment composition of d. shibae wild-type  and the dslov-deficient mutant strain . strains were grown in the dark, under white-, infrared-, and blue-light conditions until the cells reached the late logarithmic growth phase. after harvesting 1 ml of cell culture by centrifugation, cell pellets were photographed to document the individual pigmentation.  spectroscopic determination of light-dependent photopigment composition in d. shibae wild-type and mutant Δdslov.



as expected, significant amounts of photopigments accumulated in d. shibae wild-type strain in the dark indicated by a deep red coloration of the corresponding cell pellet. in contrast, illumination with broad-spectrum light led to an almost complete loss of coloration . interestingly, blue-light illumination of d. shibae wild-type cells resulted in a similar down regulation of pigment synthesis, whereas no inhibitory effect was observed upon infrared-light irradiation. in this case, cells showed a red coloration that had so far only been observed for dark grown cells.

to quantitatively analyze the pigment composition of dark-grown and illuminated cells, photopigments were extracted and the absorption of spheroidenone and bchl a  were determined as described in the methods section . dark grown and infrared illuminated cells showed comparable absorption values for both photopigments. in contrast, the absorption values of photopigments extracted from white or blue-light irradiated d. shibae cells were negligible indicating that neither bchl a nor spheroidenone accumulated under these conditions. these observations indicate that photopigment synthesis in d. shibae is predominantly controlled by a blue-light signal provided here by the blue-light leds or by the predominant blue part of the white-light spectrum.

we next analyzed if the blue-light photoreceptor dslov is involved in this regulatory process. we constructed a d. shibae dslov deletion strain  and subsequently analyzed pigment accumulation under the illumination conditions described above. the results clearly demonstrate that the Δdslov strain did not show any coloration, regardless of the applied illumination conditions  demonstrating that induction of pigment formation in the dslov-deficient d. shibae strain was almost completely abolished under all tested light regimes.

our data suggest that photopigment synthesis in d. shibae is primarily controlled by blue-light with the short lov photoreceptor dslov acting as a key regulator. based on the presented observations, we propose a unique regulatory function where the dark state of dslov seems to be the regulatory relevant state which is directly or indirectly involved in the activation of photopigment synthesis.

as shown for other aerobic anoxygenic phototrophic bacteria , d. shibae performs anoxygenic photosynthesis in the presence of light and oxygen to gain additional atp. however, since light-excitation of bchl a in the presence of molecular oxygen can result in the formation of cytotoxic reactive oxygen species  including singlet oxygen   <cit> , it might be of vital importance for d. shibae to control photopigment synthesis in response to changing light regimes. accordingly, tomasch and coworkers could demonstrate by transcriptome analysis that the transition from dark to light conditions resulted in an induction of ros-mediated stress response accompanied by a down-regulation of photosynthesis genes  <cit> . remarkably, based on our finding, the photoreceptor dslov might act as a ros-independent dark-sensor which is essential for induction of pigment formation under non-hazardous illumination conditions. in accordance with this assumption, light-mediated inhibition of photopigment synthesis was only provoked by blue light whereas infrared light that is particularly absorbed by bchl a is irrelevant for the observed regulatory process. in this context, it is worth mentioning that infrared light is rapidly attenuated in water and thus does not penetrate a water column further than ca. 5 m, whereas blue light can reach a water depth of more than 30 m. because d. shibae is a marine bacterium which lives in symbiosis with dinoflagellates in coast-near aquatic habitats  <cit> , blue light might be the most sensitive environmental factor for the proposed adaptation process.

in contrast to the light regulated photopigment synthesis in d. shibae, expression of photosynthesis genes in the facultative photosynthetic bacterium r. sphaeroides is predominantly regulated by oxygen tension. high oxygen concentration leads to activation of the repressor molecule ppsr which strictly prevents the expression of photosynthesis genes  <cit> . however, a second blue-light triggered regulatory mechanism comes into play under micro-aerobic conditions where the blue-light photoreceptors appa and cryb bind to the repressor ppsr in the dark to inactivate its suppressing function  <cit> . also, the short lov blue-light receptor rslov is involved in the light-mediated control of photosynthesis related genes  <cit> . an rslov mutant strain exhibited a stronger pigmentation and a higher bchl a content during the late exponential phase. furthermore, rslov effects the gene expression of photooxidative stress response genes as well as genes for chemotaxis and carbohydrate metabolism  <cit> . very recently, it was published that the regulator aerr acts as an antirepressor of the ppsr homolog crtj in the closely related phototrophic bacterium r. capsulatus, which inhibits the crtj-mediated repression of photosynthesis genes in a vitamin b12-dependent and light-responsive manner  <cit> . despite missing information about the detailed mode of intracellular signal transduction, our functional data suggests that photosynthesis pigment formation is apparently controlled very differently in d. shibae than in other closely related photosynthetic microbes, even though similar blue-light responsive photoreceptors are employed.

CONCLUSIONS
the photochemical and structural characterization of the ‘short’ dslov protein highlights some unique properties including a very fast recovery, a flexible n-terminal cap region as well as a dimeric structure in solution stabilized mainly via an unusual set of interactions at the molecule interface. based on the differences between the crystal structures of the dark state and the photoexcited state, we identified several key residues in the chromophore binding pocket which play an important role in signaling and are located in the hinge region connecting the n-cap to the lov core domain. these results lead us to postulate that in dslov subtle light-induced structural changes in the chromophore binding pocket are subsequently propagated, via several residues located in the iβ and hβ strands of the central β-scaffold, towards the peripheral regions and manifested as partially disordered loop in the n-cap region. however, transfer of the light signal in dslov might require conformational changes at a larger scale than observed here as permitted by the crystal lattice. additionally, we have demonstrated that dslov is essential for the induction of photopigment formation in the dark whereas blue-light specifically leads to almost complete downregulation of bchl a and spheroidenone accumulation.

the results of our functional studies show that photopigment synthesis in d. shibae takes place only in the dark when dslov is likely to be in a dimeric state. compared to the crystal structure of the dark state dimer, the dslov photoexcited state shows several structural rearrangements including an increase in flexibility in the n-cap region involved in dimer formation. it is thus tempting to speculate that these blue-light mediated structural changes  could lead to a quaternary structural change of the protein. this in turn could result in altered protein-protein interactions inside the cell, which would enable the reported physiological response.

its unique photophysical properties and regulatory functions, as well as the distinct and quantifiable phenotype of a mutant, make dslov a new and promising model system to study the intramolecular and regulatory processes of lov photoreceptors.

