BACKGROUND
male-killing bacteria, bacteria that are passed vertically from a female to both her male and female progeny and kill the males during embryogenesis, are known to occur in a wide variety of insect taxa  <cit> . much research has been conducted on their frequency in natural populations, the identity of the bacteria concerned, their potential impact. this has revealed that they vary in frequency within and between host species, with prevalence varying from  <dig> to 99% of female hosts  <cit> . the bacteria are diverse, deriving from the genera spiroplasma, wolbachia, rickettsia, arsenophonus, and an unnamed representative in the cytophaga-flavobacteria group  <cit> . the impact on the host can be profound, with high male-killer prevalence associated with sex role reversal in the butterfly acraea encedon  <cit> , and the evolution of suppressor genes in hypolimnas bolina  <cit> .

in contrast, almost nothing is known about the timing or mechanism of male-killing with the exception of a few studies in the spiroplasma-drosophila system. recent studies of this interaction have demonstrated that male-killing requires a functional host dosage compensation complex  <cit> . however, there is little precise knowledge regarding the timing of male death, and no information on the cellular pathology induced by the spiroplasma. past studies have described abnormalities occurring anywhere between cleavage divisions and  <dig> h after oviposition, with death occurring even in larval or pupal phase  <cit> . however, these previous studies are less than satisfactory because researchers were unable to identify the sex of embryos, so unhealthy embryos were automatically considered male. in addition, the focus of three of the four studies was an unnatural association: d. melanogaster transinfected with spiroplasma from d. nebulosa. whilst this transinfection does function with a good degree of penetrance, it is somewhat unstable in the laboratory, and these studies did not assess whether the infections functioned in the same way as a natural infection.

in this study, we examine the process of male death in a natural association, that between drosophila nebulosa and its male-killing spiroplasma. this strain of spiroplasma is closely related to s. poulsonii, the male-killer discovered in d. willistoni  <cit> . this strain shows very high rates of natural vertical transmission, making the infection very stable and amenable to laboratory study. an antibody against sxl  <cit> , the key switch peptide in drosophila sex determination and present only in females, is used to allow the embryos to be sexed precisely. we first conducted a detailed study of the timing of male death caused by s. poulsonii, and the abnormalities observed. we also investigated the role of apoptosis in cellular death within male embryos at the point of male death. previous work on bacteria-host interactions has demonstrated that bacteria are able to induce and repress apoptosis, both of which could result in the death of an embryo  <cit> . we tested whether apoptosis of host cells occurred during male death in the drosophila-spiroplasma system.

RESULTS
timing and morphology of male death
we first examined whetherthe sxl antibody raised from d. melanogaster sxl could be used to sex d. nebulosa embryos as it does in d. melanogaster. a comparison of the ratio of sxl-positive to sxl-negative d. nebulosa embryos in uninfected lines shows a 1: <dig> ratio of sxl+:sxl- embryos, as expected for a protein only present in females . thus we conclude the antibody does allow differentiation of male from female d. nebulosa. there was no difference in the ratio of sxl-positive to sxl-negative d. nebulosa embryos between infected and uninfected lines  indicating that this sxl expression is not altered by s. poulsonii, and can be used in infected as well as uninfected embryos.

we then examined the timing of male embryo death by tracking the developmental stage attained by  <dig> h cohorts of eggs, infected and uninfected, allowed to develop between  <dig> and  <dig> h. embryos in each cohort were placed into developmental stages delineated by campos-ortega and hartenstein  <cit> . infected males behind infected females in terms of development 6– <dig> h after egg laying , and by 10– <dig> h ael there is a clear arrest of male development . infected males arrested at or before stage  <dig> of development, whereas infected females continue through embryogenesis. uninfected male and female embryos developed broadly in parallel, and at a rate equivalent to that observed for infected female embryos .

the morphology of spiroplasma-killed male embryos was very characteristic. figure  <dig> shows a well-developed infected female embryo  and an infected male of the same age. the only normal structure that is recognisable in the spiroplasma-killed male is the cephalic furrow. there is an abnormal protruding 'sac' from the ventrum of the male embryo and the structure of the infected male becomes grainier and less regular from the point at which abnormalities are first noticeable. by this age, all nuclei in the embryo have broken down, and the embryo gives little hint of any internal structure under dapi stain . male embryos arrest before segmentation , and around the point of germ band retraction.

are cells in male embryos dying by apoptosis?
we examined the pattern of apoptosis in spiroplasma-infected and uninfected embryos using the tunel procedure  <cit> . infected d. nebulosa female embryos and uninfected embryos of both sexes were found to have apoptotic cells in the same pattern found in d. melanogaster  <cit> , with tunel positive cells around the cephalic furrow, and sporadic tunel positive cells in the posterior of the embryo, from stage  <dig> onwards . in contrast, infected male embryos of the same age show extensive apoptosis throughout the embryo, with vast numbers of tunel positive cells . the pattern observed in figure  <dig> was seen in all male embryos derived from infected females . it is notable that these infected male embryos become tunel positive before development completely arrests, as indicated by the widespread apoptosis in the stage 10/ <dig> male embryo in figure  <dig> 

discussion and 
CONCLUSIONS
this paper investigated the development of male d. nebulosa embryos infected with male-killing spiroplasma. it was observed that the infected male embryos become retarded from 6– <dig> h after being laid, and development was arrested completely at  <dig> h post egg-lay, between drosophila embryo stages  <dig> and  <dig>  no infected male embryo went beyond stage  <dig> of development. the infected male embryos have a very characteristic pattern of death, with failure to segment being observed at the point of germ band retraction, and eventually loss of the normal oval embryonic shape caused by the protrusion of an amniosera 'sac' through the ventrum of the embryo.

what was notable from this study is that the events involved with spiroplasma induced male-killing proceed very rapidly. over a 2-h period, relatively early in embryogenesis in absolute terms, the male embryos go from appearing phenotypically normal to showing widespread abnormality. the tight window over which this degradation occurs contrasts with previous studies, and probably reflects that male and female embryos could be discriminated precisely, allowing random deaths to be more precisely partitioned and a clear pattern observed. it may also reflect our study of a natural association where male-killing is being seen as a strong phenotype.

this study also examined the type of cell death occurring in dying males. it was observed that male-killed embryos were characterized by massive apoptotic death of cells within the embryo that preceded the complete arrest of development. thus, we can conclude that the processes leading to male death are active at stage  <dig>  it is notable also that male death occurs at the point at which natural apoptosis begins  <cit> . it is therefore tempting to hypothesize that male-killing operated through some subversion of the apoptosis machinery, inducing its uncoordinated expression of the apoptosis pathway across the embryo, that ultimately resulted in the arrest of development. however, it should be noted that the association of apoptosis with male death is not necessarily causal. there are many cases where apoptosis is induced by the host in response to infection rather than as a manipulation by the infection. in these cases of secondary apoptosis, death would have occurred with or without the apoptotic processes and cell death is merely a response to the pathology induced by the infection.

what remains totally unknown are the molecules secreted by the spiroplasma that create the changes observed. at the most elementary level, we do not know whether there is a previously secreted factor that becomes active only at 6– <dig> h into male embryo development, or whether a factor is secreted ab initio in males only, from 6– <dig> h into development. future work will need to focus on the nature of this factor and its interaction with host cellular and developmental systems.

