BACKGROUND
transmissible spongiform encephalopathy  or prion diseases are fatal human and animal neurological disorders with a worldwide distribution. human tse diseases include sporadic, genetic, iatrogenic and variant creutzfeldt-jakob disease , gerstmann-sträussler-scheinker disease and sporadic or familial fatal insomnia. animal counterparts are scrapie in sheep and goats, bovine spongiform encephalopathy , transmissible mink encephalopathy, and chronic wasting disease of mule deer and elk. there are strong evidences that among human tse diseases only variant cjd is caused by the consumption of bse-contaminated meat products  <cit> . the critical pathogenetic event in tse diseases is the conformational change of the physiological host prion protein  into an insoluble form  able to provoke the pathognomonic brain lesions and death. transgenic mice devoid of prpc are unable to sustain tse infection after experimental inoculation demonstrating the key role of prpc in the pathogenesis of these diseases  <cit> .

the prp gene is highly preserved among mammals  <cit> , and sequences of prion-like cdnas have been described in other vertebrate classes including birds  <cit> , reptiles  <cit> , amphibians  <cit> , and fish  <cit> . the presence of proteins "similar to" prpc  in fish has raised concern about a possible transmission of tse agents to humans through consumption of farmed fish since mammalian mbm  and other mammalian products were historically fed to farmed fish  <cit> . the distribution of stprp in trout organism was also studied through the use of newly described monoclonal antibodies which show that the protein is preferentially distributed in brain, optic nerve and spinal cord in contrast to its absence  outside the nervous system, including the intestine  <cit> .

the passage of tse agents between animals of different species is usually impaired by what is called the species barrier, i.e. the difficulty to establish clinical disease into the new host even after a prolonged incubation period. infectivity, however, might be present without clinical presentation of disease, and tissues from first attempted transmission might be infectious when re-inoculated in susceptible animals  <cit> .

the need to give an answer to public concern about safety of food possibly contaminated with tse agents prompted us to set up an experiment that uses fish as recipient of a scrapie agent . both "in vitro" and "in vivo" approaches were devised in an attempt to draw a pattern of risk related to human consumption of fish products. the 139a mouse-adapted tse scrapie strain was chosen because of its ability to cross the species barrier in different species of rodents  <cit> , while trout  and turbot  for their large use in aquaculture food industry. we also challenged the "in vitro" ability of prpsc to cross the intestinal tissues of rainbow trout when 139a was added to the mucosal side of everted or statically perfused intestine.

RESULTS
our major aim was to investigate whether tissues of orally infected fish would retain some residual infectivity . thus, turbot and trout were forced-fed with the 139a strain of scrapie and sacrificed from  <dig> to  <dig> days after challenge. muscle, intestine, and brain were taken at different time points  and inoculated into recipient mice for the measurement of residual infectivity .

no behavioral or swimming abnormalities were observed in orally inoculated trout and turbot and histological examination of tissues from inoculated fish did not show any pathological mark nor prion protein was detected by immunohistochemical examination . none of the recipient mice developed scrapie disease. no prpsc was detected in the brain of the mice injected with turbot tissues . however, prpsc was detected in the brain of one from the  <dig> mice inoculated with the intestine of trout taken one day after force-feeding inoculation, suggesting that the trout intestine contained some residual infectivity.

we therefore investigated whether trout intestine binds prpsc and transfers it to the serosal side where it may spread to the lymphoid tissues and, eventually into the cns. using everted trout intestine immersed in a solution containing 139a we observed that prpsc slightly absorbs to the mucosal intestinal layer as shown by the low, yet detectable signal at the western blot . when statically perfused intestine was used in order to study the possible role of pyloric caeca in prpsc absorption, it was possible to detect the presence of prpsc by immunohistochemistry in the stratum compactum both in the trout intestine and in the pyloric caeca . on the other hand, the absence of signal for prpsc at the western blot in the solution fluxed into the serosal side of the everted intestine  excludes, at least in this experimental setting, an active secretion of prpsc from one side to the other side of the intestinal tract.

such data are in agreement with the recent finding that stprp is not detectable in the intestine of rainbow trout  <cit> , which renders unlikely an active uptake of exogenous prpsc, but does not exclude an unspecific binding of prpsc to the fish intestinal mucosa.

in a second experiment, we inoculated trout and turbot with the same strain of scrapie as above by parenteral routes to increase the possibility of a successful infection . brain and spleen, as the most likely tissues for prpsc accumulation, were taken  <dig> and  <dig> days  after inoculation and residual infectivity was bio-assayed in mice. none of the recipient mice developed scrapie disease during their lifespan. however, prpsc was observed at the western blot in the brain of a few recipient mice inoculated with tissues taken from turbot or trout . these data show that  <dig> days after inoculation only about one ld <dig> of scrapie-infectivity is present in the spleen of turbot, and much less in the brain of turbot or in the spleen of trout. almost no infectivity  was however detected  <dig> days after inoculation of fish tissues, suggesting that the infectivity measured at  <dig> days post inoculation was likely related to the residual inoculum. as the fishes were not kept more than  <dig> days, it is not possible to exclude that infectivity might develop at a later time point, after an initial clearance phase of the inoculum, though this possibility is not likely.

in our work, we did not evaluate whether mammalian tse agents may establish infection in fish. nonetheless, the "lesion profile" curves based upon the severity of spongiform changes in brain areas of mice injected with 139a before and after passage in fish , show a similar pattern suggesting that the 139a strain did not adapt to fish in the  <dig> months period examined. a statistical comparison of scores between the two curves, done area by area by the mann-whitney's test, showed a significant difference only in the dorsal medulla area . no statistically significant difference was observed in the superior colliculus, hypothalamus, cingulate, and adjacent cortices. permutation tests performed to overcome problems due to the small sample size, confirmed this pattern. the overall lower scores observed in the brain of mice inoculated with fish tissues could merely represent the fact that these mice were not symptomatic when sacrificed while control scrapie infected mice showed evident clinical signs of disease.

CONCLUSIONS
these data show that about  <dig> million ld <dig> of 139a given by forced feeding were readily removed from fish intestine  in the first  <dig> hours after infection and that infection never reached the brain, the spleen or the muscles. this suggests that scrapie is quickly removed from fish tissues despite the presence of a cellular prion-like protein  <cit>  and a prion protein-like gene in fish  <cit> . with all the cautions due to the difference between the 139a and the bse strains, and that in this experiment fishes were observed for no more than  <dig> days after infection, it is tentatively possible to assume that the consumption of fish fed with bse-infected mbm should not pose any substantial threat to public health.

