BACKGROUND
despite the diversity of animal form in nature, a limited range of phenotypes is often observed  <cit> . stasis, convergence, and limits in the direction of morphological evolution occur within lineages even when strong selection is implicated in divergence  <cit> . the propensity for phenotypes to evolve, or evolvability  <cit> , is determined by the capacity of genetic and developmental systems to produce heritable variation and the action of selection on those variants  <cit> . consequently, rates of adaptive change and diversification are expected to depend critically on underlying developmental mechanisms  <cit> . several different lines of evidence provide more understanding of the role development plays in determining the direction of evolutionary change, including the documented association between morphological differences and changes in regulation of developmental-genetic pathways , analysis of the variational properties of different developmental mechanisms  <cit> , and analyses of the distribution of morphological characters in a given phylogeny  <cit> . how development affects the rate and direction of evolutionary change in contemporary populations under selection, however, remains largely unexplored  <cit> .

diversification of serial repeats
the elaboration and differentiation of serially repeated characters provides clear examples of the association between underlying mechanisms and morphological evolution. the complexity and diversity of arthropod body segments, tetrapod limbs, vertebrate teeth, and nymphalid butterfly wing color patterns all result from the evolutionary differentiation of homologous serial repeats  <cit> . individual elements often covary strongly, reflecting the effects of shared developmental pathways and mechanisms coordinating their development  <cit> . this covariance can affect rates of evolutionary change  <cit> , potentially limiting the independent evolution of serial repeats. as a consequence, development can bias evolution , as certain morphological changes may be more readily achieved than others. however, recent empirical studies demonstrate that strong limits predicted by patterns of covariation do not always prevent the independent evolution of morphological traits under artificial selection  <cit> . one plausible explanation for the discrepancy between theoretical predictions and empirical results is the failure of current evolutionary genetic models to account for the details of development that determine how phenotypic variation is generated, and thereby affect the rate and direction of evolutionary change  <cit> . artificial selection experiments are a powerful tool for exploring limits on the process of morphological evolution, particularly in the evolution of correlated characters  <cit> . here we focus on two characters with similar patterns of covariation among a set of serial repeats. these characters, elements of the color pattern on butterfly wings, differ in key aspects of their development. we use artificial selection to explore effects of these differences on the rate and direction of evolutionary change in this complex morphological phenotype.

evolution of eyespot patterns on butterfly wings
within bicyclus and other closely related butterfly genera, wing pattern diversification was probably driven in part by a long history of sexual and natural selection acting on the eyespots  <cit> , which are serially repeated along the wing margins. each eyespot consists of concentric rings of black and gold color surrounding a white central spot  <cit> . color composition  and size are two important functional characteristics of eyespots  <cit>  that differ in critical aspects of their development. properties of an inductive signal  produced by cells in the eyespot organizer, the central focus  <cit> , largely determine eyespot size  <cit> , whereas color composition is determined by the threshold response of surrounding tissue to the concentration gradient of the diffusing focal signal  <cit> . each of these two aspects of induction  appears to contribute differently to phenotypic variation in the eyespot pattern  <cit>  and may have very different consequences for color pattern evolution.

when selection targets either the color composition or size of a single eyespot, all eyespots evolve in concert, even those on different wing surfaces  <cit> . despite differences in the underlying development of color composition and size, each character is strongly and positively correlated across serially repeated eyespots and their main axes of variation  <cit>  in captive b. anynana populations lie in the direction of concerted changes in two or more eyespots. we used artificial selection to search for limits in this phenotype space, and selected for concerted  and antagonistic  change in the color composition or size of two eyespots. by applying similar selection to both characters and using a comparative analysis we test whether the characters differ in their propensity to evolve independently among serial repeats. given initial similarities in patterns of standing variation for both characters, we argue in favor of the hypothesis that known differences in the developmental determination of eyespot color composition and eyespot size affect their ability to respond to antagonistic selection, and thus to evolve independently in a population under selection.

RESULTS
differences in selection response between eyespot color composition and size
color composition and size were similarly correlated between the serially repeated eyespots in the b. anynana base population before selection . for both characters, most phenotypic variation in the base population lay in the direction of positive covariation between two eyespots but each exhibited substantial variation around this main axis . previous experiments demonstrated the genetic basis for these phenotypic correlations and the presence of substantial additive genetic variation for the size and color of individual eyespots  <cit> . as expected, both color composition and size responded rapidly to concerted selection imposed along the main axis of phenotypic variation . after  <dig> generations of concerted selection , novel phenotypes well outside the range of variation in the base population were produced: color composition diverged ~2– <dig> sd  in the 'black-black' and 'gold-gold' directions relative to unselected control lines , and eyespot size diverged ~4– <dig> sd in the 'large-large' and 'small-small' directions relative to unselected controls . in contrast, responses to antagonistic selection demonstrate that the boundaries of phenotype space are very different for the two characters in this population . there is little potential for independent evolutionary change in eyespot color composition, compared with the strikingly flexible evolution of eyespot sizes.

after  <dig> generations of antagonistic selection, no novel 'uncoupled' eyespot phenotypes appeared in the 'black-gold' or 'gold-black' directions . the rate of response to antagonistic selection  is clearly lower than the rate of response to selection for concerted changes in eyespot color composition. in some replicates there was no significant response to antagonistic selection for color composition . although selection can rapidly shift the mean color composition of the entire eyespot pattern , there are limits on the independent evolutionary change of individual eyespots. no comparable limits are apparent for eyespot size; antagonistic selection  rapidly produced combinations of large and small eyespots that were not present in the starting population  <cit> . moreover, the rate of response to antagonistic selection on eyespot size was as high  as the rate of response to concerted selection .

values represent slopes from the regression of response to selection on cumulative selection differential, shown for each target eyespot in the color composition and size experiments. rates of response were significantly different from zero with p <  <dig>  except those marked by † , ‡ , and ns . nested analysis of covariance  f-values are given for the interaction effect of cumulative selection differential by line nested within selection direction ; **p <  <dig> , *p <  <dig> . superscripts refer to slopes, for each eyespot within an experiment that were judged not significantly different from each other according to tukey's pairwise multiple comparisons .

potential causes of the difference in selection response
our results show that under similar selection regimes, there are strong limits on the independent evolution of eyespot color composition that do not exist for eyespot size. this difference in evolutionary response occurred despite the fact that both characters exhibited substantial phenotypic variation in both concerted and antagonistic directions prior to selection . genetic correlations  across the targeted eyespots for color composition  and size  suggest that patterns of genetic covariation were also similar for both characters. the magnitude and direction of phenotypic and genetic correlations  is generally taken to indicate the degree of limitation on the independent evolution of two or more characters  <cit> . our experimental approach involved investigating the realized potential for independent evolution among repeats of two characters with similar patterns of standing variation known to differ in important aspects of their developmental determination. we expected to observe qualitatively similar responses of color composition and size in all selected directions if the patterns of covariation alone were the major internal factors governing the independent evolution of eyespot characters. while we argue that the degree of compartmentalization of the developmental mechanisms differs between color composition and size, we discuss additional factors that may also explain the observed evolutionary responses.

compartmentalization of focal signaling
our results demonstrate much greater flexibility in the evolutionary response of eyespot sizes compared with color composition, despite the fact that both are characteristics of the same serially repeated color pattern elements on the wings of b. anynana. one explanation for this pattern is that the developmental pathways that regulate production of the focal signal  are much more flexible and more easily decoupled across a wing surface than the pathways that regulate the threshold level of response to signal concentrations . each eyespot-competent area along the wing margin produces its own eyespot organizer  <cit> . this process appears to involve independent genetic control of organizer properties; single eyespots can be independently added to or eliminated from forewing or hindwing surfaces, without affecting the characteristics of eyespots in adjacent wing cells  <cit> . eyespots are deleted from wing surfaces when focal establishment fails in specific wing cells  <cit> , and eyespot-specific allelic effects are associated with changes in size of individual eyespots  <cit> . the wing veins act to further compartmentalize the signaling foci across a wing surface  <cit> . compartmentalization  in the regulation of initially identical developmental programs is considered critical to the evolutionary divergence of serial repeats  <cit> . selection acting on heritable, independent variation in developmental regulation can promote evolutionary diversification, even when similarities in underlying developmental programs contribute to positive covariation among the characters  <cit> .

wing-wide responses to signal thresholds
in contrast, the observed tight coupling of color composition across eyespots may result from a lack of compartmentalization in the regulation of threshold levels of response to the concentration gradient of the diffusing focal signal. cells in the region surrounding the eyespot focus exhibit a threshold response to local signal concentration, which induces the expression of regulatory genes that control pigment synthesis . earlier experiments clearly demonstrate that the signaling and response components of eyespot determination can be selected independently, and that selection for eyespot color composition affects only the level of threshold response  <cit> . in our experiment, concerted selection for eyespot color composition altered the response properties of the wing epidermis, even in regions of the wing that do not normally produce an eyespot and were not directly targeted by selection. the color composition of ectopic eyespots induced on wings of butterflies from concerted selection lines  further suggest that the threshold response is not compartmentalized across comparable regions of a wing surface  where there is clear compartmentalization of focal signaling  <cit> . if threshold response is regulated across regions spanning several wing cells , variation in the color composition of two eyespots  might result from random perturbations during the development of individual wing compartments, not from independent heritable variation in response properties. although the developmental-genetic architecture of the processes that regulate eyespot color composition requires further characterization, we suggest that the extent to which focal signaling and response thresholds are compartmentalized is a critical factor determining the potential for evolutionary change in the wing color pattern.

sources of covariation across wing surfaces
selection targeted pairs of eyespots on two wing surfaces that differ in both morphology and ecological function. eyespots on the dorsal  <cit>  and ventral  <cit>  wing surfaces are thought to function differently in b. anynana; however, all eyespots are determined by similar spatial and temporal patterns of gene expression  <cit>  regardless of their location. this shared development appears to play a primary role in shaping covariation and strongly integrating eyespots among all wing surfaces in nymphalid butterflies  <cit> , although functional differentiation of some wing characters can also affect patterns of covariation  <cit> . single-  <cit>  and multi-trait selection on eyespot size  <cit>  has demonstrated that the evolutionary potential of eyespots on all wing surfaces is strongly coupled and differs little among wing surfaces, despite differences in morphology or function. antagonistic selection targeting the size of the two dorsal forewing eyespots also uncoupled individual eyespots on the ventral hindwing. the relative sizes of ventral hindwing eyespots e <dig> and e <dig>  differed by ~ <dig> sd in the antagonistic selection lines compared to unselected controls . thus the ability to decouple eyespot sizes by selection is clearly not limited to the dorsal forewing. in contrast, across a similar spatial region of the ventral hindwing , eyespot color composition is strongly coupled and antagonistic selection cannot produce independent evolutionary changes.

alternative explanations
we suggest that known differences in the developmental determination of eyespot color composition and size contribute to qualitative differences in their responses to antagonistic selection. however, our experiments do not rule out the possibility that other factors contributed to these differences. in addition to developmental constraints or biases, factors that may limit the evolution of character combinations include the effects of past selection, the effects of inbreeding or genetic background, the action of maternal effects or gene-by-environment interactions, asymmetric gene frequencies or other differences in patterns of allelic effects, linkage disequilibrium or physical linkage, and correlation with other fitness-related characters . regardless of the precise mechanism, differences in selection response are unlikely to have been caused by differences in the two experimental populations. both starting populations were derived from the same outbred stock population, which was well adapted to the laboratory and maintained at high effective population size  <cit>  before selection began, and both experiments were conducted under similar environmental conditions. consequently, neither differences in allele frequencies between the starting populations, nor in the interactions between genetic background and environmental conditions across experiments  <cit>  are likely to explain the qualitative differences in selection response between the two characters.

differences in the history  of natural selection acting on eyespot color composition and eyespot size is one possible source of differences between the characters that could influence their responses to antagonistic selection. selection favoring specific character combinations can build or contribute to phenotypic and genetic covariation  <cit>  via linkage disequilibrium. this type of covariation is expected to break down rapidly under antagonistic selection  <cit> , and the breakdown of linkage disequilibrium created by past natural selection on eyespot size  may have contributed to the rapid independent evolution of eyespot sizes under antagonistic selection  <cit> . differences in past selection acting on color composition and size provides one possible mechanism for differences in the underlying basis of covariation between the two characters. as comparable patterns of covariation may be reached through many different developmental or genetic mechanisms  <cit> , this does not exclude our developmental hypothesis.

our experiment explored whether limits exist on the evolution of particular types of eyespot combinations given standing variation in a population . change in patterns of allelic interaction or allele frequency from those currently available in the population could affect the trait combinations or range of morphologies that can be reached via selection  <cit> . it is also possible that antagonistic selection acted on rare variants for eyespot size that, by chance, were not present for eyespot color composition in the stock population. though our experiment does not rule out effects of several different underlying mechanisms, our results are consistent with theory suggesting that the mechanistic basis of character covariation is a more important predictor of evolutionary change than the correlation estimates alone  <cit> . because developmental interactions both shape patterns of phenotypic and genetic covariation among characters and evolve in response to selection acting on those characters  <cit> , genetic architecture, developmental mechanisms, and population-genetic processes interact in complex ways  <cit> . understanding how these factors interact to shape the evolution of complex traits, such as butterfly wing patterns, requires further detailed dissection of underlying mechanisms.

diversification within the lineage
phylogenetic patterns of morphological diversity are generally consistent with the idea that development limits the ability of species to occupy phenotype space . in b. anynana, despite similar patterns of standing variation for eyespot color composition and size in the base population, responses to artificial antagonistic selection show that these two characteristics of the eyespot pattern do not evolve in the same way under similar antagonistic selection regimes. moreover, these differences, found within a single b. anynana population, are consistent with wing pattern diversity across the genus . among bicyclus species, eyespot color composition seems to have evolved along a line of 'least resistance'  <cit>  parallel to the main axis of variation in b. anynana. in contrast, eyespot size has explored a larger area of potential phenotype space along the 'uncoupling' axis  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
a number of studies suggest that natural selection plays a dominant role in morphological evolution and the distribution of lineages in phenotype space  <cit> . however, a growing body of evidence shows that developmental mechanisms and individual components of developmental gene networks can differ in their effects on phenotypic variation  <cit> , and presumably, bias or limit adaptive morphological evolution. here we compared two characters that show similar patterns of standing variation in a population, but differ in an important aspect of their developmental determination. these characters evolve differently under artificial antagonistic selection, in a manner consistent with the developmental differences between them, though we cannot rule out the effects of other internal factors or processes besides, or in addition to, development. butterfly color patterns and other complex forms we see in nature result from novel combinations of their individual elements. we suggest that compartmentalized development enables the production of novel phenotypes when selection favors independent changes in these elements. under similar selection, developmental mechanisms that are less compartmentalized may limit the range of likely evolutionary outcomes.

