BACKGROUND
protein palmitoylation is a ptm that involves the addition of a 16-carbon saturated fatty acid, called palmitate, to a cysteine residue in a protein  <cit> . due to the discovery of the palmitoylation writer enzyme family in the early 2000s and the recent developments in the application of large-scale ms to study various ptms, including palmitoylation, this ptm has only recently been studied intensively. the primary function of the cysteine-attached palmitoyl group is to serve as a lipid anchor on soluble proteins, turning them into peripheral membrane proteins. different classes of lipids can function as lipid anchors  <cit> , of which acyl groups and prenyl groups anchor proteins to the cytosolic side of a membrane. these acyl and prenyl groups often work together for stable and location-specific membrane attachment. palmitoylation has a special position among them, as it is the only fully reversible lipid ptm, allowing for dynamics and regulation of protein-membrane interactions.

in addition to peripheral membrane proteins, integral membrane proteins are also frequently palmitoylated. palmitoylated proteins are implicated in at least four classes of cellular processes. the first is the attachment of soluble proteins to the membrane and their localization to specific membrane compartments. the second function is the trafficking of membrane proteins between organelles and/or the plasma membrane , and the third is the targeting of membrane proteins to specific parts of the pm such as postsynaptic clusters in neurons or lipid rafts. the fourth function is the stabilization of transmembrane proteins.

the principal protein family that is responsible for protein palmitoylation is the dhhc family of enzymes  <cit> . these are enzymes located in the membranes of the endomembrane system. they catalyze the transfer of a palmitoyl group from palmitoyl-coa to a cysteine residue, forming a thioester bond. the first proteins of this family were discovered recently in yeast, and since then the family was found to be present in all eukaryotic species, with occurrences per genome ranging from less than ten in fungi to more than  <dig> in other eukaryotes  <cit> . the family is defined by its  <dig> residue dhhc domain, which is a variant of the c2h <dig> zinc finger motif. the dhhc domain containing proteins are characterized by i) a conserved sequence motif consisting of the residues aspartate, histidine, histidine and cysteine  ii) six conserved cysteines iii) four to six transmembrane domains, the dhhc domain itself being located between two pairs of these on the cytosolic side of the membrane. this is compatible with the palmitate anchoring proteins to the intracellular side of the membrane in most cases.

two small protein families are currently known to perform protein depalmitoylation: the acyl protein thioesterases  and protein palmitoyl thioesterases   <cit> . in a structural/evolutionary classification of protein families, both are part of the alpha/beta hydrolase superfamily  <cit> . they make use of a nucleophile-acid-histidine catalytic triad. the apt and ppt families are sometimes situated within the serine hydrolase superfamily  <cit> .

the apts are cytosolic proteins  <cit> . three of them have been found in humans: apt <dig>  aptl <dig> and apt <dig>  originally they were identified as lysophospholipases , but recently they have all been found to perform depalmitoylation. apt <dig> is the best studied example  <cit> . it deacylates peripheral as well as integral membrane proteins, the classic example being signaling proteins of the ras family. it shows some selectivity for substrates, and its efficiency varies across its substrates. it is strongly conserved among eukaryotes and, as opposed to proteins of the ppt and dhhc families, also present in prokaryotic species.

enzymes of the ppt family have been shown to be targeted to the lysosomes  <cit> . they are conserved in eukaryotes. humans have two of them: ppt <dig> and ppt <dig>  they can both catalyze the depalmitoylation of palmitoyl-coa, but only ppt <dig> is capable of depalmitoylating proteins. it has been shown that ppt <dig> is incapable of protein depalmitoylation  <cit> . ppt <dig> has been heavily studied because it has been identified as the causative gene of the disease infantile neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis  <cit> . neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses  are a set of diseases characterized by an aggregation of so-called lipofuscin granules in neurons. these lipofuscin granules are composed of residues from lysosomal digestion. the nature of infantile ncl as lysosomal storage disorder seems very compatible with the function of ppt <dig> as a lysosomal enzyme. in non-diseased individuals, the protein is glycosylated at three places and transported to the lysosomes via the mannose 6-phosphate  pathway  <cit> . nevertheless, many studies have shown that ppt <dig> is also implicated in processes outside of the lysosome. in neurons, the enzyme has sometimes been found in synaptic vesicles. it is often secreted  and endocytosed again via the m6p receptor. however, much of the function of the protein remains to be discovered.

a lot less is known about protein depalmitoylation than is known about palmitoylation; it is very likely that other depalmitoylating enzymes remain to be discovered  <cit> .

explaining the seemingly irreducible complexity of writer-eraser-reader systems is an important challenge that needs to be addressed for every ptm type under investigation. in the case of tyrosine phosphorylation, it has been speculated that primitive ptps in species without ptks or reader domains are active to dephosphorylate tyr residues that have been accidentally phosphorylated by promiscuous ser/thr kinases  <cit> . a prototypical example of this phenomenon is seen in saccharomyces cerevisiae, where accidentally occurring ptyr residues exert unwanted allosteric effects, causing selective pressure for their removal  <cit> .

similarly to tyrosine phosphorylation, the very first form of lysine acetylation was also probably accidental. acetylation has been shown to occur non-enzymatically in vitro and probably also in vivo  <cit> . in e. coli, acetylation levels reflect levels of acetyl-coa present in the cell. this cofactor reflects, in turn, the nutrient status of the cell due to its central position in cellular metabolism. deacetylation is performed by sirtuins, which allows for further regulation . the earliest acetylation system in the last universal common ancestor could have been similar to this system in e. coli. in this evolutionary scenario, the acetylation writer and reader domains have been later additions to this primitive but already functional ptm system using only eraser enzymes.

while for some ptm types like tyrosine phosphorylation and lysine acetylation there have been speculations on their stepwise origin, this is not the case for most of the ptm types, including palmitoylation. in this work we study the origin and evolution of the palmitoylation toolkit enzymes. the main aims are to identify lineage-specific family expansions and contractions and relate those to protein palmitoylation functionality and secondly to identify if the evolutionary histories of palmitoylation toolkit enzymes are correlated. if more studies like this accumulate it will become clear if the evolution of ptm systems on the long timescale follows general trends, such starting out as an accidental modification that gives rise to erasers as first of the toolkit domains.

RESULTS
profiles of palmitoylating protein families
we first searched the literature for proteins for which there is experimental evidence for palmitoylating or depalmitoylating enzymatic activity . we found five members in three species of the apt family with depalmitoylating activity , four members in four species of the ppt family with depalmitoylating activity and  <dig> members in two species of the dhhc family with palmitoylating activity. the apt <dig> of saccharomyces cerevisiae and toxoplasma gondii are homologous to human apt <dig>  for one of the palmitoylating enzymes zdhhc <dig> the activity is still doubtful; the protein has been shown to be autopalmitoylated but there is no direct evidence for its palmitoylating activity. there is one more human copy of the dhhc family zdhhc11b but its activity has not been studied.fig.  <dig> profiles of palmitoylating and depalmitoylating enzymes. a overview of the strategy for profile hmm construction. b domain composition and hmm profile of dhhc protein domain. c domain composition and hmm profile of apt protein family. d domain composition and hmm profile of ppt protein family


saccharomyces cerevisiae

homo sapiens

toxoplasma gondii
bos taurus

homo sapiens

drosophila melanogaster

caenorhabditis elegans
saccharomyces cerevisiae

homo sapiens



blast searches in proteomes of completely sequenced organisms resulted in  <dig> dhhc sequences,  <dig> apt sequences and  <dig> ppt sequences. based on a subset of these homologs, we generated multiple sequence alignments and manually corrected those. these seed alignments contained  <dig> dhhc sequences,  <dig> apt sequences and  <dig> ppt sequences. we used the corrected alignments to construct hidden markov models  for each of the three families . the dhhc residues as well as six conserved cysteines can clearly be observed in the profile of the dhhc family  that has  <dig> match states. other conserved residues are a histidine at position  <dig>  an aromatic residue at position  <dig>  asparagine at  <dig> and phenylalanine at  <dig>  the apt and ppt profiles are much longer:  <dig> and  <dig> match states respectively . the actual domains are even slightly longer, because there are some insertion states that span multiple positions. apart from the catalytic triads, the two profiles show other common characteristics. for example, the catalytic serine is located in an area of conserved hydrophobic residues. they also both contain many sites with conserved aromatic residues , especially the ppt profile that has more than  <dig> of these.

the length of the dhhc family being short is consistent with the multi-domain nature of these proteins  as opposed to the single domains of which the apt and ppt family consist. palmitoyltransferases contain next to the dhhc domain, multiple transmembrane domains that anchor them to the membrane.

phylogenetic distribution
we used the hmm-profiles to search for protein family members in completely sequenced genomes of  <dig> eukaryotic and  <dig> prokaryotic species. a length-score distribution was used to determine a threshold for inclusion and proteins not containing essential residues were removed. we found that metazoan genomes contain a large number of dhhc encoding genes, although there is considerable variation between species. most of them have  <dig> to  <dig> dhhc genes, whereas vertebrate genomes contain at least  <dig> dhhcs. all eukaryotic species contain between  <dig> and  <dig> apts  and zero to four ppts . fungal genomes contain the smallest number of dhhcs; only three to seven.

within the green plants  there is a clear distinction between two classes; the chloryphyta have few dhhcs, one apt and one ppt whereas the embryophyta  have many dhhcs, four or five apts and two or three ppts . only the apt family was found outside of eukaryotes with some proteobacteria having one or two copies of this family.fig.  <dig> evolutionary history of dhhc family proteins. tree reconciliation of the dhhc rearranged tree. green bars indicate number of dhhc protein in the extant genome, cyan apt proteins, and magenta ppt proteins. yellow circles indicate inferred increases in copy numbers of the dhhc family, red circles indicate inferred decreases in copy numbers of the dhhc family. the tree topology is extracted from ncbi taxonomy. tree continues in fig. 3





from the phylogenetic distribution  it is already clear that the number of copies in a genome of each of the enzyme families is correlated, the correlation being  <dig>  between dhhc and apt;  <dig>  between dhhc and ppt and  <dig>  between apt and ppt. however, such correlation could be due to few phylogenetic events; the distributions of dhhc, apt and ppt genes in extant genomes are not phylogenetically independent.fig.  <dig> evolutionary history of dhhc family proteins. tree reconciliation of the dhhc rearranged tree. green bars indicate number of dhhc protein in the extant genome, cyan apt proteins, and magenta ppt proteins. yellow circles indicate inferred increases in copy numbers of the dhhc family, red circles indicate inferred decreases in copy numbers of the dhhc family. the tree topology is extracted from ncbi taxonomy. tree continued from fig. 2





duplications and losses in gene family trees
we used phylogenetic reconstructions and tree reconciliation to identify phylogenetically independent duplication and loss events and mapped these to a species tree. bias in inferred duplication and losses can be introduced by small errors in gene trees. to reduce this bias, we performed gene tree rearrangement such that branches that are uncertain are rearranged in order to follow the species tree . if there are many duplications in a specific branch, the gene family is expanding whereas many losses in one branch result in contraction of the family. we identify an expansion of dhhc at the last eukaryotic common ancestor. this means part of the diversity in present day dhhc enzymes arose already in this earliest stage of eukaryotic evolution. at the root of the metazoan, the dhhc diversity was shaped by an early expansion followed by contractions. these contractions continued in the non-chordate eukaryotic species and led to their low dhhc numbers. some of these species have a slightly larger number of dhhcs due to small late expansions. in the chordata, the early eukaryotic contractions were followed by expansions. one expansion is visible in the lancelet lineage, leading to the species branchiostoma oridae . a second one is actually a stretch of expansions, starting at the euteleostomi  and continuing in two lineages: via the clupeocephala until the percomorphaceae ancestor and via the tetrapoda until the boreoeutheria ancestor. this stretch of expansions was followed by late losses in all lineages. this leads to the conclusion that the copy number of dhhcs peaked in at least three ancestral species. first in the common eukaryotic ancestor, that appears to have had a larger number of dhhcs than the single cell eukaryotes and ecdysozoa living today. after that in the common ancestors of the clupeocephala and boreoeutheria, that both had larger dhhc counts than any eukaryotic species sequenced today. in the superphylum of the alveolata, small contractions in the apicomplexan linages led to a small number of dhhcs.

in the apt and ppt families we also observe gains and losses but the copy number per genome is much smaller than the dhhc . in the apt family we observe expansions at the last common eukaryotic ancestor, at the metazoan ancestor and the ancestor of the euteleostomi. the apicomplexa lost all apt family members, likely linked to their parasitic lifestyle.

correlation between dhhc and apt/ppt evolution
the phylogenetic placing of evolutionary events of the dhhc, apt and ppt families are strikingly similar. at species tree branches with many dhhc duplication events and few losses, the apt family also often expanded . conversely, at branches with few dhhc duplications and a lot of losses, the apt family often reduced . the association between the two families is only apparent for species tree branches with a large number of duplications or losses; the pattern is not visible for species tree branches with less than five dhhc duplications and less than five losses.fig.  <dig> correlated evolution of dhhc, apt and ppt families. a, b each dot represents one branch in the species tree. x-axis number of duplications in the dhhc family in that branch, y-axis number of dhhc losses in that branch  yellow; branch with gains in apt family, red; branch with losses in apt family, black no change in apt family. b
yellow; branch with gains in ppt family, red; branch with losses in ppt family, black no change in ppt family. c significant differences in net gain in dhhc family per branch between three categories of branches, gain in apt, loss in apt or no change in apt family. d significant differences in net gain in dhhc family per branch between three categories of branches, gain in ppt, loss in ppt or no change in ppt family




we assessed statistical significance by considering the net expansions in the dhhc family for each internal branch and dividing them into three groups according to events in apt or ppt family; expansion, contraction or no change. we used the wilcoxon rank-sum test for independent samples. the association between evolutionary events in the dhhc family with events in the apt family is significant . the association between dhhc and ppt evolutionary events  is even stronger . in addition, the association between the apt and ppt events is also significant .

for comparison, reconciliation of the ﻿original ml dhhc tree without rearrangement can be found in additional file 3: figure s <dig>  as a negative control, we also inferred the evolutionary history of the histone deacetylase  enzyme family that has  <dig> members in the genomes we analyzed. we tested its association with the apt and ppt families in the same manner as we did for the dhhc family. although some level of association is observed, there is no significant correlation between hdac net gain and changes in the apt and ppt families .

discussion
in this work we have analyzed the phylogenetic distribution of palmitoylating and depalmitoylating enzymes and show that these families co-evolve. we find that the dhhc family is only present in eukaryotes. the apt family on the other hand is also present in bacteria. more specifically, we find two clusters of proteins matching the apt model: a high scoring cluster with exclusively proteins from the proteobacteria, and a lower scoring cluster with proteins from proteobacteria as well as other bacterial clades. the presence of apts in bacteria strongly suggests that they arose before the dhhcs in the course of evolution. what could the function of this palmitoylation eraser family be without there being palmitoylation writer enzymes? a possibility is that they have evolved to remove accidental palmitoylation, as this modification has been shown to occur non-enzymatically. this removal of accidental modifications is similar to what has been speculated for tyrosine phosphorylation and lysine acetylation erasers  <cit> .

in the dhhc family, we find consecutive periods of expansions and contractions. a first hypothesis to explain the expansion-contraction patterns is a temporary selection pressure for a larger number of dhhcs. in general, the adaptive expansion of a gene family can occur for two reasons: a dosage increase of the proteins or a functional diversification of the family  <cit> . contractions of gene families are thought to be mainly the result of neutral selection; in other words, the loss alleles are fixated by random drift because they are not deleterious.

in this light, the question becomes why contractions of the dhhc family after its expansion are not disadvantageous. actually, hogeweg and co-worker have shown that in an evolving system, lineages with whole genome duplication are better able to adapt to a changing environment  <cit> . in case of expansion for dosage increase, it could be speculated that gene expansion is the fastest way to achieve this dosage increase. amplification of an, initially, low-efficiency enzyme can result in adaptive mutations to arise in the enzymatic function or the regulation in any of the gene duplicates. as the occurrence of adaptive mutations is limited by the per base mutation rate, a duplication increases the options to adapt. over time, the expression levels or the enzymatic efficiency of the individual genes is optimized to the new function, rendering the extra copies superfluous. in case of functional diversification, the explanation for gene loss might be that after new and improved types of dhhcs have evolved from duplicated genes, they partly replace the functions of the conserved types, also rendering them obsolete.

the co-occurrence of dhhc and apt expansions fits in this selection hypothesis in two possible ways. first, the apt expansions likely comprised only one or two duplications. the evolution of a new palmitoylation eraser enzyme might have created opportunities for more extensive use of palmitoylation in general, leading to selection for more dhhcs. alternatively, another molecular invention or a change in some environmental factor might have created a selection pressure for the palmitoylation machinary in general, including both writers and erasers.

in contrast to the apt family, the strong co-evolution of the ppt family with the dhhc and apt families was rather unexpected, for a number of reasons. firstly, it is fairly certain that ppts reside in the lysosomes. therefore, they are unlikely to participate in any signaling processes and it is unclear why their diversification in function might be useful in case of increased use of protein palmitoylation, although selection pressure for duplications for dosage increase is conceivable. and secondly, very few ppt enzymes are experimentally confirmed as palmitoylation erasers, and for some of them it has even been shown that they are not capable of this function, such as human ppt <dig>  if the selection scenario is correct, this might be an indication that protein depalmitoylation is in fact the main function of the ppt family, and that these non-depalmitoylating ppts are rather the exception.

a pattern of expansion followed by contractions is often seen at whole-genome duplications . a possible pitfall of this analysis is that we simply observe the effect of wgds. in metazoa, known wgds occurred in the common ancestor of the vertebrata and in the common ancestor of the teleost fishes  <cit> . also in the history of land plant evolution, one or more wgds are known to have occurred at the origin of multiple clades or species that are present in our data: the poaceae, eudicots, arabidopsis thaliana, populus trichocarpa and physcomitrella patens  <cit> . although some overlap is visible with dhhc expansions and wgd events, dhhc expansions also occurred when no wgd took place and gene family expansions continue in clades after wgd events.

CONCLUSIONS
this study and previous studies suggests that the functional link between writer and eraser domains is reflected in correlated evolution on the level of duplications and losses. conversely, this information could be used to infer functional relationships. so far, prediction of functional interaction based on phylogenetic information has been based on correlated sequence evolution or correlated presence-absence profiles  but not on duplications and losses. these methods work well specifically for bacteria and archaea but not as well in eukaryotes  <cit> . the co-evolution patterns we find here, could be employed to further develop functional interaction prediction methods specific to eukaryotes.

