BACKGROUND
a central question in evolutionary neuroscience is how and for what purpose did brain functions became lateralized. left hemispheric dominance of language processing and handedness were previously thought to be unique for humans  <cit> . therefore, it is suggested that language processing and handedness co-evolved and were linked to each other  <cit> . men and women differ in the degree of lateralization, as well as in their linguistic and emotional skills  <cit> .

studies in non-human mammals using different techniques have questioned the view of human uniqueness . hemispheric comparison of the sizes of brain structures, relevant for language processing, revealed comparable anatomical asymmetries between humans and great apes in the planum temporale, the sylvian fissure and the broca or homolog areas  <cit> . the latter is also involved in motor actions  <cit> . sylvian fissure asymmetries similar to humans were also documented for old world and some new world monkeys  <cit> . these findings suggest that these anatomical hemispheric asymmetries were already present on a pre-linguistic level.

functional specializations of the two hemispheres reflected by handedness were found in non-human animals and humans. various animal species exhibit individual hand/paw/foot preferences in tasks of different complexity . thus, the degree of manual specialization was distinguished between individual hand/paw preference, meaning that a single individual used one hand/paw significantly more often than the other, and handedness, meaning that individuals of the whole population showed a significant bias in one direction  <cit> . humans, some primates, some rodents, and even some toads showed right handedness/pawedness at population level in varying tasks  suggesting that asymmetries in motor control are shared between humans and non-human animals. in humans, right-handers showed a left hemispheric dominance for language. in chimpanzees, right-handedness in gestural communication is also present and enhanced when accompanied by vocalizations  <cit> . however, using imaging techniques, both right- and left-handed chimpanzees showed a left hemispheric asymmetry in the dimension of the planum temporale, suggesting that human handedness and left hemispheric specialization for language evolved independently  <cit> .

a left-hemispheric advantage for the perception of species-specific communication sounds similar to humans was described in birds and non-human mammals, based on behavioral and/or neurological approaches . to explore these hemispheric specializations in human infants and animals at the behavioral level, the head turn paradigm was established  <cit> . in the head turn paradigm, a sound is played back to the subject at exactly the same angle to both ears. an unconditioned behavioral response to the sound, the head turn, and its direction is taken as an indicator for an ear and hemispheric advantage in sound perception. as the connection of one ear to the contralateral hemisphere is dominant over the ipsilateral connection  <cit> , a right head turn is taken as a behavioral indicator for the dominance of the left hemisphere and vice versa. the head turn paradigm has provided consistent evidence for asymmetries of communication sound perception of harpy eagles  <cit> , sea lions  <cit>  and anthropoid primates . rhesus and vervet monkeys showed a strong ear preference to conspecific communication sounds of varying emotional valence suggesting that a species-specific ear-hemispheric advantage is universal across primates  <cit> . to date, however, non-human primate research of asymmetries in the perception of communication sounds focused solely on old world monkeys, whereas information on basal primates  is lacking. therefore it is unknown whether and to what extent an ancestral primate brain is already lateralized for communication sound perception and how this is related to handedness.

here, we have studied the prosimian microcebus murinus, suggested to represent the most ancestral primate condition  <cit> , to gain first insight into the evolutionary roots of lateralization in the early primate brain. an individual hand preference in a food-reaching task was suggested based on a low sample size  <cit> . the lissencephalic mouse lemur brain is one of the simplest brains among extant primates  <cit> . it shows an anatomical asymmetry for the sylvian fissure end point comparable to humans and apes  <cit> .

the gray mouse lemur  is a small-bodied, arboreal, nocturnal primate species living in a dispersed multi-male/multi-female social system  <cit> . mouse lemurs produce audible and ultrasonic communication sounds, exhibit a high auditory sensitivity to a broad frequency range  <cit> , and have developed an elaborate vocal repertoire  <cit> . across species, specific call types are used in comparable contexts of their social life: e.g., social cohesion , attention and alarm  or agonistic situations . communication sounds emitted in social cohesion contexts are here termed as sounds with positive emotional valence, those emitted in attention/alarm and agonistic situations were termed sounds with negative emotional valence.

by combing a forced food-grasping paradigm for handedness  with a head turn paradigm , we explored whether and to which extent these early primates showed asymmetries in hand usage and auditory perception and whether both are related. in the handedness test, subjects were forced to grasp meal worms with their hands out of a small hole in a box. in the head turn test, we played back acoustic stimuli from a loudspeaker 180° to the back of the subjects. we investigated subject's head turn direction in response to  <dig> acoustic stimuli : conspecific communication calls with positive  and negative emotional valence  and controls. controls were heterospecific communication calls of two evolutionarily closely related heterospecific microcebus species , a heterospecific call of an evolutionarily far related species  and non-biological sounds . specifically, we hypothesized that:  gray mouse lemurs show handedness on individual level, but not at population level;  gray mouse lemurs show a hemispheric advantage for conspecific communication sounds, but not for controls, on the behavioral level as revealed for anthropoid primates; and  individual hand preference is not correlated with an potential orientation asymmetry.

RESULTS
hand preference
in the handedness test, 79% of the subjects  showed an individual hand preference by using one hand significantly more often than the other :  <dig> subjects were right-handed and  <dig> subjects were left-handed. however, at population level, we could not find any bias in the handedness index  either for the whole population  or for one of the two sexes .

orientation asymmetry
subjects turned their head in 86% of the conspecific communication calls and in 78% of the control trials. analyzing the whole population, we did not find a head turn asymmetry for any conspecific or control playback stimuli  except for the tsaks of the heterospecific m. lehilahytsara . the transgression probability for the control stimuli to obtain one significant result from nine single tests was p =  <dig> , hence the significant results for the tsaks of m. lehilahytsara could be explained by chance. interestingly, males and females differed in the orientation asymmetry toward conspecific communication sounds. males showed a significantly right ear advantage for conspecific communication sounds of negative valence , but not for the conspecific communication sound of positive valence . the transgression probability for the conspecific playback stimuli to obtain two significant results from three single tests was p =  <dig> , therefore these orientation asymmetries cannot be explained by chance. females did not show a significant head turn bias for any of the three conspecific call types . furthermore, neither males nor females showed a significant head turn preference for any of the control or heterospecific communication sounds .

* p <  <dig> 

* p <  <dig> 

hand preference versus orientation asymmetry
combining the results of the handedness and head turn test, we found no significant difference in the handedness index between subjects which turned their head to the right or left side for any of the playback stimuli . in addition, we restricted this analysis to the performance of males toward conspecific communication sounds of negative emotional valence. the results, however, did not differ .

discussion
gray mouse lemurs showed individual hand preferences as well as sex-specific orientation asymmetries related to emotional valence of conspecific communication calls. thus, males, but not females, exhibit a right ear-left hemispheric advantage toward conspecific communication calls of negative emotional valence. hand preference of subjects was not related to orientation asymmetries.

gray mouse lemurs, like humans and non-human animals , showed individual hand preferences. however, we did not find hand preferences at population level that coincided with results of dodson et al  <cit>  based on a lower sample size. various studies of hand usage revealed task specific differences  <cit> . they hypothesized that low-level tasks such as food reaching in contrast to more complex high-level tasks such as bimanual manipulation are too simple to show handedness at population level. during insect capturing, mouse lemurs have to catch moving insects that are too large to handle with only one hand. therefore they capture insects using their mouth and one or both hands , which suggest that they lack fine motor control. in our task, we forced subjects to use one hand instead of the mouth, which made our task difficult for them. we assume therefore that the forced food-grasping paradigm is not a task that is too simple for these animals. altogether, our results suggest that brain asymmetries for the control of hand usage are already present in an early primate. handedness at population level evolved later within the primate order. further, the occurrence of handedness at population level in some rodents, birds and amphibians  suggests a convergent evolution in different taxonomic lineages.

the results for the hemispheric advantage in communication sound perception are consistent and cannot be explained by a small sample size, individual head turn preference or position of nest box and tail. in comparison with other captive settings studying lateralization of auditory perception  we used a large sample. we can rule out that subjects showed a general orientation asymmetry. analysing the head turn direction of each subject across all stimuli revealed that only  <dig> of the  <dig> subjects showed a significant individual side preference over all stimuli . we can further exclude that subjects' head turns were influenced by the position of the tail, which is important for balance in arboreal species, or the nest box. we found no differences in head turn direction when the tail was bent to the right or left side of the subject, or the nest box was attached on the right or the left side of the cage.

in humans, non-human primates and non-primate animals, a left hemispheric advantage for perception of communication sounds was described . mouse lemurs showed a different pattern of hemispheric advantage as revealed for anthropoid primates . however, in anthropoid primates the direction of hemispheric asymmetries is plastic. thus, japanese monkeys and rhesus monkeys showed a left hemispheric advantage and vervet monkeys a right hemispheric advantage for communication sound perception. altogether, results in non-human primates revealed three patterns of hemispheric asymmetries, a left hemispheric advantage for the perception of communication sounds of negative emotional valence in males of an early primate, a left hemispheric advantage in rhesus monkeys  <cit>  and a right hemispheric advantage in vervet monkeys for communication sound processing of varying emotional valence  <cit> . furthermore, non-primate animals demonstrated a right ear – left hemispheric advantage for conspecific communication sounds . altogether, it seems that lateralization of auditory perception at population level evolved gradually in primates. furthermore, findings in sea lions, mice and birds favor the view of a convergent evolution of hemispheric asymmetries in primate and non-primate animals. this suggests a more complex evolutionary scenario of hemispheric specializations in language processing than previously assumed.

focussing on males, we found that conspecific communication calls of negative valence cause a right head turn bias whereas the communication calls of positive valence did not cause any bias. this suggests that lateralisation in communication sound perception is linked to emotional valence as shown for humans . however, recent studies in humans and rhesus monkeys hypothesized that hemispheric advantages for communication sound processing are more affected by specific changes in spectral and temporal cues of the acoustic stream  <cit> . thus, in humans, the left hemisphere seems to be specialized to the analyses of rapid temporal changes that speech perception requires whereas the right hemisphere is specialized to the analyses of fine-grained spectral changes that music perception requires  <cit> . according to the calls of the mouse lemurs whistles and tsaks are very short calls with a rapid repetition rate whereas the trills are long calls with a complex frequency structure. further studies will explore to what extent these cues can explain orientation asymmetries in mouse lemurs.

in humans, men are more lateralized than women  <cit> . in mouse lemurs we found a right ear-left hemispheric advantage toward conspecific communication sounds of negative valence for males, but not for females or the whole population. this may suggest that as in humans, mouse lemur males are more lateralized than females. in humans, men and women differ in the performance of various linguistic and emotional tasks  <cit> . thus, females perform better than males. thereby, imaging studies revealed that during phonological processing, in men the left hemisphere is activated whereas in women both hemispheres are activated  <cit> . further, sex differences occurred in the anatomy of language processing areas as well as in the interhemispheric connection, the corpus callosum  <cit> . the corpus callosum is larger in women than in men, suggesting more fibres that connect the two hemispheres. kimura  <cit>  suggested that either the functions of the two hemispheres are not sharply separated in women or that the larger commissural connections reduce the hemispheric differences. such sex-specific anatomical differences in the corpus callosum were also found in prosimians, rats, dogs and apes, but not in new and old world monkeys  <cit> . as in humans the corpus callosum is larger in females than in males of prosimians. sex hormones are suggested to trigger these sex specific differences  <cit> . based on this, we suggest that mouse lemur females did not exhibit an orientation bias because the strong commissural connections reduce lateralization by analysing communication sounds in both hemispheres.

it is suggested that human language evolved from manual and facial gestures rather than from animal vocal communication  <cit> . this is supported by the fact that right-handedness is related to left hemispheric dominance of speech processing  <cit> . however, in mouse lemurs we did not find a relation between individual hand preference and ear-hemispheric advantages toward conspecific communication sounds. such a relationship is also lacking in non-human primates, who do show handedness at population level  <cit> . thus, rhesus monkeys demonstrated a right-hand preference at population level in a coordinated bimanual task  <cit> , but they did not show a relation between individual handedness and head turn direction  <cit> . altogether, these data render support for the hypothesis that hand preference and lateralization of communication sound perception evolved independently from each other in primates  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
the results of our study demonstrated that early primates already showed hand preference on an individual level and sex-specific orientation asymmetries linked to emotional valence. we suggest that this represents a first step of hemispheric specialization in an evolutionary scenario for handedness and laterality of communication sound processing in primates. as a second step, some anthropoid primates showed handedness at the population level or hemispheric dominance for processing of communication calls of varying emotional valence, but independently from each other. the lateralization of these traits reached highest specialization in humans where both are linked to each other.

