BACKGROUND
habitat selection has important implications for the fitness of animals . as habitats are typically heterogeneous in terms of quality, individuals should settle in areas which maximise their survival and reproductive output. poor habitat selection decisions can lead to insidious evolutionary or ecological traps  <cit> . the global proliferation of urban centres has modified the availability of many habitats  <cit> . one important consequence is that wildlife typically associated with natural environments may increasingly settle in urban areas near humans. animals in such urban habitats may experience both advantages  and disadvantages  compared to those in rural areas. generally, animals in urban areas are typically less wary of humans than their non-urban counterparts . the decreased wariness of urban wildlife is often attributed to learning and habituation to non-dangerous stimuli . however, population differences in wariness could also be genetically determined, for instance via local selection on behaviours that are under genetic control . in addition, if tolerance to humans is genetically-determined, genotype-based site selection may occur, with individuals with bold temperaments being more likely to settle in urban environments that experience higher levels of human disturbance .

the existence of consistent, individual differences in the temperament of animals  is well-established . however, animal personalities may result in reduced behavioural flexibility, limiting the capacity of individuals to adapt to diverse environmental conditions. individuals prospecting for potential breeding or feeding sites may therefore settle in habitats that best match their temperament. for example, more wary individuals may settle in areas of less human disturbance  <cit> . however, scant information exists on the genetic basis of temperament-based habitat selection. this is important, because temperaments may be shaped by both environmental and genetic factors . in addition, a species’ ability to adapt to changing habitats, such as the urbanisation of natural environments, may be more constrained when temperaments are at least partly under genetic control.

in recent years, growing evidence has suggested that animal temperaments are partly genetically-determined. for example, polymorphisms at the dopamine receptor d <dig> gene  are often associated with variation in diverse traits such as fear, novelty seeking and body mass . drd <dig> is an important component of the dopaminergic system, coding for a subtype of dopamine receptor in vertebrates  <cit> . dopamine is a major neurotransmitter, and its modulation of the central nervous system accordingly affects diverse functions and behaviours  <cit> . similarly, the serotonin transporter gene  is responsible for the transport of the neurotransmitter serotonin to neurons and has been linked to variation in diverse behaviours such as harm avoidance, anxiety, aggression and novelty seeking . traditionally, these genes have been investigated in humans and laboratory animals. however, a growing number of studies has highlighted their importance in shaping the behaviour of wild populations of animals , including within-species colonisation of urban habitats. for example, differences in the frequencies of sert alleles between urban and rural populations of common blackbirds  suggest that genes associated with harm avoidance are under selection during urban colonisation events  <cit> . however, no studies have simultaneously quantified genetic and behavioural differentiation between urban and non-urban populations of animals. this information is crucial to determine whether genetic differentiation is associated with phenotypic differentiation between urban and non-urban habitats.

here we tested for genotype- and habitat-associated differentiation in wariness towards humans of black swans . we first quantified wariness in populations of swans at one urban and one non-urban wetland by estimating flight initiation distance . fids are known to have a substantial heritable component in other bird species . by collecting multiple fids for a large number of individual swans at the urban wetland, we first tested whether fid is a repeatable behaviour, a prerequisite for a heritable trait under genetic control  <cit> . second, we genotyped  <dig> individuals at the drd <dig> and sert genes to test whether wary individuals were more likely to possess certain genotypes. we then collected fid and genotypic data at the non-urban population and predicted that the frequencies of genotypes associated with increased wariness was greater in the non-urban site experiencing less human disturbance.

RESULTS
repeatability of fid
as fid is positively associated with starting distance , we regressed fid with sd across all individuals for each trial separately. we then used the residuals for each individual  to calculate repeatability. we detected high intra-individual repeatability in resfid . the difference in resfid between the two trials for each individual was not significantly related to both the days lapsed between trials  and whether the same individual researcher approached the swan .

characteristics of drd <dig> and sert
the closest alignment of the swan drd <dig> protein was with anas platyrhynchos , fulmarus glacialis  and caprimulgus carolinensis . the swan sert gene aligned with anas platyrhynchos , gallus gallus  and apaloderma vittatum .fig.  <dig> black swan drd <dig> and sert protein alignments. protein alignment are for  exon three of the dopamine receptor d <dig> and  the serotonin transporter, and are aligned with orthologous sequences from various bird species. dots indicate matching amino acids relative to the black swan and dashes represent gaps. protein sequence identifiers include the species name and genbank accession number



all individuals were monomorphic at the sert locus for a 335 bp allele and we identified no single nucleotide polymorphisms  in this fragment for  <dig> individuals. the 461 bp fragment of drd <dig> contained six variable sites, resulting in five alleles . alleles a and b differed by a single synonymous snp, while the remainder of alleles differed by non-synonymous snps . the distribution of drd <dig> genotypes was highly skewed, with 83 % of individuals being homozygous at a single allele . the remaining individuals were either homozygous at a second allele  or heterozygous . allele a was present in 98 % of individuals, while the next most common allele  occurred in only 8 % of individuals.fig.  <dig> drd <dig> alignment for black swans. alignments are for  nucleotides and  amino acids of exon three of the dopamine receptor d <dig>  dots indicate matching nucleotides or amino acids relative to allele a. allele identifiers include the allele name and genbank accession number



association between fid and genotype
we lacked the statistical power to test for differences in mean fid between individuals with the five genotypes that were present at the urban site. to increase the power of our analyses, we therefore categorised individuals as either having the most common genotype  or a rare genotype . individuals with rare genotypes had longer fids than individuals possessing the common aa genotype . in addition, flight initiation distances were strongly positively related to starting distance, but not the focal individual’s distance from water or microsatellite heterozygosity .fig.  <dig> flight initiation distances of black swans from the urban site according to drd <dig> genotype. dots represent flight initiation distances for individual swans and bars represent median values

p
 <dig> 
< <dig> 
significant effects are highlighted in bold



population differences in fid and drd <dig> genotypes
black swans were more wary at the non-urban site than at the urban site . overall, the mean flight initiation distance was 13 ±  <dig>  m at the urban site and 96 ±  <dig>  m at the non-urban site.fig.  <dig> flight initiation distances of black swans between urban and non-urban swans, separated by year. dots represent flight initiation distances for individual swans and bars represent median values



forty percent of swans from the non-urban site possessed a rare genotype, compared with only  <dig>  % from the urban site . accordingly, we detected moderate genetic population differentiation at the drd <dig> locus . the fst based on microsatellite loci indicated low neutral genetic differentiation between the urban and non-urban sites .table  <dig> abundance  of the five drd <dig> genotypes found in the urban and non-urban populations



discussion
the repeatability estimate of flight initiation distances in black swans was high and very similar to previous estimates in other species . as repeatability in a trait sets the upper limit for its heritability  <cit> , this suggests that fids may have a substantial heritable component. in support of this, we have shown here that wariness in black swans is associated with polymorphisms at the drd <dig> gene. the 83 % of individuals that possessed the most abundant aa genotype displayed shorter flight initiation distances than swans possessing rarer genotypes. in contrast, we found no variation in the length of exonic codon repeats located within the sert gene. this contrasts with a previous study on common blackbirds, which detected low levels of interpopulational variation at the sert gene but at a much larger geographic scale than in the present study  <cit> . we found clear population differences in fids, with swans from the urban wetland initiating flight 83 m closer than those sampled at the non-urban wetland, where less human disturbance occurs. finally, we detected moderate differentiation at the drd <dig> gene despite the sites being separated by only 30 km, a relatively short distance for this highly-mobile species  <cit> . this pattern arose due to the greater proportion of swans at the non-urban site possessing rare drd <dig> genotypes, which were associated with greater wariness. although population differences in wariness to humans may arise due to multiple factors, our data suggest that they may also, at least in part, be explained by genotype-based site selection.

as the data for this study were collected from the urban and non-urban sites in different years, an effect of year on site differences in fid could not be excluded. however, it is unlikely that year differences could have driven the results reported here. first, the greater wariness of non-urban birds is well-documented  <cit>  and the differences in wariness of the two swan populations appears to be temporally stable. in addition, a long-term capture study at the urban site  <cit>  suggests that at least this population is largely resident and, as such, significant reversals of drd <dig> allelic frequencies are unlikely.

we do not know how variation at the drd <dig> gene translates into differences in wariness in swans. snps detected in this study presumably alter the functionality of the dopamine receptor d <dig> and its affinity to dopamine. in turn, the modulation of dopamine signalling in the brain regulates multiple traits, including fear . the pleiotropic effects of drd <dig> suggest that swans with different genotypes may also vary in other traits, such as exploratory behaviour , novelty seeking  or body condition . alternatively, linkage disequilibrium may result in the snps detected in this study being linked to snps at other genes which also regulate fear, such as the sert gene.

the high frequency of the aa genotype, which was associated with the shortest fids, suggests that selection may favour the aa genotype in the study populations. this is despite the advantages of displaying high levels of wariness towards potential predators  <cit> . selection may favour shorter fids when increased vigilance and wariness is associated with increased energetic costs, such as the reduction of foraging time or increase in energetic expenditure during flight responses. for example, individual iberian wall lizards  which habituate more rapidly to a non-threatening stimulus, increase their body condition  more rapidly than individuals that habituate less  <cit> .

the tendency of animals to be less wary around humans in areas experiencing high human traffic is a common pattern and may be related to various non-mutually exclusive factors. for example, habituation may occur when animals experience a repeated benign stimulation, resulting in a decrement in a certain behaviour, unrelated to sensory or motor fatigue  <cit> . an untested possibility is that swans at the urban site may have short flight initiation distances because humans are a very common and non-threatening stimulus at the site. indeed, the difference in fids between swans with common and rare genotypes  was relatively small compared to the difference in fids between the urban and non-urban populations . this suggests that in addition to a possible effect of drd <dig> variation on wariness, other factors, such as habituation to humans, contributed to site differences in wariness.

second, these patterns may also arise due to local adaptations, with selection favouring certain genotypes at each site and little population mixing. however, the close proximity of the sites suggest that at least some migration between the sites occurs. this is further supported by the low, but possibly biologically-meaningful, genetic differentiation at microsatellite loci. this reduces the likelihood of site-specific adaptations evolving. for example, between  <dig> and  <dig>  eleven neck-collared swans captured at the urban site were observed at the non-urban site, at a distance of between 700 m and 84 km from the site of their previous sighting . generally, one migrant per generation is sufficient to eliminate any population genetic differentiation  <cit> , suggesting that local adaptation is not operating in these populations to a substantial degree. however, population differentiation at the neutral loci was significant, despite likely migration between the populations. lastly, local site selection may be occurring. black swans display strong inter-populational seasonal movements, which are related to various factors such as rainfall and stream flow  <cit> . the increased wariness of swans at the non-urban site, coupled with the higher frequency of drd <dig> genotypes associated with wary behaviour at this site, suggest that more wary individuals settle in habitat with lower human usage. in contrast, bolder individuals may be more likely to settle at the urban site due to the greater resource abundance, including frequent anthropogenic feeding , or a potentially lower predation risk compared to rural areas .

CONCLUSIONS
we have shown here that the fear of humans by black swans may be partly genetically-determined. our findings also suggest that, in addition to learning or habituation, the lower responsiveness of wildlife in urban areas may be related to temperament-based local site selection. our findings have important implications for conservation biology. first, the estimation of fids of threatened or sensitive species is an important tool used by conservation managers interested in creating buffer zones around sensitive animal habitat  <cit> . however, within-species fid estimates can be highly labile and are associated with multiple factors associated with both the stimulus, focal individual and local environmental conditions  <cit> . our findings that individual fids may be partly genetically-determined, coupled with the high repeatability of fids, suggests that inter-individual variation in fid is greater than intra-individual variation. this justifies the estimation of fids of specific individuals based on single, or a small number of, approaches. in addition, population differences in drd <dig> genotype frequencies may lead to variability between sites in wariness to humans and hence the need for site-specific buffer zone sizes. the introduction of higher levels of human presence at previously undisturbed sites, such as when urban development occurs around wetlands or improved human access is provided, is likely to displace individuals who are more responsive to human presence. this is likely to effectively introduce local selection. finally, our findings that certain animals may be able to cope better in heavily disturbed habitats have important implications for captive breeding programs of threatened species that will eventually be released in close proximity to humans. individuals earmarked for reintroduction may be selected for specific temperaments more conductive to survival in the wild  <cit> .

