BACKGROUND
the use of complete genomes for phylogenetic analysis has greatly improved our understanding of prokaryote evolution  <cit> . however, until recently, relatively few complete genome sequences were available for such analyses in eukaryotes. as this improves, there will be a greater demand on methodology for evolutionary analysis of complete genomes. previous whole-genome studies of eukaryotes have focused on gene and gene family presence-absence  <cit> , lineage-specific gene loss  <cit> , insertion-deletion markers and introns  <cit> , and other non-sequence based information. while these approaches have their advantages, previous studies have not used complete genome sequences  for reconstructing evolutionary relationships. at the same time, the complexity of eukaryote genomes, with numerous gene duplications and losses in different lineages, has created a challenge for sequence-based phylogeny estimation. here, we outline a conservative approach designed to utilize the wealth of evolutionary information present in complete genome sequences by identifying orthologs in multiple eukaryotes for the purpose of evolutionary analysis.

methods for the identification of clusters of orthologs and lineage-specific paralogs have proven useful for classifying gene function and identifying cases where genes have been differentially lost or duplicated in different lineages  <cit> . however, such assemblages of data contain a mixture of orthologs, paralogs, and missing data as a result of gene loss, and are not generally suitable for large-scale phylogenetic sequence analysis of organismal evolution. our approach for comparing multiple genome sequences involves the identification of single-copy orthologs across a number of genomes for evolutionary analysis . we refer to such strict  orthologs as panorthologs, in reference to their presumed "complete" orthology, in contrast to synorthologs, which contain a mixture of species divergences and gene duplication events. in other words, panorthologs are those genes  that contain only species divergences and do not contain in-paralogs, out-paralogs, or co-orthologs  <cit> . on the other hand, synorthologs are those genes  that contain species divergences and any combination of paralogy . while the use of panorthologs is conservative and reduces the number of usable genes or proteins, it also lowers the probability that errors will be made in confusing a species divergence with a gene duplication event. because the ability to identify orthologs is diminished in analyses of small to moderate numbers of species or genomes, such a conservative method is appropriate in those cases. this conservative approach has been used to identify the number of shared, unduplicated proteins in homo sapiens, drosophila melanogaster, caenorhabditis elegans, and saccharomyces cerevisiae, where it was determined that such proteins perform primarily anabolic rather than catabolic functions  <cit> .

we compare our phylogenetic results and divergence time estimates for an analysis of seventeen published eukaryote genomes to a previous study that assembled nuclear protein sequence data in a more conventional manner from public databases  <cit> . while the phylogenetic relationships between the organisms included in this study are not controversial, with the exception of the position of nematodes  <cit> , this general approach will prove useful as more genomes, including those with questionable phylogenetic affinity, are sequenced. in addition, this approach facilitates the estimation of divergence times between organisms with numerous molecular clock methods.

RESULTS
the number of orthologous clusters per pairwise comparison and the percentage of those clusters showing panorthology are presented in table  <dig>  on average, pairwise orthologous clusters contained approximately  <dig> % panorthologs; exceptions include comparisons between fungi, including encephalitozoon , and all comparisons with arabidopsis . comparisons within metazoans averaged  <dig> % panorthology, with mus and rattus showing the highest number of shared transcripts  as expected due to their recent evolutionary divergence. previous analyses showed approximately  <dig>  panorthologs between mus and rattus  <cit> . caenorhabditis elegans and c. briggsae, who diverged roughly  <dig> ma  <cit> , also shared a large number of transcripts , which is similar to a previous estimate of  <dig>  panorthologs  <cit> . the number of orthologous clusters between drosophila and anopheles found here  is also similar to a previous estimate of approximately  <dig> panorthologs  <cit> . pairwise comparisons with the smallest genome, the guillardia nucleomorph, averaged ~ <dig> orthologous clusters, but the percentage of panorthologs varied greatly, from a low of  <dig> % with arabidopsis to as high as  <dig> % with encephalitozoon.

the intersection of nine metazoan genomes resulted in a large number of shared genes. among the nine genomes,  <dig> panorthologs were found, totaling  <dig>  amino acids. the neighbor-joining tree of that concatenation is shown in figure 2; all nodes in this tree received 100% bootstrap support. the intersection of all seventeen eukaryote genomes included in this study resulted in three shared genes  and orthology was confirmed manually. the reconstructed trees for the three genes showed long-branch attraction errors associated with the intracellular parasite encephalitozoon and the guillardia nucleomorph . this was expected because both have highly reduced genomes and high rates of substitution across many genes as a result of their current or ancestral parasitic and symbiotic lifestyles  <cit> . for this reason, the intersection of the remaining fifteen genomes was determined, resulting in ten panorthologs. the intersection of genomes from twelve multicellular eukaryotes resulted in  <dig> panorthologs. the functional classifications of the panorthologs found here are similar to those identified in previous studies  <cit> , with the most frequently represented functions being transcription, translation, replication and repair, and rna processing. the phylogenetic trees reconstructed from the concatenated datasets both showed the expected relationships   <cit> . all nodes in these trees received very high bootstrap support, with only one node showing less than 95% bootstrap support . the long branch observed in plasmodium  may be the result of both the long evolutionary separation from the other eukaryotes included in this study, and the high  composition of the genome  <cit>  leading to biased amino acid compositions among proteins  <cit> .

phylogenetic trees were also reconstructed for each panortholog to test for congruence with well-supported phylogenies from the concatenated data . we found that in most cases, the consensus values calculated from individual trees agree with the high bootstrap support of the concatenated analysis. two exceptions were the low consensus values for the accepted close relationship between animals and fungi and the contested position of nematodes. both taxa showed slightly longer branch lengths, and long-branch attraction artifacts  <cit>  may be affecting the individual datasets, causing low consensus values. also, recent empirical  <cit>  and simulation  <cit>  studies suggest that results from multigene analyses are more accurate when a tree is derived from a concatenated dataset of individual genes rather than a consensus of trees from multiple analyses.

divergence times were estimated for both the 15-genome and 12-genome datasets . results were consistent with previous studies  <cit> , showing an early divergence between plants, animals, and fungi , and a precambrian origin for animals . to specifically address the deuterostome-arthropod divergence within animals, two additional datasets were assembled to maximize the number of proteins analyzed: the intersection of seven genomes  and the intersection of four genomes . the seven genome intersection contained  <dig> panorthologs , and yielded a vertebrate-arthropod divergence time of  <dig> ma. the four genome intersection contained  <dig> panorthologs  and yielded a vertebrate-arthropod divergence time of ~ <dig> ma. although this last estimate was derived from more than five times the data previously used, the divergence time is remarkably consistent with previous large-scale studies  <cit> , and suggests that bilaterian animals originated hundreds of millions of years before the first fossil evidence of their existence in the cambrian . with the exception of the maximum fossil-based time estimate used in the tetrapod-actinopterygian fish calibration, the other fossil constraints used here are minimums, and therefore the resulting time estimates are minimums  <cit> . the agreement between our results and those of previous studies using different methods of data assembly suggests that our genome intersection approach is correctly assembling orthologs. younger time estimates of the vertebrate-arthropod divergence have been obtained in some studies  <cit> . however, those results are problematic because they also contain estimates which are inconsistent  with undisputed aspects of the fossil record, such as the oldest red algae , green algae , and stramenopiles   <cit> . possible reasons for their inconsistency are discussed elsewhere  <cit> .

discussion
the complete genome sequence of an organism is essentially the maximum amount of discrete, genetically encoded information available for evolutionary analyses. however, orthology determination has been a major obstacle in the analysis of complete genomes, especially in eukaryotes where considerable gene duplication and loss has created additional complexity. our approach for evolutionary analysis of complete eukaryote genome sequences is both simple and fast compared with the conventional method of gene-by-gene orthology determination using similarity searches in the public databases. the results of this approach applied to a subset of the available eukaryote genomes show agreement with previous results using conventional  approaches. in addition, the relatively high consensus values for most nodes indicate general agreement in tree topology among individual panorthologs.

the relatively low number of common genes in our intersections of 12– <dig> genomes is a combination of using panorthologs and including distantly related species. genes are more likely to duplicate over long periods of evolutionary time, as in the time elapsed since plants separated from animals   <cit> . therefore, a better approach with such distantly related species , and those groups with high levels of gene duplication and gene loss , would be to relax the orthology criterion and include synorthologs. in that case, a representative or consensus sequence may be chosen from among in-paralogs. on the other hand, the implementation used here  should yield many genes in analyses of genomes from closely related species , even if large numbers of species are used.

the use of sequence data for comparative genomics and phylogenetics has several advantages over the use of datasets based on the presence and absence or position of genes, introns and insertions. sequence data can provide a larger number of characters for analysis, yielding hundreds of thousands of amino acid sites and more than a million nucleotide sites in some cases. also, statistical models of sequence change are better known than those for non-sequence based data. finally, the assembly of sequence data from complete genomes of multiple organisms not only facilitates phylogenetic and divergence time analyses, but a diversity of other comparative evolutionary analyses requiring sequence information  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
unlike previous studies of complete eukaryote genomes, here we have used a fast, conservative approach to assemble orthologous clusters of proteins for phylogenetic analysis and divergence time estimation. our results are similar to previous studies that used conventional  gene-by-gene data mining. we find that complete genome sequences support the close evolutionary relationship between animals and fungi, and also that molecular divergences between animals occurred approximately  <dig> million years before the cambrian explosion of fossils. our approach will be further tested as more eukaryote genomes are sequenced.

