BACKGROUND
linalool , a tertiary monoterpene alcohol, is the main constituent in essential oils of lavender and coriander. it is also a fragrance of flowers  <cit> . as tertiary alcohols cannot be directly oxidized to ketones, microorganisms initiate their metabolism with oxidation reactions by oxygenases at other parts of the molecule  <cit>  or with isomerizations without molecular oxygen. the latter case has been described for the betaproteobacterium castellaniella defragrans 65phen. a linalool dehydratase/isomerase metabolizes -linalool to geraniol  <cit> . the further degradation pathway to geranic acid is catalyzed by a nad+-dependent geraniol and a geranial dehydrogenase   <cit> . however, a pathway for geranic acid degradation was not found in the genome of c. defragrans 65phen  <cit> . expected were genes and operons as described for the degradation of the monoterpene alcohols geraniol and citronellol in pseudomonas aeruginosa pao <dig>  in this strain, oxidation of the alcohols to their corresponding carboxylic acids and the oxidation of citronellic acid to geranic acid is followed by activation as coa thioester . the tertiary carbon atom is transformed into a secondary carbon atom by carboxylation of the β-methyl group as initial reaction. hydration on the c <dig> atom yields 3-hydroxy-3-isohexenylglutaryl-coa followed by acetate cleavage which removes the methyl group initially present at the tertiary carbon atom. 7-methyl-3-oxo-6-octenoyl-coa is the product of the pathway that was named acyclic terpene utilization . for several pseudomonas species the enzymes were characterized or tentatively identified: citronellol/citronellal dehydrogenase , citronellyl-coa dehydrogenase , long-chain acyl-coa synthase , geranyl-coa carboxylase , isohexenyl-glutaconyl-coa hydratase  and 3-hydroxy-3-isohexenylglutaryl-coa:acetate lyase . the corresponding genes are arranged in an operon like structure  under the control of a transcriptional regulator  . 7-methyl-3-oxo-6-octenoyl-coa undergoes two rounds of β-oxidation to two acetyl-coa and 3-methyl-crotonyl-coa. the latter enters the leucine/isovalerate utilization pathway  for complete mineralization  <cit> .fig.  <dig> proposed pathway for the linalool metabolism in t. linaloolentis 47lolt, based on the acyclic terpene utilization pathway  in pseudomonas spp. . linalool isomerase , geraniol dehydrogenase , geranial dehydrogenase 



the absence of the atu pathway in the denitrifying c. defragrans 65phen motivated us to search for the pathway in another denitrifying betaproteobacterium, t. linaloolentis 47lolt. it was isolated on linalool as sole carbon and energy source under denitrifying conditions and uses linalool and geraniol as growth substrates. it has a strictly respiratory metabolism, using molecular oxygen, nitrate, nitrite or nitrous oxide as terminal electron acceptor  <cit> . growth studies revealed the regioselective formation of geraniol from linalool in the stationary phase, while linalool and geranial were detected in geraniol-grown cultures. these findings suggested the presence of a linalool isomerase, a  <dig> -hydroxyl-Δ1-Δ2-mutase  <cit> . in this study, we attempted the identification of genes and proteins essential for the anaerobic linalool degradation by transposon mutagenesis and by mass spectrometry analyses of proteins.

RESULTS
transposon insertion mutagenesis
five thousand nine hundred sixteen transconjugants were screened on solid medium for denitrifying growth on acetate or linalool as carbon source, presenting a gene coverage of 74 % for an average gene size of 1000 bp.  <dig> mutants had a growth deficiency on linalool, thus a mutation frequency of  <dig>  was observed. transfer cultures in liquid medium on linalool and nitrate revealed for  <dig> of these transposon mutants a biomass yield equal to the wildtype, only  <dig> transconjugants lacked growth on linalool. the transposon insertion sites in the genome were identified by sequencing and comparison to the genome sequence. surprisingly, genes of the atu pathway were not inactivated by transposon insertions. the majority of the inactivated genes was affiliated to the following functional classifications : dna modification/processing , cellular transport systems , membrane integrity , miscellaneous  and unclassified . in general, these genes, involved in biosynthesis and repair, have to be seen as reflection of the cell toxicity of monoterpenes rather than the involvement in the biodegradation. monoterpene alcohols exhibit usually a higher toxicity than the pure hydrocarbons. once these compounds have passed the polar part of the lipopolysaccharide layer , they can integrate into the outer and inner membranes as well as the hydrophobic core of proteins. the amphiphilic monoterpene alcohols may act as surfactants. destabilization of the membrane system and cellular structures causes ion leakages and a collapse of the proton motive force. effects on proteins and on enzyme activities have been reported . as defense against the penetration and accumulation of lipophilic substances, gram-negative bacteria alter the composition and structure of their outer membrane  and the lipopolysaccharide layer  <cit> , e.g., a change in membrane composition from saturated fatty acids to cyclopropane-containing fatty acids has been observed from acetate-grown to monoterpene-grown cells of c. defragrans 65phen  <cit> . among the transconjugants were three mutants affected in lps core and o-antigen synthesis or modification, while another mutant was affected in a penicillin-binding protein  involved in peptidoglycan synthesis during cell growth and division  <cit> . bacteria counteract the toxic effects of monoterpenes by active export with energy-driven transporters. well known examples for such transport systems are multidrug resistance  or resistance-nodulation-cell division  efflux pumps, however the substrate range of the exporters is often not known . we obtained linalool-growth deficient transconjugants with insertion into an abc-type multidrug transporter or branched-chain amino acid transporters . ten insertions were in genes involved in dna modification and transcriptional control. two transconjugants had inactivated a putative transcriptional repressor of the tetr family  that had a different domain order, but still an overall 38 % identity on the amino acid level  to atur , a specific transcriptional regulator for the acyclic terpene utilization in pseudomonas spp.  <cit> . however, the atu genes in 47lolt are not arranged in the operon structure of pseudomonas and are distant to the repressor gene. insertion mutants of p. aeruginosa showed a consecutive basal expression of atu proteins  <cit> . thus the transcriptional role of this putative repressor remains unclear. another transconjugant had an insertion in a transcriptional regulator of the mode family, known to be involved in molybdenum uptake and incorporation  <cit> . the oxidation of geraniol to geranic acid in p. aeruginosa pao <dig> is dependent on molybdenum, but other pseudomonas species grow on geraniol and express the atu pathway without evidence for a molybdenum requirement  <cit> .

the high frequency of transconjugants with a deficiency in growth on linalool coincides with related studies that revealed distinct changes in the transcriptome and proteome in cells switching the growth substrate from non-toxic aliphatic short chain acids to monoterpenes. pseudomonas sp. m <dig> changed the expression of nearly 30 % of the genome in response to a change from lactate to myrcene, including genes involved in the atu-pathway, citric acid cycle and β-oxidation, genes for a restructuring of the lps layer and membranes and an up-regulation of nitrate-respiration gene clusters  <cit> . the toxicity of monoterpenes was also reflected in the proteomes of c. defragrans 65phen cells grown on acetate and α-phellandrene: among the  <dig> identified induced proteins were several transporters and membrane biosynthesis proteins  <cit> . for this organism, a similar transposon mutagenesis identified the central degradation pathway for monoterpenes  <cit> , but these alkenes are less toxic than monoterpene alcohols  <cit> .

the lack of mutants in the catabolic pathway may also indicate the presence of isoenzymes or a second pathway for the degradation of linalool. as second pathway, a linalool kinase/monoterpene synthase together with a degradation of cyclic monoterpenes may be considered for anoxic conditions. we did not detect isoenzymes of the acyclic terpene utilization  and leucin isovalerate utilization  pathway . candidate genes for a second pathway were also not found: monoterpene synthases or the ctm operon that was recently identified for limonene degradation  <cit> . the cytochrome p <dig> enzyme linalool 8-monooxygenase was also not present, albeit the genome contains mono- and dioxygenases. we tested growth of the transposon mutants on linalool only under denitrifying conditions, thus the linalool metabolism in the presence of oxygen will be studied in the future.table  <dig> genes involved in the acyclic terpene utilization  and leucin isovalerate utilization  pathway

linalool isomerasea
genes were identified by amino acids alignments using c. defragrans 65phena and p. aeruginosa pao1b sequences as references. proteins identified in the proteomic approach were analyzed by sds-page coupled to maldi-tof ms 



characterization of growth on linalool
t. linaloolentis 47lolt was grown on linalool under denitrifying conditions. besides the previously demonstrated formation of geraniol and geranial as metabolites  <cit>  we established the detection of geranic acid . geraniol and geranial accumulated transiently to  <dig> and 10 μm, while geranic acid accumulated up to 200 μm. low cellular concentrations of the toxic geraniol and geranial are due to high affinities of the corresponding enzymes, which is part of a cellular defense  <cit> . activities of the intial enzymes - linalool isomerase, geraniol dehydrogenase  and geranial dehydrogenase  - were measured in cell-free protein extracts of linalool-grown cultures. linalool isomerase was measured for the thermodynamically favored backward reaction from geraniol to linalool and showed an activity of  <dig> pkat * mg protein− <dig>  nad+-reductase activity for geraniol and citral  were 269 ±  <dig> pkat * mg protein− <dig> and 247 ±  <dig> pkat * mg protein− <dig>  respectively. abundant proteins in the cell-free protein extract were identified by sds-page and maldi-tof-based mass spectrometric analysis . proteins annotated as linalool isomerase, geraniol dehydrogenase, the two subunits of geranyl-coa carboxylase as well as a 3-hydroxy-3-isohexenylglutaryl-coa:acetate lyase were identified together with the two subunits of the methylcrotonyl-coa carboxylase and the isovaleryl-coa dehydrogenase of the leucine degradation pathway .fig.  <dig> growth of t. linaloolentis 47lolt on 2 mm -linalool under denitrifying conditions. a optical density at 600 nm as a measure for growth and linalool concentration in mm, b optical density at 600 nm as a measure for growth and geraniol, geranial and geranic acid concentration in μm. experiment was performed in duplicates. initial increase in linalool concentration is due to time-dependent dissolution of linalool in medium. linalool decreased accompanied with an increase in optical density. geraniol and geranial accumulated only transiently, while geranic acid accumulated up to 200 μm



genome annotation
two publicly available draft genomes of t. linaloolentis 47lolt were assembled and yielded a draft genome with  <dig> contigs of  <dig> ,076 bp, an overall g + c content of  <dig>  %,  <dig> open reading frames,  <dig> transfer rna genes and  <dig> ribosomal rna operon. the genome completely covers central metabolic pathways, e.g. citric acid cycle, β-oxidation of fatty acids, oxygen respiration and denitrification. genetic information from p. citronellolis, p. aeruginosa pao <dig>  and c. defragrans 65phen  were used to identify homologous genes in t. linaloolentis 47lolt .

annotations were fully supported by the aforementioned protein identification. one result of the reassembly was the formation of two large contigs that contained all genes of the atu and liu pathways over a region of  <dig> and  <dig>  kb, respectively. the atu genes were organized with the putative linalool isomerase gene lis downstream of atucfe and the genes for the geraniol oxidation geoab upstream of atua . the genes in between were annotated as hypothetical proteins. gene homologs for atub and atug, the putative citronellol and citronellal dehydrogenases, were identified in the draft genome but did not show significant similarity in a reciprocal best match analysis.fig.  <dig> gene arrangement of acyclic terpene utilization  and leucine isovalerate utilization  pathway genes in the draft genome of t. linaloolentis 47lolt. annotation and ncbi accession numbers are indicated. gaps size between atuh and atuc is 3488 bp and gap size between lis and geoa is 7617 bp. the atu genes are located on a 388748 bp large contig, while the liu genes are located on a 205711 bp contig



CONCLUSIONS
a transposon mutagenesis targeting the degradation pathway for linalool yielded mutants defective in the defense against the toxic monoterpene alcohol. enzyme activities of a linalool isomerase, geraniol and geranial dehydrogenases together with the formation of geranic acid demonstrated the initial degradation pathway. mass spectrometry identified the carboxylases of atu and liu pathways which indicated the utilization of these pathways for geranic acid degradation. the draft genome contained the atu genes together with candidate genes for the initial degradation pathway. to our knowledge, this is the first description of an active atu pathway outside of the genus pseudomonas and under anoxic conditions.

