BACKGROUND
micrornas are small endogenously expressed single-stranded rnas, that regulate gene expression post transcriptionally and shape diverse cellular pathways  <cit> . microrna families have continuously been added to the vertebrate lineage, and when integrated into a genome, a mirna gene is only rarely lost  <cit> . micrornas date back to the earliest bilaterians, and specific mirna families operating in specific cells and tissues of both primitive protostomes and primitive deuterostomes have been identified  <cit> , suggesting very early metazoan origin  <cit> . the emergence of vertebrates is characterized by a strong increase in mirna families, and correlates with the increase in vertebrate morphological complexity  <cit> . almost all nodes within metazoa are characterized by addition of mirna families that are rarely lost in the descendants  <cit> . the mirna family acquisition rate at the emergence of vertebrates have been estimated to  <dig> - <dig>  families per myr, and many of these  <dig> mirna families show tissue or cell type specific expression, mirnas may thus lie at the basis of cell and tissue specification in vertebrates  <cit> . acquisition of mirna genes apparently speed up with evolution of organismal complexity.

micrornas’ effects on target gene expression can be roughly classified into two types: “tuning” and “buffering”. tuning relates to effects on the target gene expression level, whereas buffering relates to repression of expressional variation  <cit> . it is speculated that the dual functions of mirnas could represent two stages in mirna evolution, mirna initially acting by reducing variance in gene expression, and only gradually taking on tuning of the expressional level over time  <cit> . apparently, mirnas of varying age are not “equal”, as older mirnas are commonly more highly and broadly expressed than younger mirnas  <cit> , and knockout of an older mirna results in a more severe phenotype than knockout of a younger mirna  <cit> . liang et. al divided mirnas into groups based on their expression level, the sequence divergence in the mature regions of mirnas with higher expression level is significantly lower than that in the remaining regions, and mirnas with very low expression tend to turn over quickly in evolution  <cit> . it has been suggested that lowly expressed mirnas may occasionally be selected and included into the regulatory network  <cit> . if newly emerged “mirnas” find targets, their regulation would probably be detrimental  <cit> , however, they may also serve as substrate for natural selection of beneficial target interactions  <cit> , and newly activated mirnas may be part of general mechanism by which speciation occurs  <cit> .

based on the observations that intraspecific variation decrease through evolutionary time, that mirna decrease stochastic expressional variation, and that mirna numbers increase through evolutionary time and with morphological complexity, it has been suggested that mirna are at the basis of the canalization development required for increased organismal complexity  <cit> . simulation of selection in presence or absence of mirna regulation suggested that evolution of population did not take place in absence of mirna genes  <cit> . by constraining the gene expression, mirnas renders phenotypic traits governed by  gene expression more “heritable”, and thereby “evolvable”  <cit> . the evolution of mirna system is intriguing, however, evolutionary questions concerning the origin of mirna genes and their subsequent evolution remain unexplained. in order to systematically understand the evolutionary relationship between mirnas gene and their function, in this work, we focused specifically on human mirnas for their diversified activities during evolution.

RESULTS
microrna emergence and evolution
to further study the evolution of human mirnas, we divided the human known mirna genes  into eight age groups according to their time of origin as estimated by the maximum parsimony method  <cit>  . during the first  <dig> myrs of vertebrate evolution, the lineage leading to human accumulated less new mirna genes, compared to ~ <dig> mirna genes during the last  <dig> myrs of evolution along the same lineage . in order to estimate the evolutionary turnover rates for human mirna genes, we applied a method from lu et al.  <cit> . this showed that the mirna birth rate in vertebrates is more than  <dig> new mirna genes per myr, which is about three times higher than that observed in drosophila . a large proportion of acquired mirna genes degenerate rapidly , and only around five percent of new vertebrate mirnas survived in the long run of evolution . this is nonetheless twice the net increase in mirna genes found in drosophila, in which only  <dig> % of surviving in drosophila  <cit> , and accumulation of new mirna genes in vertebrates for most of their evolution .

the long-term net gain  in vertebrates is two mirnas per myr, which is more than six times that found in drosophila  <cit> . accumulation rates of extant mirna were slow during the earlier stages of vertebrate evolution, and proceeded with increasing speed during the late stages. a large class of human mirna genes are thus of very recent origin, 55% of all human mirna genes having originated after the primate-rodent split. there is little overlap in mature or seed sequences between the age groups, that is, in most cases mirnas within a given age group are distinct from mirnas in other age groups . the data suggests that most emerging mirna genes produce new functional sequences. unlike coding genes, mirnas is a most dynamic class of genes in terms of emergence and decay.

mutations were frequent in young mirnas and decreased as mirnas became fixed
we compared signatures of natural selection on human mirnas with those of same-length flanking genomic sequences, assuming flanking regions to be selectively close to neutral  <cit> . we first studied the sequence variation in humans. the percentages of pre-mirnas containing snp are much lower when compared with flanking regions, and decreases with increasing evolutionary age . for both mirna precursors and mature sequences, the densities of snps are relatively higher for most of newly emerged mirna genes than those from old groups. .

the degree of sequence conservation is very strong for the mirna age groups that originated before the primate-rodent split , suggesting strong purifying selection on both precursors and mature sequences of old mirna genes; whereas for young mirnas the sequence substitution rates are rapid for both functional sequences  and their nearby flanking genomic regions, which are more than three times higher than that for old mirnas . these results strongly indicated different levels of evolutionary selection over mirna genes with different time of origin, for young mirna genes weak  selection are both observed in mirna genes and their surrounding genomic regions.

difference in sequence and structure characteristics between mirna age groups
we assessed various aspects of the mirnas and their precursors across the eight age groups. the average normalized minimum free energy  of the pre-mirnas did not differ much between the age groups , however, the nmfe variance was considerable lower for the oldest groups, and increased more than  <dig> fold from the oldest  to the youngest  group of mirnas . a recent study in drosophila showed that the high robustness of pre-mirnas secondary structure is likely to be a consequence of selection for functional structures  <cit> . the relatively rapid sequence evolution of young pre-mirnas  may have a influence on the robustness of their stem-loop structures, thus contributing to the nmfe variance. the much lower variance of nmfe observed in old pre-mirnas indicated that old mirnas may have undergone changes to acquire a sequence composition with optimized sequence and energetic properties necessary for successful recognition and processing by all parts of the mirna-processing apparatus.

further analysis of the relationship between mirna evolutionary age and  <dig> features used for prediction of mirna precursors  <cit>  indicated that while the majority of these showed little systematic variation with mirna age, several displayed a consistent increasing or decreasing trend with increasing mirna age. among these were several features related to structure and nucleotide composition .

we also took advantage of a recently published mirna prediction tool utilizing integrated sequence-structure motifs to identify mirna precursors . analysis of the mirna precursor from the different age groups show the number of ss-motifs identified in each age group increased substantially with increasing mirna age . there are more mirnas in age group t <dig> and t <dig>  and the resulting less average number of ss-motifs indicated that there is a redundancy in ss-motifs among mirnas, and that the number of ss-motifs does not increase linearly with the number of mirnas. for each age group, a number of group-specific ss-motifs were identified, and these were also far more abundant in the older age groups , suggesting that the older mirna precursors have more sequence-structure in common than younger mirna precursors. comparison to the set ss-motifs identified as being most informative with respect to computational prediction of mirna precursor , showed that more “informative” ss-motifs were identified among older than younger mirna precursors .

computational identification for pre-mirna features depends on the knowledge of known mirna genes, which may bring bias towards well-known mirna genes . in another perspective, precursors of old mirnas have acquired a sequence composition for successful recognition and processing by all parts of the mirna-processing apparatus over long-term evolution, and as a consequence of selection for functional structures, ss-motifs extracted from old pre-mirnas may be more “informative” for feature analysis.

unbalanced evolution between intronic mirnas and host genes
a considerable fraction  of human mirna genes have intronic loci. several studies have suggested relationships between intronic mirnas and the functional roles of their host genes  <cit>  which may benefit from the expressional co-regulation of mirna and host gene  <cit> . a total of  <dig> ensembl genes host one or more mirnas in sense and/or antisense strand. gene ontology analysis of these mirna host genes revealed a broad spectrum of biological roles, classified into  <dig> functional clusters. however, no particular relationship was found between the age of a mirna and the age of its host genes , nor did mirna genes of different age vary systematically in their propensity to occupy intronic loci . the latter may suggests that there are selective pressures to maintain this kind of genomic organization pattern, or that intronic loci offer more chances for activation of novel mirna genes than do most other noncoding sequence. this pattern of genomic localization may advantageous to the transcription of mirnas of both emerging and established mirnas  <cit> .

most genic mirnas differ from their host genes in time of origin, and only around one-tenth shared the time period of origin with their host gene. genic mirnas are mostly younger than the corresponding host genes, and ancient coding genes host most of genic mirnas  . one most intriguing example is that three mirna genes with distinct origin are encoded by the introns of aatyk gene , hsa-mir- <dig> is highly conserved among vertebrates, hsa-mir- <dig> originated after the primate-rodent split, and hsa-mir- <dig> originated after the human-chimp split. previous studies have showed the capacity of has-mir- <dig> to modulate aatyk mrna levels during the maturation of rat hippocampal neurons  <cit> , and co-transcription together with the host gene silencing a family of mrnas whose protein products are negative regulators of neuronal differentiation  <cit> . aatyk is an apoptosis-associated tyrosine kinase and specifically expressed in human brain, which is the most complex tissue in the human body, these three mirnas with different time of origin could have a role in establishing or maintaining cellular diversity and could thereby contribute to the differences in human brain evolution and function.

synergistic targeting of multi-age mirnas
the average number of predicted targets with selectively maintained sites increase significantly with increasing of mirna age , and the same tendency was observed for experimentally verified mirna-target pairs  <cit>  . most of mirna target genes have multiple mirna binding sites  as was also observed from the experimental data  <cit>  , and mirnas from different age groups commonly target the same or overlapping sets of genes, thus opening the possibility of substantial functional redundancy among mirnas of different ages.

difference in expression profiles between mirna age groups
to characterize trends in expression along with the evolution of mirnas, we first used a data set of  <dig> human pre-mirnas expression atlas, each of which has tissue expression data in normal and malignant cells and tissues  <cit> . as small number of newly emerged mirnas had expression data, the eight age groups were combined into three: those mirnas originated after the primate-rodent split, the young group, which contains  <dig> mirnas; those originated after rodent-non-mammalian split and before the primate-rodent split, the middle age group, which contains  <dig> mirnas; and those originated before bos taurus, the old age group, which contains  <dig> minras. we calculated a specificity score to assess the tissue specificity of mirna expression following the method used by landgraf et al. <cit> . the measure of mirna transcript abundance used here is the maximal expression level among the small rna libraries  <cit> .

the expression of young mirnas is under tight control. the specificity scores decrease with mirnas age, and the expression levels increase across tissues from all sample libraries . compared with relatively old groups of mirnas, the tissue specificity of young mirnas is significantly higher and the expression levels are significantly lower . the high degree of tissue specificity and low expression level of young mirnas suggests a strict control on expression accounting for the young mirnas activity and well-regulated expression increased over time.

a the eight age groups were integrated into three as small number of newly birthed mirnas has expression data, on which statistical analysis is likely to be spurious. those mirnas originated after the primate-rodent split was grouped into a group, referred as young; those originated after rodent-non-mammalian split and before the primate-rodent split was grouped into middle, and those originated before cow was grouped into old. wilcoxon statistics were used to test significances.

for each mirna age groups, we next examined the differences in expression patterns between normal and malignant samples. the median of young mirnas’ tissue specificity in cancer samples is significantly lower than that in normal samples; however, there is no distinct difference in tissue specificity for old mirnas, which indicated that young mirnas are expressed in more types of malignancies  than older mirnas . the median expression level of older mirnas in malignant samples is significantly higher than in normal samples, and there is no distinct difference in the median expression level of young mirnas between malignant and normal samples .

to further estimate the involvement of mirna expression tendency in malignant cells, we calculated the probability of finding a mirna expressed in malignant samples using the hypergeometric test. young mirnas are more likely to be associated with malignancy, the median probability values decreasing with increasing mirna age additional file 1: figure s <dig>  though young mirnas are under stricter control than that of older mirnas, a newly emerged mirna might target mrnas simply by chance, and that many of these interactions are likely to be deleterious. the data suggests that the regulation of young mirnas might evolve in a way of trial and error to accommodate their biological function.

as expression patterns are very complex and highly dependent on experimental and biological conditions, an alternative expression dataset was further used for this analysis. to determine the tissue-specificity of human mirnas, hsu et al. detected the expression levels of  <dig> mirnas in  <dig> major human normal tissues by using a real-time pcr-based method  <cit> . we got the same result, higher degree of tissue specificity and lower abundance for young mirnas, when using this alternative data and when comparing two groups  .

discussion
the data showed that mirna genes with new functional sequences accumulated more dynamically in vertebrates than that observed in drosophila, which correlated with the increase in morphological complexity. it has been suggested that newly activated mirnas may be part of general mechanism by which speciation occurs  <cit>  and that acquisition of mirna genes apparently speed up with evolution of organismal complexity  <cit> . hence, analysis of mirnas phylogenetics could be a useful starting point to explore the molecular basis of morphological complexity  <cit> .

such rapid emergence rate raised the question whether newly emerged mirna genes have undergone rapid sequence evolution. we observed different levels of evolutionary selection over sequences of mirna genes originated over a different time-scale. the data showed that relatively young mirna genes may have undergone rapid sequence evolution when compared with old ones. a direct explanation may be that old mirna genes have more important functions than new ones. meanwhile, another interpretation should not be excluded, that is, a newly emerged mirna may be evolving rapidly for the cooperation with its target transcripts before it is fully integrated into the regulatory network. the fact that mirnas of different ages are often predicted/verified to target the same or overlapping sets of genes, emphasized our attention to those newly birthed mirnas.

regulation function of newly emerged “mirnas”, when they find their targets, would probably be detrimental  <cit> , however, they may also serve as substrate for natural selection of beneficial target interactions  <cit> . we observed higher degree of tissue specificity and lower expression level in young mirnas, and different expression tendency between young and old mirnas. the well-regulated expression of newly birthed mirnas may reduce their effect on potential target mrnas, consequently accommodate their relatively high level of sequence variation.

the present study has certain limitations that need to be taken into account, such as, some analysis may have bias towards well-studied mirna genes or from the complex expression patterns of different mirnas across multiple conditions. however, some of the limitations may leave clues for future research under the same theme.

CONCLUSIONS
in this work, we thoroughly studied patterns of human mirnas evolution over long evolutionary time. we divided the human known mirna genes into eight age groups according to their time of origin. our data showed that for mirnas of different ages, evolution patterns are quite different in many aspects, from their precursor sequence and secondary structures , to their expression and targeting . this study calls our attention to mirnas’ origin time in the mirnas functional analysis, in future studies.

