BACKGROUND
swarming is a type of bacterial motility generally dependent on flagella and is characterized by a rapid and co-ordinated population migration across solid surfaces. in contrast to other modes of bacterial surface translocation, swarming involves a complex process of differentiation in which cells usually become hyperflagellated and elongated  <cit> . signals and signalling pathways controlling swarm cell differentiation are largely unknown. extracellular chemical signals such as n-acyl-homoserine lactones , peptides and amino acids, fatty acids, polyamines, etc, as well as physiological parameters, surface contact and wetness provide stimuli to trigger swarm cell differentiation . it is generally believed that the different environmental, cell-to-cell, and intracellular signals may be sensed and transduced by two-component regulatory systems and cytosolic regulators, leading to a complex regulatory network.

classical genetic studies performed in different bacteria have allowed the identification of several genes essential for swarming. interestingly, recent genome-scale approaches performed in model bacteria such as salmonella typhimurium, escherichia coli and pseudomonas aeruginosa, indicate that swarmer differentiation represents much more than a motility phenotype as substantial alterations in metabolic pathways and gene expression have been observed  <cit> . in e. coli, up to one-fifth of the genes on the genome seem to be involved in swarming  <cit> . besides flagellar functions, a large number of genes involved in several metabolic activities, iron acquisition, regulatory proteins, chaperones, and biosynthesis of cell surface components have been demonstrated to be important for this multicellular migration  <cit> .

in several pathogenic bacteria, swarming is associated with virulence  <cit> . this could be partially due to the fact that the expression of some virulence determinants seems to be coregulated with swarmer differentiation. urease, metalloprotease and haemolysin are up-regulated during swarming in the uropathogenic proteus mirabilis  <cit> , whereas phospholipase is induced in the opportunistic pathogen serratia liquefaciens  <cit> . global gene expression analysis performed on swarmer cells has revealed the up-regulation of a large number of virulence-related genes in s. typhimurium and p. aeruginosa such as genes encoding components of a type iii secretion system, its effectors, extracellular proteases, and proteins involved in iron transport  <cit> . an interesting aspect related to virulence is the fact that swarmer cells, like biofilm communities, display increased resistance to several antimicrobials when compared to planktonic cells  <cit> .

although swarming has been extensively studied in pathogenic bacteria, this type of surface motility has also been described in beneficial bacteria such as rhizobia. these soil bacteria are known for their ability to establish a mutualistic symbiosis with legume plants. a remarkable feature of this interaction is the formation of a new organ, the root nodule, within which endosymbiotic differentiated bacteria fix atmospheric nitrogen to generate nitrogen sources usable by the plant, thus conferring a nutritional advantage to the host. the formation of a nitrogen-fixing nodule is a complex process requiring the coordination of bacterial infection with a root developmental program . accumulating evidence suggests that in order to colonize, invade and establish a chronic infection within the host, rhizobia use similar strategies as pathogenic bacteria .

the first report of swarming by rhizobia was described for a fadd mutant of the alfalfa symbiont sinorhizobium meliloti  <cit> . in this bacterium, the lack of the fadd gene , results in multicellular swarming behaviour but also defects in nodulation, thereby suggesting that fatty acid-related compounds may act as signals controlling motility and symbiosis. more recently, it has been reported that a wild type strain of rhizobium etli, the bacterial symbiotic partner of common bean plants, can swarm  <cit> . the finding that mutants in the cinir quorum sensing system of this bacterium were no longer able to move over semisolid surfaces, led to the discovery that ahl carrying a long-chain fatty acid moiety have a dual role in swarming in this rhizobium: as quorum sensing signals and as biosurfactants which promote surface translocation  <cit> . the characterization of several r. etli mutants defective in swarming has allowed the identification of additional genetic determinants which seem to play a role in this multicellular behaviour, including genes involved in polysaccharide synthesis or export, motility and amino acid and polyamines metabolism  <cit> . interestingly, half of the mutants with an altered swarming pattern showed deficiencies in either nodulation or nitrogen fixation. the biological role of swarming in rhizobia remains to be elucidated. however, the fact that some mutations which alter swarming behaviour in s. meliloti and r. etli result in an impairment in the establishment of the symbiosis, suggests either that components essential for this multicellular motility and/or factors which are co-regulated during swarmer cell differentiation may play a role in the interaction with the host plant.

to gain insights into the adaptation process involved in multicellular swarming motility in rhizobia, global gene expression profiles of s. meliloti fadd cells under swarming inducing conditions were determined and compared with the profiles obtained during growth in liquid media as well as on non-swarming hard agar.

RESULTS
construction and characterization of a s. meliloti rm <dig> fadd mutant
in s. meliloti, swarming motility has been reported for a fadd mutant  of the gr <dig> strain. under the same swarming inducing conditions, the wild type strain gr <dig> has never shown this surface motility  <cit> . in order to identify s. meliloti genes whose expression is altered under swarming inducing conditions, we performed a transcriptomic analysis of a fadd mutant using the sm6koligo microarrays  <cit> . since these arrays are based on the genome of s. meliloti strain rm <dig>  <cit> , we constructed a fadd mutant in this genetic background by site-directed mutagenesis as described in methods. the mutant obtained was named 1021fdc <dig>  in contrast to the wild type strains gr <dig> and rm <dig>  1021fdc <dig> like qs <dig> could not grow on minimal medium  plates containing oleate as sole carbon source , a phenotype that was restored after introduction of the pbbrd <dig> construct harbouring a wild type fadd gene. furthermore, as reported for qs <dig>  1021fdc <dig> showed conditional swarming motility on semisolid mm plates . it is worth mentioning that whereas gr <dig> has never shown surface motility under our swarming inducing conditions, in approximately 70% of the experiments performed, rm <dig> cells spread over the surface of the plate resembling the movement displayed by the fadd mutants . a similar behaviour was observed for the closely related strain rm <dig> . this suggests that the control of swarming may be different in gr <dig> and rm1021/rm <dig>  although in all three s. meliloti strains a mutation in fadd promotes multicellular surface motility . this result was particularly intriguing as it has been published that in s. meliloti, expr is required for swarming but not for swimming  <cit> , and it is well known that rm <dig> and rm <dig> are expr-deficient strains  <cit> . we have tried to reproduce swarming in different s. meliloti strains under the conditions described by bahlawane et al.  <cit>  without success. in any case, we show here that expr-defective strains  can swarm on semisolid mm which suggests that the role of expr in swarming needs to be re-evaluated.

transcriptome profiling of s. meliloti 1021fdc <dig> in broth and on agar surfaces
in order to identify genes whose expression is altered during swarming in s. meliloti, the transcriptome of 1021fdc <dig> growing on swarming inducing media  was compared with that of cells growing under non-swarming conditions . we also compared the transcriptomes of 1021fdc <dig> after growth in broth and on solid mm to identify genes which are not specific for swarming but responsive to growth on surfaces. this analysis required, as a first step, the determination of bacterial growth curves in liquid, semisolid and solid mm to ensure that the respective transcriptomes were obtained in the same growth phase. fig.  <dig> shows that the growth profiles were very similar for all three conditions tested, with cells entering stationary phase at  <dig> h. we studied the different expression profiles at early exponential phase  and mid exponential phase . in our standard swarming assays,  <dig> hours is the minimum time required to macroscopically observe surface motility whereas after  <dig> hours, swarming diminishes as recognized by slower cell migration and increased mucoidy. the macroscopic appearance of 1021fdc <dig> cells growing on solid and semisolid mm is shown in fig.  <dig>  after  <dig> h on solid mm , 1021fdc <dig> grows as a homogenous lawn on the plate, indistinguishable from the non-swarming strain gr <dig>  on the other hand, on semisolid mm , growth of both gr <dig> and 1021fdc <dig> is not homogenous on the surface of the plate with visible uncolonized areas. however, whereas the borders of colonized areas by gr <dig> are smooth, in the case of 1021fdc <dig> these borders show a dendritic morphology indicating that these cells were actively swarming. therefore, we conclude that this experimental setup is adequate for a transcriptomic study of swarming.

an internal control experiment in which cy3- and cy5- labelled cdnas were synthesized from total rna extracted from liquid cultures of 1021fdc <dig>  allowed us to consider as differentially expressed only genes showing an m value of ≥  <dig> or ≤ - <dig>  a total of  <dig> genes  appeared as differentially expressed in any of the six conditions studied . more than 35% of the  <dig> genes formed part of presumed operons where two or more genes appeared as differentially expressed under our experimental conditions. to facilitate the analysis, genes showing up- or down-regulation in any of the six different comparisons were plotted in a venn diagram . most of the genes identified in our study  showed differential expression in response to growth on a surface  and only  <dig> genes appeared exclusively in the comparison of the transcriptome of cells grown on semisolid mm with that of cells grown on solid mm. within the group of surface-responsive genes, more than 50% of the genes  showed differential expression regardless of the concentration of agar used, whereas a smaller number of genes showed differential expression after growth specifically on hard agar or semisolid medium, . on the other hand, a total of  <dig> genes were found to be differentially expressed specifically under swarming inducing conditions , plus  <dig> genes which exclusively appeared differentially expressed in cells grown on semisolid vs. liquid media). it is noteworthy that  <dig> out of the  <dig> genes differentially expressed under swarming inducing conditions were also found differentially expressed in response to surface growth . this might suggest that a significant portion of swarming-responsive genes are regulated in response to contact with a surface, a known signal for swarming in other bacteria  <cit> .

surface responsive genes
the comparison of the transcriptome of cells grown in liquid mm with that of cells grown on solid or semisolid mm sampled at two different time points, led to the identification of  <dig> differentially expressed genes :  <dig> genes were up-regulated in response to surface growth,  <dig> were down-regulated, and  <dig> genes showed variable responses . most of the surface responsive genes identified in our study  showed a late response, appearing as differentially expressed after  <dig> hours growth .

many of the down-regulated genes  encoded proteins of unknown or hypothetical function, which hindered drawing conclusions from down-regulated processes. most noteworthy of the remaining down-regulated genes is that several are involved in nitrogen metabolism and exopolysaccharide production. among the former are the regulatory genes glnk and ntrbc, glutamine synthetase genes , putative glutamate synthase genes , the nirb nitrite reductase gene, and genes coding for transporters for ammonium , nitrate , and amino acids . the lower expression observed for most of these genes could be explained by the down-regulation of the ntrc gene coding for the key transcriptional activator of nitrogen catabolic operons  <cit> . likewise, the expression of some nif  and fix  genes was diminished in cells grown on solid and semisolid media compared to liquid culture. this could also be a consequence of the lower abundance of the ntrc activator and/or of the higher oxygen concentration in agar-solidified media. the other conspicuous group of down-regulated genes in response to growth in agar surfaces included several exo genes involved in exopolysaccharide  production .

in contrast with the down-regulated genes, the majority  of the genes up-regulated in response to surface growth have known or putative functions. below is a description of the most relevant ones:

1) carbon and energy metabolism
the induction of genes involved in the uptake  and metabolism  of mannitol as well as those involved in glutamate degradation , the carbon and nitrogen sources provided in our experiments, indicated a higher metabolic rate in response to surface growth. this is in agreement with the up-regulation of genes of the tricarboxylic acid cycle , the calvin cycle , glycolysis , and of the different complexes in the respiratory chain and associated functions: nuoa1b1c1d1g1ijk1lmn, cyobc, fixn1q <dig>  ndh, ctabcde, rrpp, ppa, ppk, atpabdeff2ghi and smc <dig>  the higher metabolic rate could also be the cause of the observed induction of phosphate transport systems .

2) protein metabolism
as many as  <dig> genes coding for ribosomal proteins were found to be induced during surface growth. we also observed up-regulation of different genes involved in the ribosome assembly and maturation , genes involved in the processing of mrna, rrna and trna , and different genes related to the translation process . due to the general induction of protein synthesis it was not a surprise to find induction of other related processes such as trna and amino acid biosynthesis .

3) macromolecule synthesis
in agreement with the above mentioned increase in protein synthesis, the induction of several functions related to the transcription process was also observed, including the induction of rna polymerase genes , several sigma factors  and the transcription terminator factor . on the other hand, we also detected induction of genes involved in dna synthesis  and related functions .

our microarray data suggest that during growth on agar surfaces, s. meliloti cells stimulate fatty acid biosynthesis over degradation. thus, genes involved in the initiation  and elongation  of fatty acids and the acyl carrier protein acpp were up-regulated during growth on agar media compared to broth, whereas the fadb and smc <dig> genes, putatively involved in degradation of fatty acids were down-regulated.

as previously mentioned, we observed repression of several exo genes suggesting that in response to growth on agar surfaces, s. meliloti produces less succinoglycan. on the contrary, several genes with a role in the synthesis of different surface polysaccharides were found to be up-regulated. this was the case for the kdsa, kdsb and kdta genes, involved in the synthesis and transfer of kdo , a component present in capsular polysaccharides  and lipopolysaccharides ; the rkpa gene involved in the biosynthesis of a specific lipid carrier required for kps synthesis; and the acpxl and lpxd genes involved in the biosynthesis of the lipid a of lps  <cit> . genes involved in the transport and modification of cyclic β-glucans such as ndva and opgc as well as genes involved in the synthesis of peptidoglycan  and lipoproteins  were also up-regulated under surface growth conditions.

4) motility and chemotaxis
no less than thirty seven genes of the flagellar regulon were up-regulated during growth on a surface, whereas only two chemotaxis genes  showed lower expression under these conditions compared to growth in liquid medium. up-regulated genes included those for chemotaxis , the flagellar structure , the flagellar motor , the chaperone-encoding gene mote, related genes of yet unknown function , as well as genes coding for regulatory proteins   <cit> . motility genes were generally more induced than chemotaxis genes in response to growth on a surface. five genes belonging to the four different classes of the s. meliloti flagellar regulon were chosen to validate our microarray data .

5) iron uptake and metabolism
 <dig> genes up-regulated in response to growth on surfaces belong to this functional category, including genes involved in the synthesis  and transport  of the siderophore rhizobactin  <dig>  <cit> ; several genes coding for proteins involved in the uptake of haem and hydroxamate siderophores   <cit> ; the exbb-exbd genes putatively coding for the inner membrane components of the tonb energy transduction complex required for fe3+-siderophore acquisition systems  <cit> ; the fhuf gene coding for ferrioxamine b reductase  <cit> ; and the putative iron regulator irr. induction of these genes may be related to increased difficulty for iron acquisition during growth on a solid surface due to a slower diffusion of nutrients than in broth.

6) stress-related genes
up-regulation of genes related to oxidative stress was detected in response to surface growth including sodb, kata, peroxidases , and glutathione transferases . noticeable was also the induction of genes related to thermal stress such as those coding for cold shock proteins  and heat shock proteins . the up-regulation of genes involved in dna repair processes  could be linked to the induction of genes involved in dna synthesis , whereas the induction of chaperone genes  could be the consequence of the observed increase in protein synthesis and/or the existence of stress conditions during surface growth. also noteworthy was the induction of several genes involved in resistance to different toxic compounds. this was the case for mrca <dig>  a gene coding for a probable penicillin-binding 1a transmembrane protein, the fsr gene which encodes a putative fosmidomycin resistance transmembrane protein, the uppp gene coding for a putative undecaprenyl-diphosphatase which could confer resistance to bacitracin, putative components of a multidrug efflux system , and the aqps-arsc genes involved in arsenic detoxification.

all together these data suggest the existence of striking differences in the physiology of s. meliloti growing in broth compared with agar surfaces and more specifically that cells growing on agar surfaces have a higher metabolic rate than those grown in broth. similar results were obtained in a transcriptomic study performed in salmonella  <cit> . as suggested in the work by wang et al.  <cit> , this could be explained if agar surfaces represent a more aerobic environment than liquid cultures. this could also explain the down-regulation we have observed for several low oxygen responsive genes  during growth on agar-solidified media when compared to broth. on the other hand, the up-regulation of several genes related to oxidative stress, chaperone functions, or genes involved in resistance to different toxic compounds, could indicate that cells growing on solid agar surfaces are subject to stress. however, the observed induction of chemotaxis and motility genes together with the down-regulation of several exo genes under surface growth contrast with the response of s. meliloti to several environmental stresses , in which motility genes are down-regulated while at the same time exo genes are up-regulated  <cit> . the identification of several regulatory genes in s. meliloti which simultaneously affect eps production and cellular motility, indicates that regulation of these two rhizobial traits are coupled  <cit> . in addition to environmental stresses, the results obtained in this work suggest that contact with a surface might be another signal recognized by s. meliloti to co-ordinate the regulation of eps production and motility.

regulation of genes in response to swarming-specific conditions
in contrast to surface growth, our microarray data revealed that the response of s. meliloti to swarming-specific conditions is characterized by the differential expression of a smaller number of genes  :  <dig> of these were identified in the comparison semisolid vs. solid,  <dig> of which also appeared in the comparison semisolid vs. broth, plus  <dig> genes which exclusively appeared in semisolid vs. broth. this result is comparable to that found in a similar transcriptomic study performed in salmonella in which a small number of genes  were found to show swarming-specific regulation, in contrast with more than a thousand genes found to respond to surface growth  <cit> . in our study, most of the genes  responding to swarming-specific conditions identified in the comparison semisolid vs. solid showed an early response  . on the contrary, the majority of genes  identified in the semisolid vs. broth comparison, appeared after  <dig> hours of growth.

 <dig> genes out of the  <dig> genes were up-regulated under swarming-inducing conditions, only  <dig> were found to be down-regulated and the remaining  <dig> showed variable responses. no informative conclusions could be reached from down-regulated functions as, firstly, approximately one fourth of the genes code for hypothetical proteins of unknown function and secondly the remaining down-regulated genes belong to diverse functional categories. similarly, many of the up-regulated genes have unknown functions or display partial or global homology to genes deposited in databases . this suggests that bacterial components with a putative role in swarming in s. meliloti have yet to be thoroughly studied. however, a subset  of the up-regulated genes induced under swarming inducing conditions could be assigned to iron uptake and metabolism, including the transcriptional regulator of the iron limitation response rira  <cit> , and the putative iron response regulator irr. it is also interesting that swarming conditions induced in s. meliloti 1021fdc <dig> a slight up-regulation of genes involved in the resistance to toxic compounds . increased resistance to antibiotics and to other antimicrobials has been observed in swarmer cells of different bacteria  <cit> . whether this is also the case for s. meliloti swarmer cells will be the subject of future studies.

to gain further insight into some of the genes responding to swarming specific conditions, we focused on the subset of  <dig> genes  which were identified as differentially expressed in both semisolid vs. solid and semisolid vs. broth  . five genes of s <dig> were chosen to validate our microarray data . the majority of the genes within s <dig>  were up-regulated under swarming inducing conditions compared to growth in either broth or on hard agar, whereas only one gene  was found to be down-regulated. 36% of the genes belonging to s <dig> were located on megaplasmid psyma, a percentage which is significantly higher than the 21% expected for an even distribution among s. meliloti replicons, suggesting a putative role of this megaplasmid in s. meliloti swarming. interestingly, up to  <dig> genes present in s <dig> are related with iron uptake and metabolism. they include smb <dig> and smb <dig> which code for putative components of iron uptake abc transporters, and  <dig> out of the  <dig> iron-related genes identified as up-regulated in response to surface growth .  <dig> out of the  <dig> surface-responsive genes related to iron uptake and metabolism were also significantly induced on solid mm versus broth after  <dig> hours of growth . although the induction of these genes could be explained by the increased difficulty for iron acquisition during growth on agar containing media, it is surprising that up to  <dig> of these iron-related genes show higher expression in  <dig> % swarm agar than in the harder  <dig> % agar. this suggests that lower diffusion of iron is not the only factor controlling the expression of genes involved in iron uptake and metabolism, and furthermore that a specific connection may exist between swarming and iron-related genes. in s. typhimurium and p. aeruginosa induction of genes related to iron uptake and metabolism has also been detected in the transcriptomic analysis of swarmer cells  <cit> . moreover, mutants of e. coli and p. putida affected in different systems of iron acquisition show defects in swarming  <cit> . these and our results suggest that different bacteria have acquired similar adaptation processes for swarming with iron acquisition systems playing an important role.

a the subset s <dig> comprises  <dig> genes showing differential expression in the two transcriptome comparisons aimed to identify swarming responsive genes ; b log <dig> . values in bold face indicate that they meet both m and p criteria; c genes validated by rt-qpcr . ss, growth in semisolid mm ; s, growth in solid mm ; l, growth in liquid mm.

validation of the results from the microarray experiments by rt-qpcr
to validate our microarray data we performed reverse transcription-quantitative pcr on several selected surface responsive genes as well as on genes showing response to swarming-specific conditions. among surface responsive genes, we analyzed the expression of several motility genes belonging to different classes of the s. meliloti flagellar regulon  <cit>  on solid, semisolid and in liquid mm after  <dig> h of growth: the visn and rem genes coding for master regulators of class ia and class ib, respectively; the flgb gene as a representative of class ii genes, encoding a flagellar basal-body rod protein; and the class iii genes flaa and flac, encoding the principal and secondary flagellins, respectively. in our transcriptomic study flaa was not present in the list of differentially expressed genes. since many motility genes were up-regulated in response to surface growth and flaa is the main component of the flagellum, we hypothesized that the fact that this gene does not show differential expression in our study, could be due to the limitations inherent to the microarray approaches. therefore, we decided to include flaa in the rt-qpcr studies. all five of the motility genes analyzed showed surface specific induction , thereby confirming the microarray results. interestingly, the rt-qpcr analyses revealed that, except for rem, the motility genes analyzed showed higher induction values on semisolid than on solid media, which is in agreement with the existence of a higher motility activity under swarming inducing conditions.

to confirm the differential expression of genes showing response to swarming-specific conditions, we selected: four genes related to iron uptake and metabolism  which showed early induction  in semisolid vs. solid; nex <dig>  a symbiotically induced gene showing late  up-regulation in semisolid vs. solid; and exsf, a gene coding for a putative two-component response regulator with sequence similarity to chey, and found as an early down-regulated gene in swarm cells compared to cells grown on solid mm. the expression of these six genes was determined on solid and semisolid mm after  <dig> and  <dig> hours of growth. as shown in fig. 5b, once more, the rt-qpcr results confirmed the microarrays data.

as detailed above, we have macroscopic evidence that under our experimental conditions  cells of 1021fdc <dig> show swarming . however, to test whether the genes differentially expressed under these conditions could truly be considered swarming-specific, we analyzed and compared the expression of rhbb, rhta and hmus by rt-qpcr from cells present in the border of swarming colonies obtained in standard swarming assays and cells from a colony grown on solid mm. the results confirmed the up-regulation of these genes in swarming cells vs non-swarming cells with relative expression values of  <dig>  ±  <dig>  for rhbb,  <dig>  ±  <dig>  for rhta and  <dig>  ±  <dig>  for hmus. the differences in the induction values found for these genes between cells spread plated on semisolid mm  and cells from the border of a typical swarming colony could be explained by differences in the growth phase of the two samples. nevertheless, these data indicate that our experimental approach is adequate for the identification of swarming-specific genes.

role of psyma, rhizobactin-related genes and iron in s. meliloti swarming
since the proportion of genes belonging to psyma present in the subset s <dig> of swarming-responsive genes was higher than expected, we investigated whether this megaplasmid played any role in surface translocation. the swarming ability of sma <dig>  a s. meliloti strain cured of psyma, was tested. in contrast to the parental strain rm <dig>  sma <dig> did not show swarming in any of the numerous assays performed . mutagenesis-based approaches have revealed that a wide variety of genes are involved in swarming  <cit> . since psyma harbours more than one-fifth of the genes present in the s. meliloti genome, the finding that loss of this megaplasmid results in loss of swarming, might be not surprising. however, this result prompted us to investigate which genes of psyma could play a role in triggering conditional swarming in s. meliloti.

among the psyma swarming-specific induced genes were those involved in the biosynthesis and transport of the siderophore rhizobactin  <dig>  <cit> . in e. coli, mutations in most of the genes involved in the utilization of the siderophore enterobactin strongly inhibit swarming  <cit> . likewise, in p. putida, mutants either in the siderophore pyoverdine or in the fpva siderophore receptor have been shown to be defective in surface motility  <cit> . hence, the swarming-defective phenotype observed in sma <dig> could be due to the lack of rhizobactin-related genes. to test this, swarming assays were performed with mutants affected in either of the two different rhizobactin  <dig> biosynthesis genes , a mutant lacking the rhta outer membrane receptor for the siderophore, and with a rhra mutant strain lacking the arac-like regulator which positively regulates the production and transport of rhizobactin  <dig>  additionally, we also looked at the swarming phenotype of a rira mutant. rira has been demonstrated to be the general regulator of the iron response in s. meliloti, including genes involved in the biosynthesis and transport of rhizobactin  <dig>  <cit> . in our microarrays, rira appeared to be induced 2-fold in growth on semisolid vs. solid media after  <dig> hours of incubation . as shown in fig. 6b, neither the mutants in the rhizobactin biosynthesis genes  nor the rhra mutant were able to swarm, while the absence of either the rhta siderophore receptor or the rira regulator did not prevent swarming. the motility defect shown by the rhb and rhra mutants was specific for swarming since assays performed in bromfield and mm  showed that these strains were able to swim . thus, the motility phenotypes shown by the rhb and rhra mutants suggest that either rhizobactin-mediated iron uptake or rhizobactin per se play a role during swarming in s. meliloti rm <dig>  in p. putida, the defect in swarming shown by mutants unable to synthesize the siderophore pyoverdine could be restored by adding different sources of iron, suggesting that the intracellular iron level rather than the siderophore is the functional signal for swarming in this bacterium  <cit> . to test whether the lack of surface motility in the rhb and rhra mutants could be due to iron deficiency, increasing concentrations  of either fecl <dig> or the iron chelate ferric citrate, whose uptake is independent on siderophore, were added to the media. none of these conditions could restore surface translocation in the mutants , with the highest concentration used being inhibitory of cell growth. this result indicated that low intracellular iron levels were not responsible for the swarming deficiency of the rhb and rhra mutants, and that the presence of rhizobactin  <dig> is important for triggering swarming in s. meliloti. furthermore, the fact that the rhta mutant which is defective in rhizobactin  <dig> utilization  <cit> , still swarms  suggests that the function played by rhizobactin  <dig> in swarming is exerted outside the cell. rhizobactin  <dig> is a citrate-based dihydroxamate siderophore structurally similar to schizokinen with the only but important difference that rhizobactin  <dig> contains a long-chain fatty acid -2-decenoic acid) that gives the siderophore an asymmetric structure and amphiphilic properties  <cit> . the role of the decenoic acid residue in rhizobactin  <dig> function has not been studied, although it has been proposed to be important during the membrane translocation of the ferric complex by making the molecule more mobile. considering our results, it is tempting to speculate that the surfactant properties of rhizobactin  <dig> may promote surface translocation in s. meliloti. similarly, the biosurfactant activity associated to long-chain ahls produced by r. etli has been proved to play a direct role in surface movement of swarmer cells, adding a new function to these well known signalling molecules  <cit> . curiously and in support of our hypothesis, s. meliloti gr <dig> which is not able to swarm on semisolid mm, does not produce siderophores in liquid mm as determined by the cas assay .

the restoration of surface motility of the rhizobactin-defective mutants was attempted by adding concentrated supernatants containing rhizobactin  <dig>  although the addition of these supernatants functioned in iron nutrition bioassays restoring the growth of rhb mutants, they failed to promote swarming of the mutants and even hampered this surface motility of the wild type and fadd mutant strains . this result might be due to the negative effect on swarming of supraoptimal concentrations of nutrients or compounds excreted by rm <dig> 

to further confirm that the presence of rhizobactin  <dig> is important for triggering swarming in s. meliloti, the motility phenotypes of rm <dig> and the rira mutant were tested under iron-replete conditions as it has been reported that these conditions inhibit rhizobactin  <dig> production in the wild type but not in the mutant  <cit> . cas assays were performed to determine siderophore concentrations in the supernatants of these two strains under different growth conditions. we found that the wild type and the rira mutant produced similar amounts of siderophore when cells were cultivated in mm containing  <dig> μm of fecl <dig> . the presence of  <dig> μm of fecl <dig> abolished siderophore production in rm <dig> but not in the rira mutant . hence, swimming and swarming assays were performed in mm containing  <dig> μm of fecl <dig>  no differences in swimming were observed between the two strains . however, swarming by rm <dig> was inhibited at this iron concentration but not that by the rira mutant in which swarming seemed even to be enhanced compared to lower iron concentrations . this result not only supports that in s. meliloti rm <dig> rhizobactin  <dig> is required for swarming but also suggests that iron and rira play a role in the control of this multicellular phenotype. the concentration of iron in the medium has been shown to be decisive for swarming in several bacteria  <cit> . in s. meliloti strain rm <dig>  like in pseudomonas spp., an excess of iron inhibits swarming, an effect that in s. meliloti could be due at least in part to the inhibition of rhizobactin  <dig> production. on the other hand, the enhanced motility shown by the rira mutant under high iron conditions suggests that additional genes controlled by this regulator might be involved.

the lack of a functional fadd gene restores swarming in psyma-cured and rhizobactin-defective strains, and allows swarming under high-iron conditions
as described above, psyma and at least the rhizobactin 1021-related genes rhb and rhra are required for swarming in s. meliloti rm <dig>  to investigate if these genes are also important in the surface motility shown by the fadd mutant, swarming assays were performed with the psyma-cured strain sma <dig> in which the fadd was inactivated as well as with double mutants rhbfadd and rhrafadd. as shown in fig 7a and 7b, the lack of a functional fadd gene restored surface motility in all the swarming-deficient strains. thus, although rhizobactin biosynthesis and regulation genes were found to be up-regulated in the fadd mutant under swarming inducing conditions, these genes are not required for this surface motility in this genetic background. a possible explanation for these findings could be that the signal transduction pathway leading to the induction of the rhizobactin genes is not altered in the fadd mutant. a recent microarray analysis performed in our group supports this hypothesis. the comparison of the transcriptome of the wild type strain with that of the fadd mutant under swarming-inducing conditions after  <dig> and  <dig> hours of growth, revealed only  <dig> differentially expressed genes  . neither rhb genes nor rhra were amongst them, suggesting that these genes show similar expression levels under swarming inducing conditions in both genetic backgrounds. the finding that rhizobactin-related genes are not essential for swarming in the fadd mutant could be explained if the function played by iron/rhizobactin  <dig> in the control of swarming in rm <dig>  could be exerted in the fadd mutant by a different and unknown compound which is not present or inactive in the wild-type strain.

we also tested if the presence of high iron concentrations prevents swarming in a fadd mutant as it does in  <dig>  swarming assays were performed on semisolid mm containing  <dig> μm of fecl <dig> with  <dig> and gr <dig> as wild type strains, and their corresponding fadd-derivative mutants. as shown in fig. 7c, swarming was never observed in gr <dig> but always in the fadd mutant qs <dig>  as already mentioned, in  <dig> swarming was observed at a certain frequency on mm containing  <dig> μm of fecl <dig> and never observed under high iron conditions but its corresponding fadd mutant showed swarming at both iron concentrations similar to that found for the rira mutant. however, in contrast to the rira mutant, the iron-independent swarming phenotype shown by the fadd mutant cannot be explained by differences in the production of rhizobactin  <dig> since the fadd mutant, like the wild type, inhibits siderophore production under high iron conditions . therefore in s. meliloti, the lack of a functional fadd gene relieves the control that iron has over swarming as well as the dependence on rhizobactin  <dig> for this surface motility. a possibility worth investigating is if fatty acid derivatives, whose concentration is dependent on fadd activity but not iron-responsive, could replace siderophore function during swarming. likewise, future investigations should address a possible connection between the rira and fadd regulatory networks that could explain the iron-insensitivity of swarming shown by the fadd and rira mutants.

CONCLUSIONS
to the best of our knowledge, the present work represents the first global gene expression analysis of rhizobium growth on surfaces, including swarming inducing conditions. the results reveal that the physiology of s. meliloti cells growing on the surface of agar media is significantly different from that of cells growing in broth, with the differential expression of more than a thousand genes. it is tempting to speculate that these major changes in gene expression could also take place in rhizobium during colonization of root surfaces, an important prerequisite for nodule formation. thus, the approach used in this study may be helpful to identify genes and regulatory mechanisms that could be crucial during the early stages of the rhizobium-legume symbiosis and it could serve as a model for studying gene expression in different plant-associated bacteria.

the surface motility shown by several expr-deficient strains in this work indicates that the role played by this luxr-type regulator in swarming by s. meliloti needs to be re-examined. moreover, the genomic analysis under swarming-inducing conditions allowed the identification of environmental signals  and genes that play important roles in the control of this surface motility in a wild type strain of s. meliloti. furthermore, the results suggest that rhizobactin  <dig> plays a role in swarming although the requirement for rhizobactin-related genes and the inhibition of this surface motility by an excess of iron can be circumvented in a fadd mutant. future work should focus on investigating the specific role of rhizobactin  <dig> in swarming of s. meliloti as well as to identify why the lack of a functional fadd gene allows surface translocation of bacterial cells under conditions which negatively influence this type of multicellular migration.

