BACKGROUND
a recent analysis of the voluntary oscillatory movements of one single extremity in different mechanical contexts   <cit>    <cit>  led to the hypothesis that these movements are controlled by a neural mechanism that compares the intended position  with the actual position . the sign and size of the detected position error would in turn determine the direction  and the amount of the compensatory motor activation. by this "private" position controller, each limb may overcome the mechanical contingencies by a continuous adjustment of the movement to the central motor command.

this hypothesis has been recently tested by verifying how far subjects could maintain a null position error when the oscillation frequency or the mechanical context was changed. in this aim they were asked to rhythmically oscillate their extremities so that the oscillation peaks were synchronised to the beat of a metronome. the position error was then estimated as the phase delay between the metronome beat  and the actual oscillation peak . with the limbs unloaded, the peak of both the hand and foot oscillations maintained a slight constant phase delay with respect to the metronome signal over the explored frequency range . this constancy was obtained by phase-advancing, at each frequency increment, the emg activation with respect of the metronome beat by the amount necessary to compensate for the simultaneous increase of the lag between the emg and the movement, caused by the limb mechanical impedance. after loading of either limb, the increase of the oscillation frequency induced larger emg-movement delays and the anticipatory compensation, albeit increased, became insufficient, so that the movement progressively phase-lagged the metronome. finally, the compensatory phase-advance of the muscular activation in both the unloaded or loaded conditions could be accurately simulated by a neural network model that compares a central command  to the limb actual position, acting as a closed-loop pid  controller.

the above experimental results and the model simulations strongly suggest that the synchronisation of the rhythmic oscillations of either hand or foot with a time keeper is sustained by a "private" feed-back control that conforms the position of each limb to that encoded in the central voluntary command. if so, when movements of the two limbs are coupled, the position controller of each limb should per se be sufficient to keep the two limbs synchronised with each other  without need for any information exchange between them. this should occur even when the limbs, as in the case of the hand and foot, have different mechanical properties, so that a different frequency-dependent compensation is required for each segment.

with regard to interlimb synchronisation, it was earlier observed that during hand-foot coupled oscillations  the interlimb phase difference is kept almost constant by phase-advancing the activation of the hand movers with respect to the foot movers  <cit> . this finding led us to propose that the control mechanism may: i) compare the kinaesthetic signals from the two moving limbs; ii) compute the instantaneous phase difference between the limbs positions and iii) utilise the resulting phase error for advancing the activation in the lagging limb with respect to the leading limb. set againts this background and arguing that the kinaesthetic feedback from a moving extremity might operate also when only one extremity is oscillated and the second is still, we investigated the possibility that kinaesthetic afferences from one limb could influence the motor pathways to the other limb  <cit> . specifically, the excitability of the h-reflex and corticospinal pathways to the resting forearm muscles was tested during cyclic voluntary oscillations of the ipsilateral foot. it was found that excitability in both the descending and reflex motor pathways to wrist movers was sinusoidally modulated during foot oscillations. however, such modulation cannot be related with the kinaesthetic inflow from the foot since, after having artificially modified the emg-movement phase relations by applying an inertial load to the foot, the modulation remained phase-linked to the activation of foot movers, not to the foot angular position.

in summary, while we found no evidence in favour of a crossed kinaesthetic feedback between the extremities, other clues suggested that each limb is supplied with a control mechanism that compensates for the limb mechanical impedance. in this perspective, synchrony between the hand and foot during coupled oscillations might result from the fact that both segments automatically maintain the synchronism with respect to a common central command, without the need of any inter-limb kinaesthetic feedback. this paper will present further elements in favour of this view.

it might be argued that if the oscillation of each extremity is synchronised to a central rhythm generator by a "private" controller, then the phase relation between the output of the rhythm generator and the movement should be identical when the segment is moved alone and when it is coupled with another extremity. alternatively, if each segment entrains the oscillations of the other through crossed kinaesthetic afferences, the phase linkage between the generator output and the movement might be different when the segments are moved separately or together. for example, let's suppose that one segment lags the rhythm generator  because of its larger inertial resistance. a feedback mechanism, which monitors the inter-segmental delay by comparing the kinaesthetic afferences from the two limbs, might reduce the inter-limb delay by either anticipating the lagging segment or delaying the leading one: in either case, however, its intervention modifies the segment "intrinsic" delay with respect to the central command.

assuming that during careful synchronisation of a cyclic movement with a metronome the central voluntary command is phase-locked to the metronome beat, we measured the synchronisation between the limb oscillations and the pacing signal when the two segments were moved in isolation and when the two limbs were coupled, both iso- and antidirectionally. based on the above considerations, we would expect that the activation of a crossed kinaesthetic feedback during coupling should modify the clock-movement synchronisation by either anticipating the lagging  segment or delaying the leading  one.

we also examined whether and how the synchronisation is influenced by changing the oscillation frequency  and by separately loading the hand or the foot, in order to increase the mismatch in their mechanical impedance.

RESULTS
the aim of this investigation was to compare the synchronisation of the hand and foot oscillations with a pacing signal when the two segments were moved separately and when they were iso- or antidirectionally coupled. this was done by measuring the phase delays between the rhythmic clock beat and one peak of the limb oscillation . the clk-mov delay includes a neural delay, between the clock signal and the synaptic input to motoneurones , plus the lag between the motoneurone input signal and the movement , influenced by the mechanical impedance of the limb. on the assumption that the rhythm generator is synchronised with the clock beat as the task requires, the neur delay represents the phase difference between the output of the central rhythm generator and the input to motoneurones. it will be shown that such delay is negative, i.e. a phase advance. the way in which the above delays were estimated is illustrated in fig.  <dig> and described in detail in the methods section.

in different experimental series, the  <dig> subjects were asked to rhythmically oscillate the two segments both alone and coupled together, first in isodirectional  and then in antidirectional association . subjects had to take the maximal care that the peak of the segments' oscillations coincided with the beat of a metronome. all the trials were also repeated after enhancing the mechanical difference between the extremities by loading either the hand or the foot with a rotating mass. the three relevant phase differences  were measured and plotted against the oscillation frequency.

hand and foot unloaded
separate oscillations of the hand and foot and isodirectional hand-foot coupling
two aspects are noteworthy. first, in both extremities, either coupled or uncoupled, the movement peak maintained a constant phase delay from the metronome beat . the way in which this phase lock was achieved is understood by examining the curves in plot 2b. the two mech curves describing the mechanical phase-response of each oscillating segment, either alone  or coupled , could be well fitted by a pendulum equation . confirming previous observations  <cit> , the resulting resonance frequency  was always significantly lower for the hand than for the foot , indicating a relatively larger influence of the moment of inertia in the upper extremity. it is easily argued that if the onset of muscular activation in either segment had maintained a stable phase delay with respect to the metronome beat then the clk-mov curve would have run parallel to the decaying mech curve. thus, the observed constancy of the clk-mov delay over the entire frequency range in both extremities is necessarily correlated to a progressive phase advance of the motoneurone input on the clock beat , an advance which virtually mirrors in either extremity the increasing lag of the corresponding mech curves.

the second noteworthy feature of fig  <dig> is seen when comparing the clk-mov, mech and neur phase-relations of each limb, obtained during isodirectional coupling , with the corresponding relations obtained when movements were performed with the hand or foot alone . in either limb, the curves referring to isolated movements are practically superimposed to those referring to coupled movements, indicating that the limbs behave in a virtually identical manner when they move in isolation or coupled.

statistical comparison was drawn on the clk-mov data collected during associated vs isolated limb oscillations by a two way  repeated measures anova, which failed to uncover any main effect of either coupling or frequency, as well as any interaction . comparing the best-fit functions of the mech curves through the extra sum-of-squares f test, also showed that limb coupling did not introduce any significant modification in the mech curves .

antidirectional hand-foot coupling
in these trials the explored frequency range ended at  <dig>  hz, the maximal frequency that all subjects were able to follow in antidirectional association. the clk-mov curves of fig. 3a  show that the movement peak of either extremity maintains a constant phase delay from the clock in this association too .

due to the  <dig>  hz frequency limit, the two mech curves  only included the flat initial portion of the decay. consequently, fitting with the pendulum equation led to poorer r <dig> values and larger variability of the estimated parameters  than in trials when frequency was increased up to  <dig> hz . since this would weaken the statistical comparison between the best-fit curves, the mech data for the coupled and uncoupled conditions were also matched by a two way  anova, which confirmed the presence of a significant frequency-effect , in the absence of a main effect of coupling and of any frequency-coupling interaction .

as seen for the isodirectional association, a progressive phase advance of the motor input on the clock beat  virtually mirrored in either extremity the increasing lag of the corresponding mech curves.

fig.  <dig> also allows the direct comparison between the curves referring to anti-phase coupling  and the corresponding curves  obtained when the same subjects performed oscillatory movements with either the hand alone or the foot alone. inspection of the curves suggests that both limbs behave in a virtually identical manner when they move in isolation or coupled. this was confirmed by statistical analysis , which did not uncover any significant difference.

in conclusion, the striking similarity between the curves of the coupled and uncoupled limbs strongly supports the view that one and the same mechanism operates in both instances. it might therefore be argued that the "private" controller, which compensates for the phase lag of each extremity when it is moved alone, is also sufficient to keep synchrony between hand-foot coupled oscillations driven by a common clock signal, without need for any crossed feedback interaction between the two limbs.

however, the lack of any significant change in synchronisation when the limbs were moved separately or together, might have a more trivial explanation, i.e. that the difference between the limbs mechanical properties were significant but minor, perhaps too small to elicit any sign of interaction between the two moving segments. the mechanical difference between hand and foot were therefore experimentally enhanced by separately adding an inertial load to one or the other extremity .

inertial loading of the limbs
results of the loading experiments will be illustrated following the same criteria used in figs.  <dig> and  <dig> for the unloaded condition . inertial loading of the cyclic movements of the hand or foot was obtained by fixing a metal disk concentrically to the axis of rotation of the respective platform . the moment of inertia of each disk was about  <dig>  times that of the related limb plus the rotating platform.

hand loading
separate hand-foot oscillations and isodirectional coupling
loading produced an earlier decay of the hand mech curve, with a satisfactory fitting by the pendulum equation and a conspicuous decrease of the hand fr , thus strongly increasing the difference between the hand and foot mechanical responses . correspondingly, a clear-cut increase in the slope of the hand neur curve developed symmetrically to the decay of the mech curve. the compensation, however, was not as effective as in the unloaded condition and the clk-mov delay for the hand significantly increased when the frequency increased .

loading, however, did not introduce any significant difference between curves obtained during uncoupled and isodirectionally coupled movements of the hand .

antidirectional coupling
as in the case for isodirectional coupling, loading produced the earlier decay of the hand mech curve  and a symmetrical, clear-cut increase in the slope of the neur curve . the advance in motor activation, however, was not as effective as in the unloaded condition in compensating for the mech delay, thus leading to a significant increase of the hand clk-mov delay when the frequency increased . again, no difference was detectable between the curves obtained during uncoupled and antidirectionally coupled hand-foot oscillations .

finally, note also that, in both iso- and antidirectional associations, the curves measured in the unloaded foot did not differ from those measured when the foot was moved alone or was coupled with the unloaded hand .

foot loading
separate hand-foot oscillations and isodirectional coupling
after applying an inertial load to the foot platform, the foot mech response decayed faster than that of the unloaded hand . the reactive anticipation of the motor output to foot movers  was enhanced with respect to the unloaded condition but the advance was apparently insufficient to maintain the clock-movement synchrony over the entire frequency range, as witnessed by the progressive increase of the clk-mov delay over  <dig>  hz  resulting in a significant frequency-dependence of the clk-mov curve .

again, no significant difference  was visible between the curves obtained during the uncoupled  or the coupled movements .

antidirectional coupling
foot loading produced a faster decay of the mech phase-response  and an enhancement of the neur anticipation  also during antidirectional association. again, the neur compensation was insufficient to maintain the clock-movement synchrony so that the clk-mov delay  increased in a frequency-dependent manner . once more, however, no difference was visible between the curves obtained during the uncoupled  or the coupled movements  .

finally, in neither iso- nor in antidirectional association, did loading of the foot introduce any significant change in the curves of the coupled unloaded hand, which remained indistinguishable from the corresponding curves obtained when both limbs were unloaded or the hand was moved alone.

interlimb phase relations: effects of loading and association direction
the commonest way to describe associations of cyclic limb movements is plotting their inter-limb phase relations. from this material such relations were easily obtained as the differences between the clk-mov curves of the hand and foot for each of the various loading and coupling combinations. these interlimb relations are shown in fig.  <dig> for isodirectional  and antidirectional  oscillations, with different symbols for the three loading conditions . the illustrated relations confirm the previously described delaying effects of inertial loading on the hand curves  <cit>  and add the description of the effects of foot loading on the curves.

statistical evaluations were performed on the data included in the frequency range common to both iso and antidirectional association, i.e., between  <dig>  and  <dig>  hz. a  <dig> way repeated measures anova  showed significant main effects of loading  =  <dig>  p <  <dig> ) and frequency  =  <dig>  p <  <dig> ) and a significant load × frequency interaction  =  <dig>  p <  <dig> ). in turn, the neumann-keuls post-hoc test on the interaction disclosed that the frequency effect was significant when either limb was loaded but not when both limbs were unloaded. in contrast, no difference, was found between curves obtained in iso- and antidirectional association .

discussion
the present results show that the synchrony between the cyclic movements of the hand or foot with respect to an external time-giver is unchanged when the two extremities are oscillated separately and when they are coupled, both isodirectionally  and antidirectionally .

the virtually identical hand/foot synchronisation with the clock beat, irrespectively of the fact that the segments were moved alone or together, would indicate that a cross-talk between the moving limbs is unnecessary to guarantee the coupling control, even when the mechanical disparity between the moving segments is heavily enhanced. as a matter of fact, loading one limb induced a progressive phase lag of its movement with respect of the clock signal, but this lag did not change significantly between the "alone" and "coupled" conditions. since also the synchronisation of the second  limb remained indistinguishable either when coupled or moved alone, it may be concluded that no significant adjustment occurred after coupling in either the unloaded or the loaded segments. consequently, the effects induced by loading on one extremity were directly transferred into commensurate phase shifts between the two. accordingly, it may be reasonably suggested that hand-foot synchronisation during coupling results from the independent linkage of each segment with the clock signal, through a "private" feedback position control based on the kinaesthetic afferences from the same segment. then, the inter-limb phase relation merely results from the algebraic summation of the phase delay that each limb has with respect to the reference signal when it is moved alone.

it is well known that when coupling segments of the upper and lower limb on the same side, the preferential association is to move the segments in the same direction  <cit> . coupling the limbs in phase opposition requires a great attentive effort and spontaneous reversal to in-phase association becomes unavoidable when the oscillation frequency increases, consistently reducing the maximum frequency of the anti-phase vs in-phase oscillations.

the present results do not give any apparent indication that the feedback position control considered here may exert differential action during one or the other type of association. indeed, no significant difference was found between any of the phase curves obtained in the different associations. intervention of the feedback position control in determining the inter-limb phase relation is apparently straightforward during isodirectional hand-foot movements. it might be argued that a cyclic command is produced by a rhythm generator  and dispatched in parallel to the motor pathways of the two oscillating segments. in turn, the motor pathway to each segment is provided with a "private" kinaesthetic feedback control that continuously conforms the segment position to the position encoded in the central motor command  <cit> . in addition, we recently found evidence that the voluntary command producing the oscillation of one extremity, while the other is still, is accompanied by the collateral excitation of the motor pathways to those muscles of the second limb that would produce "isodirectional" movements. this excitation is revealed as a subliminal excitability modulation of the motor pathways when posture is stable  <cit>  and as an overt muscle contraction, featured as an anticipatory postural adjustment   <cit> , when postural stability is decreased. thus, when the two extremities are moved together, these collateral postural effects would reinforce the explicit voluntary activation of "isodirectional" muscles.

the present results further show that the "private" position-control of each limb is active also during the anti-phase association, allowing synchronisation with the clock beat up to the maximum frequency  allowed to these movements. considering that during both uncoupled and isodirectionally coupled limb oscillations the synchronisation is maintained up to frequencies well above the latter critical value, it may be argued that the capabilities of the position control will not be saturated during anti-phase movements. this would suggest that the frequency limits of the anti-phase performances, signed by the spontaneous transition from anti- to isodirectional association, should not be dependent on failures of the limb feedback position control based on kinaethetic afferences. this view seems confirmed by spencer et al.  <cit>  who compared normal subjects and patients with uni- or bilateral deafferentation drawing symmetrical or anti-symmetrical circles with both hands. they found that spatial consistency and position both between and within limbs were disrupted in the absence of somatosensory feedback, whereas this loss was not critical for achieving temporal coupling between the hands nor did it contribute significantly to the disruption of anti-symmetrical coordination at faster movement rates.

it may be worth adding that a possible origin of the spontaneous transitions may instead be the conflict between the voluntary commands and the apas described above, which are distributed as to facilitate the isodirectional and hinder the antidirectional association. in line with this interpretation, welsh et al.  <cit>  found that the non-preferential coupling of upper limbs is favoured by increasing the trunk postural stability, i.e. attenuating the need of postural adjustments.

as discussed in baldissera and esposti  <dig>  <cit> , when performing hand-foot antidirectional movements, which require activating the "isodirectional" muscles in phase opposition, the apas have to be suppressed or overwhelmed by the voluntary commands. theoretically, during anti-phase association two commands opposite in phase may be simultaneously supplied to the motor pathways of the two limbs either by activating a second generator that pulsates in phase opposition with respect to the first one or, alternatively, by phase-reversing the motor command from a common time-giver to one of the two segments. the supplement of neural activation required for operating either type of phase-reversal and for contrasting apas might explain the attentional effort requested when performing antidirectional movements. in turn, the saturation of the effort capabilities when the movement frequency increases or their attenuation by "fatigue" when the exercise is prolonged might explain the spontaneous reversal into the less demanding isodirectional mode. whatever the mechanism, this may be the level at which different factors act to induce a phase transition from anti- to isodirectional association. in this view, the transition should be caused by a failure in the mechanism that builds up the commands shape, not in the mechanism that controls the accuracy of the limb position with respect to the commands.

distinction of two control levels for limb movement coupling has already been proposed in the literature. in  <dig>  schmidt et al.  <cit>  found that during simultaneous reaching movements there is a strong correlation in time between the two hands, while spatial errors in hitting the targets are poorly correlated. those authors then proposed that the control of isomorphic movements of two limbs is obtained by one motor program, in which the temporal aspects are specified by parameters common to both movements, while force is coded by other, segment-specific parameters. in turn, wing and kristfferson  <cit>  dissected the variance of the inter-tap interval into a clock and a motor components and turvey et al.  <cit>  utilised this same technique for identifying two levels of control of bilateral wrist-pendulum coupled oscillations, a time keeping and a motor function respectively. these last authors observed that, when the mechanical properties of the oscillating system of one side were modified, only the correlation between the right and left motor variances was affected while the two clock variances were still correlated. conversely, the contrast of phase symmetry  affected the correlation between the clock variances but did not affect right and left motor variances  <cit> . on this basis they concluded that "absolute coordination is to be understood as the assembling of a single common clocking process and not as the linking of already established clocks". evidence in favour of a central temporal coupling was also found by semjen and summers  <cit>  when studying synchronic and alternate bimanual tapping.

the position control proposed here, which conforms the actual to the intended limb position through a peripheral feedback mechanism, seems to fit, both in topology and function, with the motor level of the turvey's reference frame, which is not involved in phase transitions. indeed, the position control is affected by loading of the limbs while it operates equally well during iso- and antidirectional coupling and isolated movements too.

a subdivision in two hierarchical levels has also been proposed for the cat spinal central pattern generator   <cit>  that controls locomotion. it was suggested that separate structures within the cpg would provide on the one hand the rhythm generation, on the other the pattern formation, i.e., shaping the final outflow to motoneurones according to the different tasks and contexts, under the influence of peripheral afferences   <cit> .

the role of one main component of the kinaesthetic input  in controlling ipsilateral limb movements and coupling between limbs was investigated by verschueren et al.  <cit> . those authors found that tendon vibration of biceps and deltoid muscles perturbs circle drawing with the ipsilateral arm  but had no effect on drawing with the contralateral, non-vibrated limb. moreover, the ipsilateral alterations were not different when the contralateral arm was moving or resting. on this basis, they concluded that proprioception exerts an independent spatial control on each arm, without any crossed effects. this would support our hypothesis of a "private" position control for each limb. however, since the vibratory stimuli produced a change in the interlimb phase relations, those authors proposed that the temporal control between the two arms is dependent on the contribution of proprioception, a conclusion that would sound in contrast with our claim for an independent phase control of each limb. it should be noted, however, that the trajectory disparity resulting from unilateral vibration  is automatically reflected into a change in the relative phase between the two arms. thus the change in relative phase that was described as failure in the temporal control is seemingly implicit in the unilateral change of spatial control. viewed in this perspective, the contrast with our conclusions would disappear.

with regard to the effects of limb loading on movement coupling, our results replicate those already presented for hand loading  <cit>  and supplement them with a description of the effects produced by loading the foot. the observed shifts in the hand-foot relative phase induced by loading substantially conform to those described for asymmetric loading of arm-leg  <cit>  or bimanual  <cit>  oscillations.

finally, it should be stressed that the present results do not exclude the existence of mutual kinaesthetic influences from one limb to the motor pathways to the other but only demonstrate that these appear not to have any significant influence in synchronising the hand and foot during coupled voluntary movements. inter-limb reflexes have been repeatedly demonstrated and considered important for ensuring arm-leg coordination during rhythmic locomotor tasks   <cit> . however, their features do not seem well suited for sustaining the on-line feedback control of the inter-limb phase difference. some reflexes are evoked by cutaneous afferences, i.e., poor candidates for precisely monitoring the limb position. further, their latency appears rather long  for playing a crucial role in the hypothesised feed-back loop. finally, since these reflexes are modulated during the locomotion cycle they should interact with the motor output stage of the spinal cpg   <cit> , and the latter should be for the most part different from the motor stage of the encephalic rhythm generator that drives the non-locomotor voluntary movements we studied. a separation between the two motor stages is also suggested by the relatively few varieties of locomotory patterns as opposed to the great number of different "focal" voluntary movements. altogether, these diversities might explain why crossed inter-limb effects are present during locomotion and absent in our context.

nor do the present findings exclude the possibility that afferent signals elicited by passive oscillations of one limb may draw the central rhythm generator and entrain the movement of another limb, as other periodical signals also do . this entraining action on the time keeper level might explain results obtained when manipulating kinaesthetic afferences originated outside the moving limbs. for instance, serrien et al.  <cit>  found that the coordination of homolateral effectors  is perturbed by the passive cyclic movements of a third limb, the anti-phase to a larger extent than the in-phase coupling. in turn, carson et al.  <cit>  observed that passive flexion extension of the left hand, phase-locked to a visual sinusoidal stimulus, favours 90° coupling of similar movements of the right hand with the visual signal.

CONCLUSIONS
the present study provides evidence suggesting that synchrony of coupled hand-foot movements is attained by two independent position controllers, one for each limb, that keep the limb movement synchronous to a common rhythm generator, up to  <dig> hz. because of this mechanism, the inter-limb phase difference results from the algebraic summation of the phase delay that each limb has with respect of the central clock. this apparently applies equally well to the in-phase and anti-phase coupled oscillations.

