BACKGROUND
water deficit is recognised as one of the main environmental constraints restricting natural and agro-ecosystem productivity  <cit> . the influence of water availability on plant productivity suggests that water limitation has shaped the natural variation and evolution of many physiological traits  <cit> . biotechnology has investigated the genetic basis of drought tolerance by targeting relevant genes  <cit> . however, manipulating a single gene at a time, even genes encoding transcription factors, has proved insufficient to maintain productivity under drought; the tendency of cell systems is to restore homeostasis and mutants showing improved drought-or salt-tolerance are often stunted  <cit> . transcriptome meta-analyses and regulon detection could contribute to identifying physiological processes relevant to drought response. the availability of genomic tools such as high density arrays or whole-genome microarrays has led to an increasing number of studies examining drought-induced transcriptional remodelling  <cit> .

drought tolerance, which is obviously a multigenic trait, clearly depends on genome x environment interactions  <cit> . comparative genomics has emerged as a promising means of unravelling the molecular networks underlying complex traits  <cit> . studies analysing gene expression in parallel with quantitative trait loci  have shown that drought-induced changes in gene expression in specific genotypes were consistent with the observed physiological responses  <cit> . wilkins et al. highlighted the genotype specificity of the transcriptome response occurring in poplar leaves under drought conditions  <cit> . two drought-tolerant genotypes of maize showed more rapid and drastic changes in gene expression under drought, especially during recovery, than a drought-sensitive genotype  <cit> . moreover, drought tolerance relies on physiological adjustments occurring in distinct organs, involves the interplay of signalling/sensing cascades, and supposes integrated responses from molecular to whole-plant level. the few studies that have compared leaf and root transcriptomes have highlighted the organ specificity of drought responses  <cit> . roots sense the edaphic water deficit, send chemical signals to shoots, and maintenance of root growth despite reduced water availability can contribute to drought tolerance through water foraging  <cit> . species-dependent features also shape the transcriptome response; almost none of the  <dig> genes reliably responsive to water stress in arabidopsis were regulated under drought in poplar and pine  <cit> . besides, many genes "inducing drought tolerance" have been identified under an abrupt and/or severe stress, which is a far cry from a realistic, slow developing and long-lasting drought  <cit> . by quantifying and controlling water deficit by physical variables such as soil relative water content, the two genotypes experienced a similar degree of water deficit, allowing a robust comparison of their physiological and molecular responses  <cit> . such an ecophysiological approach has proved to be an efficient means of comparing drought response across genotypes  <cit> .

since the publication of the populus trichocarpa genome in  <dig>  poplar has become the model species for trees and the most studied tree species overall  <cit> . in addition, poplars are also ecologically and economically important. poplar inter-specific hybrids  are among the fastest-growing trees under temperate latitudes and are grown for pulp, paper wood and fuel production purposes  <cit> . while poplars are known to be sensitive to water deprivation as compared to other trees, drought tolerance varies considerably between genotypes of populus, both inter-and intra-specifically  <cit> . the purpose of the present study was to analyse the transcriptome responses induced by mild-to-moderate water deficit in two poplar genotypes. on the one hand, we applied a short-term water deficit to access sensing and signalling events; on the other, we imposed prolonged water deficit to reveal the molecular controls of plant performance under steady state stress. transcriptome responses were analysed in mature leaves and in growing root apices in order to gain a wide assessment of the response and to draw an integrative picture of molecular responses to drought. the comparison of two genotypes known to differ in their drought tolerance revealed not only reliable drought markers but also the divergences and similarities in transcriptional networks, highlighting candidate genes for future diversity screening.

RESULTS
experimental design
we focused on two hybrid genotypes  exhibiting contrasting tolerance to drought in field experiments, carpaccio productivity being less hampered by drought than that of soligo  <cit> . young trees were submitted either to a short-term water deficit by withholding irrigation  <dig> hours before harvest  or to a  <dig> day-long treatment, inducing a mild drought  or a moderate drought .

none of the water deficit treatments modified leaf water status. however leaf predawn water potential and leaf relative water content differed significantly between genotypes . leaf full turgor osmotic pressure increased in response to long-term stresses, indicating active osmotic adjustment, especially in soligo. in both genotypes, the ear treatment was too brief to affect either leaf full turgor osmotic pressure or stem growth rate. long-term stresses reduced growth in height similarly in both genotypes. under all treatments, including controls, gas exchange rates were significantly higher in soligo. lmo reduced the net co <dig> assimilation rate by 30% in both genotypes. stomatal conductance was reduced under all drought treatments-more strongly in response to lmo than in ear and lmi, reflecting the applied stress level. the sharp drop in stomatal conductance was responsible for the higher instantaneous water use efficiency  in soligo under ear treatment. in long-term treatments, wuei was enhanced similarly in carpaccio and soligo. while contrasting drought tolerance has been assessed in the field, the physiological adjustments diverged only weakly between genotypes under our mild-to-moderate water deficit experiments carried out on juvenile trees in the greenhouse. the ecophysiological responses observed were consistent with the level and duration of each treatment, indicating that trees sensed and responded to the water deficits applied.

an affymetrix poplar genome array was used to assess genome-wide expression in mature leaves and root apices. the array, which contains  <dig>  probesets representing over  <dig>  transcripts and predicted genes, was generated from several populus species. as we were dealing with a comparative approach, we checked the suitability of this array for both genotypes by hybridizing with genomic dna. this point is important as transcript sequences might have diverged in the two genomes, which could lead to absence of hybridization without expression meaning  <cit> . genomic arrays were screened in parallel with expression arrays to extract probesets informative for both genotypes. analysis of signal intensity highlighted that 20% of probesets never matched and 18% of probesets were detected on only genomic dna arrays, i.e. these genes were never transcribed under our conditions . within this class,  <dig> probesets were carpaccio-specific and  <dig> soligo-specific, indicating a similar level of divergence in the two genomic sequences. based on gene expression patterns, we also filtered out the  <dig> and  <dig> probesets that hybridized exclusively to soligo or carpaccio sequences, respectively. indeed, the absence of signal in all arrays dedicated to one of the two genotypes, including genomic arrays, was interpreted as a genotype-specific modification of the target sequence leading to a technical mismatch, rather than a between-genotype difference in expression. further analyses were performed on the remaining  <dig>  probesets, which clearly matched both carpaccio and soligo. targeted genes were expressed mostly in both organs while most genotype-specific sequences were expressed preferentially in a single organ.

1gene expression patterns were assessed without regards to growth conditions, i.e. if transcripts are present in the two replicates of at least one of the  <dig> conditions dedicated to the organ  per genotype.

transcriptome response in root apices is consistent across treatments and genotypes but contrasted in leaves
to assess drought-driven transcriptome responses, the expression data of drought-treated trees were compared with their respective controls within organs and genotypes. pair-wise correlation provides a global view of the changes in gene expression across conditions . pearson coefficient values were low, in some cases non-significant, between leaf and root transcriptomes, indicating organ-contrasting transcriptome responses to drought. drought-driven changes in gene expression occurring in root apices were strongly consistent, regardless of the conditions compared. in mature leaves under prolonged drought, a genotype specificity can be suspected, as correlations between lmi and lmo responses within each genotype were stronger than all other between-genotype comparisons. in contrast, considering ear treatment, the best correlation was detected between genotypes, showing that early responses could be distinguished from long-term responses. this global overview showed that between-genotype differences were exacerbated in leaves given the consistency of root transcriptome responses. our experimental design did not deal with pure dose-or time-dependant drought treatments. however co-variations between changes in gene expression in all three conditions were detected, indicating similarities in the transcriptome responses.

pearson coefficient values between relative expression data . all given values are significant  unless specified otherwise by ns .

one-fifth of the  <dig>  probesets displayed a significant change in signal intensity in response to drought in at least one pair comparison , either in roots or in leaves. as expected from the experimental design, which considered several organs, genotypes and treatments simultaneously, more than half of the significant drought-driven regulations occurred only once across the  <dig> comparisons. drought-driven regulations were distributed unequally among the  <dig> comparisons . the leaf transcriptome appeared less drought-responsive than the transcriptome of root apices , which might reflect, in part, the higher sensitivity of an actively growing tissue to water deprivation. ear-treated soligo roots exhibited more drought-driven regulation than the other conditions although rather weak in intensity, consistent with the lower variance of the comparison . in contrast in carpaccio, drought yielded stronger regulation in terms of median or extreme values . when carried out on all regulated genes, quantitative analysis revealed the high responsiveness of the root transcriptome and confirmed the existence of genotype specificity of transcriptome responses.

functional categories involved in drought-induced transcriptome responses
drought-responsive probesets were assigned to poplar gene models and annotated using web-based queries. screening allowed the annotation of almost all probesets. only  <dig> out of the  <dig>  probesets were neither assigned to a poplar gene model nor functionally annotated. for the sake of brevity, and given the assumption that best homology implies a true ortholog, gene names of the closest arabidopsis genes are used to describe poplar genes. an overview of functional groups involved in drought responses was obtained through singular enrichment analysis . concerning the cellular component ontology, "endomembrane system"  and "cell wall"  were sorted in response to all drought conditions and were highly enriched for soligo roots . another term, "nucleus" , was enriched in the up-regulated responses to ear for both organs and to all drought conditions for soligo roots, whereas it was found among the down-regulated responses for lmo-treated carpaccio roots. the most enriched terms of biological processes ontology were "response to stimulus" , "response to abiotic stimulus" , "response to stress"  and "response to endogenous stimulus" . these enrichments were seen for both organs under all conditions and indicated not only that the constraint was perceived--although the treatments were only mild-to-moderate--but also that prolonged drought remained a stressful growing condition. interestingly, "growth"  was specifically enriched for soligo roots . for mature leaves, metabolisms responded differentially in the two genotypes. "primary metabolic process"  was enriched for carpaccio . in contrast, for soligo, "photosynthesis"  and "secondary metabolic process"  were detected among the down-regulations occurring in response to short and prolonged drought, respectively.

in terms of molecular function ontology, the most significant enriched term was "binding" . consistent with this, "transcription factor activity"  and "transcription regulation activity"  were sorted under all treatments . "transporter activity"  was enriched for soligo leaves  and for carpaccio roots . other go terms, such as "catalytic activity" , "hydrolase activity" , and "transferase activity"  were found in most lists.

in order to detect physiologically relevant patterns, groups of functionally related genes were identified using iterative group analysis   <cit> . functional groups of genes were delineated using not only go terms but also any keywords from gene annotations. the iga procedure revealed concerted changes in functional groups . concerning leaves, in carpaccio, "abi <dig> binding protein" and "9-cis-epoxycarotenoid dioxygenase"  were significantly up-regulated and "pyarabactin resistance-like"  significantly down-regulated in response to ear, indicating an involvement of aba biosynthesis/signalling pathways. in contrast, in soligo, ear induced a generic response to stress, including regulations of signal transduction, transcription and metabolic processes, while the aba signalling/response was detected in response to lmo , "rare-cold-inducible" , "xerico"). similarly, "galactinol synthase" was up-regulated in response to ear in carpaccio and by prolonged drought in soligo. in carpaccio subjected to prolonged drought, up-regulated groups were related either to cell redox homeostasis  or to cell rescue processes , and included an lmi-specific "dead-box rna helicase". soligo responses to prolonged drought were characterized by down-regulated "transporter".

groups of functionally related genes were identified by iga. the probability of change  and the number of changed versus total group numbers  are given. significantly regulated groups are shown .

in roots , many functional groups were detected in accordance with the strong responsiveness to drought of the root transcriptome. in these large lists, the iga procedure revealed a striking conservation of the concerted changes in most conditions, highlighting a common response to drought. whatever the condition, we detected enrichment in groups of genes known to be responsive to abiotic stress and/or drought. the generic response involved genes that were related to i) aba biosynthesis/signalling , ii) cell rescue and/or cell redox homeostasis , and iii) the response to hypoxia . as expected for actively growing organs, stress impacted recurrent groups of genes that were involved either in expansion  or in meristematic activity and cell cycle . ear-treated soligo roots underwent an extensive metabolism-related response . in addition, an erosion of the "transcription factors" group was detected across treatments. in carpaccio roots, a "transcription factors" group of nine up-regulated genes was detected in response to ear , "responsive to desiccation" , "nuclear transcription factor y, alpha" , "heat shock transcription factor c1" , "aba-repressor1" ), whereas five up-regulated genes were detected under lmi , and only one under lmo. concerning soligo, we detected five "transcription factors" groups in response to ear , two groups under lmi  and no enrichment under lmo. as highlighted by this functional categorization, the applied treatments clearly drove transcriptome responses in both organs and genotypes. both procedures provided consistent results, enabling the extraction of processes physiologically relevant to drought responses. several genes of interest can be discriminated on the basis of their contribution to enriched functional categories.

analysis of drought-responsive gene networks based on gene co-expression relationships provides robust drought markers and candidate genes
conservation of co-expression patterns between the two genotypes was investigated using a differential clustering algorithm   <cit> . this approach is a two-step procedure that  defines transcriptional groups of co-expressed genes in one genotype , and  evaluates, for each transcriptional group defined in step  <dig>  its level of conservation in the other genotype . in this study, we chose carpaccio as the reference genotype and soligo as the target genotype . to avoid chance associations, the dca procedure was carried out on subsets of genes that were significantly regulated at least twice across all conditions . co-expression relationships between genes were assessed on the basis of expression modifications occurring across drought conditions, either in the two organs , or separately in mature leaves  and root apices . the reliability of the procedure was highlighted by the agglomeration of probesets that targeted identical gene models in consistent modules .

in a joint analysis of drought-driven regulation in leaves and roots,  <dig> clusters of co-expressed genes were first identified in carpaccio . the dca procedure revealed  <dig> transcriptional modules as fully conserved between the two genotypes . delineation of these transcriptional groups confirmed the contrasting gene regulation in mature leaves and growing root apices. four clusters  appeared to be relatively distant from each other compared to two homogeneous sets of clusters . in between, some co-regulation relationships appeared to be partially conserved , meaning that a subset of the genes that are co-expressed in the reference genotype lost their co-expression relationships in the target genotype. this phenomenon applied to  <dig> genes  and  <dig> genes . finally, the large divergence of co-expression relationships between genes in carpaccio and soligo were highlighted . up-regulated cluster  <dig> included several aquaporins and genes related to aba signalling or the response to oxidative stress . loss of co-expression relationships between genes was due mainly to almost invariant gene expression in carpaccio  or in soligo . these two latter transcriptional modules collected genes with a similar annotation  or associated with "cell wall" or "transport activity" .

in mature leaves, drought-driven regulation of gene expression was weak  and led to the clear distinction of  <dig> transcriptional modules . drought-driven transcriptome responses appeared strongly dependent on stress duration, splitting clearly into early and long-term responses in accordance with global gene expression analyses . most transcriptional modules of co-expressed genes were conserved. on the one hand, some conserved modules were regulated exclusively in response to prolonged  or short  drought. on the other hand, conserved clusters  <dig> and  <dig> encompassed  <dig> genes that were responsive to all drought conditions but that were inversely regulated in short and in prolonged drought. the contrast between short and prolonged drought responses in mature leaves relied on the regulation of  <dig> distinct genes . the dca procedure also revealed drought marker genes that were up-regulated in both genotypes and under all drought conditions . the sole transcriptional module identified as not-conserved between the two genotypes  resulted partly from the genotype-specific response to lmi . far more informative were the partially conserved clusters . genes were almost invariant in soligo but strongly regulated in carpaccio in sub-group 3b  and in sub-group 5b . in cluster 4b, genes were strongly repressed by lmi in carpaccio leaves but were not drought-responsive in soligo . conversely, genes that were almost invariant in carpaccio and drought-responsive in soligo were split into up-regulated sub-group 10a  and down-regulated sub-group 10b .

in root apices, the strong intensity of drought-driven expression patterns allowed  <dig> transcriptional modules to be defined unambiguously . two distant sets of clusters could be discriminated . the down-regulated set included genes related to cell cycle and dna processes, notably putative cyclin-dependent protein kinases and dead-box rna helicases. the up-regulated groups included genes related to metabolic processes , and to catabolism . as shown in figure 3c, carpaccio transcriptional modules were delineated according to differences in intensity of gene regulation across treatments. this clustering outline was valid for both genotypes, which is consistent with the high correlation observed between treatments and genotypes . however, most of the transcriptional modules were labelled "not conserved". in these cases, the homogeneous response, in terms of up or down regulation, masked the fine genotype-specific tuning of transcriptome responses that was revealed by the dca procedure. in cluster  <dig> only, the expression pattern differed widely between genotypes. besides, some modules were labelled "fully" or "partially" conserved, indicating that genes conserved their co-expression properties . in root apices, drought-driven regulation was highly consistent in both genotypes, and it was the differential tuning across drought conditions that accounted specifically for the loss of conservation in gene co-expression relationships.

common and specific components of drought-induced response in different organs
in order to test the consistency of drought-regulated genes across species and organs, we cross-referenced our results with the poplar literature regardless of pattern of regulation . of the  <dig> drought-regulated genes found here,  <dig> had already been identified as drought-responsive in leaves or roots of other populus species. among them, xerico, rd <dig>  athb <dig>  arabidopsis thaliana drought-induced  <dig>  metallothionein 2a  and metallothionein  <dig>  were confirmed as robust drought markers as they were drought-responsive in most studies. our analysis also highlights the finding that regulation previously detected in leaves also occurs in root apices and vice versa . the low conservation level of gene lists across studies might arise from differences in genotypes, organs, drought treatments, molecular platforms and statistical analyses.

our experimental design did not allow unequivocal testing of organ-preferred expression since tissue specificity  and maturity level  were confounded. to our knowledge, only one study has compared leaf and root transcriptomes under drought, thus precluding a robust meta-analysis of the differential impact of drought according to the organ. given that gene expression patterns between leaf and root have been compared more extensively under optimal conditions, we delineated two subsets of drought-regulated genes on the basis of consistent expression pattern in control and drought treatment . among drought-regulated genes with a leaf-preferred expression pattern, one-fourth was confirmed to be expressed preferentially in leaf in other populus species. a similar result was found for genes expressed preferentially in root. the expression patterns of  <dig> genes were not confirmed in other populus species and the patterns of  <dig> genes could not be tested due to missing information. to our knowledge, the interaction of organ maturity and drought on the transcriptome responses has not been documented in poplar. although maturity level could affect the sensitivity of the transcriptome response to drought, we searched for expression profiles in young and mature organs under optimal conditions in another populus species   <cit> . from the two subsets of drought-regulated genes in our study, we extracted six contrasting expression profiles under optimal conditions . s <dig> gathers potential markers of growing tissues and could also be drought-regulated in growing leaves. in contrast, genes in s <dig> and s <dig> were confirmed as being expressed preferentially in root, either in old roots  or in young roots . genes that are expressed preferentially in young leaves under optimal conditions were drought-regulated in growing roots or mature leaves . among genes expressed preferentially in mature leaves in our experiment,  <dig> were confirmed to be expressed preferentially in mature tissue, either in leaf  or in both leaf and root . although indirect , these arguments strengthen the hypothesis of an organ-preferred expression of some drought-regulated genes. however, missing information precludes a robust meta-analysis allowing the drought responses within the populus genus to be unravelled. given that most drought transcriptome studies have focused on mature leaves, the comparative information provided here will benefit future integrative approaches.

discussion
maintenance of water status, a key process in plant functioning, is actively regulated on the whole plant scale  in response to variations in water availability. given the known difference in drought sensitivity of the two genotypes, severe drought could yield two contrasting physiological states  <cit> . in our study, the physiological and transcriptional responses clearly indicate that both genotypes perceived water deficit as stressful. however, leaf water status was maintained and growth similarly hampered in both genotypes. the moderate stress levels applied induced similar physiological responses in both genotypes, allowing genotype-dependent transcriptional responses to be considered as intrinsic divergences in genome functioning rather than the result of the interaction between genome and physiological status. drought sensing and metabolic adjustments involve tight molecular control  <cit> . we examined this control in poplar, analysing transcriptional remodelling in response to short and prolonged water deficits and in parallel in root apices and mature leaves. given that poplar pathway information was inferred mainly from the arabidopsis literature, common gene names of the closest arabidopsis homolog were used to describe poplar genes   <cit> .

controlling energy and drought signalling under drought: a candidate process related to productivity
genes related to alternative metabolic pathways, transport and catabolism were up-regulated, and those associated to growth and biosynthesis were down-regulated by drought . this transcriptional remodelling suggested that an energy deficit could occur, especially in roots. to test this hypothesis, our results were compared with kin10-targeted genes  <cit> . one-third of the  <dig> genes involved in energy signalling in arabidopsis were found to be drought-regulated in poplar . the transcriptional remodelling, consistent with energy deficit signalling, was exacerbated in soligo roots under short water deficit, and paralleled by the down-regulation of photosynthesis-related genes in mature leaves, which is consistent with a potential reduction of sugar transfer to roots. our analysis indicates that this response could be mediated by a king ortholog. transcriptional remodelling regulated by snf1-related kinases was not found in mature leaves, suggesting that trehalose-6-phosphate signalling could be inefficient in source organs, as previously described in arabidopsis  <cit> . this energy deficit transcriptional response is described here for the first time in poplar and need to be further validated. energy saving processes in arabidopsis are believed to involve a reduction of expansion and growth  <cit> . the drought-induced reduction of soligo productivity in the field might arise from its intrinsic sensitivity and responsiveness to energy deprivation. in parallel, stress responses were found to be more generic in soligo than in carpaccio. in leaves of the drought-tolerant genotype, some "dead-box rna helicases" were up-regulated in response to lmi , concurrently to the down-regulation of "responsive to desiccation 22" and putative "myc2" . in roots, most putative "dead-box rna helicases" were down-regulated in accordance with maintenance of aba signalling. these results suggest but not prove that the up-regulation of "dead-box rna helicases" in leaves, by contributing to the transience of the stress response, could contribute to the drought tolerance of carpaccio in the field  <cit> .

aba biosynthesis and signalling under drought: consistent transcriptome responses in leaf and root
the up-regulation of 9-cis-epoxycarotenoid dioxygenase , phytoene synthase and β-carotene hydroxylase  suggests enhanced aba biosynthesis in roots under all drought conditions . consistently, this regulation has been previously associated with a peak in aba content during poplar bud development  <cit> . beta-ohase could be involved in aba biosynthesis and its over-expression enhanced stress tolerance in arabidopsis  <cit> . in leaves, transcript profiling suggested that aba biosynthesis was no longer activated under prolonged drought--only nced was up-regulated under short drought stress--although aba signalling was still detected, suggesting long-distance transport of the phytohormone.

concerning aba-responsive genes, pyarabactin resistance-like  were down-regulated and those of protein phosphatase type-2c  were up-regulated. pyls encode aba receptors that interact with pp2c as regulators of the aba-mediated signalling pathway  <cit> . the opposite regulation of pyl and pp2c, either in roots or in both organs, was described in arabidopsis in response to aba treatment  <cit> . as shown in additional file  <dig>  we detected several orthologs of dehydration-responsive-element binding protein  and four predicted aba-responsive-element binding factors known to be involved in signalling cascades  <cit> . interestingly, a putative transcription factor, close to homeobox protein athb <dig> and athb <dig>  was up-regulated under all drought conditions. these aba-induced growth mediators were up-regulated in response to water-deficit in arabidopsis  <cit> . among up-regulated transcription factors were two putative responsive to desiccation 26--a transcriptional activator in aba signal transduction  <cit> . eight orthologs of arabidopsis nuclear factor-y  were drought-regulated in poplar  <cit> . in arabidopsis, drought-driven induction of nf-ya <dig> and of nf-yb <dig> was aba-dependent or aba-independent, respectively  <cit> . here, putative nf-ya and nf-yb were both up-regulated in carpaccio roots. however, only putative nf-ya transcripts accumulated in ear-treated leaves, which is in line with aba-dependent activation. the zfp family, encoding c2h2-type zinc finger proteins, was found to be drought-responsive in poplar. three genes similar to salt-tolerance zinc fingers and one similar to arabidopsis zinc finger protein  <dig> were regulated by drought in poplar, in accordance with their responsiveness to aba and abiotic stress in arabidopsis  <cit> . in addition, three drought-responsive genes in poplar were similar to zat <dig>  which is involved in ros and abiotic stress signalling in arabidopsis  <cit> . among them, zfp <dig> was up-regulated in roots under all drought conditions, in line with its induction by abiotic stress in poplar  <cit> . three putative rare-cold-inducible  were up-regulated in poplar. in arabidopsis, most rci <dig> genes are induced by aba and abiotic stress, and are potentially involved in the regulation of plasma membrane potential  <cit> . rci2-a contributes to salt tolerance by preventing over-accumulation of k+ and na+  <cit> . the stress-responsive plasma membrane protein cor413-pm is potentially involved in signal transduction  <cit> . two putative cor413-pm were induced in roots in response to drought. as highlighted in figure  <dig>  drought repressed several genes in poplar that are known to be up-regulated in response to hypoxia in arabidopsis and in poplar  <cit> . such down-regulation has been reported previously in aba and/or drought responses and could reflect antagonism between aba and ethylene signalling  <cit> . accordingly, poplar response to drought implied cross-talk between hormonal pathways  in accordance with the literature  <cit> .

multi-stress responsive genes in poplar
wrky transcription factors constitute a large family of plant-specific regulators controlling senescence and responses to stress and aba  <cit> . in poplar, we detected  <dig> drought-responsive wrky. in arabidopsis, atwrky- <dig>  - <dig> and - <dig> were found to be structurally related, atwrky- <dig> and - <dig> could interact each other, atwrky- <dig> and - <dig> exhibited partial overlapping functions, and atwrky- <dig> and - <dig> counteracted accumulation of salicylic acid  <cit> . in silico analysis of poplar wrky- <dig> and - <dig>  revealed an ear-motif--a potential signature of transcriptional repressors  <cit> . putative atwrky- <dig>  - <dig>  - <dig>  - <dig> and - <dig> exhibited similar expression patterns, being up-regulated in roots under prolonged drought and in leaves in the early response, and/or being repressed in leaves under prolonged drought. conserved clusters  <dig> and 6a  gathered nine wrky and some co-regulated genes such as nim1-interacting <dig> and a putative pathogenesis-related protein <dig>  <cit> . in poplar, wrky and a putative plant natriuretic peptide  were co-regulated by drought as already observed in arabidopsis  <cit> . atpnp-a, an extracellular signalling molecule, could affect water and solute transport in response to stress  <cit> .

reactive oxygen species  have been associated with stress sensing/signalling, and have emerged as important general signals  <cit> . although the drought applied here was mild-to-moderate in degree, we highlighted the activation of oxidative detoxification processes. in maize under mild water deficit, aba accumulation triggered the generation of ros, which up-regulated the antioxidant system  <cit> . glutathion-s-transferase, superoxide dismutase, lactoylglutathione lyase, catalase, glutathione peroxidase, and ascorbate peroxidase were up-regulated in roots under all conditions, and in leaves more strongly under prolonged stress. drought also induced the up-regulation of several genes involved in oxidative stress tolerance/response in arabidopsis , such as alternative oxidase , temperature-induced lipocalin, at1g <dig>  senescence-associated protein <dig> or senescence-associated gene <dig>  <cit> . in poplar roots, drought positively regulated two putative heat shock-like protein , which, in arabidopsis, were involved in tolerance to oxidative stress and were drought-and aba-responsive  <cit> . the chac-like family protein, which was repressed in response to oxidative stress, were strongly down-regulated in poplar leaves  <cit> . in accordance with ros production and detoxification processes, we detected up-regulation of four raffinose synthases in roots, of a stachyose synthase in leaves and of three galactinol synthases . an increase in galactinol, raffinose and stachyose content could improve osmoprotection and ros scavenging  <cit> . the poplar drought response also implied the induction of genes related to cell rescue, including detoxification and chaperone-like activities .

in poplar, predicted lipid transfer proteins  and remorin  were induced strongly in roots, and late embryogenesis proteins  were up-regulated in both organs. similar inductions in response to drought were detected in arabidopsis  <cit> . non-specific ltps could be calmodulin-binding, implying a possible ca2+/cam signalling function  <cit> . atrem <dig>  and atrem <dig>  were induced strongly in response to osmotic, salt, drought, aba and brassinosteroid treatments  <cit> . stress responsive leas are suspected to act as chaperones and/or ros scavengers, to bind metal ions or divalent cations  <cit> . among the four heat-stable protein <dig>  up-regulated in roots, eugene <dig>  was specifically regulated in carpaccio. in populus tremula, sp <dig> was identified as a new stress responsive protein  <cit> . in poplar, we detected several genes that are commonly down-regulated by drought in arabidopsis  <cit> . among them, two putative germin-like  were repressed under short water deficit but induced in response to lmo. atger <dig> and atger <dig> may be involved in the control of synthesis of cell wall polysaccharides and/or in scavenging of extracellular nucleotide-sugars  <cit> . in poplar, the two eskimo orthologs, namely gw <dig> viii. <dig>  and gw <dig> x. <dig> , were repressed under most drought conditions. in arabidopsis, eskimo <dig>  a positive regulator of transcription, negatively regulates cold acclimation  <cit> . the eskimo <dig> mutant was not drought-or salt-tolerant although athb <dig>  athb <dig> or pp2c were constitutively up-regulated  <cit> . however, eskimo <dig> is suspected to play a role in whole-plant water economy in arabidopsis  <cit> . while poplar gene functions are extrapolated mainly from sequence similarities, the transcriptome analysis performed here has given new insights into their involvement in cell physiology.

CONCLUSIONS
comparative genomics is a powerful tool that can help decipher the molecular basis of drought responses and reveal physiologically relevant processes. reliable stress markers were extracted as well as genes whose expression differed in tolerant and sensitive genotypes. similarly, analysis of variance detected a strong genotype effect in the transcriptome responses of poplar leaves to drought  <cit> . however, when using multi-species designed arrays, the risk of misinterpreting divergent signals has to be acknowledged and controlled for. we used a genomic dna-based selection strategy to improve the detection of differentially expressed transcripts. hybridizing genomic dna was previously used in genotyping arabidopsis accessions and for analysing transcriptomes by cross-hybridization   <cit> . our quantitative analysis of gene expression in poplar provides an unambiguous comparison of two hybrid transcriptomes. although requiring to be tested further  our meta-analysis has revealed several candidate genes and processes that are differentially regulated in root and leaf, potentially under developmental control, and preferentially involved in rapid and long-term response to drought. since most of these genes were not previously ascribed to poplar drought response, our work provides expression data that will enrich our knowledge of gene function in populus.

