BACKGROUND
the auditory brainstem response  is a voltage response evoked by acoustic stimuli as sound is processed along the auditory pathway. it consists of electrical signals resulting from the sum of sound-evoked activity along the auditory nerve and brainstem nuclei. abr analysis determines the sound intensity at which a neural response first appears   <cit> . previous studies in rats in mice have shown that abr thresholds do not indicate absolute behavioural hearing thresholds  <cit> . however, abr audiometry has been used extensively in animal hearing research for examining gene therapy  <cit> , cell-replacement therapies  <cit> , and noise-induced hearing loss  <cit> .

the abr offers an objective measurement of auditory signal processing. the objectivity is diminished by conventional visual inspection of the abr threshold level. subjectivity and variability are introduced when the investigator has to decide when a complex, multi-component response first becomes distinguishable from background noise  <cit> . methodologies have been developed to address the subjective component of threshold detection by including criteria about the shape, pattern, or absolute amplitude of the response, yet these still require a visual decision about the presence of a signal. eliminating subjectivity in auditory threshold determination would improve the sensitivity and reliability of this important audiometric technique.

while visual estimation remains the conventional technique for abr threshold detection, a need for automated statistical methods for detection is highly recognised. several methods have been developed based on the techniques of fsp analysis  <cit> , cross correlation  <cit>  and feature vectors  <cit> . fsp analysis requires calculation of a variance ratio in the abr waveform followed by application of the f-statistic to this ratio. cross correlation measures the degree of similarity between a sliding template and an averaged waveform. feature vectors quantify selected components of the response's time course. fsp has been incorporated into available software  yet the other methods lack comparable implementation.

here we develop a simple, fully automated auditory threshold detection method to address the subjectivity and variability associated with visual estimation of abrs. this method is based on the signal-to-noise ratio and the software has been made readily available  <cit> . the algorithm is calibrated by comparison with visual estimation, implemented via investigation of stem cell transplantation, and compared against variability obtained with visual estimation.

RESULTS
algorithm
the automated method is based on the ratio between the observed peak amplitude of the evoked abr signal and the standard deviation  of the baseline noise. the peak was taken as the maximum absolute amplitude of the averaged evoked abr signal in a time window encompassing the abr signal . this peak amplitude represents the true peak amplitude plus a contribution from the background noise. the sd of the noise was calculated in a time window clearly following termination of the abr signal. these calculations were repeated for each member of the family of voltage responses recorded at different sound intensity levels. the median value of the sds was taken as the best available estimate of the true noise sd. the sound intensity level was deemed to have reached threshold when the peak abr amplitude was four times the noise sd . this signal-to-noise ratio was chosen after investigating other values  as it provides sensitive signal detection while maintaining a low probability of a false positive.

the automated detection method is based on a statistical foundation. assuming a normal distribution of baseline noise data,  <dig> % of noise values will lie within ±  <dig> sd of the mean. any amplitude values occurring outside this range allow rejection of the null hypothesis  at the p <  <dig>  level. this confidence level is valid when a single data point in the abr signal is examined. if we search for a peak amplitude across a time window containing  <dig> data points, then a peak signal >  <dig> sd is significantly different from baseline noise at the p <  <dig>  level, thus confirming the presence of an abr signal and providing a statistically reliable estimate of the hearing threshold level.

an automated detection method based on the signal-to-noise ratio has previously been reported  <cit> . this method requires calculation of a parameter, fsp, which is the variance of the amplitude values across an specified time window of the averaged response ), divided by the variance of the amplitude of a single time point across several hundred sweeps ). this deterministic approach assumes that the evoked abr voltage waveform is constant from trial to trial yet neural population signals typically fluctuate in amplitude from trial to trial due to changes in the number of neurons contributing to the response. such abr amplitude fluctuations will cause var to be systematically overestimated. in contrast, assumption of biological variability has been included in our algorithm.

this relatively simple and intuitive threshold detection method was developed as a plug-in module for axograph x, a data analysis application . the automated analysis module, with source code, is freely available with an application license  <cit> . the module imports a graph containing the family of averaged voltage responses recorded at different sound intensity levels, then automatically outputs a plot of the signal-to-noise ratio versus sound intensity, with the abr threshold level indicated.

automated method detects accurate and consistent hearing threshold levels
to test the automated detection method, abrs were evoked by acoustic stimuli  and measured with subdermal electrodes in normal-hearing mice . the abrs consisted of five major wave components as reported previously  <cit> . in mice, the waves likely correspond to peripheral signal processing  and central signal processing . acoustic stimuli were delivered in descending intensities and hearing thresholds were detected by computerised automated detection and compared to visual estimations of hearing thresholds. for automated detection, peak signal and background noise measurements were made in time windows of  <dig> – <dig> ms and 12– <dig> ms, respectively. a plot of signal-to-noise ratio versus sound intensity level was generated, and the abr threshold level was indicated . for visual estimation, two experienced observers  noted the lowest sound intensity that evoked an abr.

for click and tone stimuli, automated detection produced a similar threshold value as visual estimation for the same series of abr traces in normal-hearing mice . summary data indicated that automated detection provided a mean threshold value of  <dig> ±  <dig> db  for click stimuli that was not significantly different than the mean threshold value predicted by visual estimation . this was also consistent in response to tone stimuli where automated detection showed a mean threshold value of  <dig> ±  <dig> db  while visual estimation predicted a mean threshold value of  <dig> ±  <dig> db; n = 18; figure 2a). individual data revealed that automated detection produced identical estimates of abr threshold compared to visual estimation in 48% of mice  for click stimuli and in 50% of mice  for tone stimuli. in the non-identical data, the threshold estimates for automated detection differed from visual estimation by a mean of  <dig> ±  <dig>  dbs  for click stimuli and by  <dig> ±  <dig> dbs  for tone stimuli.

two independent observers estimated significantly different threshold levels for the same series of abrs . the absolute difference in threshold values between observers was statistically different than zero for click stimuli  and for tone stimuli . together, the results confirm that a signal-to-noise ratio value of four  predicts equivalent and consistent threshold levels in comparison to visual estimation and that variability in threshold detection is associated with visual estimation.

automated detection method is used to investigate vestibular stem cell transplantation
the automated threshold algorithm was implemented to investigate the effect of adult stem cell transplantation into the cochlea on hearing threshold levels . stem cell transplantation is rapidly gaining interest as a potential therapy for hearing loss . our recent findings show that transplantation of adult tongue stem cells into deafened mice results in a significantly smaller mean abr threshold shift compared to sham injection  <cit> . previous studies suggest that vestibular stem cells reside in the vestibular sensory epithelium, and are pre-programmed to differentiate into vestibular hair cells that share similarities with cochlear hair cells  <cit> . here we use the automated threshold algorithm to determine abr changes after adult vestibular cell transplantation. acoustic deafening prior to transplantation, as performed in our earlier studies, was omitted to investigate the specific effects of stem cells on transplant surgery. hearing thresholds were measured four weeks after transplantation of a cell suspension containing vestibular stem cells or sham injection of the vehicle  alone. comparisons were made of the shift between pre- and post-surgery abr threshold levels in the treated ear .

the mean abr threshold shift between pre- and post-surgery hearing levels for mice transplanted with vestibular cells was  <dig> ±  <dig> db  in response to click stimuli. this threshold shift was not significantly different than for mice receiving a sham injection . for pure tone stimuli, the mean abr threshold shift was also not significantly different for stem cell-transplanted  versus sham-injected animals .

automated detection avoids variability associated with visual estimation
to assess the subjectivity and variability associated with visual estimation of abr threshold levels , ten independent observers assessed the threshold levels on the abrs previously analyzed by automated detection . the observers were blind to the experimental conditions, and included experienced auditory clinicians and neuroscientists. visual estimation corroborated the results provided by automated detection, showing that threshold shifts between stem cell-transplanted and sham-injected mice were not significantly different in response to click and tone stimuli . however examination of the data for individual observers shows that while most observers did not detect a significant difference in threshold shifts, some observers noted a significant difference  between stem cell-transplanted and sham-injected mice . this variability in significance levels differed for click and tone stimuli. thus the automated detection method predicts similar mean threshold values as visual estimation, in agreement with the results obtained for normal-hearing mice , and avoids the variability in abr threshold shifts and significance levels associated with visual estimation.

CONCLUSIONS
a simple, fully automated auditory threshold detection method was developed to address the subjectivity and variability associated with visual estimation of abrs. the threshold values provided by automated detection were similar to those provided by visual estimation, indicating the automated method predicts valid threshold levels. the automated detection method was implemented in experimental conditions and revealed no difference between stem cell-transplanted and sham-injected mice. visual estimation by independent observers corroborated these results but revealed variability in abr threshold shifts and significance levels for stem cell-transplanted and sham-injected animals. in summary, the automated detection method developed here offers an accessible, accurate, and reproducible approach for measuring hearing threshold levels in auditory brainstem responses.

