BACKGROUND
natural selection is expected to increase the frequency of locally advantageous alleles, resulting in higher among-population differentiation at these adaptive loci , compared with differentiation in the rest of the genome   <cit> . identifying adaptive divergence among populations at specific loci from genome scans is an active and challenging research area . this task is especially demanding for dominant biallelic markers such as amplified fragment length polymorphism  markers, although they represent an easy way to scan a large number of markers scattered throughout the genome in non-model species  <cit> . so far, the most widely used method to detect outliers from aflp genome scans is implemented in dfdist, an extension of fdist software that allows the use of dominant markers  <cit> . dfidst is a frequentist method based on summary statistics of a symmetrical island model . each locus is compared to the neutral distribution built from the mean fst averaged across all populations. dfdist is likely to generate false positives  when gene flows are asymmetric across populations, and/or when some populations experiment bottlenecks. to overcome that limitation, foll and gaggiotti  <cit>  have recently developed a new hierarchical bayesian method  that also allows the accommodation of aflps data. their method is derived from the method of beaumont and baldwin  <cit> . it produces a posterior probability for each locus being under selection. the main advantage of bayescan is that it estimates population-specific fst coefficients, therefore allowing for different demographic histories and different amounts of genetic drift between populations. in structured populations, the bayesian approach is less likely to detect false positives. the proportion of false positive in detected outliers cannot be easily estimated in the bayesian approaches as it requires simulating datasets under different scenarios  <cit> . by contrast, it can be estimated using false discovery rate  <cit>  in frequentist methods.

after detecting outlier loci, it is then a challenging prospect to verify whether they are involved in local adaptation and to isolate the different ecological factors responsible for the behaviour of each outlier from a complex natural environment  <cit> . indeed, despite recent advances in tracking adaptive genes out from the neutral background genetic variability across populations of a species, the relative role of biotic versus abiotic constraints acting on genomes in their natural environment remains a largely under-explored area. for non-model organisms, outlier loci cannot be mapped and hence their functional role will remain unknown. an alternative approach is to correlate their variation in frequency throughout the sampling area with that of continuous environmental variables, such as altitude or climate  <cit> , or qualitative variables such as different host-plants for insects  <cit>  or different life habits  for fish ecotypes  <cit> .

the evolutionary success of phytophagous insects is thought to result mainly from their adaptation to various host-plants, with insect adaptation driving plant diversification in a co-evolutionary process  <cit> . alternatively, the diversification of widespread species could be driven by adaptation along environmental abiotic gradients. the large pine weevil hylobius abietis l.  is a good model for addressing this question because it is widespread in europe  and because, during larval development, it depends exclusively on only two plant genera: spruce  and pine . the large pine weevil is one of the most important economic pests of european conifer forests. the larvae feed under the bark of stumps and roots of recently felled trees, and take from three months to two years to develop into adults, depending on location  <cit> , presumably because of climatic conditions and/or host plant quality  <cit> . the adults are active only under cool climatic conditions, usually in spring and autumn, and burrow into the soil during hot summers and cold winters; adults can fly large distances and can live up to four years  <cit> . because of this complex life cycle, several climatic factors including temperature, precipitation, soil, frost and wind speed may have either a direct impact on larval/adult survival, or a more indirect impact on fitness through host plant quality, and represent therefore potential selective forces acting on the pine weevil genome at a large geographical scale. adults are attracted to recently felled trees  where the females lay eggs under the bark. managed pine and spruce forests planted in western europe 200- <dig> years ago offer many oviposition opportunities for this weevil, allowing large stable populations to be sustained in contrasting climatic environments.

the first study on the population genetic structure of the pine weevils, at the european scale  <cit>  revealed that genetic variation of this insect is better explained by geography than host-plant . furthermore, a locus by locus amova identified some loci with significant fst across different host-plant groups, suggesting that host-plant linked selection might occur in this species. a second analysis consistently identified  <dig> out of  <dig> unlinked aflp markers as outliers by using univariate logistic regressions to search for correlations between molecular markers scattered throughout the genome and several environmental variables suggesting an effect of climate on weevil adaptation  <cit> . however, the effect of the host-plant type was not tested.

in the present analysis, we focused on disentangling the role of abiotic environmental variables on one hand from the effect of the host-plant  on the other. we therefore excluded adult weevils from the original aflp dataset because they cannot be assigned to a host-plant, reducing the analysed dataset to  <dig> individual larvae. we firstly detected outlier loci across geographic and host-specific groups of individuals in  <dig> managed forest sites distributed across  <dig> large forestry regions  using population genetic approaches . we then used a correlative approach to disentangle the effects of host-plants from those of various environmental variables. to further confirm the involvement of selection in genetic patterns of differentiation, we tested for the drift-migration equilibrium  on neutral loci. if adaptation to host-plant is promoting divergence, then we would expect to find outliers loci when comparing different host populations whereas loci candidate to diverge independently from host-plant would be rather correlated with other ecological pressures, such as climate.

 <dig> both pine and spruce locally co-exist

RESULTS
population genetic approaches
the global fst, calculated with aflp-surv  <dig>   <cit>  was low but significant . most pairwise fst between sites within region were non-significantly different from zero, while all pairwise fst between the four forestry regions were significant , indicating that forestry region is a coherent population genetic entity. when larvae were grouped according to their forestry region , four markers were consistently detected by both population genetic approaches as being under directional selection: loci  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> . dfdist detected one outlier  that was not detected by bayescan, and bayescan detected two outliers  that were not detected by dfdist.

1as in figure  <dig> 

2no outliers were found with the significance level used.

3bold type indicates markers that are detected by both methods with a type-i error  =  <dig>  for dfdist, and with a posterior probability >  <dig>  for bayescan .

subdividing the geographic data set into host-plant groups   allowed three additional outliers, loci  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig>  to be detected only with bayescan .

when local pairwise comparisons between host-plants were performed within each region , only one locus was detected as host-specific by both genetic methods in limousin . this locus was also detected in host-plant groups  by the bayesian approach. no host-plant outliers were detected in finland and in ardèche .

these last years, it has been suggested to use false discovery rate or q-values to assess significance in multiple tests  <cit> . the maximum estimated q-value among all p-values less than or equal to  <dig>  was  <dig> : this means that among  <dig> loci predicted as outliers, less than  <dig> are false positives , so that it is very unlikely that there is any false positive among the  <dig> loci identified as outliers.

results from the correlative approach and comparison with population genetic methods
the first two axes of the principal component analysis  used to investigate correlation between environmental factors explained 96% of the variance , suggesting that all these variables were highly correlated . the first two axes of the pca were used as orthogonal predictors in the logistic regressions.

based on both a minimal akaike criterion and the likelihood ratio test significant at level α =  <dig> × 10- <dig>  the multiple logistic regressions identified  <dig> markers correlated with at least one of the  <dig> explanatory variable tested . the regression coefficients of the climatic variables were significant for  <dig> markers, those of host-plant were significant for one marker , and those of interactions between host-plant and one of the pca axis representing abiotic environmental variables for two markers . the maximum estimated q-value among all p-values less than or equal to  <dig>  was  <dig> . again it is very unlikely that there is any false positive among the  <dig> loci identified as outliers.

 <dig> axis  <dig> and axis  <dig> are the two first pca components  of the projection of altitude and nine climatic variables calculated from the latitude/longitude as yearly mean of monthly values for the period  <dig> to  <dig> .

2statistically significant logistic regression coefficients are indicated in bold . ns: the correlation was not significant.

finally, seven loci were identified as under positive selection by the regression method and at least one genetic based method . six of these were correlated with one or two axes of the pca representing the climatic variables, one  was correlated with host-plant, and one  with the interaction between the pca axis  <dig> and host-plant.

the correlative method did not detect the locus  <dig> detected as outlier by dfdist but not detected by the bayesian approach, suggesting that this is site-specific locus related to a particular demographic history of a site rather than to the ecological pressures analysed.

bayescan suggested that loci  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> were involved in host-plant adaptation, which is confirmed by logistic regression for locus  <dig> . however for marker  <dig> and  <dig>  the logistic regression only found an effect of environmental variables . finally, one locus  detected by bayescan both in structure  <dig> and  <dig>  was found significantly associated with the interaction between host-plant and pca axis  <dig> 

when the outliers were omitted from the dataset, there was no correlation between neutral genetic distance ) and geographical distance  or the logarithm of the geographical distance .

discussion
detection of outliers - complimentary approaches
the lack of correlation between genetic and geographical distances, together with low fst observed throughout the range of comparisons, suggest that large pine weevils populations are not at the drift-migration equilibrium; the low fst consistently observed throughout the sampling range suggests that migration is overwhelming drift in this species. this is a further justification to use the bayesian approach rather than dfdist to detect outliers. therefore we consider outliers detected by bayescan as more reliable. however, both population genetic methods rely on the identification of loci that differ more than the rest of the genome between two or more groups of individuals. one caveat of such approaches to detect outliers is the possible detection of loci with different inherent features such as markers on sexual chromosomes, or markers that exhibit different intrinsic mutation rates. for instance, a sex-linked locus would have a different effective population size  than autosomal loci and thus more extreme fst values; and, as a consequence, potentially mis-classified as outlier. finally, excoffier et al.  <cit>  highlight the need to have a good understanding of the population genetic structure of the studied organism, to accurately identify loci with unusual levels of differentiation using population genetic approaches. in that context, the validation of outliers detected using population genetic approaches by correlative approaches appear to be particularly important. eight loci were identified both by logistic regression and by bayescan as being under positive selection. out of these loci, one was correlated with host-plant, and one was correlated with the interaction between host-plant and abiotic factors. the congruence of the results obtained with two different methods using totally different algorithms , makes us confident about these findings. locus  <dig> was detected as an outlier linked to host-plant only in limousin , which raises the question of local adaptation at the regional scale. in the limousin, locus  <dig> is much more frequent on spruce than on pine . although it was not detected as an outlier in the two other regions , it was also more frequent on spruce, suggesting that it is a global trend as also suggested by the logistic regression.

in contrast, the loci identified as outliers by only one of the methods should be interpreted with caution. first, the lack of congruence observed between the two genetic methods could be linked to the presence of false positives, which can be generated by both methods  <cit> .

second, the identification of an outlier by dfdist but not by bayescan could result from the fact that dfdist does not take into account population-specific demographic effects. this was the case for one locus  over-represented in one region  compared with the other regions . because the bayesian model takes into account site-specific effects in modelling population divergence , it did not detect this locus as differing more than expected given the overall divergence of this isolated south-western region  compared to the rest of the european weevil distribution. accordingly, the fst estimates for this locus was strikingly different depending on the method used, with much higher estimates obtained using dfdist than bayescan . another hypothesis that can support the fact that locus  <dig> was only detected as an outlier by dfdist and not bayescan in landes is the "allele surfing effect"  <cit> . in a 2d spatial demographic expansion model, it is possible that one front of the wave drift caused by a spatial bottleneck could push low frequency alleles to increase their proportion and possibly become fixed in those populations at the edge of the geographical range of species distribution. the non-identification of such locus by the logistic regression could be a way to further confirm a false positive.

ecological divergence: possible selective pressures
the logistic regression identified  <dig> loci not consistently found by the genetic methods . such results could be interpreted as spurious correlations, not linked to adaptation. a second explanation could be that these loci are indeed under directional selection, but that both genetic methods failed to detect them as outliers. indeed, both genetic methods have a high rate of false negatives, i.e. loci that are true outliers but that are not detected. for example, beaumont & balding  <cit> , using simulated datasets, found that as many as 50% of true directionally selected biallelic codominant loci  were mis-classified as being neutral by fdist, a proportion that might be even higher with dominant markers. with bayescan, foll and gaggiotti  <cit>  showed that for simulated aflp datasets with an average fst of  <dig> ,  <dig> populations,  <dig> individuals sampled per population, and a selection coefficient of  <dig> , the false negative rate was as high as 33%. the parameters used in these simulations were similar to those of our dataset .

two strategies can be used to search for loci under environmental selection. the first consists of applying population genetic methods to identify outliers, then using logistic regression only on the identified outliers to characterise the selective pressure that best explains their variability  <cit> . the second strategy is the one we used in the present study, which was also used by joost et al.  <cit> . the approach consists of systematically applying the logistic regression to all loci to identify all marker correlations and thus perhaps identify additional markers, correlated to the environmental variable, that were not detected as outliers by the genetic approaches. as a second step in this strategy, one returns to the genetic method to investigate these newly detected relations in more depth, for example by using different groupings that better reflect the selective pressure identified by the logistic regression.

in fact, only logistic regression allows assumptions to be made on the selective pressure shaping observed patterns of adaptive genetic diversity. although it is only a correlative approach, it can help us to formulate biological hypothesis. however, we need to keep in mind i) the possibility of spurious relations, and ii) the problem of the choice of the explanatory variables, which is not an easy task. indeed, climatic variables are often highly inter-correlated and in most cases also correlated with elevation, longitude and latitude. in our case, to avoid the correlations between the climatic and elevation variables, we applied a pca to produce orthogonal predictors, reducing a total of  <dig> highly correlated explanatory variables to two 'environmental' predictors. however, to have more precise information about the involvement of each climatic/elevation variable on the behaviour of each locus, it would be necessary to use the climatic variables directly rather than the pca axes as explanatory factors, as done in joost et al.  <cit> . in this later paper based on a larger dataset but not testing for the impact of the host-plant on locus-specific differentiation, two outliers  were shown to be correlated with climatic variables, locus  <dig> being positively correlated with the number of days of ground frost and negatively with precipitation, sunshine and diurnal temperature range, while locus  <dig> was positively correlated with diurnal temperature range. a priori biological assumptions and knowledge about the selective pressure at play in nature can help with the choice of predictors to be used in the model. however, when no a priori assumption is available, all variables  should be included in the model. we do nevertheless need to keep in mind that it is always better to favour direct predictors  over indirect predictors   <cit> .

although migration is likely to be important in this flying weevil, which may also be enhanced due to the high connectivity of pine and spruce planted forests in europe and perhaps by human-mediated translocations, we detected  <dig> loci out of  <dig>  under directional selection across europe - corresponding to a selection coefficient  <dig> times stronger than migration  <cit> . out of these adaptive loci, only one was correlated with the host-plant, and one was correlated with the interaction between host-plant and abiotic variables. hylobius larvae feed on decaying plant material, so that the food quality might depend both on the host-plant type and on climatic variables. furthermore, host-plant genotypes might vary from a region to another, explaining why the interaction between both biotic and abiotic factors might be more important than each factor taken separately in explaining genetic variability at some particular locus. this shows that in this widespread oligophagous weevil, climatic variables have a relatively larger effect than the host-plant in shaping genetic differentiation across the genome. managed conifer forests in western europe are relatively recent from an evolutionary perspective and have been planted with both spruce and pine throughout large areas outside the natural range of the two tree genera, thereby possibly limiting the opportunities for selection based on host-plant. in contrast, the wide geographic range of these managed forests means that hylobius abietis encounters a large variability in climatic conditions. for instance, this weevil lives underground during its diapause stage, and the length of the soil frost period is likely to be a selective factor  <cit> . we found only limited evidence for host-plant-specific outliers, which represented only  <dig> % of all loci. this is comparable to the 1-2% of aflp loci detected as host-specific in a genome scan performed on different ecotypes of timema walking sticks, using two host-plant species  <cit> , and slightly less than that observed across maple and willow beetles . most of the host groups in this latter study were however taken from different geographic localities, making it difficult to distinguish environmental effects from host-specific adaptations. finally, the limited evidence for host-plant adaptive loci in hylobius abietis could be related to the presence of obligate endosymbiotic bacteria in the midgut of larvae  <cit> . although the precise role of these bacteria in hylobius abietis fitness has not yet been elucidated, the presence of this third genome  might be an alternative way to specialize on various host-plants, thereby limiting the selection for adaptive loci within the genome of the insect itself. obligate endosymbionts are widespread in insects and might play a key role in the adaptation of phytophagous insects to alternative host-plants  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
our study shows that correlative methods are very promising to investigate the respective role of many environmental variables in shaping the geographical distribution at a locus level . they are particularly useful to validate outliers detected using population genetic methods, especially when populations are not at their demographic equilibrium. finally, correlative methods represent the only way to investigate for adaptive loci when sampling is conducted at the individual rather that population level, and no a priori grouping of individuals into panmictic populations can be performed, rendering population genetic methods inappropriate.

