BACKGROUND
the gram-negative bacterial pathogen salmonella enterica serovar typhimurium  is a leading cause of human gastroenteritis worldwide. it has the ability to infect a broad range of hosts such as poultry, pigs, cattle, rodents and human and the severity of disease is sometimes determined by the type of host infected  <cit> . for example in mice s. typhimurium exhibits symptoms similar to those of human typhoid, while in humans it causes classical non-typhoidal gastroenteritis  <cit> .

the genome of s. typhimurium contains a large number of prominent genes that code for virulence factors which are non-existent in non-pathogenic strains. regions of the genome that code for these virulence factors are known as pathogenicity islands. s. typhimurium possesses two major islands, which are known as salmonella pathogenicity island  <dig>  and salmonella pathogenicity island  <dig> . these islands encode for two different type iii secretion systems   <cit> . the ttss is responsible for enabling pathogenic salmonella to transfer virulence factors into the host, allowing it to invade and hijack the host cellular processes  <cit> . spi <dig> encodes for the ttss <dig>  responsible for the invasion of the host's intestinal cells, while spi <dig> encodes for the ttss <dig>  responsible for the survival and proliferation of the bacteria within the host cells  <cit> . overall, the ttss consists of more than  <dig> proteins including soluble cytoplasmic proteins, integral membrane proteins and outer membrane proteins  <cit> .

the outer membrane proteins are influential in how bacteria interact with each other and with its immediate environment and are actively involved in both the uptake of nutrients and the transport of toxic by-products out of the cell  <cit> . more importantly, these surface exposed proteins play a critical role in pathogenic processes such as motility, adherence and colonisation of the host cells, injection of toxins and cellular proteases, as well as the formation of channels for the removal of antibiotics   <cit> . therefore these functions make outer membrane proteins attractive targets for the development of antimicrobial drugs and vaccines  <cit> . however, it is well documented that the isolation and characterisation of outer membrane proteins has been fraught with difficulty for use in conventional proteomic techniques such as 2d gel electrophoresis  due to their association with the membrane or peptidoglycan and relative low abundance when compared to the whole cell complex  <cit> . work carried out by molloy et al attempted to characterise omps using 2d ge with the addition of the zwitterionic detergent amidosulfobetaine- <dig>  in the rehydration buffer with some degree of success  <cit> . in addition, several strategies have been developed to try and enrich samples in favour of outer membrane proteins based on differential solubilisation using detergents such as triton x- <dig>  <cit>  and sarcosyl  <cit> , chemical enrichment such as sodium carbonate  <cit>  and surface labelling such as biotinylation  <cit> . however, each strategy fails to remove all contaminants such as cytosolic and ribosomal proteins.

new gel-free proteomic approaches such as two dimensional liquid chromatography - tandem mass spectrometry  have been developed for the downstream analysis of complex protein mixtures and are able to overcome the limitations gel based proteomics face especially when dealing with membrane associated proteins  <cit> . however, these new methods do not focus on preliminary sample preparation where the outer membrane proteins are separated from the rest of the cell protein complex prior to mass spectrometry analysis.

in this study, we have utilised a novel method using lipid-based protein immobilization  technique to elucidate the outer membrane protein of s. typhimurium. the lpi™ flowcell is a single use device with a membrane-attracting surface that allows for the immobilisation of intact proteoliposomes  directly produced from membrane. the proteins are kept in their native state with retained structure and function. the lpi™ flowcell, allows for multiple rounds of chemical treatment and a wide variety of applications since the membrane vesicles are attached directly to the surface. the work-flow starts with the preparation of small membrane vesicles from s. typhimurium. the membrane vesicles are washed and are then injected into the lpi™ flowcell, allowing attachment to the surface. the immobilised membranes are then subjected to enzymatic digestion of proteins, in one or multiple steps to increase sequence coverage. by using proteases such as trypsin, the surface exposed parts of the membrane associated proteins are digested into smaller peptide fragments which can be eluted from the flow cell and analysed by liquid chromatography - tandem mass spectrometry . a multi-step protocol can then be designed to increase the total sequence coverage of proteins identified, and so adding more confidence to the results generated using the lpi™ flowcell. this approach allowed to identify a larger number of outer membrane proteins expressed by s. typhimurium than previously reported  <cit>  where many of which are associated with virulence.

RESULTS
preparation of outer membrane vesicles
a key step for the successful isolation of outer membrane proteins when using the lpi technology is the generation of outer membrane vesicles . here cells were converted into osmotically sensitive spheroplasts in triplicates by digesting the peptidoglycan layers of the cell wall with lysozyme. this was followed by osmotic shock treatment which induced the formation of vesicles at the outer membrane. some were freely liberated as judged by electron microscopy. however, many were still attached to cells and were released by vigorous shaking. intact, unbroken cells were removed from the vesicles by a low centrifugation step and the outer membrane vesicles were collected by ultracentrifugation.

the process of vesiculation and the purity of the vesicle suspension was monitored using electron microscopy  . the various stages were monitored, that is from untreated washed cells to pure outer membrane vesicles to exclude as far as possible the presence of whole cells prior to loading on the lpi™ flowcell. the images obtained by em demonstrated the morphological changes the cell undergoes during the vesiculation process and the efficiency of the procedures used to generate omvs.

protein identification
all samples were prepared in three biological replicates and multiple technical replicates. the proteins were considered successfully identified if they were present in at least two of the biological replicate samples with at least two peptides assigned per protein. in the case of protein mltc, ompx and stm <dig>  which was found in only one of the replicates the corresponding spectra were manually examined to confirm their correct identification

optimization of wash protocol
initially, outer membrane vesicles  were washed with hplc grade water  and loaded onto the lpi™ flowcell in triplicates. the proteins of the omvs were digested with trypsin and the resulting peptides were eluted from the lpi™ flowcell and analysed using lc-ms/ms. in total,  <dig> proteins were identified of which  <dig> were identified with two or more peptide hits. out of this  <dig> proteins  were classified as outer membrane proteins .

the low proportion of outer membrane proteins was attributed to high level of contamination from cytosolic proteins. the washing protocol using hplc grade water was considered not to be efficient in removing cytosolic proteins that were non-specifically attached to the membrane vesicles. to reduce the level of contamination, a further set of experiments were carried out where the vesicle preparations, in triplicates, were washed twice with ice cold sodium carbonate prior to being loaded onto the lpi™ flowcell. in total,  <dig> proteins were identified of which  <dig> were identified with two or more peptide hits. the percentage of non-membrane associated proteins identified dropped from 85% to 57% when compared to the preparation without a sodium carbonate wash. the removal of cytosolic proteins was accompanied with an increase of the outer membrane proteins detected. after the washing step,  <dig> additional omps were detected giving a total of  <dig> omps identified with more than  <dig> peptide hit . there was a four-fold increase in proportion of outer membrane proteins from 7% to 29% when compared to the run that was not subjected to the sodium carbonate wash step .

optimization using multi-step protocols
considering many of the outer membrane and membrane associated proteins were identified from a single peptide, the immobilised vesicles were subjected to a second round of trypsin digestion for  <dig> hr in order to generate additional peptides and increase the sequence coverage. in total,  <dig> proteins were identified of which  <dig> were identified with more than one peptide hit .

in an attempt to further maximise the sequence coverage, in duplicate, the immobilised vesicles were exposed to a second round of trypsin digestion for  <dig> hr with pps silent®, a reagent formulated for the extraction and solubilisation of hydrophobic peptides. pps silent® is compatible with mass spectrometry and has been shown to improve the in-solution enzymatic digestions of hydrophobic proteins. as a result, a total of  <dig> proteins were identified of which  <dig> were identified with two or more peptide hits. in addition, the percentage of non membrane-associated proteins increased slightly from 31% to 35% when compared to the run without pps silent®. further analysis, specifically for outer membrane proteins revealed that  <dig>  of the proteins identified with two or more peptide hits were classified as outer membrane proteins. however, when compared to the digest without pps silent® there was a small drop in the proportion of outer membrane proteins identified from 51% to 47% , even though the number of outer membrane proteins increased from  <dig> to  <dig>  the second digestion step resulted in a further  <dig> proteins being identified with two or more peptide hits  where in some cases no peptides where found in the first digest.

collating the results from both the first and second digests, a total of  <dig> outer membrane proteins were identified with two or more peptide hits with varying functions. previous experiments performed by coldham et al  <cit>  identified  <dig> outer membrane proteins using a method based on a multi step fractionation strategy of the whole cell lysate into its various intracellular parts coupled with two dimensional hplc-mass spectrometry . here we identified  <dig> of the  <dig> outer membrane proteins which is summarised in additional file  <dig>  furthermore, studies carried out by molloy et al  <cit>  identified  <dig> outer membrane proteins from escherichia coli  which is closely related to s. typhimurium using sodium carbonate to enrich for outer membrane proteins and the detergent asb- <dig> to solubilise them prior 2d ge. in this study we managed to identify  <dig> out of the  <dig> outer membrane proteins which is is summarised in additional file  <dig>  outer membrane proteins identified included various transport proteins such as the vitamin b <dig> transporter btub precursor, long-chain fatty acid transport protein and the outer membrane usher protein, maltoporin as well as enzymes such as membrane-bound lytic murein transglycosylase c precursor, mltc. furthermore, various proteins associated with virulence were also identified, such as major outer membrane lipoprotein  <dig> precursor, lpp <dig> and outer membrane protease and receptor for phage ox <dig>  ompx which is essential for full virulence and survival within macrophages. a complete list of the outer membrane proteins identified together with their known biological functions are summarised in additional file  <dig> 

discussion
membrane proteins are extremely difficult to isolate and characterise due to their association with the lipid bi-layer or the peptidoglycan and relatively lower abundance when in comparison with the whole cell complex. established methods for the extraction and characterisation of membrane proteins that are commonly used include sodium carbonate precipitation, sucrose density gradients and the use of detergents to selectively solubilise and enrich the sample in favour of membrane proteins  <cit> . however these methods each have their own caveats. detergent based methods use reagents that are often directly incompatible with downstream analytical techniques and so further clean up steps are required, resulting in a lengthy workflow  <cit>  while sucrose density gradient and sodium carbonate precipitation face problems when resolubilising the membrane protein enriched fraction.

here, we attempted to characterise the surface proteome of s. typhimurium using lipid-based protein immobilisation technology in the form of lpi™ flowcells. the lpi™ flowcell system provides a novel platform for the identification and characterisation of membrane proteins. no detergents are required and no sample clean up is needed prior to downstream analysis. the immobilised proteins can be digested with proteases in multiple steps to increase sequence coverage, and the peptides eluted can be characterised directly using lc-ms/ms.

initial work highlighted the need to incorporate a wash step during the production of the intact membrane vesicles to minimise the carryover of contaminating cytosolic proteins that can potentially mask the lower abundant omps. the results generated showed that washing the membrane vesicles with a high ph sodium carbonate solution lowered the amount of non membrane proteins identified, and so enriching the vesicle preparation in favour of outer membrane proteins.

we have shown that a multi-step digest protocol can also be effectively used to increase total sequence coverage of proteins and to generate a list of outer membrane proteins identified with a greater confidence. however, even after incorporating a second digestion step,  <dig> outer membrane proteins were still only identified with one peptide hits, which is probably due to them being of low abundance. the addition of the acid cleavable mass spectrometry compatible detergent pps silent® was incorporated into the work flow to try and improve the solubilisation and in-solution enzymatic protein digestions of hydrophobic proteins with trypsin. results indicated that the addition of pps silent® increased the total amount of different proteins identified with one peptide hits. however when counting just confident protein identifications  this increase is less pronounced. looking at confident protein identifications with pps silent®, the total number of outer membrane proteins increased from  <dig> to  <dig>  however, pps silent® appears to enhance detection of non-membrane proteins over outer membrane proteins as the proportion of non-membrane proteins increased marginally, while the proportion of outer membrane proteins decreased in the samples subjected to pps silent®. this suggests that outer membrane proteins are relatively resistant to solubilising in pps silent®, while non-membrane associated proteins solubilise more readily.

when comparing the data generated from this study with previously published work by coldham & woodward, more omps  were identified here in comparison to  <dig> reported in their study. however, there were proteins that were not identified by using the lpi™ flowcell. coldham & woodward <cit>  identified  <dig> outer membrane proteins using a method based on fractionating the whole cell lysate into its various intracellular parts coupled with two dimensional hplc-mass spectrometry . of the  <dig> outer membrane proteins identified, just over half  were found in our dataset. overall there were  <dig> s. typhimurium omps identified in our dataset that were not reported previously  <cit>  . some of these differences may be due to the use of different strains and variation in microbial culture conditions between both studies which will be reflected in their protein expression profiles. in addition, since the method used by coldham & woodward relied on multiple fractionation steps of the whole cell lysate, potential loss of outer membrane proteins, especially lower abundant ones could have occurred at each step in their workflow. furthermore, it has been reported that results generated from mass spectrometry vary depending on the database search algorithm used to identify proteins  <cit> . the work carried out by coldham &woodward used the search algorithm sequest, while in this study the search algorithm mascot was used. therefore, the differences observed between the two methods could also be attributed to the database search algorithms and parameters used. previous work carried out by molloy et al  <cit>  identified  <dig> outer membrane proteins from escherichia coli  which is closely related to s. typhimurium using a method based on the enrichment of outer membrane proteins using sodium carbonate washes and incorporating the detergent asb- <dig> to aid in solubilising them prior 2d ge. this study manages to identify  <dig> of the  <dig> outer membrane proteins. a further  <dig> outer membrane proteins reported by molloy et al were not seen in this study while  <dig> outer membrane proteins were identified in this study that was not reported by molloy et al. some of these differences may be attributed again to the different strains and growth conditions used as well as the different instrument used to identify the proteins and bioinformatics tools used to confirm the presence of outer membrane proteins. these results show there is no real consensus of proteins identified between the lpi™ flowcell method and more established methods such as 2d ge and 2d-lc-ms/ms . instead these methods complement each other and therefore when designing experiments to identify outer membrane proteins it is important to try a range of approaches to maximise the coverage of omps detected.

finally, when collating the results from both digests performed in this study, different classes of membrane proteins with varying functions were also identified. a total of  <dig> proteins were identified as being outer membrane proteins of which  <dig> were identified with two or more peptide hits . using the database uniprotkb http://www.uniprot.org some of the functions of the outer membrane proteins were deduced. these included the transporters btub which is responsible for the uptake of vitamin b <dig>  lamb which is involved in the uptake of maltose and maltodextrins and lolb which is involved in the incorporation of lipoproteins in the outer membrane. other biologically significant proteins identified included the enzymes mltc which may play a role in cell elongation and division and nlpd which is involved in catabolic processes in cell wall formation as well as proteins involved in virulence such as lpp <dig>  lpp <dig> and ompx. to further verify the functions of the outer membrane proteins identified in the present study, manual mining of the data, which involved searching through literature containing information on the proteins of interest, was also undertaken. this approach shed further light on outer membrane proteins identified that were not apparent using uniprotkb, a shortcoming of using a single approach to verify the functions of proteins  <cit> . these included membrane-bound lytic murein transglycosylase  which is important for cell growth  <cit> , conjugal transfer surface exclusion protein  which is responsible for resistance to bacterial killing by serum  <cit>  and rcsf protein which is part of the rcs phosphorelay signalling pathway responding to peptidoglycan damage by regulating colanic acid capsular exopolysaccharide synthesis, and has also been seen to enhance bacterial survival in the presence of antibiotics  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
the present study aimed to elucidate the expression of outer membrane proteins in salmonella typhimurium using lpi™ flowcells. the membrane preparations largely excluded most of the cytosolic proteins that co-purifies with it when using currently available fractionation procedures and therefore achieved a wider coverage of the membrane subproteome than had been reported. furthermore, since there was no real cross over in the outer membrane proteins identified between this method than previously reported, highlights the importance of incorporating a range of methods into the experimental design that complement each other to maximise the range of outer membrane proteins identified. in addition, it has been emphasised frequently, that while downstream analysis of proteins have improved markedly over the last decade with ever increasing mass spectral analysis and software developments, initial sample preparation methods from various microorganisms and fractionation procedures, particularly for low abundant proteins have lagged behind. several approaches are being used, one of the most recent being the use of combinational peptide libraries. the technique was used successfully to study cell extracts of e. coli and resulted in a significant increase in the number of proteins that are normally detected and included very low copy number metabolic enzymes  <cit> . a drawback of this approach is the large volume of starting material required. it is our view based on current sub-cellular fractionation procedures, that lpi™ technology currently provides the widest coverage of outer membrane proteins as demonstrated here for salmonella typhimurium. current studies are aimed at culturing this microorganism in growth conditions more akin to those in vivo to gain further insight into the expression of the membrane proteins and the role of specific proteins in disease.

