BACKGROUND
dirofilaria repens is a filarial species transmitted by more than  <dig> mosquito species acting as intermediate hosts of the parasite  <cit> . dogs and other carnivores are its final hosts and humans are incidental hosts. dirofilaria repens is a well-recognized parasite of dogs and humans in southern europe  in the ukraine  <cit>  and southern russia  <cit> . although cats appear to be competent hosts for d. repens, they are much more resistant to invasion and in endemic regions prevalence is considerably lower than in dogs  <cit> .

recently, the emergence of canine and human dirofilariosis due to d. repens has been reported in central european countries, a region that was previously considered to be non-endemic for this parasite species . among the most probable reasons for this northward expansion of d. repens in europe are climatic changes associated with global warming  and translocation of infected dogs from southern to central europe  <cit> . the total number of human cases of dirofilariosis has changed dynamically, increasing from  <dig> cases reported in  <dig>  <cit>  to over  <dig> cases reported in  <dig>  <cit> , an increasing statistic that is likely also to be mainly attributable to a greater interest in the epidemiology of dirofilariosis in recent years. thus dirofilariosis caused by d. repens is now considered to be an emerging zoonosis in europe  <cit> .

dogs serve as the major source of infection of d. repens for mosquitoes which then transmit infection to humans. therefore, the recognition, treatment and prevention of d. repens invasion in dogs is likely to help also the control of infection in humans  <cit> . although there are new measures for the elimination of adult d. repens worms from dogs  <cit> , a key problem is that neither the diagnosis nor the implementation of preventative/ control measures are common in newly established endemic regions in central europe. recent studies on the distribution of d. repens in slovakia and poland have detected high prevalence  of infection in clinically healthy working dogs  <cit>  and these asymptomatic infections are not usually recognized and treated. the presence of adult d. repens in dogs causes canine subcutaneous dirofilariosis, with a range of dermatological manifestations  <cit> , but apparently may also be asymptomatic and chronic for several years  <cit> . the pathogenicity associated with accumulating high numbers of microfilariae in the circulating blood of infected dogs is also not well recognized but there are a few reports on possible acute and fatal outcomes of such infections associated with the presence of microfilariae in vital organs   <cit> .

dirofilaria repens infections in dogs, humans and vectors have been reported often in recent years in countries in the vicinity of poland  <cit> . in germany at least two endemic regions have been recognized: between stuttgart and frankfurt/men and in branderburg federal state   <cit>  in slovakia, d. repens in dogs was recorded for the first time in  <dig>  and to date is widely spread and has been detected in aedes vexans mosquitoes  <cit> . in the ukraine, dirofilariosis is a registerable zoonotic disease and about  <dig> new cases in humans are registered each year  <cit> .

to our knowledge, no data on the prevalence of d. repens in cats in central europe is available.

in poland, d. repens was recorded for the first time in a dog in  <dig>  <cit>  but already central poland is now well recognized as a recently established endemic region for this species, with a high prevalence having been reported in dogs, then in mosquitoes and as autochthonous zoonotic invasions in humans  <cit> . however, the distribution of the parasite in other regions of poland is less well recognized.

the high prevalence of d. repens infections in dogs/ cats constitutes a new challenge for veterinarians due to the increasing probability of co-infection occurring with other blood parasites vectored by ticks  <cit> . among the vector-borne diseases of greatest importance is canine babesiosis, caused by babesia canis transmitted by dermacentor reticulatus ticks . in central and eastern regions of poland canine babesiosis is endemic and hyper-endemic, causing thousands of life-threatening infections in dogs each year. as an example, over a period of 6 months  over  <dig> canine babesiosis cases were treated in selected vet clinics in two districts in eastern poland   <cit> . prevalence of b. canis infections in d. reticulatus ticks may be as high as 8–16 % in central poland  <cit>  and this tick species dominates on dogs in this part of poland  <cit> . to our knowledge, the impact of concurrent infections of d. repens with b. canis has not been investigated. therefore we assessed the prevalence of d. repens and its effect on the host in dogs infected with b. canis, originating from the mazovia region.

the aims of the present work were:  to estimate the prevalence of d. repens infection in cats and dogs from different regions of poland  to compare the prevalence of d. repens in healthy dogs and dogs with babesiosis and finally  to analyze the influence of d. repens infections on the severity of canine babesiosis.

methods
sampling
overall,  <dig> blood samples from cats were included in this study. these originated from pet cats that were regularly allowed to roam freely outside the house or apartment of their owners, and were provided by the lab-wet diagnostic laboratory in the period 2013– <dig> 

in total,  <dig> individual blood samples were collected from dogs between october  <dig> and november  <dig>  including samples from healthy dogs from central poland, warsaw area , samples from dogs from northern poland ; samples from southern poland  and samples from western poland . samples from gdańsk, kraków and wrocław were provided by lab-wet diagnostics laboratory, and originated from dogs referred for blood analysis because of a range of different medical reasons.

in addition to these  <dig> samples, the occurrence of d. repens was investigated among  <dig> dogs suspected for babesiosis. these samples originated from dogs presenting with a wide range of babesiosis symptoms, including fatal cases, originating from central poland in the vicinity of warsaw, a region that is known to be endemic both for canine babesiosis and dirofilariosis. samples were enrolled into the study on the basis of a positive diagnosis of b. canis infection as detected by the lab-vet diagnostics laboratory.

to study the effect of concurrent infection with d. repens and b. canis, we analyzed standard data on blood cell concentrations  available from  <dig> dogs and biochemistry parameters available from  <dig> dogs suffering from babesiosis. blood parameters were compared between dogs with single  and double  infections.

molecular analysis
infections with d. repens and b. canis in dogs were identified/confirmed based on specific pcr amplification and sequencing of reference genes . additionally, to detect d. repens invasions in cats, a fragment of the ftsz gene of the filarial endosymbiotic bacterium, wolbachia, was amplified and sequenced following turba et al.   <cit> . detection of wolbachia in blood samples constitutes an indirect, but sensitive method for the assessment of the presence/absence of filarial infections.

blood samples were collected into  <dig>  m edta and frozen at a temperature of -20 °c until dna extraction. dna extractions were performed on whole blood using the axygen miniprep blood kit  or mo bio ultra clean blood spin dna isolation kit . a combination of d. repens specific primers  extracted from a multiplex pcr developed by gioia et al.   <cit>  was used to amplify the 12s rrna gene fragment  of d. repens  <cit> . amplification of the 18s rrna babesia gene fragment was performed using the previously described pcr protocol  <cit> . primers bab gf <dig>  and babgr <dig>  were used to produce a ~550 bp fragment. positive controls were as follows: for babesia detection- b. microti king’s college strain genomic dna  <cit> ; for d. repens- d. repens genomic dna from an adult nematode kindly provided by dr. aleksander masny, national institute of health in warsaw. positive and negative  controls were included in each set of pcrs.

amplicons were visualized with midori green stain  following the electrophoresis in  <dig>  % agarose gels. selected amplicons were purified and sequenced by a private company . dna sequence alignments were conducted using mega version  <dig>   <cit> . the resulting sequences were compared with sequences deposited in genbank ncbi.

statistical methods
prevalence of d. repens infection  in dogs with and without babesiosis was compared by fisher exact test, instat software. comparison of mean blood parameter values between dogs with single  and double  infections was carried out by student’s t-tests, implemented by the software package, ibm spss v.  <dig> . an anova was also used for the comparison of mean blood parameter values between dogs categorized in  <dig> classes of severity of babesiosis- to confirm correct categorization of scores . the presence/absence of d. repens infection, fitted as a binary factor  was included in a second anova, incorporating also severity scores of babesiosis or scores for the severity of appropriate ‘general’ symptom as the dependent variables  . these analyses were carried out to test our research hypothesis, that severity of babesiosis may be affected by concurrent d. repens infection through the negative impact of microfilariae on a range of blood parameters and the function of vital organs  . thus, we performed a series of statistical comparisons with the presence/absence of d. repens as a factor associated with severity scores for three main ‘general’ symptoms and an overall severity score for babesiosis .table  <dig> comparison of blood parameters between dogs co-infected with b. canis and d. repens and infected only with b. canis


p

sem standard error of the mean, p probability values from student’s t-tests, mcv mean corpuscular volume, mchc mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration, ast aspartate aminotransferase, alt alanine aminotransferase, alp alkaline phosphatase

p

p-probability values from anova tests

reference values for parameters and explanations as in legend to table 1


p values derived from anovas


d. repens presence x anemia level on erythrocytes count; d. repens presence x anemia level on leucocytes count; d. repens presence x anemia level on thrombocytes count


d. repens presence x hepatic dysfunction level on ast activity; d. repens presence x hepatic dysfunction level on alt activity; d. repens presence x hepatic dysfunction level on alp activity; d. repens presence x renal dysfunction level on serum creatinine; d. repens presence x renal dysfunction level on serum urea

nd- not done, the lack of cases in this group



the severity of babesiosis was classified at  <dig> levels. as all dogs with babesiosis  suffered from thrombocytopenia  , this parameter was not included in the classification. the three main groups of general symptoms  included: a. severity of anemia ; b. hepatic dysfunction parameters  and profoundly above  the normal range, representing scores of  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig>  respectively, table 2); c. renal dysfunction parameters  and profoundly above  the normal range, representing severity scores of  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig>  respectively, table 2).

then all dogs with any of these three general symptoms classified as ‘severity score 2’ were assigned to group  <dig> ; dogs presenting with more than one dysfunction  at level  <dig>  were assigned to group  <dig>  and finally dogs presenting only with one group of symptoms  were assigned to group  <dig> . this final classification was carried out to assess the general impact of concurrent d. repens infection on the severity of babesiosis in dogs and appropriate levels were implemented into multifactorial anovas for each dog for each blood parameter .

finally, log-linear analyses of contingency tables were performed  to compare prevalence of d. repens in dogs assigned to three severity classes . this analysis was carried out to test our research hypothesis that the prevalence of d. repens infection should be higher in dogs suffering more severe symptoms . again, this was done to seek evidence for an association between severity of the disease and presence of d. repens. we tested two models: anemia scale x babesiosis scale x d. repens presence  and hepatic dysfunction class x renal dysfunction class x babesiosis scale x d. repens prevalence .

RESULTS
the occurrence of dirofilaria repens and wolbachia in cats
dirofilaria repens
dna was detected only in one blood sample, from one cat positive also for wolbachia . our sequence was identical to the d. repens isolate obtained from the blood of a sled dog in our previous study . wolbachia dna was detected in  <dig> out of  <dig> cats . both sequences were identical, displaying the highest homology  to the sequence of wolbachia, endosymbiont of d. repens .

the occurrence of dirofilaria repens in dogs from different regions of poland
dirofilaria repens
dna was detected only in dogs from central poland. none of the samples from the other regions  tested positive. the specific diagnostic 320 bp band of the 12s rrna gene fragment of d. repens was observed in  <dig> dogs out of  <dig> healthy dogs that were tested . to confirm the specific amplification,  <dig>  randomly selected samples were sequenced, aligned and compared with sequences from the genbank database. all sequences were identical, displaying the highest homology  to the sequence of d. repens isolated from a subcutaneous human case in russia . our sequences displayed similar high homology  with the d. repens isolate obtained from a sled dog in our previous study .

to test for the occurrence of possible unidentified, asymptomatic co-infections with b. canis and d. repens, we also analyzed samples from these  <dig> healthy dogs from central poland for babesia dna. only  <dig> asymptomatic dog  proved positive for b. canis but it was not infected with d. repens.

the occurrence of dirofilaria repens in dogs with babesiosis in central poland
first, to confirm the laboratory diagnosis of b. canis infection based on microscopical observation of blood smears, the 560 bp 18s rrna gene fragment of babesia was amplified in blood samples from all symptomatic dogs . then, the 320 bp 12s rrna gene fragment of d. repens was amplified with species-specific primers. dirofilaria repens dna was detected in  <dig> of  <dig> dogs with babesiosis . the difference in prevalence of d. repens between healthy dogs and dogs with babesiosis  was highly significant .

to confirm the occurrence of co-infections of b. canis and d. repens, respective pcr products were sequenced from  <dig> double-positive dogs . sequences were aligned and compared with the genbank database. sequencing revealed that  <dig> babesia sequences displayed the highest homology  to the b. canis genotype  <dig> , originally isolated from a dog with babesiosis in poland  <cit>  and to a b. canis isolate from a d. reticulatus tick .

the sequencing of  <dig> d. repens positive amplicons revealed the presence of a d. repens variant identical with isolates obtained in this study from the healthy dogs from the same region of central poland, displaying the highest homology  to the sequence of d. repens isolated from a human case in russia  and to a sequence from one of our dogs deposited earlier . lower homology for several sequences arose through some non-specific background amplification of canine dna.

the influence of d. repens infections on the severity of babesiosis
various blood parameters were compared between two groups of dogs:  <dig> or  <dig> dogs co-infected with b. canis and d. repens and  <dig> dogs infected only with b. canis .

generally, mean numbers of erythrocytes, leucocytes, thrombocytes and mean values for hematocrit or hemoglobin concentration obtained for all  <dig> dogs with babesiosis were below reference values, but the majority of these values were lower in dogs with co-infection in comparison to dogs infected only with b. canis. however, these differences were significant only for the mean number of thrombocytes and leucocytes . thrombocyte numbers were twice as high in dogs with just b. canis compare to those with co-infection.

a contrasting pattern was observed for biochemical parameters. although overall mean parameter values calculated for all dogs with babesiosis were higher relative to normal levels , the means for dogs only infected with b. canis were higher than those of dogs with concurrent d. repens , indicating a more severe babesiosis in the former dogs with involvement of hepatic and renal failure. statistically significant differences were observed only for alp activity .

in the next step of analysis, we test our research hypothesis, that severity of babesiosis may be affected by concurrent d. repens infection through the negative impact of the presence of microfilariae on a range of blood parameters and the function of vital organs . the symptoms were compiled to create three general classes of symptoms , each with three severity levels and implemented into statistical models . statistical analysis confirmed significant differences between the mean blood parameters of dogs arbitrarily assigned to three classes of severity  and revealed some interesting effects of the interaction between the presence of d. repens and severity of general symptoms on mean values of selected parameters . contrary to our expectations, among the different parameters the values that were profoundly above normal level were observed in dogs assigned to class  <dig> and infected only with b. canis, and the range of means in three severity classes was generally lower in dogs with co-infections .

in the final step of our analysis, we examined associations between the prevalence of d. repens and the severity scores for babesiosis, anemia, symptoms of hepatic or renal dysfunction . no statistically significant associations were obtained in these analyses. the only observed trend was for the association between the presence of d. repens and hepatic dysfunction classes . prevalence of d. repens was highest in class  <dig>  with all dogs co-infected with filariae ; was 91 % in class  <dig>  and the lowest  in dogs assigned to severity class  <dig> , indicating an opposite association to that predicted in our research hypothesis.

discussion
the main aims of this study were to estimate the prevalence of d. repens in cats and dogs from different regions of poland and to evaluate the influence of this nematode infection on concurrent canine babesiosis. we confirmed the high prevalence of d. repens infection in the recently established endemic region in central poland and found no infected dogs outside this area. interestingly, although the prevalence of d. repens was more than twice as high in dogs with babesiosis in comparison to healthy animals, statistical analyses of a range of blood parameters revealed a diverse influence of concurrent d. repens infection on measures of pathology in babesiosis.

in our study d. repens dna was found only in dogs and in one cat from the area of warsaw, spanning a radius of about 60 km from the city center in the region of mazovia . to our knowledge, this is the first finding of d. repens in a cat in central europe. interestingly, detection of the filarial endosymbiotic bacterium, wolbachia, proved to be a more sensitive detection technique than the direct detection of d. repens dna, detecting  <dig> and  <dig> positive cat, respectively, but this conclusion needs further confirmation due to the very limited number of positive samples in our study.

mazovia was first recognized as a new endemic region for canine dirofilariosis in poland  <cit>  and recent studies, including the present one, confirm the stable continuous transmission of parasites in this region  <cit> . the prevalence of d. repens recorded in this study in dogs  is within the range of previously reported rates in this area  and is typical for endemic regions in much warmer climates  <cit> . such a high prevalence in dogs indicates a high risk of emergence of human dirofilariosis in the region, as seroprevalence of d. repens in humans may reach the same values as prevalence in dogs in some locations  <cit> . interestingly, all the dogs included in this study were ‘healthy’, as were the dogs in previous studies  <cit> , so no directed treatment to control microfilaraemia in these dogs had been implemented, creating a continuous source of infection for the vectors.

we were unable to discover d. repens dna in more than  <dig> dogs from three other macroregions of poland. this is generally in agreement with the results of a previous study on  <dig> dogs from poland, reporting a much lower prevalence of d. repens in dogs from northern, western and southern poland, spanning a range of just 0–10 %  <cit> . demiaszkiewicz et al.  <cit>  reported higher prevalence in dogs from eastern poland, ranging between 13–16 % for podlaskie and lubelskie voivodeships, in regions not included in the present study. however, the well-established endemic area in central poland may serve as the source of the spread of the parasite to new regions in poland, due to translocation of asymptomatic but nevertheless infected dogs.

central and eastern poland are also endemic regions for canine babesiosis and we discovered a positive association between infection with these two vector-borne parasites. prevalence of d. repens was  <dig>  times higher in dogs with babesiosis than in representatives of a healthy population from the same region and this association was highly significant. although d. repens infections are more prevalent, but generally asymptomatic, in dogs in central poland, infection with b. canis rarely remains asymptomatic  <cit>  although the course of babesiosis may differ from moderate to severe and sometimes even fatal. all the dogs involved in this phase of our study were infected with b. canis, presenting a range of symptoms and typically characteristic changes in blood parameters . additionally, to check if there were any asymptomatic co-infections of b. canis and d. repens, we tested  <dig> healthy dogs from mazovia by the same molecular techniques. despite the high prevalence of d. repens  in these dogs, we detected only one dog from this group as positive for b.canis dna and this individual was free of d. repens, so no asymptomatic co-infections were found. however, in  <dig> microfilaraemic but clinically healthy working dogs in slovakia,  <dig> cases of co-infection of b. canis and d. repens were confirmed  <cit> . the other explanation can be that the high rate of co-infection between mosquito-borne dirofilariosis and tick-borne babesiosis is the result of generally higher exposure of the dogs to these vectors, i.e. through their spatio-temporal activity patterns or the lack of treatment for ectoparasites in this group of dogs.

the possible mechanisms underlying the impact of d. repens on the course of babesiosis are currently unknown. in a recent review on common features in malaria and babesiosis, two principal factors linked to pathogenecity were identified, one associated with immunological stimulation and the second with adhesion and sequestration of infected rbc  <cit> . heavy burdens of microfilariae in capillary vessels may interfere with rbc adhesion, disturbing blood flow through vital organs. in our study, analyses of various blood parameters revealed a quite different pattern for parameters associated with blood morphology and anemia and for biochemical parameters. in the first instance, as we might have expected, the most pronounced changes were observed in dogs with co-infection compared with dogs infected only by b. canis , but of these only the number of thrombocytes was significantly lower. contrary to our expectation, the biochemical parameters displayed more pronounced changes in dogs infected solely by b. canis, implying that these animals were experiencing more severe episodes of babesiosis with hepatic and renal failure. this finding has similarities to the conclusions of a long-term study on malaria and intestinal helminths in humans from thailand  <cit> . observational studies in thailand have shown that although the incidence of plasmodium falciparum malaria was twice as high in helminth-infected patients, there was a 64 % reduction of cerebral malaria and an 84 % reduction of acute renal failure in patients co-infected with malaria and helminths in comparison to those without helminths  <cit> . although fever was lower in patients with co-infections, they suffered from more severe anemia, but generally it was concluded that helminth invasions had a protective effect against severe and fatal course of p. falciparum malaria.

the possible mechanisms underlying these phenomena  require further investigation. the higher probability of developing babesiosis after b. canis infection in d. repens-infected dogs, may be the result of a depression of the immune response against pre-erythrocytic stages , as proposed for p. falciparum  <cit> . as helminths, including d. repens, are long-lived parasites stimulating a th- <dig> type response profile with low production of pro-inflammatory cytokines, they have a marked depressive effect on other immune pathways including the th- <dig> type responses that are considered to be host protective in the case of intracellular parasites such as babesia spp.  <cit> . suppression of the th- <dig> arm of the immune system would inevitably reduce pathology associated with effector mechanisms unleashed during th- <dig> driven immune responses  <cit> .

the much lower counts of thrombocytes in dogs with co-infection, may be associated with the recently discovered significant role of these cells in both innate and adaptive immunity against a range of pathogens  <cit> . recruitment of platelets in a response targeting b. canis-infected rbcs and microfialariae may be the cause of the considerable reduction in their numbers in the circulation of dogs with co-infections. however, although in our study the differences in several blood parameters  were significant or showed borderline significance , the group of dogs with the single infection was quite small  and the output of these analyses should be treated with some degree of caution at this stage.

our study has several limitations. the sensitivity of pcrs was not determined so prevalence of d. repens could be underestimated. the number of sampled dogs outside the warsaw area is limited. the data on blood parameters was available only for dogs suspected of babesiosis and similar data is missing for dogs infected only with d. repens. the main reason for this lack is that dirofilariosis is a relatively new health problem and is very rarely diagnosed and treated in routine vet care of pet dogs. thus, it was impossible to include a group of samples from dogs with clinical symptoms suspected of suffering only from dirofilariosis. we have data on blood parameters only for two dogs infected solely with d. repens . not much conclusions can be drawn from these values and further study is needed to fill this gap.

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, a very high rate of co-infection with b. canis and d. repens in dogs treated for babesiosis and the lack of asymptomatic co-infections in healthy dogs suggest that microfilaremic dogs are more prone to developing symptomatic babesiosis. however, contrary to our predictions, the values of biochemical parameters in dogs with co-infection were closer to those of healthy dogs than those solely infected with b. canis suggesting milder babesiosis in these animals. these findings are important due to the current spread of dirofilariosis and babesiosis in central europe, which being mostly undiagnosed has resulted in large numbers of untreated microfilaraemic dogs in the region, which may be more prone to babesiosis. the possible protective effect of the nematode infection on hepatic or renal dysfunction in canine babesiosis is intriguing and its mechanisms require further investigations.

abbreviations
alpalkaline phosphatase

altalanine aminotransferase

anovaanalysis of variance

astaspartate aminotransferase

clconfidence interval

dnadeoxyribonucleic acid

edtaethylene diamine tetra-acetic acid

ibminternational business machines

mchcmean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration

mcvmean corpuscular volume

nsnot significant

pprobability values

pcrpolymerase chain reaction

rbcred blood cell

rnaribonucleic acids

semstandard error of the mean

spssstatistical package for the social sciences

