BACKGROUND
vaccination is a highly effective approach to disease control in human and veterinary health care. a vaccine is a molecular or supramolecular agent which elicits specific, protective immunity; that is an enhanced adaptive immune response to re-infection by pathogenic microbes through the potentiation of immune memory. vaccination ultimately mitigates the effect of subsequent infection and disease. thus, the immune system recognizes vaccine agents as foreign, destroys them, and subsequently 'remembers' them. when the pathogenic microorganism is encountered again, the immune system has been primed to respond, by neutralizing the target before it can enter cells, or/and by destroying infected cells before the microorganism can grow and cause damage. vaccines have contributed to the eradication of smallpox, the near eradication of polio, and the control of a variety of diseases, including rubella, measles, mumps, chickenpox, typhoid  <cit> .

vaccines from the pre-genomic era were based on killed or live, but attenuated, microorganisms, or subunits purified from them  <cit> . subunit vaccines contain one or more pure or semi-pure antigens. in order to develop subunit vaccines, it is critical to identify those proteins which are important for inducing protection and to eliminate others. an antigen is said to be protective if it is able to induce protection from subsequent challenge by a disease-causing infective agent in an appropriate animal model following immunization. the empirical approach to sub-unit vaccine development, which includes several steps, begins with pathogen cultivation, followed by purification into components, and then testing of antigens for protection  <cit> . apart from being time- and labour-consuming, this approach has several limitations that can lead to failure. vaccines can not be developed using this approach for microorganisms which can not easily be cultured and only allows for the identification of those antigens which can be obtained in sufficient quantities. in some cases, the most abundant proteins are not immunoprotective. in other cases, the antigen expressed during in vivo infection is not expressed during in vitro cultivation.

genomics has revolutionized vaccine research. the ability to sequence the whole genome of a virulent microorganism has led some to screen in silico for the most probable protective antigens before undertaking confirmatory experiments. this approach, known as reverse vaccinology  <cit> , was first used to identify antigens as potential candidate vaccines against serogroup b meningococcus  <cit> . apart from obvious advantages – such as speed and low cost – the success of this approach is dependent on the accuracy of antigen prediction, and many bioinformatics tools are available to facilitate this process  <cit> . they can identify surface-associated or outer membrane proteins, signal peptides, lipoproteins, or host-cell binding domains. most algorithms use sequence alignment to identify antigens. this is problematic for several reasons. some proteins formed through divergent or convergent evolution lack obvious sequence similarity, although they may share similar structures and biological properties  <cit> . in such a situation, alignment-based approaches may produce ambiguous results or fail. moreover, antigenicity, as a property, may be encoded in a sequence in a subtle and recondite manner not amendable to direct identification by sequence alignment. likewise, the discovery of truly novel antigens will be frustrated by their lack of similarity to antigens of known provenance.

to overcome the limitations of alignment-dependent sequence similarity methods, we propose a new alignment-independent method for antigen prediction based on auto cross covariance  transformation of protein sequences into uniform equal-length vectors. acc is an protein sequence mining method developed by wold et al.  <cit> , which has been applied to quantitative structure-activity relationships  studies of peptides with different length  <cit>  and for protein classification  <cit> . the acc transformation accounts for neighbour effects, i.e. the lack of independence between different sequence positions. in the present study, we applied acc pre-processing to sets of known bacterial, viral and tumour antigens and developed alignment-independent models for antigen recognition based on the main chemical properties of amino acid sequences. the principal properties of the amino acids were represented by z descriptors, originally derived by hellberg et al.  <cit>  to describe amino acid hydrophobicity, molecular size and polarity. the models were implemented in a server for the prediction of protective antigens and subunit vaccines, which we call vaxijen. this is freely accessible via the world wide web. our method is the first alignment-free bioinformatics tool for the in silico identification of antigens.

RESULTS
three datasets were used in this study: one for bacteria, one for viruses, and one for tumours. each set consisted of  <dig> known antigens and  <dig> non-antigens, collected as described in the methods section. each amino acid in the protein sequence was represented by three z descriptors: z <dig>  z <dig>  and z <dig>  each protein was transformed into a uniform vector, which consisted of  <dig> acc terms, by applying acc pre-processing, as described in the methods section. the new matrices were imported into simca-p  <dig>   <cit>  and were subject to a two-class discriminant analysis using the partial least squares technique . the models were validated using leave-one-out cross-validation  on the whole sets and by external validation using test sets. the test sets were selected randomly to include 25% of the whole sets. then models were developed based on the remaining 75% and tested on the excluded proteins. the validation results were assessed in terms of aucroc, accuracy, sensitivity and specificity, as described in the methods section. additionally, five negative sets were compiled, and subsequently combined with the positive set to generate five new training sets. they also underwent da-pls and their aucroc, accuracy, sensitivity and specificity are given as mean values. within the server, the final model for each type was derived as a mean of the best five models, as assessed by loo-cv.

vaxijen model for prediction of protective bacterial antigens
the loo-cv of the bacterial model had 82% accuracy, 91% sensitivity and 72% specificity . as expected, the external validation showed a lower value but was still satisfactory. the roc curves are shown in figure  <dig>  the average values for the additional sets were very close to those derived for the initial model.

athe area under the curve  is a quantitative measure of the predictive ability and varies from  <dig>  for a random prediction to  <dig>  for a perfect prediction.

bthe threshold of the highest accuracy.

caccuracy = /total.

dsensitivity = true antigens/all antigens.

especificity = true non-antigens/all non-antigens.

gmean values of five training sets.

vaxijen model for prediction of protective viral antigens
the viral model performed very well in the loo-cv ; performance in the external validation was more moderate  . roc curves of the viral model validation are shown in figure  <dig>  the additional training sets showed lower mean accuracy, sensitivity and specificity.

vaxijen model for prediction of tumour antigens
the tumour model had excellent performance both in the loo-cv and in the external validation, exhibiting more than 85% accuracy. the roc curves are shown in figure  <dig>  the additional models had lower sensitivity but similar specificity and accuracy.

sequence similarity of training set
potential similarity between sequences in the antigen and non-antigen sets was assessed as described. the viral and bacterial protective antigen sequence sets show very little sequence similarity. this reflects their diverse species origins. the tumour set, derived from a single proteome, exhibits a higher internal degree of self-similarity, but is still clearly highly diverse.

vaxijen server
the loo-cv bacterial, viral and tumour models were included in the vaxijen server. protein sequences can be submitted as single proteins or uploaded as a multiple sequence file in fasta format. a single target organism can be selected. additionally, acc coefficients can be output. this option makes the server useful for general acc calculations of proteins. the results page lists the selected target, the protein sequence, its prediction probability, and a statement of protective antigen or non-antigen, according to a predefined cutoff. since more of the models had their highest accuracy at a threshold of  <dig> , this threshold value was chosen for all types.

discussion
vaxijen is the first server for alignment-independent prediction of protective antigens of bacterial, viral and tumour origin. the server contains models derived by acc pre-processing of amino acids properties. the predictive ability of our models was tested by internal leave-one-out cross-validation on training sets and by external validation on test sets. accuracies of internal and external validation for the three models lie in the range 70% to 89%. the models showed remarkable stability, as tested by combinations of the positive set and five different negative sets. thus, vaxijen is a reliable and consistent tool for the prediction of protective antigens. it can be used singly or in combination with other bioinformatics tools used for reverse vaccinology.

the z descriptors are highly condensed descriptors, and are derived from a principal component analysis  of  <dig> experimental or calculated physicochemical properties of the twenty naturally occurring amino acids. they correspond to the first three principal components explaining the variance in the set  <cit> : z <dig> represents hydrophobicity, z <dig> steric properties, and z <dig> polarity of the amino acids. since their creation, z descriptors have been widely used for the characterization  <cit>  and classification  <cit>  of proteins, and in qsar studies on peptides  <cit> . recently, we have found that z descriptors are good predictors of mhc binding peptides  <cit> . in the present study, z descriptors represent the main physicochemical properties important for the recognition of antigens.

acc transformations were used to remove irrelevant information, such as sequence length, and to amplify the class-discriminating properties  <cit> . sjostrom et al  <cit>  applied the acc transformation to z scale values in order to assign successfully the subcellular location of bacterial proteins . more recently, a similar method was applied to g-protein coupled receptors  and succeeded in classifying them into their major classes  <cit> . as antigenicity is not a simple, readily-interpreted linear property, it is unsurprising that acc pre-processing of the physicochemical properties of antigens and non-antigens allows for a good discrimination between them. the recognition of protective antigens arises synergistically from a combination of intermolecular interactions which involves a diverse variety of underlying features – steric, electrostatic and hydrophobic – which are explained well by the three z descriptors.

the most important result of the present work is the ability of the models to predict whether a protein sequence will, or will not, be a protective antigen. such antigens form the basis of subunit vaccines. in order to facilitate the use of the derived models, a server, named vaxijen, was developed to allow users to assess a protein's ability to induce protection. the server deals with single proteins as well as whole proteomes submitted in fasta format. as the method is general, models for parasite and fungal antigens will be developed in the future and included in the vaxijen server.

CONCLUSIONS
vaxijen is the first server for alignment-independent prediction of protective antigens. it was developed to allow antigen classification based solely on the physicochemical properties of the protein irrespective of sequence length and the need for alignment. vaxijen is an open system: new models will be included in the future, old ones will be improved. the server can be used singly or in combination with alignment-dependent prediction methods.

