BACKGROUND
transcription-regulating elements such as enhancers, insulators and silencers are commonly detected by their effects on the expression of transfected genes, i.e., by comparing the expression obtained from transfected dna that either bears or lacks a candidate dna segment. ideally, such comparisons would measure expression in a normal cellular environment and under circumstances in which the only variable is the structure of the transfected gene. however, the commonly used methods do not meet these criteria. thus, in the case of "transient" transfections, expression is measured one or two days post transfection from extrachromosomal dna, sometimes at very high copy number. in "stable" transfections, the transfected dna typically inserts as an array of multiple copies; the insertions occur at undefined and irreproducible chromosomal sites, the copy number varies idiosyncratically, and the multiple copies are in both orientations. these features – insertion site, copy number, and orientation – can affect expression of the transfected dna and obscure the analysis of regulatory elements. for example, independent transfectants bearing a gene for either the immunoglobulin μ or κ chain showed a  <dig> fold range in expression  <cit> . this variation was probably due in part to the effects of neighboring elements at the insertion site  <cit> . however, the presence of multiple transgene copies in the array is also problematic. on the one hand, the enhancers might act multiplicatively and thus make a weak enhancer appear many fold stronger than reality. on the other hand, repeated copies of the transgene can induce gene silencing, thus leading to an underestimate of enhancer strength  <cit> . also, because the array of transfected dna contains transcription units in tandem and in both orientations, the enhancer lies both 5' and 3' of at least some promoters and in both orientations. this complexity has often obscured whether enhancers in fact function independently of their position and orientation. finally, many reporter cassettes are derived from bacterial genes, and features such as the relatively high cpg content of non-vertebrate dna might impose non-physiological requirements on expression.

to analyze regulatory elements in a reproducible  context two methods have been used: homologous recombination  and recombination-mediated cassette exchange . expression in such isogenic cell lines typically varies less than two fold  <cit> . although hr has the important advantage that elements are assessed in the normal context, hr carries the disadvantage that the normal locus sometimes contains redundant or counteracting elements that obfuscate analysis. rmce is useful for analyzing how a specific gene functions at an alternative site. to use rmce, a selectable/counter-selectable cassette  flanked by site-specific recombination substrates  is placed in the genome, generally at an undefined site  <cit> . a vector bearing a reporter cassette that is likewise flanked by recombination sites is then co-transfected with a vector expressing the cognate site-specific recombinase . in this way the target cassette is replaced with the reporter cassette, thus always placing the reporter cassette in the same genomic context.

in our earlier work using targeted recombinants to study the role of regulatory elements in the endogenous igh locus of the mouse, our analysis was impeded by the presence of redundant enhancers  <cit> . rmce offered the possibility of overcoming the redundancy problem, thus allowing individual activating elements to be characterized with precision. because the enhancer and promoter of immunogolobulin genes require b cell-specific transcription factors, the existing rmce-bearing cell lines could not be used. we therefore established an rmce system in a mouse  b cell line. as reported here, this system yielded the expected reproducibility and thus allows sensitive, precise measurement of the effects of regulatory elements on gene expression. however, the system did present some unanticipated problems: the predominant product of the counter-selection was not a replacement, and even among the cells with replacements, a significant fraction had undergone additional changes that would obscure or confuse analysis. the additional tests and procedures that we developed to ensure analysis of only those transfectants with the desired replacement are also described here.

RESULTS
the rmce system described here made use of the cre recombinase and its cognate loxp sites and was based on a system developed previously  <cit> . in this system the selectable/counter-selectable marker was the hygr-tk fusion gene, which confers resistance to hygromycin  and sensitivity to gancyclovir . in the target vector, which is here denoted as ph/t , the loxp sites  that flank the hygr-tk fusion gene are inverted with regard to each other in order to prevent cre-mediated excision of the target cassette  <cit> .

construction of recipient cell line
as noted above, previous work indicated that the enhancer and promoter of immunoglobulin genes require b cell-specific transcription factors. for this reason we established rmce in a derivative of the mouse b hybridoma cell line, sp <dig>  which expresses the immunoglobulin μ heavy chain and κ light chain genes at high level and assembles these chains into igm specific for the hapten, trinitrophenyl . in designing a system for assessing regulatory elements in the immunoglobulin heavy chain  locus, we considered that it might be advantageous to use an immunoglobulin heavy chain gene as the reporter. using the μ gene as a reporter required that the recipient cell line lack a functional μ gene. for this purpose we used a cell line, z <dig>  that was derived from the sp <dig> hybridoma and had deleted the μ gene . μ expression in z <dig> could then be measured by elisa , flow cytometry  as well as by northern blot of μ rna.

in preparing a derivative of z <dig> bearing the target cassette, we sought to minimize the non-physiological dna that would adjoin the μ reporter and so excised the target cassette with enzymes that cut close to the loxp sites. previous work showed that ~ <dig> nucleotides are often excised from the ends of transfected dna  <cit> , the target vector was therefore cut with pvu ii at sites  <dig> and  <dig> nucleotides outside the loxp sites, with the expectation that cutting in this manner would usually result in transfectants which retained both loxp sites. as described in methods, dna of the target vector was electroporated into the z <dig> cell line at a relatively low concentration to reduce the occurrence of tandem or multiple insertions. transfectants were selected in hygromycin and subcloned. we then confirmed that both loxp sites were present, using pcr with primer pairs that flanked each of the two loxp sites, and tested for single copy insertions by southern blot .

construction of vectors bearing target and replacement cassettes
to prepare vectors bearing the reporter cassettes, a truncated μ gene from the sp <dig> hybridoma was inserted between  loxp . in the vector pvoc the μ gene lacked all the intronic activating elements. the pvmem'c vector was constructed by inserting the core enhancer  and flanking matrix attachment sites  into pvoc at their normal position. as described below, we used pcr to examine whether the μ gene reporter was intact after replacement. because the switch region, with its numerous short repeats, could give a variable pcr product and thus interfere with the assessment of the reporter, both replacement vectors were constructed without the switch region.

as illustrated, the target and replacement vectors were identical outside the loxp sites, except that the hind iii site shown to the right of the loxp  site in the ph/t vector was changed to a nhe i site for use in the replacement vectors. this change allowed us to test simply whether the incoming μ gene had become linked to flanking sequences derived from the target vector. because the two loxp sites were in opposite orientations, the reporter cassette could recombine in both the "forward" and "reverse" orientations, as illustrated . the orientations were distinguished by pcr using different primer combinations .

several potential target cell lines, each bearing a single copy of the target cassette, were then tested for rmce, i.e., they were co-transfected with the cre expression vector and a replacement vector. ganr cells were selected and examined for the replacement cassette. although none of the candidates yielded replacements with high frequency, one recipient, denoted z10hytk2- <dig>  was generally better than the others and was selected for further work.

another unexpected finding was that of  <dig> igm-producing replacements obtained with z10hytk2- <dig>   <dig> were in the reverse orientation. we do not understand why one orientation was so strongly favored. however, our subsequent work indicated that expression of the μ gene in this orientation was enhancer-dependent and therefore suitable for analyzing enhancer function. the protocol described below was designed to detect replacements only in the reverse orientation and solely on the basis of dna structure.

introduction of the reporter cassette
the recipient cells bearing the target cassette were grown continually in hygromycin to eliminate cells that had spontaneously lost expression of the hygr-tk cassette. to introduce the replacement cassette,  <dig> cells were electroporated in the presence of  <dig> μg cre-expression plasmid and  <dig> μg replacement plasmid. as indicated in methods, the electroporated cells were divided among multiple flasks to obtain independent replacements. cells were then incubated in normal medium for  <dig> days to allow the intracellular pool of hygr-tk rna and protein to decrease sufficiently for cells to become resistant to gancyclovir.

transfectants emerged as large colonies after ~ <dig> days at a frequency of ~1– <dig> × 10- <dig> per surviving cell. dna from these colonies was isolated and subjected to the following four tests to identify proper replacements. the fractions given below for colonies with the indicated features are based on results using several vectors of the same general structure as those shown in figure  <dig> 

a) test for a μ gene in the reverse orientation. pcr using primers  <dig> &  <dig> detected colonies in which the cells had acquired the μ gene in the reverse orientation .

b) test for μ gene replacement of the target cassette. the pcr product  was incubated with hind iii and nhe i to distinguish whether the μ gene had replaced the hygr-tk gene or inserted elsewhere in the genome. cutting with only hind iii indicated that the only μ gene in the reverse orientation had replaced the target cassette; cutting with only nhe i indicated that the only μ gene in the reverse orientation had randomly inserted; cutting with both enzymes indicated that both events had occurred. .

c) test for intact μ gene. for those colonies with a replacement, the dna was analyzed with two pcrs, using primer pairs  <dig> &  <dig> and  <dig> &  <dig>  these pcrs generated two overlapping dna segments spanning the entire replacement cassette and flanking loxp sites. the two pcr products were digested with xba i and xba i + hind iii, respectively, and yielded fragments ranging in size from  <dig>  kb to  <dig>  kb. by comparing these fragments with the digestion products of the original vector we could detect even small alterations. .

d) test whether the colony also acquired a randomly inserted μ gene in the forward orientation. for colonies with an intact replacement cassette in the reverse orientation, the dna was further analyzed by pcr using primer pairs  <dig> &  <dig> and  <dig> &  <dig>  .

analysis of μ expression
using the foregoing protocol we isolated eight independent replacements with vector pvmem'c and seven with pvoc. expression of the μ gene was estimated with the igm-specific elisa, and the cell lines showing the highest and lowest level of igm were then analyzed for μ mrna by northern blot  and by flow cytometry of intracellular μ . in the absence of the enhancer, expression of the μ gene was undetectable with each of the three assays. each assay indicated that the single copy of the intronic enhancer increased expression of the μ gene by at least  <dig> fold. as quantified by northern blot and by elisa, the reproducibility in expression among independent replacements bearing the μ gene with the intronic enhancer was ~ <dig>  fold, which is similar to what was reported using this rmce system and a β-galactosidase reporter in mel cells  <cit> . flow cytometry indicated that expression was homogeneous in the population.

the rna measurements indicated that the μ gene bearing the intronic enhancer was expressed at ~8% of the level that it was expressed in the original sp <dig> hybridoma. according to the measurements by elisa and flow cytometry  expression of the μ gene in the replacement cassette was ~20% and 40%, respectively, of the endogenous locus. we consider that the northern blots are the most accurate, as the quantification of the μ and κ rna by phosphorimager was linear over a large range and normalizing with the μ/κ ratio eliminated variations in input. the difference in μ gene expression between the cassette and the endogenous locus suggests that the endogenous locus includes elements – perhaps the 3' enhancers – that contribute to endogenous expression and were lacking in the replacement cassette.

CONCLUSIONS
the potential advantages of site-specific recombination for constructing isogenic cells were reported many years ago  <cit> , and several more refined systems involving the cre/loxp system of bacteriophage p <dig> and flp/frt system of yeast have been developed  <cit> . as reported here, we adapted one such system to a mouse hybridoma b cell line. the system yielded the expected reproducibility , and it was therefore a great improvement over other systems in which expression of the μ gene varies  <dig> fold. however, using the rmce system as described here demanded substantially more time and labor than other systems. the extra work was required for two general reasons. first, the frequency of replacement  in our system was lower than what was found previously: > 90% for two lines derived from mel cells; 10% and 50% for two lines derived from es cells  <cit> . second, our analysis revealed that in a significant fraction  of the cells, the μ gene was not intact or there was an additional, ectopic insertion of the replacement vector. identifying these cases required specific pcr tests.

most measurements of the strength of the igh and other enhancers have been made with transgene arrays, and, as noted in the background, several features of the array have made it difficult to infer enhancer strength from these measurements. by contrast, our measurement of the effect of a single copy of the igh intronic enhancer showed that this enhancer increases expression by at least  <dig> fold. this same system can likewise be used to measure the effectiveness of other regulatory elements – both b cell-specific and tissue-nonspecific – such as promoters and insulators. inasmuch as this system is amenable to flow cytometry, it will also be useful for studying the molecular basis of variegated expression.

the fact that the reporter is a fully mammalian gene increases the relevance of the measurements. moreover, because the reporter gene was derived from the endogenous gene of a hybridoma cell line and is expressed in a closely related cell line, the expression of the reporter and the endogenous μ genes can be compared directly to assess the effects of omitting or including individual elements of the endogenous locus in the reporter cassette.

