BACKGROUND
the evolutionary mechanisms responsible for divergence in gene expression between species are poorly understood. to begin with, expression level is for most genes a high-dimensional phenotype: almost without exception it differs among cell types, across the life cycle, and in response to numerous environmental factors  <cit> . this makes it challenging to link positive selection on regulatory sequences to any particular aspect of a gene’s expression. in addition, populations often harbor significant levels of genetic variation that influences gene expression  <cit> , confounding attempts to distinguish between-species divergence from within-species variation. finally, the full complement of cis-regulatory elements is rarely known, constraining attempts to carry out comprehensive scans for natural selection. perhaps unsurprisingly, it has proven difficult to detect a clear relationship at a genomic scale between the distribution of positive selection on noncoding sequences and divergence in gene expression, particularly in multicellular organisms  <cit> .

the question is whether this result is a true or false negative. one way to move beyond a quest for simple correlations is to carry out joint analysis of genes that contribute to related phenotypes. during human origins, for instance, many of the same functional categories of genes show enrichments for signatures of positive selection  and for changes in tissue-specific expression level , even though on a gene-by-gene basis no correlation is evident. this overlap in enrichments hints at cause-and-effect or common-effect relationships. for example, two genes whose products are part of the same biological process might both experience positive selection to change expression levels because they both alter the same quantitative organismal trait in the same direction. the clearest examples come from metabolic pathways , but in principle this relationship could apply to any set of genes that contribute to the same trait or set of traits. working with functionally related sets of genes rather than single genes should, in principle, improve our ability to detect relationships between signatures of positive selection and gene expression change.

to test this concept, we measured transcript abundance in five tissues in humans and chimpanzees, and then used the results to assess the relationship between gene expression and positive selection. we chose tissues informative to understanding the evolution of metabolism, namely adipose tissue, cerebellum, cortex, liver, and skeletal muscle. these tissues provide an opportunity to explore the “expensive tissue” hypothesis that a major shift in energy allocation among tissues occurred during human evolution in order to support the remarkable expansion of the metabolically expensive human brain . we analyzed our measurements of transcript abundance from all tissues together in a single statistical model so as to maximize our power to detect expression differences. we then looked at correlations between differential gene expression and the results from three noncoding dna datasets. these included a combination of human accelerated regions   <cit> ; as well as rapidly evolving putative cis-regulatory regions upstream of coding sequences   <cit> . as expected, we find little correlation between gene expression changes and adaptive noncoding  changes at the level of individual genes; however, we did find appreciable correlations between the two for several informative kinds of biological functions. our results demonstrate the utility of considering functional categories when studying the evolution of gene expression and provide novel insights into the genetic basis for human origins.

RESULTS
measurements of gene expression
we used rna-seq to measure expression of  <dig>  genic regions in at least one of white adipose tissue, lateral cerebellum, frontal cortex, liver, and skeletal muscle sampled from four male humans and four male chimpanzees . using a multi-factor generalized linear model  to analyze our measurements of all tissues together  <cit> , we identified  <dig> genes whose expression differs between humans and chimpanzees . this proportion, 34% , is greater than in previous studies that analyzed different tissues in separate models  <cit> . go analyses of overall differential expression show significant expression differences in categories related to cell signaling, neural processes, ion transport and development . in keeping with many previous studies , cluster analysis revealed a greater overall similarity in expression by tissue than by species; the tissue term in our glm on average explained a greater fraction of differential expression  than did the species term .fig.  <dig> boxplot of the –log <dig> distributions from the glm examining the tissue  and species  effects




changes in expression divergence and tissue specificity
we then examined the trends of genes that have diverged in expression levels between humans and chimpanzees in individual tissues. we calculated a specificity score for differential expression  in a given tissue relative to the rest of our gene expression data . this score is not based on the magnitude of expression levels, but rather on the distribution of expression over tissues. a gene that is mainly differentially expressed in one tissue  between humans and chimpanzees will have a specificity score closer to one, and genes not showing changes in expression will have scores closer to  <dig>  we found a strong correlation of tissue specificity and changing gene expression between humans and chimpanzees in all five tissues  . these results suggest that the more tissue specific a gene’s expression, the more likely its expression is to change over evolutionary time, even during the short divergence time between the human and chimpanzee lineages. in contrast, the categories of genes we found enriched for similar expression levels across the tissues we measured here are mainly comprised of housekeeping processes, such as “transcription regulation” and “dna binding”. this is consistent with the idea that tissue-specific selection pressures are more easily accommodated by changes in cis-regulation than by changes in protein structure, because the latter are more likely to have deleterious pleiotropic effects  <cit> .fig.  <dig> correlation between tissue specificity and gene expression divergence between humans and chimpanzees. there is a significant correlation between higher specificity to a tissue and expression divergence 


fig.  <dig> bubble plot of go biological process enrichments for gene expression differences across five tissues between human and chimpanzee. to display these traits visually, we calculated an optimal 2-dimensional arrangement using non-metric multidimensional scaling on the between-category sematic similarity scores, a measure of a priori relatedness of traits. traits whose simrel distance is less than  <dig>  are considered similar within the go biological process ontology tree . the significantly differentially expressed categories are displayed on the same axes, but separated into two plots for clarity. in each plot, the intensity of the colors of the circles and text indicate the evidence for differential expression of each trait. the area of the circle is proportional to the log of the number of genes counted in each trait


fig.  <dig> ideogram of clustering of significant differentially expressed genes in humans compared to chimpanzees across tissues 




functions of differentially expressed genes across humans and non-human primates
considering just the large  gene ontology categories  we see themes of metabolism, signaling, development, and nervous system as differentially expressed between humans and chimpanzee . these results are intriguing, but only represent biological processes functioning in normal tissue.

to further understand the implications of these expression differences, we analyzed their distribution over multiple gene sets using the molecular signatures database   <cit> ; see “methods” for details). msigdb consists of  <dig>  sets grouped into  <dig> collections representing broad aspects of gene function and organization. the collections form a shallow, partially hierarchical, tree structure. one of the challenges in interrogating these large gene ontology sets is the redundancy in, and heterogeneous size of, these gene set ontologies  <cit> . for example, the c3:all collection is the union of the c3:mir and c3:tft collections with no deeper branching. therefore, we considered only  <dig> leaf  collections . in order to emphasize broad trends among changes in gene expression between humans and chimpanzees, we restricted attention to sets containing at least  <dig> genes whose expression we measured.

the  <dig>  msigdb gene sets most enriched with genes scoring high for overall differential expression between humans and chimpanzees are listed. collection is the msigdb collection containing the set . genes is the number of genes whose expression we measured in the set . r
rb is the rank-biserial correlation between scores for differential expression and membership in the set; sets are ordered by decreasing r
rb. se is the standard error of r
rb via bootstrapping with  <dig>  replicates




we then went on to examine whether the differentially expressed genes between humans and chimpanzees have roles in human disease or dysregulation. the kegg pathways that show enrichments are clearly related to two general groups of processes: neuronal function and cancer . there are a number of categories related to “neuronal signaling.” for processes related to cancer, the signal appears to be coming from differential gene expression in processes related to cell signaling and adhesion . this is suggestive that healthy differential gene expression between humans and chimpanzees overlaps with gene also involved in some late-onset disease susceptibilities.

genic correlations between differential expression and noncoding adaptation
four thousand five hundred eighty-one genes whose expression we measured were also analyzed in our previous study of noncoding  regions immediately upstream from transcription start sites  <cit> . consistent with that study, the correlation between our current scores for overall differential expression between humans and chimpanzees  and our previous scores for adaptive sequence changes during human evolution is negligible . the tissue with the highest correlation between scores for per-tissue differential expression and scores for adaptive sequence changes is cerebral cortex, but the correlation is weak . similar analyses using scores for adaptive sequence changes from two other studies of noncoding regions  <cit>  yield similar results . thus, per gene, the relationship between gene expression and adaptive noncoding changes is apparently weak.

beyond the possibility of noise or errors in the scores, this finding is unsurprising for several reasons explained above. we measured expression in only a few tissues from healthy adults, giving us a limited view of this high-dimensional expression phenotype. for these and other reasons, we had not expected to see a strong relationship between gene expression and adaptive noncoding changes at the level of individual genes.

there are correlations between differential expression and adaptation at the level of ontology categories
however, we hypothesized that there might be a stronger relationship at the level of biological function than at the level of individual genes. conceivably, both genes whose expression differs between humans and chimpanzees and genes near noncoding regions whose sequences changed adaptively during human evolution might tend to affect the same biological functions. of course, biological function is an extremely broad notion. as the diversity of msigdb collections attests, genes can be categorized in many different ways, from their molecular characteristics through their contributions to normal development and physiology to their involvement in pathologies such as cancer. accordingly, our question amounts to whether there is some type of biological function with respect to which there is a stronger relationship between gene expression and adaptive noncoding changes. we addressed this question using the commonly accessed msigdb gene ontology collections  <cit> .

for each msigdb gene set delineated above and for each previous study of noncoding regions mentioned above , we computed a rank-biserial correlation  of the kind presented in table  <dig> for enrichment with genes scoring high for adaptive sequence changes in putatively regulatory regions of the human genome. as in our previous meta-analysis of such studies  <cit> , we combined these rank-biserial correlations across the studies to obtain one rank-biserial correlation for each set, restricting attention to sets represented in at least two of the studies, with correlations not significantly heterogeneous across these studies, and containing at least  <dig> genes analyzed on the average over these studies . for each msigdb collection delineated above, we then computed the correlation over gene sets in the collection between enrichment rank-biserial correlations for differential expression, either overall or per-tissue, and enrichment rank-biserial correlations for noncoding adaptation. interpreting these correlations is complicated by overlap among sets within a collection—a typical gene is a member of several sets—which tends to inflate the correlations. thus, for each correlation, we corrected by computing a p-value using a form of permutation testing that accounts for overlap among sets.

all msigdb collections we considered are listed except for c2:cp:biocarta, in which no gene set contained at least  <dig> genes analyzed in a previous study of adaptive noncoding changes. # sets is the number of gene sets we considered in the collection. r
r is the rank correlation between rank-biserial correlations for enrichment with differential expression  and rank-biserial correlations for enrichment with noncoding adaptation . p is the one-tailed p-value of r
r via permutation test with  <dig>  permutations; collections are ordered by increasing p, which reflects r
r, # sets, and patterns of overlap among gene sets in the collection




discussion
the correlations that we detected between positive selection and changes in gene expression are significant, but not strong. there are several plausible reasons for this, beyond whatever noise exists in the expression measurements and selection scores. it is possible, for instance, that some expression differentiation is neutral or even deleterious, and that some of the adaptation happened along the chimpanzee rather than human lineage. it is also important to bear in mind that both datasets contain only a subset of all possible genes and tissue types over the four individuals. additionally, several recent studies have shown the importance of looking over multiple tissue types to gain a clearer understanding of important cis-regulatory effects within human populations, where eqtls differ among or across environments . including more expression data would also likely improve the correlation between expression differences and the scans for selection in our study as well as in other, more distal putative enhancer regions  <cit> .

nevertheless, there are other studies that support the idea that one can detect the effects of adaptation on cis-regulation on human traits. a correlation between expression divergence in other tissues and mutations in short core promoter regions has been reported  <cit> . more recently, an analysis of positive selection across the human genome using human population genomic data  found that signatures of adaptation are common in regulatory regions   <cit> . these are signals of more recent positive selection than were detected in haygood et al. , suggesting that these regulatory regions are continuing to adapt to novel challenges and environments, and, presumably, this correlates with changes in gene expression.

the enrichments for differential expression between humans and chimpanzees by cytogenetic band was somewhat unexpected. for example, the category c4:cgn , shows up as significant in our correlations between noncoding adaptation and differential expression. it is possible there are more global regulators of expression for these regions that differ between species. compared to the genomic regions highlighted in  <cit> , there does seem to be an overlap between these regions and regions where segmental duplications have occurred in the human genome. this could influence some of our signal of positive selection due to orthology issues; however, there is previous evidence of positive selection in regions with duplications, both in coding  <cit>  and in regulatory sequence  <cit> .

we also found a strong correlation between tissue specificity and shifting gene expression between species. this makes sense in the light of pleiotropic concerns, where genes with a greater degree of tissue specificity can change expression pattern or levels over relatively short evolutionary time spans.

one important question is whether there are pleiotropic consequences of these adaptive changes in gene expression that have accrued during human evolution. we find that disease pathways involved in signaling and certain forms of cancer are enriched in the genes that show differential expression between humans and chimpanzees. there appears to be a substantial difference in the frequency of epithelial derived cancers, such as breast, ovary, and prostate between humans and non-human primates: incidence of cancer is significantly higher in humans compared to non-human primates in captivity , reviewed in  <cit>  and human fibroblasts also show reduced apoptotic ability as compared to chimpanzees and other non-human primates  <cit> . although much of this difference is likely driven by environmental and dietary factors, some of the difference may be due to genomic differences between the species. it will take functional studies to understand how these gene expression differences are driving the differences in organismal phenotypes between humans and our closest relatives, and to understand how much of the differences in gene expression we see are due to genetic as opposed to environmental factors.

CONCLUSIONS
we find that adaptation in regulatory regions may have driven many of these changes in gene expression, but that may have also had other attendant consequences related to human disease states. in looking at changes across tissues and evolutionary time, we see that shifting specificities across tissues show how gene expression can be the raw material for selection. these data present a window into how positive selection has worked to change gene expression between humans and chimpanzees at the level of larger groups of changing gene expression. these changes underlie the more obvious changes in phenotype, but may have the important side effect of also underling differential disease susceptibilities that may not have been visible to selection.

