BACKGROUND
dna triplexes  <cit>  are formed when a duplex containing a poly-purine track is recognized by single-stranded polynucleotide . the third strand interacts through the major groove of the duplex, thereby making specific hydrogen bond interactions with the watson-crick purines  <cit> . the tfo can be dna, rna or different oligonucleotides with modifications in either their nucleobases or phosphoribose backbone  <cit> . two types of triplexes have been described on the basis of the orientation of the tfo with respect to the central polypurine track: i) parallel triplexes and ii) anti-parallel triplexes. the parallel triplex is characterized by hoogsteen hydrogen bonds between the tfo  and the central watson-crick purine , while the anti-parallel triplexes show reverse-hoogsteen hydrogen bonds and the tfo is purine-rich . parallel triplexes are believed to be more stable than the anti-parallel ones in normal laboratory conditions, but the situation can reverse in physiological environments, especially when the target duplexes contain a poly-g track  <cit> .

the presence of a tfo in the major groove of the duplex leads to major distortions in the capacity of the target duplex to be recognized by specific proteins  <cit> . this produces major changes in the functionality of the target duplex, which has been used for biotechnological and biomedical purposes  <cit> . thus, modified tfos containing suitable chemical compounds have been used to develop artificial nucleases  <cit> , to induce recombination in mammalian cells  <cit> , and to trigger mutations in target dna  <cit> . in all these cases, the formation of the triplex guides the active chemical compound to the proper position in the target genome. unmodified tfos increase the rate of mutations at the triplex target sequence , which opens the possibility for knocking down genes  <cit> . triplex formation inhibits mrna synthesis  <cit>  when the tts is located at a regulatory region. furthermore, when the triplex is formed in the middle of a gene, mrna elongation is stopped just before the tts, which indicates that triplex binding is strong enough to displace complex transcriptional machinery  <cit> . these two findings open up the possibility to use tfos as "anti-gene" drugs. these pharmacological agents would have the capacity to specifically arrest the transcription of pathological genes, thus leading to an intense and targeted therapeutic action  <cit> . however, despite their promise, anti-gene therapies still face many technical problems  <cit>  and the density and location of ttss in human genes is unclear.

in a recent paper, we explored the presence of ttss  in the human genome  <cit> . our analysis showed that these sequences are vastly over-represented when compared to what randomness predicts. interestingly, the largest relative concentration of ttss occurs in the upstream regulatory region   <cit> . recent studies by our group  show that these trends are common to many other organisms, from mammals to procaryotes, indicating that many genes may be targets for triplex formation . however, this interesting finding raises an intriguing question: why are ttss so abundant in crucial regions for the control of genome function?

here we present an extensive descriptive analysis of ttss in the human genome in an attempt to elucidate why these sequences are so abundant in regulatory regions. our results indicate that the unique physical properties of ttss may explain this overpopulation.

RESULTS
as proposed in previous studies using an older genomic data base  <cit> , ttss are largely over-represented in human genome with respect to a background model such as that described in reference . this over-representation is particularly noticeable when considering the proximal promoter region , where a considerable density of large ttss are found. note that the over-representation is clear irrespective of the random model used  and that the statistical significance of the difference is demonstrated by clover calculations .

very interestingly, the over-representation of ttss in the promoter region with respect to the general human genome decreases as more distant promoter regions are considered . clearly, there is an unusually large region with potential to form triplexes in region proximal to transcription origin, which is rich in promoter regions. at first glance, several reasons for this behaviour can be offered: i) triplex formation may be an ancient regulatory mechanism  for rna-mediated control of gene expression, ii) target sequences for transcription factors have an overpopulation of ttss, iii) ttss have several intrinsic physical properties that are useful for protein binding to dna.

are ttss part of an ancient dna auto-regulatory mechanism?
triplex formation is a powerful mechanism by which to modulate gene function, and, when formed in the promoter region, triplexes can knock-out or knock-down a gene. accordingly, it is feasible that the large number of ttss at a promoter region is related to regulatory processes. interestingly, analysis of go terms using the fatigo  program shows that the set of genes with large ttss  at promoter regions correspond to a subset of genes which differs significantly  from the background. irrespectively of the length of the tts  and the section of the early promoter region 0– <dig> or 0– <dig> nts upstream, genes with ttsp are over-enriched with functions in the regulation of physiological processes, and very often are characterized as transcription factors or related protein . in fact, tts in promoters seems to be as determinant of the functionality of genes as the cpg islands . on the basis of this observation, we therefore propose that the presence of large tts in the promoter region of these genes might provide advantage for the control of the expression of these genes. furthermore, it is tempting to consider the existence of an rna-mediated feed-back mechanism  which controls the expression of the regulatory genes by triplex formation between the tts at the promoter region of these genes and the tfo present in the intron of the regulated genes. unfortunately, go analysis and inspection of transfac  <dig>   failed to provide evidence connecting transcription factors with tts at the promoter region with those with the corresponding tfo in introns. in addition, we analysed the cases in which a transcription factor with a tts in its promoter interacted with a second transcription factor, in order to examine whether the introns of genes regulated by this second factor contained tfos complementary to the ttss in the first transcription factor. however, again we did not find any relationship between genes with tts in the promoter and those with intronic tfos. given the low number of cases for which experimental evidence of regulation by transcription factors is available, this negative result cannot be taken as evidence against the rna-mediated feed-back mechanism proposed.

are ttss rich in transcription factor recognition sites?
as described in methods, we mapped the transfac database into the human promoter region  and computed the occurrences of nucleotides in long ttss  in the promoter region around the transcription factor binding site . sequences which were recognized as targets of transcription factors showed much less probability to be in tts than neighbouring promoter sequences . furthermore, generation of random sequences  showed that no-tts random sequences have a much larger probability to be transcription factor binding sites than tts random sequences. overall, we must conclude that even in some cases small  poly-purine segments might be found in tfbs, tts as defined here  are very rarely present in tfbs. that means that the hypothesis that ttss are over-represented in promoter regions because they contain tfbs can be ruled out.

although ttss do not interact directly with transcription factors, they show a profile of conservation when approaching to the start of transcription similar to that of the whole of non-tts and of sequences that have been annotated as tfbs . ttsp in the near promoter regions are quite well conserved  suggesting that they may have an important physiological role that is not related to direct dna-protein interactions.

do ttss have distinct intrinsic physical properties?
previous results seem contradictory and somehow difficult to rationalize. thus, although tts in promoters  are over-represented, appear in key genes for the control of physiological processes and are very well conserved, they are not targets for transcription factors. no evidence is found regarding the possibility that tts acted as an ancient regulatory mechanism, mimicking the functionality of interference rnas. how can we reconcile all this findings? in our view, the only possibility will be if tts have some intrinsic physicochemical properties that are useful when present in the promoter region of certain genes.

as described in methods, we analyzed several physical-chemical descriptors of dna in two sets: i) randomly generated ttss and ii) randomly generated human-like dna. in general, ttss displayed average melting temperatures similar to those of normal dna sequences , which agrees with the observation that the average stacking energy of ttss and normal dna sequences are the same. thus, ttss do not introduce bias in the stability of the dna duplex, which could provide an advantage for the functionality of promoter regions. curvature analysis using bolshoy's algorithm indicates that ttss are significantly more curved than random dna sequences. furthermore, analysis of configurational volume  strongly suggests that ttss are on average more rigid than normal dna. these findings strongly support the hypothesis that ttss at promoter regions can be used as rigid and curved separation signals for transcription factors. it is clear that these physical properties modulate nucleosome positioning and rotational phasing, and several authors have pointed out that polypurine tracks are not well incorporated into the nucleosome  <cit> . unfortunately, sequence rules for nucleosome positioning and phasing are, in our hands, not accurate enough to test this hypothesis.

in addition to the possible role of ttss in the organization of dna in nucleosomes, when these sequences are present, their unique physicochemical properties have a large impact on the promoter region. thus, large flexibility is desirable for dnas that need to bind to proteins, and accordingly deform its structure, but rigidity is useful for the definition of spacing elements that should isolate protein-induced dna deformability in specific regions of the duplex. the larger curvature is also a desired element, since it can help in the relative positioning of transcription factors in 3-d space, helping then to establish physiologically critical protein-protein interactions. thus, the presence of ttss at promoter regions can provide the cell with specific mechanisms, probably in most cases not related to triplex formation, by which to enhance activation/repression of genes that are crucial for the regulation of cellular processes mechanisms.

the results presented in this paper show that, irrespectively of whether the cell now uses or once used a triplex-mediated control mechanism, ttss in the promoter region are very abundant and that genes with ttsp are crucial for the control of cell life. ttsp do not bind to transcription factors, but besides this, they have a conservation profile similar to that of non-tts segments in promoter regions, including that of sequences recognizing transcription factors. analysis reported here suggests that the ttsp provide the promoter region unique physical properties that can contribute to a better functioning of regulatory proteins. all these results strongly support the notion that triplex-based anti-gene technology is widely applicable in the control of pathologies related to malfunctioning of the regulatory mechanisms of physiological processes.

CONCLUSIONS
triplex-target sequences  are over-represented in the human genome. such an over-representation is especially large when promoter regions  <dig> to  <dig> upstream are considered.

genes with tts in promoters are over-enriched with functions in the regulation of physiological processes, and very often are characterized as transcription factors or related protein.

tts are not part of sequences which are directly targeted by transcription factors, but their  conservation profiles suggest that they are important for gene functionality.

tts are significantly more curved and rigid than normal dna, which suggests that  tts act as spacing fragments which help in the correct positioning of transcription factors.

