BACKGROUND
a balance between genetic stability and mutability is essential for bacteria to both retain species identities over long evolutionary times and enable adaptability to changing environments, but little is known about the mechanisms for establishing, maintaining and modulating such a balance. it is richly documented that, under usual growth conditions, genetic stability is largely assured by the functional dna replication and repair systems. conversely, when the environment becomes stressful, genetic modifications through mutation or acquisition of exogenous dna may provide novel traits for greater adaptability of organisms.

among the known systems for maintaining genetic stability, the dna mismatch repair  machinery is the most powerful contributor to the inhibition of mutation and recombination events  <cit> . bacteria that have elevated mutation rates due to defects in mmr genes, e.g., muts, mutl or muth, are termed mutators or hypermutators and have been isolated from various human pathogens or commensals  <cit> . the mutator genotype may confer a temporary selective advantage for the bacteria under stressful conditions, as it allows for the creation of genetic novelties, including stochastic mutations and incorporation of a great diversity of exogenous dnas  <cit> . however, as most mutations or intruding dnas are likely to be harmful, the continuous existence of defective mmr alleles would eventually lead to loss of fitness. one may therefore predict that bacteria should be able to optimize their evolutionary fitness through mechanisms that balance the mmr system between functional and non-functional states, allowing beneficial changes to be made when needed and otherwise minimizing the accumulation of harmful changes. to date, such mechanisms have not been identified.

in previous work, we demonstrated that conversion of mutl between functional and defective  alleles may act as a genetic switch to modulate bacterial mutability at the population level  <cit> . unlike other mechanisms such as the sos response, the rpos regulon, dinb error-prone dna polymerase, reca, etc., which undoubtedly all can generate a high mutability state and can contribute to bacterial evolution  <cit> , the repeats-mediated allele conversion via slipped-strand mis-pairing seems to be the only known mechanism that is spontaneous and can respond to environmental changes swiftly. to validate the existence of such a genetic switch and to determine whether mutation or recombination events can actually take place only when the switch is set at the non-functional state, we experimentally locked mmr into either functional or non-functional states so that spontaneous conversion between the two states would become unlikely and then scored bacterial mutability. we found that, when the switch was locked at the functional state, genomic evolutionary events  were significantly inhibited. this genetic switch model may be generalized to other bacteria, as small repeats also exist in their mmr genes and may mediate allele conversion through slipped-strand mis-pairing.

RESULTS
detection of conversion between functional and defective mutl alleles
as the special structure of the tandem gctggc repeats in mutl is expected to easily lead to deletion or duplication of a copy of the six bases via slipped-strand mis-pairing and in turn to changes in bacterial mutability  <cit> , we first needed to experimentally validate the effects of mutl allele conversions on mutability. for this, we cultured the s. typhimurium lt <dig> mutator strain 9052d <dig>  which had the 6bpΔmutl genotype  <cit> , and screened for spontaneous allele conversion between mutl and 6bpΔmutl. when started, the culture contained only  6bpΔmutl cells. during incubation, the bacterial culture showed a gradual increase in the fraction of wild type mutl cells - on day  <dig>  the population contained approximately equal numbers of mutl and 6bpΔmutl cells . a spontaneous mutl revertant obtained from 9052d <dig> on day  <dig> was saved and designated 9052d1r for subsequent analysis.

to monitor the allele conversion from mutl to 6bpΔmutl, we constructed a tyr auxotroph in 9052d1r and designated it 9052d1r tyr-. when inoculated into m <dig> minimal medium supplemented with gradually decreasing concentrations of tyrosine , 6bpΔmutl cells in 9052d1r tyr- were detected, slowly increased as a fraction of the population and eventually predominated . conversely, we did not find any detectable allele conversion in salmonella non-mutators such as sgsc <dig> and sgsc <dig> . this may be due either to real absence or to very low frequencies of 6bpΔmutl cells in the bacterial population. we thus increased the screening scale from  <dig> to over ten thousand single colonies. nevertheless, no allele conversion was detected either. detection might become possible had we kept increasing the screening scale, e.g., from thousands to millions of single colonies or more, but such work scales would not be practical by conventional methods. furthermore, if we did not find the allele conversion even at the million-colony scale, we would still not be able to distinguish between absence and low frequency of 6bpΔmutl cells in these bacteria and, consequently, could not draw any conclusion regarding whether such a spontaneous genetic switch may exist in these bacterial populations. therefore, alternative methods had to be sought for a definite answer, such as "locking" the mutl gene to prevent it from conversion between the wild type and 6bpΔmutl alleles and then inspecting overall mutability changes of the bacterial population.

construction of strains containing different mutl alleles and evaluation of their mutability
as the inter-conversion between the wild type mutl and 6bpΔmutl alleles in s. typhimurium lt <dig> results from copy number changes in the tandem  <dig> bp repeats  via slipped-strand mis-pairing  <cit> , we sought to experimentally prevent the conversion by disrupting the sequence identity between the tandem repeats through base substitution that would not change the amino acids encoded. for example, we "locked" mutl allele into its functional state by converting gctggc gctggc gctggc to gcttgc cctggc gctggc , using a gene replacement technique  <cit> . the modified sequence still encodes the amino acids lalala, but the three  <dig> bp sequences are no longer identical and thus slipped-strand mis-pairing should be inhibited. we introduced the "locked" mutl allele  into s. typhimurium lt <dig> and obtained lt2mutll <dig> . similarly, we "locked" the 6bpΔmutl allele into its non-functional state  and constructed lt26bpΔmutll . we chose to use s. typhimurium lt <dig> rather than s. typhimurium lt <dig> for this experiment due to the consideration that its whole genome sequence is known so that all genetic manipulations could be made with ease. as a control, we constructed strain lt2mutll1u , in which the "locked" mutl allele was "unlocked" through restoration of the original wild type mutl allele sequence . as a control experiment to estimate the impact of synonymous substitutions on bacteria, we arbitrarily changed codon  <dig> in mutl from ctg to ctt  and obtained lt2mutllc .

a, the first codon encoding the protein is underlined.

b, italic characters represent modified bases; characters in small case indicate neighboring base of the sequence.

mutation rates of these constructed isogenic strains shown in figure  <dig> unambiguously demonstrated the key roles of mutl allele conversion in modulating genetic stability of a bacterial population - when mutl was locked into the functional state , the mutability was obviously suppressed compared to its wild type ancestor , whereas when mutl was locked into its defective state , the mutability was significantly increased compared to its parent strain . moreover, the mutability of the wild type strain level was seen again when the locked mutl allele was restored to its convertible wild type sequence. the synonymous base substitution process itself did not lead to apparent influences to the bacterial mutability, as strain lt2mutllc exhibited a mutation rate similar to that of wild type lt <dig> .

we also examined changes in genetic stability by comparing recombination frequencies among these bacterial strains and found the same trend . in conclusion, the prevention of conversion of mutl from the functional to a defective state significantly reduced the capacity of the bacteria to accept genetic novelties that would facilitate their adaptation to environmental pressures, e.g., through mutation to develop antibiotic resistance  or through recombination to acquire needed biosynthesis genes, even when the genes were available in the environment .

other dna repeats within mutl and muts genes in s. typhimurium lt2
the fact that mutability of a bacterial population comprised of lt2mutll <dig> was reduced but not completely abolished prompted us to search for other sequence repeats in mutl as well as other mmr genes that might also play the roles of genetic switches through internal tandem repeat copy number changes. as a result of this more extensive search, we found three additional candidate dna repeats in mutl and one in muts in s. typhimurium lt <dig> , all of which could possibly mediate additions or deletions of nucleotides via slipped-strand mis-pairing during replication and thus might influence genetic stability/mutability. to evaluate their potential roles as genetic switches, we constructed a series of isogenic strains, including lt2mutll <dig>  lt2mutll <dig>  lt2mutll <dig> and lt2mutsl , in which at least one base in the repeats within mutl or muts was changed to disrupt the sequence identity among the repeats. as shown in figure  <dig>  the range of mutability in the bacterial populations decreased 4- <dig> fold compared to that of the wild type lt <dig> strain, indicating that these repeats may also serve as switches in modulating the bacterial genetic stability/mutability. we are initiating a series of experiments to lock all of these potential convertible sites in mutl and muts at the functional states in the same bacterial cell to determine whether the mutability of the bacterial population started with this genetically manipulated cell might be further reduced or even abolished.

dna repeats within mmr genes in other bacterial species
we wondered whether the mutl-6bpΔmutl switch model that we describe in salmonella might be applicable to other species, as all bacteria should experience a similar need to modulate genetic stability and mutability. after a careful examination of multiple bacterial genomes, we found that the exact  <dig> bp tandem repeats that are present in the mutl gene of s. typhimurium were identifiable only in bacteria that are very closely related to salmonella, such as escherichia and shigella . in more distantly related bacteria, such as yersinia or pseudomonas, there were nucleotide differences in that particular site  that were sufficient to abolish the sequence identity required for allele conversion by slipped-strand mis-pairing. nevertheless, we found numerous other short dna repeats  in other regions of the mutl or muts genes in over  <dig> bacterial species , raising the possibility that genetic switches may be common in a wide range of bacterial species. it is of great interest to notice that in almost all of the common bacterial pathogens several repeats were identified in mutl and muts genes . this may enable the pathogenic organisms to counteract host antibacterial responses by allowing rapid evolutionary bursts mediated via transient mmr defects.

discussion
the concept of genetic switches for spontaneously modulating mutability is important, as it reconciles the two seemingly conflicting requirements of genetic stability and mutability. without genetic stability, species continuity would not exist; without mutability, organisms would hardly be able to adapt to changing environments by generating genetic novelty.

the dna mismatch repair system is well known for its role in maintaining genetic stability  <cit> . considerable effort has been devoted to the elucidation of the emergence and molecular causes of mmr defects and their impacts on evolution. however, the roles of variable mmr gene function in balancing genetic stability and mutability have received little attention. in this study, we experimentally validated our previous observations about the consequences of mutl/6bpΔmutl allele conversion in bacterial genomic stability and further demonstrated that such conversion might occur in multiple mmr genes, serving as spontaneous genetic switches that bacteria can use to modulate mutability at the population level during evolution.

some of the results seemed inconsistent with the genetic switch hypothesis. for example, although we readily detected mutl to 6bpΔmutl conversion in s. typhimurium lt <dig> mutators, we did not find detectable allele conversion in salmonella non-mutators , even though our hypothesis would predict the rare appearance of a 6bpΔmutl genotype under these experimental conditions. however, the "negative findings" do not necessarily mean that the mutl to 6bpΔmutl conversion was really negative. for instance, if the 6bpΔmutl frequency was 10- <dig> at the start of the experiment and was increased to 10- <dig> at the end of the experiment, this ten thousand-fold amplification would still be well beyond the detection capability by the available techniques. we thus attempted to tackle this problem from the opposite direction: if we prevented the mutl to 6bpΔmutl conversion when the 6bpΔmutl genotype was predicted as necessary in a challenging growth environment, would adaptability of the modified bacteria be reduced compared to the wild type controls? when mutl was prevented from conversion to 6bpΔmutl by nucleotide replacement, we found that bacterial mutability as evidenced by adaptability in challenging environments was significantly reduced. this result demonstrated that conversion from mutl to 6bpΔmutl plays important roles in bacterial adaptation; success to detect the 6bpΔmutl at high frequency in some but not all bacterial strains in the experiments may just reflect genetic variations among them, which however will not negate the fact that conversion from mutl to 6bpΔmutl may render the bacteria greater adaptability in challenging environments.

we emphasize here that the genetic switch works at the population level. specifically, we postulate that 6bpΔmutl cells pre-exist as rare variants in bacterial populations, rather than arising in response to environmental or metabolic challenge. one key point here in the postulation is that they do exist, no matter how low their frequencies might be. under normal conditions, 6bpΔmutl cells would not impose any harmful effects because of their low frequencies. once under stress, bacteria may require novel biological traits to adapt and survive. by chance, some rare 6bpΔmutl cells in the population may have accumulated "beneficial" nucleotide changes or acquired "useful" exogenous genes and thus will be selected to propagate to increasing subpopulation sizes, eventually predominating in the population. we envision that, following successful adaptation, the 6bpΔmutl cells would provide no further benefits or may even facilitate deleterious genomic changes and would consequently become once again rare in the bacterial populations. in this way, the mutl-6bpΔmutl switch may establish and maintain a dynamic balance between genetic stability and mutability under different environmental conditions.

previous work with evolving e. coli populations has also demonstrated spontaneously arising mutl mutators as the result of changes in repeat length  <cit> . the reported repeat unit in that case was the 6-bp string, ctggcg, beginning at position  <dig> of the mutl gene in e. coli b. however, we believe that the variable tandem repeat unit should be identified as gctggc, starting at position  <dig> of the mutl gene in e. coli and also having three repeats in functional mutl, exactly as what we have found in s. typhimurium. although e. coli b has the two overlapping sets of tandem repeats, we note that three copies of gctggc, rather than those of ctggcg, are conserved throughout the salmonella-e. coli-shigella complex  and thus are more likely to function as a common mechanism for modulating genetic stability/mutability in these bacteria.

although in this study we primarily focused on the mutl-6bpΔmutl switch, our bioinformatic analysis also predicted four other sets of dna repeats in mmr genes of s. typhimurium lt <dig>  with three in mutl and one in muts. because locking these repeats into their functional states also yielded a significant decrease in mutability in the bacterial populations , we suggest that these repeats may also function as genetic switches. it is likely that these multiple mutl or muts switches work stochastically to spontaneously modulate genetic stability/mutability in bacterial populations, although it is possible that some of the switches might be more functionally important than others according to the ease with which conversion between functional and defective alleles occurs and the effect of the defect on the protein encoded by the mmr gene  <cit> .

based on the findings reported in this study, we have updated the adopt-adapt model of bacterial evolution  <cit>  by assigning a key role for repeats-mediated allele conversion of mmr genes . we suggest first that foreign dna  will be most readily incorporated into the genome of the recipient cell when mmr function is diminished. second, if the incoming dna segment is large , its incorporation at some site within the genome would cause the normally balanced oric to terc distances to become unequal in the two replicores. as bacteria with unbalanced genomes are less fit and show increased generation times  <cit> , the bacteria that have incorporated the additional dna  may undergo further genomic rearrangements  mediated by recombination among partially homologous sequences and facilitated by defective mmr activity to restore oric to terc balance. we further speculate that bacterial speciation events, such as the recent divergence between salmonella choleraesuis and s. paratyphi c  <cit> , may arise in part through the rapid accumulation of non-synonymous mutations that are also attributable to variable genetic mutability switches .

it is worth noting that over-representation of small dna repeats have also been identified in other stress response genes and virulence genes in bacteria  <cit> , but none has so far been directly implicated in a switch-like role for mutability-modulation during bacterial adaptation to environmental challenges. the concept of spontaneous genetic switches based on repeats-mediated allele conversion may therefore be a useful starting point for further investigation of regulatory mechanisms for bacterial adaptive behavior and evolution.

CONCLUSIONS
mmr allele conversion through repeats-mediated slipped-strand mis-pairing could work as a mechanism for spontaneous switching between states of high genetic stability and mutability during bacterial evolution.

