BACKGROUND
all genomes are composed of nucleotides, which are represented abstractly as letters , guanine , cytosine , and thymine ). strings of such letters can be conceptualized as words, which provide the blueprints for organisms. each word is found a specific number of times in a particular genome. note that the expected frequency of a word is inversely related to the word's length. some nucleotides appear more frequently than others , giving each genome a distinct % content and biasing expected word frequencies. higher order frequencies  also show distinct biases beyond those expected for single nucleotide frequencies  <cit> .

distinct selective pressures shape words positioned in different genomic regions. for example, a word in an open reading frame  has a direct influence on the primary amino acid sequence of a protein and hence is under strong selective pressure. in contrast, words in introns are likely to be under more relaxed selective constraints, unless they are important for gene functions, for example by providing docking sites for splicing factors  <cit>  or for enzymes involved in the post-transcriptional processing of a transcript  <cit> . the gene sections corresponding to the 5' and 3' untranslated regions  are also likely to be under less selective constraints than the orfs, yet signatures of strong selection in utrs have been described . the constant formation of dna microsatellites through slippage by the replication machinery, and the action of viruses and transposons, also complicate the word landscape, especially in regions with lower selective constraints   <cit> .

this manuscript describes the results of a genome-wide analysis to discover putative regulatory words. within this context, we define the cis-regulatory apparatus as all the dna segments that are located proximal to a gene, and that also contribute to the gene's expression. it is the function of transcription factors, mirnas, or other molecules that interact with dna, to interpret the words  hardwired in the cis-regulatory apparatus and to 'execute' them, thereby generating signals to the basal transcription machinery that result in changes to the rate of rna production by the corresponding dna-dependent rna polymerases. when located upstream of the transcription start site , the cis-regulatory apparatus is often referred to as the promoter of a gene.

promoters are typically divided into three regions: core, proximal and distal. the core promoter, a region at location  relative to the tss, performs a central role in the formation of pre-initiation transcriptional complexes. immediately upstream of the core promoter is the proximal promoter, which is located at position  relative to the tss and serves as a docking site for transcription factors. the distal promoter is located at  relative to the tss and contains the regulatory elements that are commonly known as enhancers and silencers. the participation of a particular dna segment in the regulation of gene expression can only be demonstrated experimentally. thus, understanding the rules at play in deciphering the transcriptional regulatory code remains one of the most significant challenges in biology today.

although most regulatory elements are present in the utrs and upstream regions, due to their proximity to the tss, studies have shown the presence of regulatory elements in introns, and, to a much lesser extent, in coding regions  <cit> . building on this knowledge, a segment-based analysis was performed that is focused on non-coding regions within the open reading frames  and flanking non-coding regions . the coding regions were omitted from this analysis because they are under other selection pressures corresponding to the amino acid sequences of the proteins they produce, and thus they are subjected to biases other than regulation.

arabidopsis thaliana provides an ideal reference organism to investigate the word landscape of a plant genome, and to relate said landscape to important biological features. the arabidopsis genome consists of  <dig> mbp arranged into five chromosomes  <cit> . the genome is well annotated and regions corresponding to introns, 3'utrs, 5' utrs, and intergenic genomic spaces are all available from the arabidopsis information resource   <cit> .

many studies have characterized arabidopsis dna sequence motifs that participate in the regulation of particular genes , and public databases such as athamap  <cit>  and agris  <cit>  provide comprehensive collections of cis-regulatory elements likely to participate in the regulation of gene expression. however, a systematic analysis of all the words present in the arabidopsis genome is still lacking.

to analyze the different segments of the arabidopsis genome, an enumerative word discovery approach was used to detect statistically overrepresented words. similar approaches have been successfully applied over the last decade in the area of motif discovery  <cit> . in a  <dig> study, tompa et al.  <cit>  showed that enumerative methods outperformed heuristic methods in many cases. they are particularly applicable in this research, because they allow the study of the entire 'word landscape' of a genomic data set.

our approach scans the sequences and produces a set of words and word frequencies. this information is employed by a markov model to compute expected word frequencies. words with unexpectedly high frequencies are putative functional elements, and thus they are further characterized by comparing word frequencies and positions to gene induction or suppression using the method of geisler et al.  <cit> . additionally, clusters of similar words are formed and used to create motifs for putative transcription factor binding sites. sequences that contain the same functional elements are grouped together into putative 'nodes' of regulatory networks. words that co-occur often are identified as putative transcription factor binding modules.

RESULTS
distribution of 8-letter words in the arabidopsis genome
to determine the word distributions in the segments of the arabidopsis thaliana genome that contribute to the cis-regulatory apparatus, a comprehensive analysis of 8-letter words in the entire genome was conducted and compared with segments corresponding to non-coding regions. words of length 6- <dig> were examined and the complete results have been made available via agris  <cit> . this article reports findings for words of length eight because they correspond to the typical dna sequence length recognized by transcription factors . furthermore, 8-mers are long enough that there is enough diversity of word choices  to reduce false positive results, while retaining sufficient word counts to be statistically informative.

the genome was sub-divided into segments comprising the 3' utrs, 5'utrs, promoters and introns . the promoter segment was further dissected into the core promoter, corresponding to ; proximal promoter ; and distal promoter . the general properties of the six genome segments are shown in table  <dig>  as in a similar study, which was aimed at discovering regulatory elements involved in human dna-repair pathways  <cit> , word-based genomic signatures were created for each segment. specifically, the following were identified for each of the genome segments:  the set of overrepresented words ,  words missing from the sequences ,  word-based clusters,  word co-occurrences and  functional categorizations of the signature words. the results are detailed in the remainder of this section.

overview of the characteristics properties for non-coding segments and the entire genome for arabidopsis thaliana. the number of sequence refers to the respective number of unique sequences in the specific segment. in case of the entire genome the sequences are the complete chromosomes. min. seq. length refers to the length of the shortest sequence in the set, while max. seq. length refers to the length of the longest sequence in the set. mean seq. length provides the average length of the sequences in the set, while std. deviation describes the deviation from said mean. finally total nucleotides describes the total number of nucleotides contained within the sequences of the set and genome percentage elaborates on the relationship between the nucleotide count of the set versus the entire genome.

some sequences in the segments are shorter than  <dig> nucleotides. since these sequences cannot harbour any putative regulatory elements in the context of this study, the sequences are removed from the table. for the 3'utrs this results in a total of  <dig> nt being omitted, for 5'utrs  <dig> nt and for introns  <dig> nt. they are however included in the calculation of the background for the different segments since they contribute to the overall nucleotide distribution.

overrepresented words
all 8-letter words present in the segments were identified and scored using observed:expected frequency ratios . specifically, each word was scored and ranked by using the function s*ln, where s is the number of sequences that contained the word, 'ln' is the natural logarithm, and es is the number of sequences in which the word was expected to occur. words discovered in the whole genome were analyzed using the o*ln score, with o referring to the overall occurrence of a word across the entire genome and eo representing the expected occurrence of that word. the  <dig> top-ranked words, corresponding to ~ <dig> % of all possible words, which also corresponds to ~ <dig> % of the discovered words, were taken as an exemplary subset of the results and further examined .

top  <dig> overrepresented words for the 3'untranslated regions in arabidopsis thaliana. the word attribute describes the short nucleotide sequence associated with a putative word. s and es describe the number of sequences a word occurs in and the number of sequences the word was expected to occur in respectively, while o and eo describe the total number of occurrences and the expected total number of occurrences. the score slnses describes a statistical coverage of the sequences analyzed in the set and is based on a markov chain background model. each set of attributes was computed for the masked as well as the unmasked version of the corresponding segment with the emphasis placed on the unmasked version .

further information for the word is provided through its reverse complement  and the position of the reverse complement in the set of results  as well as a notion describing if the word is a genomic palindrome .

finally, pvalues describes a p-value that is assigned in order to provide statistical insight allowing the determination if a word is relevant or was discovered as interesting by random chance.

top  <dig> overrepresented words for the 5'untranslated regions in arabidopsis thaliana. the word attribute describes the short nucleotide sequence associated with a putative word. s and es describe the number of sequences a word occurs in and the number of sequences the word was expected to occur in respectively, while o and eo describe the total number of occurrences and the expected total number of occurrences. the score slnses describes a statistical coverage of the sequences analyzed in the set and is based on a markov chain background model. each set of attributes was computed for the masked as well as the unmasked version of the corresponding segment with the emphasis placed on the unmasked version .

further information for the word is provided through its reverse complement  and the position of the reverse complement in the set of results  as well as a notion describing if the word is a genomic palindrome .

finally, pvalues describes a p-value that is assigned in order to provide statistical insight allowing the determination if a word is relevant or was discovered as interesting by random chance.

top  <dig> overrepresented words for the introns in arabidopsis thaliana. the word attribute describes the short nucleotide sequence associated with a putative word. s and es describe the number of sequences a word occurs in and the number of sequences the word was expected to occur in respectively, while o and eo describe the total number of occurrences and the expected total number of occurrences. the score slnses describes a statistical coverage of the sequences analyzed in the set and is based on a markov chain background model. each set of attributes was computed for the masked as well as the unmasked version of the corresponding segment with the emphasis placed on the unmasked version .

further information for the word is provided through its reverse complement  and the position of the reverse complement in the set of results  as well as a notion describing if the word is a genomic palindrome .

finally, pvalues describes a p-value that is assigned in order to provide statistical insight allowing the determination if a word is relevant or was discovered as interesting by random chance.

top  <dig> overrepresented words for the core promoter regions in arabidopsis thaliana. the word attribute describes the short nucleotide sequence associated with a putative word. s and es describe the number of sequences a word occurs in and the number of sequences the word was expected to occur in respectively, while o and eo describe the total number of occurrences and the expected total number of occurrences. the score slnses describes a statistical coverage of the sequences analyzed in the set and is based on a markov chain background model. each set of attributes was computed for the masked as well as the unmasked version of the corresponding segment with the emphasis placed on the unmasked version .

further information for the word is provided through its reverse complement  and the position of the reverse complement in the set of results  as well as a notion describing if the word is a genomic palindrome .

finally, pvalues describes a p-value that is assigned in order to provide statistical insight allowing the determination if a word is relevant or was discovered as interesting by random chance.

top  <dig> overrepresented words for the proximal promoters in arabidopsis thaliana. the word attribute describes the short nucleotide sequence associated with a putative word. s and es describe the number of sequences a word occurs in and the number of sequences the word was expected to occur in respectively, while o and eo describe the total number of occurrences and the expected total number of occurrences. the score slnses describes a statistical coverage of the sequences analyzed in the set and is based on a markov chain background model. each set of attributes was computed for the masked as well as the unmasked version of the corresponding segment with the emphasis placed on the unmasked version .

further information for the word is provided through its reverse complement  and the position of the reverse complement in the set of results  as well as a notion describing if the word is a genomic palindrome .

finally, pvalues describes a p-value that is assigned in order to provide statistical insight allowing the determination if a word is relevant or was discovered as interesting by random chance.

top  <dig> overrepresented words for the distal promoters in arabidopsis thaliana. the word attribute describes the short nucleotide sequence associated with a putative word. s and es describe the number of sequences a word occurs in and the number of sequences the word was expected to occur in respectively, while o and eo describe the total number of occurrences and the expected total number of occurrences. the score slnses describes a statistical coverage of the sequences analyzed in the set and is based on a markov chain background model. each set of attributes was computed for the masked as well as the unmasked version of the corresponding segment with the emphasis placed on the unmasked version .

further information for the word is provided through its reverse complement  and the position of the reverse complement in the set of results  as well as a notion describing if the word is a genomic palindrome .

finally, pvalues describes a p-value that is assigned in order to provide statistical insight allowing the determination if a word is relevant or was discovered as interesting by random chance.

top  <dig> overrepresented words for the entire genome of arabidopsis thaliana. the word attribute describes the short nucleotide sequence associated with a putative word. s and es describe the number of chromosomes a word occurs in and the number of chromosomes the word was expected to occur in respectively, while o and eo describe the total number of occurrences and the expected total number of occurrences. the score olnoeo describes a statistical overrepresentation of the word in the genome and is based on a markov chain background model. each set of attributes was computed for the masked as well as the unmasked version of the corresponding segment with the emphasis placed on the unmasked version .

further information for the word is provided through its reverse complement  and the position of the reverse complement in the set of results  as well as a notion describing if the word is a genomic palindrome .

finally, pvalues describes a p-value that is assigned in order to provide statistical insight allowing the determination if a word is relevant or was discovered as interesting by random chance.

a detailed analysis of the words identified a minimal overlap between the sets of overrepresented words for the different segments. specifically, considering the list of top  <dig> words discovered in any of the six segments ,  <dig> words were unique to one specific set,  <dig> words occurred uniquely in two sets,  <dig> in three sets,  <dig> in four sets and none in five sets. only two words  were shared in six out of seven sets . note that the word aatatatt has a significant similarity to the sequence of the tata-box, a regulatory element that is  often found in core promoters and  known to contribute to the correct positioning of the core transcriptional machinery  <cit> . it is conceivable that the absence of aatatatt in the 5'utr set prevents the initiation of transcription at incorrect sites.

the large differences between the various sets of words provide evidence for the existence of segment-specific signatures. of additional interest is the uniqueness of the word-based genomic signatures in comparison to the signature for the entire arabidopsis genome. clearly, the segments' signatures distinguish them from each other and from the entire genome.

in addition to uniquely characterizing each segment, the top words discovered in each data set also have a strong probability of being functional regulatory elements. this argument was strengthened by a functional analysis, which is described later in this section.

missing words
another interesting component of our word-based signature is the set of words not contained within the different segments , referred to as unwords  <cit>  or nullomers  <cit> . the absence of words in particular segments is an interesting phenomenon and may represent negative selection pressure or increased mutation rates specific to these words, or structural constraints on dna  <cit> . thus, the missing word sets, which show unwords and their associated scores, serve as important 'fingerprints' for the segments.

top  <dig> words that were expected to occur in the 3'utr but are not part of the sequences. each word is identified through is nucleotide sequence and contains information about the expected number of sequences it was computed to occur in  as well as the expected number of total occurrences in the set of sequences . the words are sorted by their expected sequence occurrence.

top  <dig> words that were expected to occur in the 5'utr but are not part of the sequences. each word is identified through is nucleotide sequence and contains information about the expected number of sequences it was computed to occur in  as well as the expected number of total occurrences in the set of sequences . the words are sorted by their expected sequence occurrence.

top  <dig> words that were expected to occur in the introns but are not part of the sequences. each word is identified through is nucleotide sequence and contains information about the expected number of sequences it was computed to occur in  as well as the expected number of total occurrences in the set of sequences . the words are sorted by their expected sequence occurrence.

top  <dig> words that were expected to occur in the core promoters but are not part of the sequences. each word is identified through is nucleotide sequence and contains information about the expected number of sequences it was computed to occur in  as well as the expected number of total occurrences in the set of sequences . the words are sorted by their expected sequence occurrence.

word-based clusters
any biologically required sequence experiences evolutionary pressure  resulting in a narrowing of the range of allowable sequence mutations. often, a word and various mutations of the word exhibit the same functionality. to incorporate this into our analysis, clusters were built around each of the top overrepresented words, forming groups of words that are similar to each 'seed word.' word similarity was measured through the hamming distance metric, which models single point mutations. a hamming distance of  <dig> was used to form the clusters. each cluster is depicted via a sequence logo, providing a visual motif of the characteristics of the cluster.

selected clusters and the corresponding sequence logos are shown in additional file  <dig>  two representative motifs are presented for each segment. motifs for each segment were chosen in order to provide a variety of examples of putative binding sites for the non-coding segments.

the presented motifs correspond to well-known regulatory elements and complex motifs, which represent sets of putative regulatory elements. of particular interest in additional file  <dig> are the word-based clusters for the core promoters  which correspond to the tata-box. also known as the goldberg-hogness box  <cit> , the tata-box is a well-characterized regulatory element appearing  <dig> bp upstream of the transcription start site in 30% of the promoter sequences in arabidopsis  <cit> . the core promoters also contain another interesting motif, , which is involved in stress response in arabidopsis thaliana  <cit> . an extensive functional characterization is described later in this section.

word location distribution
the locations of a particular word within a segment can provide insight into functional properties of the word. for example, functional tata motifs are located at a specific distance upstream of the tss  <cit> . we identified the segment-specific locations of the seed words of the clusters shown in additional file  <dig>  being selected for their high complexity, these words are expected to exhibit a distribution bias, manifesting as peaks in the scatterplots of the distribution across sequences, as shown in figures  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> 

the figures contain histograms showing the numbers of occurrences of specific words at each point along the sequences. for uniformity, sequence lengths are normalized to the range . strong peaks can indeed be found for the words selected in the intron, core promoter, and proximal promoter regions. the peaks detected for the intron segment are at both the 5' and 3' ends of the introns, which means that the words occur in close proximity to flanking exons. the close proximity to the intron-exon boundaries is expected for splicing regulatory sequences  <cit> . the peaks exhibited in core and proximal promoters are not surprising. the distributions of words locations in these segments are expected to show clustering, due to positional conservation of locations of cis-regulatory elements  <cit> . of particular interest is the location of the peak for the first word chosen for the core promoter distribution , the tata-box. a location of around  <dig> bp upstream from the tss corresponds to the findings in  <cit> .

interestingly, we also detect strong peaks for the example words chosen for the genome wide word landscape, possibly indicating an important chromosomal feature that is not yet understood.

word co-occurrences
genes are usually controlled by a combination of multiple transcription factors, or by transcription factor complexes binding to different sites embedded in the genes' regulatory non-coding regions. in order to detect the interacting transcription factor binding sites of a complex, we examined the positional relationships of words. the top  <dig> overrepresented words were paired, and the overrepresentation of each pair was determined using a markovian background model of order  <dig>  the top  <dig> overrepresented word pairs for each segment are displayed in table  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> . the limited overlap between the word pairs of different segments indicates additional unique word-based signatures for genomic segments.

overrepresented non-overlapping word-pairs detected in the 3'untranslated regions of arabidopsis thaliana. a word-pair is characterized through the two nucleotide sequences associated with it , the number of sequences the pair occurs in  as well as the expected number of sequences  and a statistical score symbolizing the overrepresentation of the word-pair in the specific sequence set ).

overrepresented non-overlapping word-pairs detected in the 5'untranslated regions of arabidopsis thaliana. a word-pair is characterized through the two nucleotide sequences associated with it , the number of sequences the pair occurs in  as well as the expected number of sequences  and a statistical score symbolizing the overrepresentation of the word-pair in the specific sequence set ).

overrepresented non-overlapping word-pairs detected in the introns of arabidopsis thaliana. a word-pair is characterized through the two nucleotide sequences associated with it , the number of sequences the pair occurs in  as well as the expected number of sequences  and a statistical score symbolizing the overrepresentation of the word-pair in the specific sequence set ).

overrepresented non-overlapping word-pairs detected in the core promoters of arabidopsis thaliana. a word-pair is characterized through the two nucleotide sequences associated with it , the number of sequences the pair occurs in  as well as the expected number of sequences  and a statistical score symbolizing the overrepresentation of the word-pair in the specific sequence set ).

overrepresented non-overlapping word-pairs detected in the proximal promoters of arabidopsis thaliana. a word-pair is characterized through the two nucleotide sequences associated with it , the number of sequences the pair occurs in  as well as the expected number of sequences  and a statistical score symbolizing the overrepresentation of the word-pair in the specific sequence set ).

overrepresented non-overlapping word-pairs detected in the distal promoters of arabidopsis thaliana. a word-pair is characterized through the two nucleotide sequences associated with it , the number of sequences the pair occurs in  as well as the expected number of sequences  and a statistical score symbolizing the overrepresentation of the word-pair in the specific sequence set ).

agris lookup
the agris database  <cit>  contains a large collection of known regulatory elements for arabidopsis thaliana. the words discovered in this study were compared to the regulatory elements of equal or lesser length in agris. table  <dig> provides the overview of the motifs and their locations within the results.

observations about the regulatory elements  contained in the agris database  <cit> .

functional categorizations of words
in order to reveal biological meanings of overrepresented words, we established associations between the overrepresented words and biological functions of the genes that harbour a particular word in their corresponding segment . for a single word, all the genes that contain that word in their selected segment were found and the corresponding overrepresented gene ontology  terms were identified. overrepresentation of a go term is determined by using the arabidopsis gene go term distributions as a background model. the developmental and experimental parameters that perturb the expression of genes harbouring a particular word was determined by comparing the number of induced, suppressed or neutral genes, to that expected by chance in a collection of  <dig> tissue and stress microarrays from the public domain. significant enrichment or depletion of induced or suppressed genes has been shown to correlate strongly with factors affecting regulation of a cis-regulatory element  <cit> .

as shown in figures  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig>  we identified overrepresented functional categories  of genes that carry a particular word  in either their 3'utr , 5'utr , intron , or promoter regions . the red squares depict overrepresented categories with lowest p-value, calculated for each segment separately, smaller than 10e- <dig>  for example, the word gtttttga was significantly enriched in the 3'utrs of genes that participate in the go category "protein synthesis" , and is correlated with genes suppressed in flowers and early stage siliques . based on microarray expression of micro-dissected tissues , the word tgtttttt is present in the 3' utr of genes induced in roots , in the atrichoblast  cell files of the root , the root cortex , endodermis , and lateral root cap . the word ctctcttt, enriched in introns, was correlated with differential induction in cotyledons , suppressed in young flowers, especially carpals  and heart stage embryos . surprisingly, the presence of these words in the utrs and introns were strongly correlated with tissue specific profiles, but were only weakly enriched or strongly depleted for responses by hormones, biotic and abiotic stresses. there was no significant correlation to any of the  <dig> surveyed conditions if the words were located in the  <dig> bp upstream or downstream regions. this is strikingly different to the well characterized abscisic acid responsive element    <cit> , which when found in the  <dig> bp 5'upstream region, was strongly correlated to induction by  <dig> μm abscisic acid  , cold, salt and drought stresses , in flowers , and suppressed in roots  but no significant correlations were observed when abre was present in the 3'utrs, 5'utrs or introns. we also analyzed primary promoter regions where most of the basal promoter elements are expected to be located. the frequency of words is calculated as described above, and genes that contain the high scoring word in their primary promoter region were queried for enriched biological function. for example, gcccatta is found in core promoter regions of genes preferably involved in ribosome biogenesis and translation. genes with this word in the upstream promoter are significantly depleted for response to all hormones, biotic and abiotic stresses . in other words, genes harbouring this word in their upstream promoter region tend to be less responsive to stresses than randomly chosen genes. however, the word ctataaat was found in core promoter regions of genes preferably functioning as storage facilitating proteins . genes with this word in the upstream promoter are rapidly induced by  <dig> nm brassinolide  and by salt stress in roots . these genes are also induced in roots, flowers, pollen, and during seed development, and strongly suppressed in young leaves and cotyledons.

a set of  <dig> frequently enriched cis-elements was recently provided for the ath <dig> gene coexpression neighbourhood   <cit> . our results show a direct overlap with two of those words , which are detected and marked as 'interesting' in the 5'utrs, and the proximal promoters, respectively. several words were hit partially as members of the 'interesting' word clusters , while others were not represented in the selected word clusters and the top  <dig> words. while no overlap for gaccgttn could be found, it is possible to validate the significance of ggcccann and gcgggaan through the detection of these two words as unwords in the introns, marking them interesting regulatory elements associated with the expression, but not necessarily with the regulation of the associated alternative splicing process.

CONCLUSIONS
the analyses described here provide a first view of the word landscape within the non-coding regions of the arabidopsis thaliana genome. an analysis centred on the statistically interesting words furnishes important insights into the unique elements of each segment. the correlations of particular words with cellular functions or expression patterns provide valuable hypotheses for further experimentation. correlation between word position and expression also seems strong, with one class of words only present in the 5'/3'utrs and introns, and another class of words putatively functioning only in the region upstream of the tss. words in the first class seem more directed at regulation of tissue and cellular identity, while words which function upstream appear more likely to be involved in environmental responses.

