BACKGROUND
biologists are captivated by the evolution of new forms and functions  <cit> . over large evolutionary scales, new traits like oxygen metabolism  <cit> , flowers  <cit> , limbs  <cit>  and the vertebrate neural crest  <cit>  have facilitated the ecological and numerical dominance of the lineages that possess them. on more recent timescales, organisms adapt to their environments by continued innovation and modification of these features. a growing literature seeks to explain the genetic and developmental mechanisms of both macro- and micro-evolutionary novelty  <cit> .

two recent but largely separate lines of research address the question. the first amounts to a renaissance in our understanding of the evolutionary role of hybridization  <cit> . hybrid organisms are generally unfit when compared to parent populations  <cit> . however, hybrids may have greater fitness than their parents in extreme environments  <cit> , when environments fluctuate  <cit> , or after environmental and/or human disturbance  <cit> . hybridization contributes to 'creative' evolution in two major ways: by  providing hybridizing species with genetic variation for adaptive traits, or  producing new species. hybrid origin  theories of evolutionary radiation combine these two ideas  <cit> . as an example of , grant et al.  <cit>  used long-term study of darwin's finches to show that directional introgression of alleles from geospiza fortis to g. scandens, coupled with natural selection, could explain trends in beak shape and body size. the work of rieseberg and colleagues on helianthus sunflowers provides one of the best examples of . hybrid speciation in helianthus is a product of chromosomal rearrangement  <cit>  and ecological selection acting on pleiotropic genes in remote habitats  <cit> . helianthus hybrid species specialize in extreme environments, where they out-compete their parents  <cit> . this phenomenon of transgressive segregation , in which hybrids outperform parental forms, is more common than once believed. rieseberg and others  <cit>  summarized data from  <dig> traits in  <dig> experiments and found that 91% of studies reported at least one transgressive trait and that 44% of traits were transgressive overall.

importantly, rieseberg et al.  <cit>  also considered the genetic architecture of ts and proposed that complementary action of genes with additive effects was the major cause. complementary gene action works as follows : species a  segregates  <dig> quantitative trait loci  for size and  <dig> of these contribute phenotypic effects of 'large,' while  <dig> contribute phenotypic effects of 'small;' species b  also segregates  <dig> qtl for size,  <dig> of which contribute phenotypic effects of 'small,' while  <dig> contribute phenotypic effects of 'large.' species a and b produce hybrids that intercross to produce f2; after recombination and independent assortment, some f <dig> are larger than parent a  and some are smaller than parent b . thus, complementary gene action may be a general genetic mechanism of ts.

an upshot of this reasoning was that traits experiencing a history of strong directional selection were less likely to exhibit ts  <cit> . this was codified in orr's qtl sign test  <cit> , which compares the distribution of direction of qtl effects to a random expectation, as a quantitative genetic metric of directional selection. albertson and kocher  <cit>  extended this logic to argue that directional selection and genetic architecture limit the evolutionary role of ts. using malawi cichlid hybrids, they showed that lower jaw shape, a trait under strong directional selection  <cit> , did not exhibit ts while the shape of the neurocranium, a trait not under directional selection, did. they concluded that natural selection might constrain the degree of diversification that can be achieved via hybridization. this might hold, in particular, for aspects of the craniofacial skeleton involved in feeding, including the shape of skeletal components, the dentition, and simple levers involved in jaw function  <cit> .

a second line of research targeting the evolution of novelty departs from a concentration on trait morphology per se and instead focuses on function, or more specifically the relationship between form and function. investigators have contrasted the relationship between shape and biomechanics for simple versus more complex lever systems in fish jaws to illustrate a general principle of organismal design  <cit> . for instance, the 4-bar linkage system  models the rotation of the maxilla given a known input of lower jaw depression. the output of the model can be computed by geometry when component lengths and angles are measured. as with simpler, two component lever systems, one can estimate kinematic transmission , in this case the amount of motion transmitted to the maxilla, through the linkage system, from lower jaw depression  <cit> . jaw linkages with higher maxillary kt transmit more motion through the system and are predicted to evolve in fishes that feed on elusive prey  <cit> . in contrast to simple levers, morphological variation is only a modest predictor of kt for the 4-bar system  <cit> . many different morphological designs can yield similar values of maxillary kt  <cit> ; this is called many to one mapping  of form to function. in essence, mtom is an example of functional redundancy. diverse lineages that exhibit mtom may be predisposed to evolutionary novelty, because manifold solutions exist among species for new ecological or functional demands  <cit> . mtom of form to function may be a general property of all but the simplest biomechanical systems and may influence system diversity, robustness, modularity and evolvability in complex ways  <cit> .

we reasoned that mtom of form to function might contribute to functional transgression in hybrid offspring. just as complementary gene action describes hybrid trait transgression as the piling up of qtl of the same direction  from different parental genomes, we envisioned scenarios in which mtom parental species might segregate 4-bar links to hybrids in combinations producing biomechanical output  well beyond the parental range. to evaluate this possibility, we characterized the 4-bar mechanism in lake malawi cichlids and simulated hybrids using a simple but realistic genetic model. lake malawi cichlids are apposite study organisms for this question. they exhibit tremendous morphological diversity on a background of genomic mosaicism . species hybridize in the wild  <cit>  and speculation persists that hybridization has contributed to the adaptive radiation of this species flock  <cit> . our simulations demonstrate that transgressive function is a likely outcome of hybridization among malawi species exhibiting mtom. functional transgression is a product of recombination and assortment between alleles controlling the lengths of the lower jaw and the maxilla, occurs in the absence of transgressive morphology, and can be predicted from the morphology of parents.

RESULTS
diversity and correlation in the malawi 4-bar linkage
we calculated maxillary kt from  <dig> lake malawi cichlid species  sampled in july  <dig> or borrowed from the american museum of natural history. malawi species exhibit a wide spread of kt values  comparable to that observed in other fish lineages  <cit> . the bulk of the specimens had kt values between  <dig>  –  <dig>  , corresponding to putatively intermediate jaw speeds and force potentials. planktivores, on average, exhibited higher maxillary kt than other trophic groups . the input  and output  links were significantly and antagonistically correlated with kt across the data set .

underlined values are negative correlations; * indicates statistical significance at p <  <dig> .

we next asked whether correlations among links and kt were robust to the pattern of malawi cichlid evolutionary history. it has been known for some time that trait correlations should be corrected for phylogeny because related individuals do not represent independent statistical samples  <cit> . this is a particularly important and difficult problem in the malawi cichlid assemblage where species are young  and phylogenetic resolution is limited  <cit> . table  <dig>  shows evolutionarily independent correlations calculated using the phylogenetic topology shown in additional file  <dig>  employing an approach described in hulsey et al.  <cit> . we use a single mitochondrial genealogy because the locus offers more resolution than nuclear genes in this rapidly evolving lineage  <cit> . the corrected correlations are similar to the uncorrected in all but one case. the lower jaw link, positively associated with kt using uncorrected data, is not associated with kt across the malawi phylogeny. further inspection of the data suggests that this is due to lack of power to detect a phylogenetic association  as most rock-dwelling mbuna have relatively short lower jaws compared to most non-mbuna taxa.

given this caveat, our empirical data support results from simulation in other studies  <cit> : longer lower jaws on average yield higher values of kt while longer maxillae produce the opposite . notably, lower jaw and maxillary links were positively correlated with one another in our data set . moreover, a simple ratio of lj/max lengths was a near perfect predictor of the fully parameterized calculation of kt . our data point to an appreciable linear component to variation in this 4-bar linkage system noted for its non-linear evolutionary dynamics  <cit> .

comparison of species' trait values  identified numerous cases of convergence in kt via divergence in link length, or mtom of form to function  <cit> . the correlations noted above help to explain this observation. for example, both cynotilapia afra and pseudotropheus elongatus have kt values of approximately  <dig> , but they exhibit distinct morphologies. cynotilapia afra has relatively long input and output links, while p. elongatus has relatively short elements of each. we reasoned that hybridization between species like these that are mtom for function might produce f <dig> hybrids with extreme kt values, if independent assortment recombines the long lower jaw of c. afra with the short maxilla of p. elongatus  or the long maxilla of c. afra with the short lower jaw of p. elongatus . we tested the generality of this prediction using a simple, but realistic genetic model.

simulated hybrids of mtom species are transgressive in function
our mendelian genetic model assumes no evolution and no environmental variance . we specified that size-standardized lengths of each of the four linkage components  were controlled by  <dig> independent loci . links themselves were modeled to be genetically independent of one another. the effect of each allele was assumed to be equal and additive. importantly, the assumptions of  number of loci per link,  genetic independence of links and  additivity of allelic affects are supported by empirical quantitative genetic data for the cichlid craniofacial skeleton  <cit> . for example, even though the lower jaw and maxilla links are positively  correlated in our data set, this is unlikely to be due to genetic linkage; qtl for the shape of these elements map to distinct chromosomal regions. we used this model to  determine if mtom species would produce hybrids transgressive for function,  estimate the percentage of f <dig> progeny exhibiting transgression from specific lake malawi cichlid intercrosses, and  investigate the genetic contribution of each link to the phenomenon of functional transgression.

we assumed that each f <dig> parent was homozygous at every locus; since every allele had additive and equal effects, no transgression was produced in the physical lengths of 4-bar links. by contrast, transgression in 4-bar function  was found in 80% of simulated crosses  in which we calculated kt for each and every of  <dig>  composite f <dig> genotypes. note that we have employed a modified and conservative definition of transgression, specific to the distribution of kt produced by the model; an individual is 'transgressive' if its kt value lies ±  <dig> standard deviation  from the mean. the frequency of transgressive individuals, per cross, ranged from  <dig>  – 34%, with up to 6% of the kt values lying two  standard deviations beyond the mean for some .

transgressive  individuals exhibit kinematic transmission  at least one sd either side of the mean from the distribution of hybrid kt values. h/l indicates whether transgression occurs with values higher and lower than the parents.

we used bubble plots to examine the genetic limits to transgression in each of the simulated crosses and the distribution of those limits among the four link lengths . these plots show the frequency of parental  alleles for each link in f <dig> hybrids exhibiting transgressive kt, where hybrid kt is lower  or higher  than parental values. for example, in the cross between cynotilapia afra and pseudotropheus elongatus, transgressive kt lower than parental values  is possible with nearly any combination of alleles for the nasal and fixed links. by constrast, transgression is observed in individuals with certain genotypic combinations of lower jaw  and maxillary links . bubble plots for the cross between protomelas fenestratus and p. ornatus are similar . these plots can be explained by the starting morphology of the parents  and the noted relationship  between the input link , output link  and kt. both pseudotropheus elongatus and protomelas fenestratus have short maxillae and short lower jaws; cynotilapia afra and protomelas ornatus possess long elements of each. recombination and independent assortment of alleles controlling lower jaw and maxillary links produce functional transgression in kt, according to this model.

our choice of the  <dig> crosses to analyze presents a biased estimate of the proportion of crosses that would yield ts. however, because of the computation involved, a full analysis of all possible crosses in our data set is prohibitive. to overcome this, we realized that the simple ratio of lower jaw length to maxilla length is a strong predictor of kt from the fully parameterized calculation . we also realized, from the detailed analysis of the genetic model above, that transgression is usually produced by recombination between loci specifying the lengths of the lower jaw and maxilla. combining these ideas, we devised a test to ask whether all pairwise crosses between any two of the  <dig> species in our data set would produce f <dig> hybrids transgressive for kt. we generated a matrix encompassing all possible pair-wise combinations of size-adjusted lower jaw and maxilla lengths from all species in the data set. roughly a third of these combinations  produced transgression in kt value. we next used these data to ask whether the occurrence of transgression in f <dig> could be predicted by the degree to which parents  are mtom. as a proxy for mtom, we used a simple metric of kt distance between the parents of any cross. formally, if mtom contributes to hybrid transgression in kt, we expect crosses that produce transgressive hybrids to be between parental species with smaller differences in starting kt. this is in fact what we observed .

CONCLUSIONS
we have described a general and likely pervasive mechanism that generates functional novelty. simulated hybrid offspring among lake malawi cichlids exhibiting mtom are transgressive for function at appreciable frequency. our modeling approach is noteworthy because it allows us to identify morphological components of the 4-bar mechanical system that contribute to ts. functional transgression is a product of recombination and assortment between alleles controlling the lengths of the lower jaw and the maxilla and occurs in the absence of transgressive morphology. transgression occurs when link lengths approaching parental values assort in new combinations in the f <dig> generation. novel function therefore is realized via new morphological combinations, but not transgressive lengths for any single link. our model can be tested by breeding malawi cichlid hybrids in the lab and examining the morphological and mechanical diversity of their 4-bar linkages.

it is important to comment that the model we present shows how mtom of form to function in the malawi cichlid 4-bar linkage could generate ts in jaw biomechanics. one question raised by the modeling results is why mbuna species have not evolved higher maxillary kt . what maintains the positive phenotypic correlation between the lower jaw and maxilla links? one possibility is functional constraint imposed by other aspects of the feeding apparatus. for example, the lower jaw and maxilla both function to position the oral jaws for occlusion and contribute to the gape of the mouth. mismatches in the length of upper and lower jaw elements may have negative functional ramifications that outweigh increased performance in jaw speed.

recombinational evolution, mtom and the limits to functional diversity
the genomic era has changed the way that evolutionary biologists think about hybridization. gene flow among recently diverged species  is common rather than the exception  <cit> . hybridization may provide an important source of genetic variation in the form of new trait combinations  <cit>  that sometimes help hybrid organisms maneuver across fitness landscapes  <cit> . the phenomenon of ts, wherein hybrids outperform the parents, is a frequent observation in laboratory and natural outcrossings  <cit> .

it has been suggested that strong directional selection and simple genetic architecture should limit ts because they point the phenotypic effects of qtl in the same direction; this would essentially constrain diversification by hybridization  <cit> . our analysis shows how mtom promotes ts in function, without transgressive morphology, via recombination and independent assortment. because multiple morphological solutions exist for any function , mtom may buffer those constraints, imposed by directional selection, on the extent of mechanical diversity produced by hybridization. as the craniofacial skeleton evolves, functional demands of numerous mechanical systems shape the lengths and linkages of bony elements  <cit> . mtom of form to function in each of these systems might facilitate, or perhaps even require, the evolution of diversity.

