BACKGROUND
epstein-barr virus  is a ubiquitous human b-lymphotropic herpesvirus that infects more than 90% of the world's population and establishes a lifelong  infection in its host. it has been estimated that the number of ebv-infected b cells is controlled in healthy individuals by ebv-specific immunity  <cit> . nevertheless, ebv is the causative agent of infectious mononucleosis and is associated with several malignant proliferative disorders such as burkitt's lymphoma, hodgkin's lymphoma, some b- and t-cell non-hodgkin's lymphomas, and nasopharyngeal and gastric carcinoma  <cit> . in immunocompromised subjects, active ebv infection is a strong risk factor for the development of post-transplant lymphoproliferative disease  and aids-related lymphoma  <cit> .

quantitative molecular assays for the assessment of viral load have helped to describe and monitor ebv-related diseases. although highly sensitive, however, conventional quantitative pcr is rather laborious and time-consuming. in contrast, real-time amplification technology can overcome these difficulties. a range of different assay formats and protocols involving taqman probes  <cit>  and fluorescence resonance energy transfer probes  <cit>  have been reported and various in-house and commercial assays for ebv load measurement are available  <cit> . however, the considerable differences in ebv load detected by quantitative assays  <cit>  constitute an unsolved problem. this study compares the performance of two real-time pcr assays for ebv dna: a commercial kit  and an in-house assay   <cit> .

RESULTS
in order to evaluate the dynamic range of the assays,  <dig> serial five-fold dilutions of culture supernatant derived from an ebv-positive cell line were tested in triplicate by both methods. these were prepared since high-titre reference material was not available. for each method, linear results were obtained up to 3-log dilution, whereas the three further five-fold dilutions showed comparable quantitative results. only 1– <dig> out of  <dig> replicates were detected in the last two possible dilutions, while 10- <dig> dilution was negative in both assays. altogether, the in-house assay  showed a remarkable overestimation  of quantitative results, as compared to the commercial assay  . to establish the level of precision, inter- and intra-assay variability was determined by amplifying replicates of three dilutions of ebv-positive culture supernatant using the same dna as a sample in both methods . intra-assay variability of the q-ebv pcr and ebv rq-pcr methods was determined by amplifying all samples in quadruplicate, whereas inter-assay variability was determined by amplifying the three dilutions in triplicate in four independent experiments. overall, the last dilution reached in both methods the highest coefficient of variation and linearity lack for values near or just below the cut-off level. moreover, the in-house ebv rq-pcr reached a slightly higher intra-assay precision and lower inter-assay precision, compared to the commercial assay.

the accuracy of the two methods was evaluated using a quality control for molecular diagnosis  ebv  <dig> proficiency panel. aliquots of qcmd samples were extracted and aliquots of the dna samples were analysed at the same time by each assay, avoiding repeated freeze-thaw cycles. both methods correctly classified the only negative sample  and all the samples  containing more than  <dig>  copies/ml, as determined by em. only q-ebv-pcr detected three more samples with a viral load of 100– <dig>  copies/ml , though not all replicates were positive . quantitative results indicated an overestimation by ebv rq-pcr  and an underestimation by q-ebv-pcr , as compared to em quantification.

of  <dig> consecutive plasma samples received by our laboratory for ebv dna quantification,  <dig> were positive and  <dig> negative by both methods. all the samples were monitored for the presence of inhibitors by adding internal positive controls, beta globin and actin dna, and no negative results or partial amplification were observed. all the  <dig> plasma samples from healthy blood donors were negative in both assays. the mean copy numbers for the  <dig> positive plasma samples was respectively  <dig>  copies/ml  and  <dig>  copies/ml  . considering all the  <dig> samples positive to both tests and including the qcmd ebv panel samples and serial dilutions of culture supernatant obtained from immortalized clinical specimen lymphocytes, the results of the two methods were statistically correlated  . a systematic difference was noted by plotting the mean value of each positive sample tested by both assays against the difference between the results of the two methods , with about  <dig>  log mean overestimation by ebv rq-pcr.

the different levels of circulating ebv dna measured by each assay might be due to a difference in pcr efficiency. pcr efficiency was calculated by the equation e = - <dig>  the mean percentage of pcr efficiency, based on  <dig> consecutive experiments measuring inter- and intra-assay variability, was  <dig> % for q-ebv pcr and  <dig> % for ebv rq-pcr. one of the variables possibly affecting pcr efficiency is the source of dna used as a standard for quantification   <cit> . to test this hypothesis, samples of namalwa cellular dna used in the standard curve of the in-house method were amplified in the commercial assay: ebv dna values were on average  <dig>  fold lower than expected . by contrast, when namalwa dna dilutions were used as a standard in the same experiment, pcr efficiency was about 8% lower . the amplification of the plasmid standards enclosed in the q-ebv pcr kit yielded copy numbers  <dig>  fold higher than the expected average .

discussion
the quantification of ebv dna load is useful for detecting viral reactivation, which increases the risk of ptld in immunosuppressed patients  <cit> , and monitoring antiviral therapy. in addition, recent studies suggest that ebv dna fragments are released from tumour cells in nasopharyngeal carcinoma and ebv-positive lymphomas  <cit> . in such cases, the ebv dna load may be used as a surrogate disease activity marker with potential applications in clinical monitoring and prognostication. in order to determine the clinical significance of an ebv load, it might be better to monitor viral load dynamics in patients by quantification of ebv load in peripheral mononuclear cells , though ebv dna is detectable during active infection for a longer period in whole blood than in plasma  <cit> . however, the real-time pcr protocol used in these assays is preferable for the quantification of viral load in plasma or liquor.

today a wide variety of quantitative pcr assays are available for ebv dna quantification, including quantitative-competitive pcr and real-time pcr   <cit> . they are faster than conventional quantitative pcr and employ a close-tube system that eliminates the need for post-pcr analysis, thus reducing the risk of contamination. although real-time pcr assays are known to be of excellent diagnostic value in certain clinical settings, interlaboratory standardization of ebv dna load monitoring has yet to be achieved  <cit> .

we compared the performance of two real-time pcr assays for ebv dna quantification in plasma, one of which is commercial  and the other in-house . false negative results, due to the presence of inhibitors, did not occur and none of the samples inhibited amplification of the internal positive control in either of the real-time pcr assays. these results confirm that the method used for dna extraction does provide an inhibitor-free target for quantitative assessment by pcr.

several factors have been linked to variation in pcr results, including pcr reagents, primer stability and specificity, and pcr product size  <cit> . the choice of target region for amplification is known to influence significantly the results of quantitative ebv dna assays. one of the most widely used pcr targets, the bamhi-w region, occurs in multiple repeats which can vary considerably across naturally occurring ebv isolates. for this reason, the ebv dna load can be up to 5-fold higher when bamhi-w primers are used, as compared to primers located in single-copy ebv genes  <cit> . this observation, however, does not account for the discrepancies observed in the present study, as both assays amplify the single-copy ebna- <dig> gene.

real-time pcr quantification relies on the assumption that amplification efficiencies are the same for patient samples and in the standard used for calibration. low amplification efficiency in patient samples, compared to the calibrator, lead to underestimation of the dna content in samples  <cit> . alternatively, it can be argued that the decreased pcr efficiency of standards may lead to overestimation of dna samples. the dna standard source used to build a calibration curve appears to be crucial in determining the final outcome of quantification  <cit> . indeed, we observed a lower rate of efficiency in the in-house assay, using a genomic standard, as compared to the commercial assay, which employs a plasmid standard. the influence of calibrator dna on the assay's quantitative results is supported by the observation that when genomic dna was used as a standard in the commercial assay, amplification efficiency was lower, and higher ebv dna values were measured on plasmid samples containing known amounts of ebv dna.

CONCLUSIONS
our results suggest that commercial and in-house assays for the quantification of ebv dna are both appropriate for clinical use because they perform similarly in analytical terms and generate correlated quantitative results. the use of common standards would help to achieve comparable absolute values, thus limiting the high degree of variability in ebv dna load shown by various assays  <cit>  and improving the diagnostic significance of real-time ebv copy number quantification.

given the high coefficients of variation involved, it would also help to specify the confidence interval in reported results , so that viral load fluctuations are not misinterpreted as clinically significant data.

