BACKGROUND
subcellular localization is a key functional attribute of a protein. since cellular functions are often localized in specific compartments, predicting the subcellular localization of unknown proteins may be used to obtain useful information about their functions and to select proteins for further study. moreover, studying the subcellular localization of proteins is also helpful in understanding disease mechanisms and for developing novel drugs.

as a result of large-scale genome sequencing efforts in recent years, protein data has accumulated in public data banks at an increasing rate. analyzing protein data to extract useful knowledge is thus essential for projects like automatic annotation. it is desirable to have an automated and reliable system for predicting subcellular localization of proteins from amino acid sequences.

a number of efforts  <cit>  have been made to predict protein subcellular localization. most of these prediction methods can be classified into two categories: one based on the recognition of protein n-terminal sorting signals and the other based on amino acid compositions  <cit> .

previous works have been focused on protein localization prediction for gram-negative bacteria. there are five primary localization sites in gram-negative bacteria, which are the cytoplasm, the extracellular space, the inner membrane, the outer membrane, and the periplasm. psort i  <cit>  is the most widely used tool for predicting multiple localizations for gram-negative bacteria. it uses biological knowledge represented by "if-then" rules for predicting protein localization sites. most of these rules were derived from experimental observations. however, the psort i does not consider the extracellular space site. additionally, the overall recall for the data set  <cit>  only attains  <dig> %.

gardy et al.  <cit>  presented psort-b to improve the prediction performance of psort i. psort-b combines information of the amino acid composition, similarity to proteins of known localization, presence of a signal peptide, transmembrane alpha-helices and motifs corresponding to specific localizations for a given protein sequence, through a probabilistic approach. it returns a list of five possible localization sites with associated probability scores. it attains an overall recall of  <dig> % for the same data set mentioned above.

recently, yu et al.  <cit>  proposed a predictive system called cello for gram-negative bacteria by using support vector machines based on n-peptide compositions. they classified  <dig> amino acids into four groups  to reduce the dimensionality of the input vector. forty svm classifiers were used to predict the localization sites. their overall recall was  <dig> %. it was a significant improvement over the previous results of psort-b. however, the recall for extracelluar proteins was still relatively low at  <dig> %.

this paper studies ways to improve the accuracy for predicting extracellular localization in the gram-negative bacteria. we explored a new way to extract features from protein sequences for protein localization prediction by clustering  <dig> amino acids into a few groups using a greedy algorithm. our method for clustering  <dig> amino acids considers the factors of both amino acids' physical-chemical properties and their contextual correlations. in contrast, the method presented by yu et al. classifies the  <dig> amino acids into  <dig> groups  based on physical-chemical properties of amino acids alone. instead of simply combining multiple svms to give a better prediction, we propose a selection score function and a greedy algorithm to select a subset of svms to maximize the prediction accuracy.

based on the proposed approaches, we have developed a system called p-classifier for predicting the subcellular localization of gram-negative bacteria by using a combination of multiple support vector machines. this has resulted in an improvement in the recall for extracellular proteins from  <dig> % in cello  <cit>   to  <dig> % in p-classifier. the overall recall of p-classifier reaches  <dig> %. to the best of our knowledge, these are the most accurate results for predicting protein subcellular localization in gram-negative bacteria.

RESULTS
the dataset used in this study is from  <cit>  and was extracted from swiss-prot release  <dig>   <cit> . it contains  <dig> proteins of experimentally determined localization, where  <dig> proteins are resident at a single localization site and  <dig> proteins are resident at dual localization sites. table  <dig> lists the number of protein sequences from different sites in the data set.

the prediction performance of our prediction system is estimated from a 5-fold cross-validation where the given training samples are randomly partitioned into  <dig> mutually exclusive sets of approximately equal size and approximately equal class distribution.

it is observed that there are some protein sequences in the dataset containing character "x". to avoid possible noise from ambiguous information, the protein entries containing "x" in the protein sequence are excluded in the cross-validation training set, but included in the testing set in this work.

in the dataset, some proteins occur in two different subcellular localizations. since we are comparing our combined classifier p-classifier with the p-sortb and cello classifiers, we followed their method in evaluating the classifier for proteins resident at dual localization sites, where we consider them as predicted correctly if one of their localization sites is predicted correctly. table  <dig> shows the prediction recall for dual localizations.

the matthews correlation coefficient  <cit>  is used to measure the predictive performance for five predictive sites. the mattews correlation coefficient  is defined by:



where tpx, tnx, fpx, and fnx are true positives, true negatives , false positives , and false negatives of localization site x, respectively. mcc offers a comprehensive and robust measurement for the predictive performance as this measurement considers both under-and over-predictions. the value of mcc equals  <dig> for a perfect prediction, and  <dig> for a completely random assignment.

discussion
to computationally analyse protein data, the representation of protein sequences is an important issue. a good input representation makes it easier for the svm to identify underlying regularities and therefore is crucial to the success of svm learning.

in this paper, we encode protein sequences by using the patterns of one amino acid, two adjacent amino acids, three adjacent amino acids, and four adjacent amino acids.

as there are  <dig> and  <dig> different patterns for the three and four adjacent amino acids cases, clustering  <dig> amino acids into several groups provides a way to reduce the number of unique patterns since it is difficult to train the svm with very large number of features such as  <dig> for all possible patterns of four adjacent amino acids. since amino acids in proteins do not contribute to the function of proteins independently and functional patterns in proteins are embedded as sequence correlations, amino acids may not be grouped based on their physical-chemical properties alone  <cit> . for the prediction task, a good amino acid grouping leads to an improvement in prediction performance.

it is observed that the prediction results from svms constructed by different lengths of adjacent amino acid patterns, e.g. the patterns of a single amino acid and amino acid pairs, are complementary. that is, there are some cases where the prediction made by the svm constructed by patterns of some particular length is correct while the prediction made by the svm constructed by patterns of another length is incorrect, and vice versa. therefore, combining complementary results provides a way to improve the prediction accuracy. however, combining all complementary results together may not be a good choice. therefore, we propose to choose a subset of complementary support vector machines properly that will maximize the prediction accuracy.

after analyzing the predictive results, it is observed that there are some protein sequences that cannot be predicted correctly by any svm in the combined classifier. it means that these protein sequences cannot be correctly classified by their composition. this is the reason why the recall of some predictive sites in gram-negative bacteria cannot be further improved.

since we are comparing our combined classifier p-classifier with the p-sortb and cello classifiers, we use the same data set as theirs. we did not check the sequence redundancy in the dataset. as the level of sequence redundancy normally strongly affects prediction accuracy, removing those protein sequences which have high sequence identity  with each other in the dataset can avoid redundancy and bias.

instead of giving full credit for dual-localized proteins if either of the sites is predicted correctly, we also evaluate the prediction performance by counting "half" correct when only one of the sites of dual-localized proteins is predicted correctly. table  <dig> shows their prediction recalls. the full credit for dual-localized proteins is only given when two possible localization sites with the top two associated probability scores match to actual dual localizations of the protein. the corresponding overall recall for predicting dual localizations only reaches  <dig> %. to properly deal with subcellular localizations for proteins resident in several different sites is a challenging problem. the paper  <cit>  addressed the problem of subcellular localizations for proteins resident in several different sites.

there are three methods used for cross-validation test: the independent dataset test, n-fold cross-validation test, and the leave one out cross-validation test. among these methods, the leave one out cross-validation test is the most rigorous and objective  <cit> . however, the leave one out cross validation test is very expensive computationally and is often impractical for large datasets. the n-fold cross-validation test provides a bias-free estimation of the accuracy  <cit>  at much reduced computational cost and is considered as an acceptable test for evaluating predictive performance of an algorithm  <cit>  for large datasets.

CONCLUSIONS
this paper introduces a protein subcellular localization prediction method using amino acid subalphabets and a combination of multiple support vector machines.

the main contributions of our work include:  a new way to extract features from protein sequences by clustering  <dig> amino acids into a few groups using the proposed greedy algorithm to reduce the input dimensionality of support vector machines. our method for clustering  <dig> amino acids considers not only the factor of the amino acids' physical-chemical properties but also the factor of their contextual correlations.  a selection score function and a greedy algorithm are proposed to select a subset of candidate support vector machines to maximize the cross-validation accuracy instead of simply combining multiple support vector machines to give better prediction.  a web-based system has been developed for predicting protein subcellular localization of gram-negative bacteria. it allows people to submit multiple gram-negative bacteria protein sequences to perform protein subcellular localization prediction. it is available at  <cit> .

clustering  <dig> amino acids into a few groups by our proposed greedy algorithm provides a new way to extract features to cover more adjacent amino acids from protein sequences and reduce the dimensionality of these features. since amino acids in proteins do not contribute to the function of proteins independently, it may not be a good idea to group amino acids based on their physical-chemical properties alone. for the prediction task, a good amino acid grouping leads to an increase in prediction performance. furthermore, properly choosing a subset of complementary support vector machines constructed by different features of proteins maximizes the prediction accuracy.

