BACKGROUND
in dogs, research into motor unit disorders is a growing field  <cit> . up to now investigations regarding the pathogenesis are mainly based on electromyography, motor and sensory nerve conduction velocity measurements and histopathological examination of muscle and nerve biopsies or are based on the identification of genetic abnormalities  <cit> . approaches to evaluate functional components of such disorders in cell culture systems have not been established in veterinary neurology so far.

all previously mentioned procedures for muscle satellite cell culture systems of animals are described predominantly for use under laboratory conditions. hereby, tissue processing such as harvesting of satellite cells takes place immediately. this limits the application of the technique for investigating spontaneously occurring disease. only animals kept in the vicinity of or in the laboratory can be used for setting up the primary culture. furthermore, applying these methods for research into muscle diseases of client-owned animals  remains questionable. up to now no procedures have been described to obtain muscle biopsies from healthy or diseased companion animals. also the influence of shipping to a specialised laboratory for further processing and the impact of long-term storage on cell cultivation and analysis have not been evaluated until now.

therefore, the aim of the current study was to establish an appropriate shipping method in combination with adequate tissue processing for collecting primary satellite cell cultures in dogs. furthermore, the feasibility of electrophysiological examinations of voltage- gated ion channels expressed by canine myotubes with the patch clamp technique was evaluated.

RESULTS
cell culture
biopsies were taken during standard surgical procedures from different striated muscle of  <dig> dogs, stored for one to three days at 4°c in a special transport medium in order to simulate shipping conditions and were further processed . the differential centrifugation steps used to enrich the satellite cells and separate fibroblasts of the currently used method seemed to be the crucial processing steps. data regarding “id” of the donor, origin of biopsy, age and breed of the animal and further processing of the cultures after the proliferation period of myoblasts are summarised in table  <dig>  the typical morphology of the muscle cell culture during proliferation and differentiation is demonstrated in figure  <dig>  spontaneously occurring contractions of the matured myotubes were documented in video files . these contractions were observed incidentally and no influences on the contraction rate, of age, or breed of donor or duration of storage before processing could be recognized. the initial time necessary for sufficient proliferation varied depending on the age of the biopsy donor. samples from older dogs  needed a longer time period for initiating proliferation , whereas samples from younger dogs started to proliferate  <dig> or  <dig> days after harvesting. in  <dig> cases immunofluorescence or immunohistology using a monoclonal antibody directed against the muscle-specific intermediate filament desmin was performed to identify the myotubes . however, cell morphology was lost due to artifacts obtained during the preparation procedures . therefore, the morphology of the immunohistochemically marked cells  differs in morphology compared to cells labelled by immunofluorescence .

id = identification number, m. = musculus, d = days, mix. = mixed breed, if = immunofluorescence, ih = immunohistology, x = indicates preformed staining method.

the cells of the remaining cultures were identified as myotubes due to their typical morphological changes after inducing differentiation. the latter included multinucleated giant cells . after inducing differentiation cells with fibroblast morphology could be clearly distinguished. the percentage of muscle cells ranged from 60% to 80%. under differentiation conditions, including achievement of a confluence of up to 80% of the proliferating cells without splitting of the culture, reduction of serum concentration, change to horse serum and withdrawal of growth factors, fibroblasts lacked proliferation. all media used in this study were prepared without any antibiotic-antimycotic supplementation. only  <dig> of the  <dig> cultures had to be discarded due to fungal contamination.

after an initial proliferation period of  <dig> to  <dig> days,  <dig> cultures  were frozen at −80°c for  <dig> hours and then stored in liquid nitrogen for several weeks . frozen pellets were thawed and recultivated in proliferation medium. in the first 2– <dig> days of recultivation an increased amount of fibroblast was noticed . nevertheless, the amount of the remaining myoblast was between 40% and 60% as shown by morphology and immunohistochemistry .

in order to simulate shipping conditions the storage period in transport medium for the biopsies prior to processing ranged from  <dig> to  <dig> days at 4°c. this time interval allowed for express shipping from various locations of the country to the biopsy processing laboratory.

patch-clamp examinations
to demonstrate the feasibility of patch-clamp measurements on the cultured canine myotubes, voltage-gated ion channels were evaluated in a pilot study. the applied series of depolarisation pulses initiated whole-cell currents of ion channels in  <dig> different cells grown out of  <dig> different muscle biopsies  . by the modalities of the used pulse protocol and the shape of the recorded currents we can state that voltage-gated channels were activated. due to the small sample size of so far measured cells  and the preliminary nature of the electrophysiological study neither evaluation of the kinetics of the recorded data nor the exact characterisation of these channels by different pharmacological tools were performed.

discussion
cell culture
the feasibility of canine muscle biopsies for muscle cell culture and possible consecutive patch-clamp measurements has been successfully demonstrated and represents an important tool to further investigate functional muscles diseases such as episodic weakness or spasticity and suspected channelopathies in dogs. furthermore potential animal models for rare human diseases can be identified. tissue cultures of skeletal muscle satellite cells have been studied in various species   <cit> . skeletal muscle satellite cells represent a reservoir for prenatal growth of muscle fibres  <cit> . they are muscular stem cells for growth and regeneration of differentiated muscle tissue and are a source of myogenic precursor cells  <cit> . these myogenic satellite cells have been the source for muscle tissue cultures. they were harvested from young animals in their activated state as myoblasts and various growth factors have been tested for enhancing proliferation or maintenance in vitro  <cit> . in vivo the satellite cells are activated by endogenous factors which are liberated due to postnatal growth or as a consequence of injuries or muscle disease  <cit> . quiescent satellite cells become activated and proliferate as myoblasts. the proliferation phase of the myogenic cells is terminated by the induction of differentiation. under in vitro conditions a high local density of myoblasts, a change of serum source and a decrease of serum concentration initiates fusion of the myoblasts to form multinucleated giant cells termed myotubes which finally differentiate to form muscle fibres in the presence of a motor neuron   <cit> . these newly generated fibres fuse with adjacent ones to realise muscle growth or repair damaged muscle tissue in vivo <cit> . the final developmental step of cultured myoblasts, without the presence of a motor neuron in vitro, represents the differentiation into myotubes  <cit> . in dogs, methods to establish a primary muscle cell culture under laboratory conditions and to prove the myogenic origin of these cells  have been described  <cit> . however, procedures have not been established to obtain muscle cell cultures under clinical conditions. such procedures are used in human muscle disease research to collect samples of rare diseases and for storing the tissue to allow further examinations  <cit> .

in the present study transport of the tissue was simulated by  <dig> to  <dig> day storage of the muscle biopsies at 4°c. the applied culturing method proved to be suitable for the purpose of the current study. the method was based on a protocol applied to harvest human satellite cells from muscle biopsies in the muscle tissue culture collection at the friedrich-baur-institute, munich. it was modified according to the methods described by michal et al.  <cit> . the central point of the modification was the differential centrifugation of the minced and enzymatically dissociated muscle tissue as previously described  <cit> . during these centrifugational steps the dense fibroblasts and the remaining detritus obtained during mechanical and enzymatic dissociation can be separated from the muscle satellite cells  <cit> . the differential centrifugation led to an enrichment of muscle satellite cells and a separation of canine fibroblasts. besides the mechanical removal of all visible connective tissue this is the crucial step for increasing the homogeneity of the cell culture  <cit> .

the applied method for establishing a primary muscle cell culture allowed a successful processing of canine muscle biopsies obtained from healthy animals of different ages and various breeds. proliferation and differentiation of muscle cells was inducible in all samples. establishing muscle cell cultures from mature animals is described as being more difficult than from young growing animals  <cit> . in the current study the time interval for initiating the proliferation varied depending upon the age of the biopsy donor. however, using the proliferation medium proliferation could be induced in all cultured samples. potential differences in cell growth considering the different breeds were not examined and are expected to be subtle. additionally, the donor age might have influence on the ion channel expression of the dogs. differences between fetal channels and matured channels  might occur if neonates are examined. kinetic patch clamp data were not analysed due to the preliminary nature of the electrophysiological part of the current study. additionally the cell culture system is as an ex vivo technique is still an artificial system using resident stem cells of the muscle. these cells are the origin of cellular growth in the young and in the adult dog. probably compensating for the age of the donor animal as long as myoblasts can be grown. to verify this hypothesis further patch clamp studies have to be performed.

disease or injury of muscles may cause a prominent endogenous activation of the satellite cells in living humans and animals  <cit> . therefore, it is highly probable that muscle cells harvested from diseased animals display enhanced proliferation and differentiation. however, proliferation has to be studied for each disease as shown in dogs with x-linked muscular dystrophy, in which satellite cells were no different in numbers or function from those of wild type dogs, so that at least a comparable amount of cells to the healthy donors in this study can be expected in these cases  <cit> .

an important feature of a cell culture method is the long-term storage of cultured cells in liquid nitrogen and their successful recultivation after thawing  <cit> . in the current study it could be shown that recultivated canine myoblasts were able to proliferate for at least  <dig> passages and to differentiate after freezing  and thawing. continuous cultivation of these primary cell cultures is not possible. the lifespan of all cultured somatic cells is limited to some extent due to the shortening of a deoxyribonucleic acid sequence termed telomere  <cit> . this problem is also known in human myoblast cultures  <cit> . to set up a primary cell culture with a longer lifespan further modifications and additional procedures beyond the purpose of the current study would be necessary  <cit> .

the developed method to culture canine muscle cells will enhance the amount and the access of available muscle samples from diseased dogs. simulation of shipping did not noticeably influence the successful processing of the samples. all previously described methods for primary muscle cell cultures were not applicable for the scientific objectives of clinical muscular research in veterinary neurology  <cit> . the developed cultivation method will enable the founding of a muscle tissue bank for samples of various muscle diseases occurring in dogs in different countries providing sufficient material for further in vitro examination methods, without causing unnecessary distress to the diseased animals.

patch clamp
functional studies could be performed using the canine myotubes. the feasibility of patch-clamp measurements has been successfully demonstrated in the second part of this study. consecutive measurements on the myotubes could identify the ion channel type of the recorded channel  and define their electrophysiological properties. by means of the modalities of the used pulse protocol and the shape of the recorded currents we can conclude that voltage-gated channels were activate. a distinct identification of the type of recorded voltage-gated channels by application of specific blocker substances such as tetrodotoxin has not been performed so far  <cit> . however, to the authors’ knowledge this is the first described patch-clamp recording of voltage-gated ion channels expressed by canine myotubes. although a thoroughly electrophysiological evaluation of the expressed channels in normal myotubes still has to be performed, future studies of electrophysiological properties of cells from muscular diseased animals could be compared with those of healthy animals to identify illness underlying pathophysiological mechanisms  <cit> . this would allow the characterisation of canine skeletal muscle channelopathies, including voltage- and possibly ligand-gated channels or functional deficits in the sarcolemma of inherited myopathies  <cit> . another useful application would be the functional characterisation of myogenic cells that carry already genetically identified mutations with an unknown function. furthermore, new treatment strategies could be developed and tested in vitro using cells from the diseased donors as an alternative to or supplementary to clinical trials  <cit> . moreover, genetic evaluations of various myopathies could be performed with the myotubes generated using the described cell culture method  <cit> . a therapeutical approach already evaluated for humans using animal models, such as the ex vivo gene manipulation of myogenic stem cells for treatment of myopathies represents another potential future application  <cit> . myogenic cells collected by the presented culture method could be used for such treatment strategies in dogs.

CONCLUSIONS
the results of the current study offer additional possibilities beside genetic approaches to elucidate functional components of muscular disorders on a molecular level. a collection of biopsies from locations europe-wide and the foundation of a canine muscle tissue bank are possible using this new technique. furthermore, functional studies on voltage-gated muscular ion channels with the patch-clamp technique are feasible and can potentially clarify pathomechanisms of so far unknown disease entities of the muscle cell membrane. this also might be the basis for the in vitro development of new treatment strategies.

