BACKGROUND
the microbial communities that exist on oral surfaces are complex and dynamic biofilms that develop through temporally distinct patterns of microbial colonization  <cit> . for example, initial colonizers of the salivary pellicle on the coronal tooth surface are principally commensal oral streptococci such as s. gordonii and related species. establishment of these organisms facilitates the subsequent colonization of additional gram-positives along with gram-negatives such as fusobacterium nucleatum. as the biofilm extends below the gum line and becomes subgingival plaque, further maturation is characterized by the colonization of more pathogenic gram-negative anaerobes including porphyromonas gingivalis  <cit> . while organisms such as p. gingivalis are considered responsible for destruction of periodontal tissues, pathogenicity is only expressed in the context of mixed microbial communities. periodontal diseases, therefore, are essentially microbial community diseases, and the interactions among the constituents of these communities and between the communities and host cells and tissues, are of fundamental importance for determining the health or disease status of the periodontium.

oral biofilm developmental pathways are driven by coadhesive, signaling and metabolic interactions among the participating organisms. pioneer bacteria provide a substratum and appropriate metabolic support for succeeding organisms. complex consortia then accumulate through recognition and communication systems. these interbacterial signaling processes can be based on cell-cell contact, short range soluble mediators, ai- <dig>  or nutritional stimuli  <cit> . in general, bacterial adaptation to the community lifestyle is accompanied by distinct patterns of gene and protein expression  <cit> . in s. gordonii for example, arginine biosynthesis genes are regulated in communities with actinomyces naeslundii which enables aerobic growth when exogenous arginine is limited  <cit> . over  <dig> genes are differentially regulated in p. gingivalis following community formation with s. gordonii but not with s. mutans  <cit> , whereas in monospecies p. gingivalis biofilm communities there are changes in abundance of over  <dig> envelope proteins  <cit> .

while over  <dig> species or phylotypes of bacteria can be recovered from the oral cavity, in any one individual there are closer to  <dig> species  <cit>  and the diversity of bacteria assembled in dense consortia will be further limited by nutritional and other compatibility constraints. p. gingivalis can accumulate into single species biofilms and mixed species consortia with s. gordonii and related oral streptococci  <cit> . moreover, introduction of p. gingivalis into the mouths of human volunteers results in almost exclusive localization in areas of streptococcal-rich plaque  <cit> . development of more complex multi-species communities in aerated environments such as supragingival tooth surfaces may require oxygen scavenging by f. nucleatum  <cit> . f. nucleatum is also able to coaggregate with p. gingivalis and with oral streptococci  <cit> . hence communities of s. gordonii, f. nucleatum and p. gingivalis are likely to be favored in vivo; however, community formation by these three organisms has not been investigated. the aim of this study was to examine the ability of s. gordonii, f. nucleatum and p. gingivalis to form multispecies communities in vitro, and to utilize a global proteomic approach to investigate differential protein expression in p. gingivalis in response to presence of these organisms.

RESULTS
assembly of p. gingivalis-f. nucleatum-s. gordonii communities in vitro
confocal laser scanning microscopy  was used to investigate the ability of p. gingivalis to assemble into communities with s. gordonii and f. nucleatum. in order to mimic the temporal progression of events in vivo, s. gordonii cells were first cultured on a glass surface and this streptococcal substratum was then reacted in succession with f. nucleatum and p. gingivalis. the f. nucleatum and p. gingivalis cells were maintained in the absence of growth media in order to be able to detect any metabolic support being provided by the other organisms in the community. a 3d reconstruction of the heterotypic community is shown in fig.  <dig>  both p. gingivalis and f. nucleatum formed discrete accumulations and could be either separate from each other or interdigitated, consistent with the concept that the later gram-negative colonizers such as p. gingivalis and f. nucleatum initially establish themselves on the streptococcal rich supragingival plaque  <cit> . the results demonstrate the mutual compatibility of these three organisms for heterotypic community development, an early step in the overall process of plaque biofilm accumulation. participation in multispecies communities may provide a basis for synergistic interactions in virulence. for example, mixed infections of p. gingivalis and f. nucleatum are more pathogenic in animal models than either species alone  <cit> , and f. nucleatum can enhance the ability of p. gingivalis to invade host cells  <cit> .

proteome of p. gingivalis in a three species community
to begin to investigate the mechanisms of adaptation of p. gingivalis to a community environment, the proteome of non-growing p. gingivalis cells incorporated into a community with f. nucleatum and s. gordonii was compared to the proteome of non-growing p. gingivalis cells alone. the expressed proteome of p. gingivalis in a community consisted of  <dig> annotated gene products detected qualitatively. based on spectral counting,  <dig> gene products showed evidence of relative abundance change at a q-value of  <dig> :  <dig> proteins at higher relative abundance and  <dig> at lower relative abundance, using p. gingivalis alone as a reference state. spectral counting is a conservative measure of protein abundance change that tends to generate low fdrs  <cit>  but that often suffers from high fnrs in studies of the kind described here  <cit> . less conservative calculations based on intensity measurements  <cit>  found  <dig> gene products with evidence of relative abundance change at a q-value of  <dig> :  <dig> proteins at higher relative abundance, and  <dig> proteins at lower relative abundance. spectral counting and protein intensity measurements were examined for common trends. trends tended to be consistent across both biological replicates, but the magnitudes of the abundance ratios showed significant scatter, similar to most published expression data at either the mrna or protein level  <cit> . in most cases the abundance ratio trends were the same, using both quantitation methods, although not necessarily significantly so. in only eight cases were the spectral counting trend and summed intensity trend significantly in opposite directions for the same protein . the integrated relative abundance trends found  <dig> gene products with evidence of lower relative abundance change and  <dig> at higher relative abundance. for purposes of examining the totals for combined trends, if an abundance change was called as significant  in one measurement, it was considered significant for the above combined totals only if the ratio of the other measurement showed the same direction of abundance change, with a log <dig> ratio of ±  <dig>  or greater regardless of the q-value in the second measurement. the experimental data for differential protein abundance are shown in fig.  <dig> as a pseudo m/a plot  <cit>  with a lowess curve fit  <cit> . the same data are plotted in fig.  <dig> as open reading frames according to pgn numbers from the atcc  <dig> genome annotation  <cit> . a complete listing of all proteins, their abundance ratios relative to p. gingivalis controls incubated alone under the same conditions as determined by spectral counting and summed signal intensity  <cit> , and q-values, are given in additional file 1: table st <dig>  qualitative identifications for proteins secreted by p. gingivalis in the 3-species community but not by p. gingivalis alone are given additional file 1: table st <dig>  additional file 1: figs. sf <dig>  sf <dig>  sf <dig>  sf <dig>  sf <dig> and sf <dig> and explanatory notes provide more detailed technical information regarding reproducibility of the biological replicates and the adequacy of sampling depth. to assess global sampling depth, average spectral counts were calculated by summing all spectral count numbers for all p. gingivalis proteins in the filemaker script output described under methods and dividing by the total number of p. gingivalis proteins in that file. the average redundant spectral count number for peptides unique to a given orf for p. gingivalis alone was  <dig>  for p. gingivalis in the community it was  <dig>  the lower number of counts observed for p. gingivalis proteins in the community is consistent with the added sampling demands placed on the analytical system by sequence overlaps in the proteomes of all three microbes and thus the smaller number of unique proteolytic fragments predicted. more discussion of this topic is given in the explanatory notes . spectral count values for individual proteins are given in data additional file 1: table st <dig>  details regarding access to mass spectrometry data for individual peptides and their sequest database searching scores  <cit> , p-values and q-values are given in the notes to the data tables .

proteins and functions differentially regulated by p. gingivalis in a community
cell envelope and cell structure
in bacterial communities significant surface-surface contact occurs both within and among accumulations of the constituent species, as was also observed in the p. gingivalis-f. nucleatum-s. gordonii consortia. regulation of outer membrane constituents of p. gingivalis would thus be predicted in the context of a community and this was borne out by the proteomic results. overall,  <dig> proteins annotated as involved in the cell envelope were detected, and  <dig> of these showed reduced abundance in the three species community, indicating an extensive change to the cell envelope. only four proteins showed increased abundance, two omph proteins  and two lipoproteins . mreb , a bacterial actin homologue that plays a role in determining cell shape, showed almost a 2-fold decrease in community derived p. gingivalis. expression of mreb has been found to decrease under stress or during stationary phase in vibrio paraheamolyticus  <cit> . however, stress-related proteins were generally reduced in p. gingivalis cells in the community  so stress is an unlikely explanation for the change in mreb. rather, the decrease in mreb abundance may be due to the p. gingivalis cells entering a state resembling stationary phase or responding in a previously unseen way to the formation of the three species community.

protein synthesis
extensive changes were observed in ribosomal proteins and in translation elongation and initiation proteins. while overall more proteins showed reduced abundance in the three species community, the changes to the translational machinery were almost exclusively increases in abundance. of  <dig> ribosomal proteins detected,  <dig> showed increased abundance, while only one showed decreased abundance. of nine translation elongation and initiation proteins detected, none showed significant abundance decreases but five showed increased abundance , putative efg , efts , eftu , and if <dig> ). this represents not only a substantial portion of the translational machinery but also a large portion, 36%, of the proteins showing increased abundance. it is well known that ribosomal content is generally proportional to growth rate  <cit> ; however, given that the cells were not in culture medium during the assay, rapid growth is an unlikely explanation for these results. the increased ribosomal content presumably indicates increased translation, consistent with the community providing physiologic support to p. gingivalis and allowing higher levels of protein synthesis.

vitamin synthesis
pathways for synthesizing several vitamins showed reduced protein abundance in the three species community. most of the proteins involved in thiamine diphosphate  biosynthesis were downregulated . thiamine is a cofactor for the 2-oxoglutarate dehydrogenase complex that converts 2-oxoglutarate to succinyl-coa and for the transketolase reactions of the anaerobic pentose phosphate pathway  <cit> . however, transketolase  showed no abundance change while of the three components of the 2-oxoglutarate dehydrogenase complex  only the beta subunit showed an abundance increase.

only incomplete pathways have been identified for many of the other vitamin biosynthesis activities in p. gingivalis. however, cobalamin  synthesis  <cit>  can be predicted to be decreased in the community, with five  of the seven identified proteins having statistically significant reductions. less complete population of pathways was observed for pyridoxal phosphate  and biotin synthesis. only two of the four detected proteins for vitamin b <dig> synthesis showed reduced abundance . for biotin synthesis, three of the six detected proteins showed reduced abundance . none of the vitamin/cofactor synthesis pathways showed any indication of increased protein levels in the three species community.

the decrease in several vitamin/cofactor pathways could be due to a decreased utilization of those cofactors. however, in the case of thiamine, the proteins that utilize this cofactor showed no decrease, and a possible increase in abundance, implying that demand for vitamin b <dig> was unchanged. a more likely explanation for the reduced cofactor pathways is therefore nutrient transfer. either one or both of the other organisms in the three species community could be providing p. gingivalis with cofactors, allowing reduced cofactor synthesis without reducing expression of the cofactor dependent pathways. nutritional cross-feeding among members of oral biofilms is well established  <cit> , and indeed p. gingivalis has been found to utilize succinate produced by t. denticola  <cit> .

nucleotide synthesis
pyrimidine biosynthesis appeared to be reduced in the three species community  as many of the proteins leading to the production of finished pyrimidine nucleotides have decreased abundance. however, the proteins responsible for incorporating finished ribonucleotides into rna show unchanged or increased abundance. as with vitamin biosynthesis this may be the result of nutrient transfer from the other organisms in the community. p. gingivalis can acquire nucleosides and nucleobases and it has even been suggested that they may represent an important nutrient source for p. gingivalis  <cit> . consistent with uptake of nucleosides and their precursors, uracil permease  shows increased expression in the three species community.

purine biosynthesis does not appear to be significantly effected in the three species community . a few proteins showed reduced abundance, but the central biosynthesis pathway was primarily unchanged.

stress proteins
the ability of the community to provide physiologic support to constituent species might result in p. gingivalis experiencing lower levels of environmental stress than occurs in monoculture. consistent with this concept, community derived p. gingivalis showed a significant reduction in abundance of dna repair proteins . dna repair genes are generally induced in the presence of damaged dna  <cit> , and lower abundance of dna repair proteins is consistent with the monoculture experiencing more dna damage than p. gingivalis in the three species community where the presence of the partner organisms provides protection against dna damage.

only two stress proteins showed increased abundance, and then only 30% increases, the molecular chaperone dnak  and a phoh family protein possibly involved in oxidation protection .

role of the differentially regulated p. gingivalis protein hmur
to begin to test the functional relevance of proteins identified as differentially regulated in the three species community, we undertook a mutational analysis. for this purpose it was important to target a protein that directly effectuates a biological function and lacks homologs in the genome. hmur, a major hemin uptake protein, and potential adhesin  <cit> , was selected. as shown in fig. 7a, while wild type p. gingivalis cells are abundant within a s. gordonii-f. nucleatum-p. gingivalis community, p. gingivalis cells lacking hmur are deficient in community formation. biovolume analysis showed a 70% reduction in community formation by the hmur mutant . furthermore, this effect was specific for the three species community as a decrease in accumulation by the hmur deficient mutant was not observed in monospecies biofilms, or in two species communities of p. gingivalis with either s. gordonii or f. nucleatum . hence loss of hmur, that is up-regulated by p. gingivalis when the organism is associated with s. gordonii and f. nucleatum, results in a phenotype that is restricted to three species community formation. p. gingivalis cells were first cultured in hemin excess, under which conditions the hmu operon is expressed at a basal level  <cit> . as the three species model system involves metabolically quiescent p. gingivalis cells in buffer, it is unlikely that the role of hmur is related to its hemin uptake capacity. however, tonb dependent receptors can exhibit functions distinct from transport across the outer membrane. for example, in e. coli the tonb dependent catecholate siderophore receptor iha confers an adhesin function and contributes to colonization and virulence in the mouse urinary tract  <cit> . hence, hmur may have a cohesive function in community formation by p. gingivalis although further studies are necessary to resolve this issue.

CONCLUSIONS
complex multi-species biofilms such as pathogenic dental plaque accumulate through a series of developmental steps involving attachment, recruitment, maturation and detachment. choreographed patterns of gene and protein expression characterize each of these steps. in this study we developed a model of the early stages of plaque development whereby three compatible species accreted into simple communities. p. gingivalis increased in biomass due to attachment and recruitment, and this allowed us to catalog differential protein expression in p. gingivalis consequent to contact dependent interbacterial signaling and communication through short range soluble mediators. the proteomic analysis indicated that around 40% of p. gingivalis proteins exhibit changes in abundance in a community with f. nucleatum and s. gordonii, implying extensive interactions among the organisms. the proteomic results were consistent with the formation of a favorable environment in a p. gingivalis-f. nucleatum-s. gordonii community, wherein p. gingivalis showed evidence of increased protein synthesis and decreased stress. moreover, nutrient transfer may occur among the constituents of the community. as evidenced by hmur, these proteins may have a functional role in the development of multispecies communities and ultimately shape the pathogenic potential of plaque.

