BACKGROUND
for many years the vast majority of gene expression studies have employed non-quantitative or semi-quantitative rna gel blots and rt-pcr analysis. real-time pcr technology has removed many of the difficulties associated with quantitative gene expression studies  <cit> , and real-time quantitative rt-pcr  is rapidly being adopted as a standard method for in-depth expression studies, including studies of alternative splicing, verification of microarray expression results, and molecular diagnostics  <cit> .

real-time qrt-pcr offers a robust means for precisely quantifying changes in gene expression over a wide dynamic range. it is also applicable to experiments where rna amounts are limiting, such as for micro-dissected tissues. however, selection of an appropriate normalization method is crucial for reliable quantitative gene expression results  <cit> . the purpose of normalization is to correct for non-specific variation, such as differences in rna quantity and quality, which can affect efficiencies of the rt and pcr reactions.

normalization to total rna content poses a number of problems. it is difficult to quantify small amounts of rna, and variation in rt and pcr reaction efficiencies are not accounted for by this method. similarly, normalization to an external rna standard is problematic due to rna instability. the most commonly used method is relative quantitation, whereby gene expression level is normalized to that of an internal reference gene. while this avoids the problems and limitations of absolute quantitation, selection of a proper internal control–gene expressed at a nearly constant level in all tissue samples being investigated–is required. failure to use an appropriate control gene may result in biased gene expression profiles, as well as low precision. the consequences may be that only gross changes in expression level are declared statistically significant, or that patterns of expression are erroneously characterized.

until recently, internal controls , were selected based on stability of expression in qualitative studies , via low-sensitivity assays such as densitometry of hybridized blots, or via semi-quantitative rt-pcr. none of these will be adequate for identifying reliable internal controls for real-time qrt-pcr. for example, expression profiling via real-time qrt-pcr of  <dig> commonly used human internal control genes revealed different degrees and patterns of expression among  <dig> tissue types, and no single gene was a suitable universal control for all tissue types  <cit> . although 18s rrna is frequently used as an internal control, it is far from ideal. it requires the use of total rna and random primers for the rt reaction, and is expressed at very high levels; some means for attenuating 18s expression might be needed when weakly expressed genes are studied. in addition, there can be imbalances in rrna and mrna fractions between different samples, and 18s is not always expressed at a constant level in all conditions  <cit> . finally, 18s expression levels appear to be affected to a lesser extent by partial rna degradation than are mrna expression levels  <cit> .

studies in mammalian and microbial systems, where real-time qrt-pcr has been most extensively applied to date, have begun to include evaluations of various housekeeping genes for normalization  <cit> . vandesompele et al.  <cit>  recognized the importance of using statistical approaches to selecting the best internal controls for a given set of samples, and developed a procedure to select internal controls based on the mean pairwise variation of a gene from all other tested control genes. the adoption of real-time qrt-pcr methodology is somewhat reminiscent of the introduction of cdna expression microarrays in that initial microarray studies did not identify differentially expressed genes by a statistical method, but by an arbitrary cut-off value of fold-change  <cit> . similarly, the first real-time qrt-pcr studies have generally normalized expression levels to an internal control that is assumed to be valid rather than one that has been shown to be valid by statistical analysis of data. more rigorous methods will be needed as qrt-pcr is increasingly applied to study of regulatory genes, and for verifying patterns observed in microarray experiments.

in this study, we used real-time qrt-pcr to examine the expression of  <dig> housekeeping genes in a diversity of poplar  tissues collected at different developmental stages, and at different times of the year. the goal of our studies was to detect changes associated with seasonal development and tree aging for several regulatory genes. we therefore undertook a study to compare the stability of several potential control genes. we found that the genes tested exhibited very different degrees of variation in expression among tissue samples, and that a statistical and graphical method helped us to select the genes best suited for the developmental studies we were conducting. this approach, which is very similar to a classical method used by plant breeders to assess the relative stability in yield of different varieties  <cit> , can be applied to any gene or set of tissues to identify the most stable internal controls.

RESULTS
expression profiling of poplar housekeeping genes
ten housekeeping genes that represent different functional classes and gene families were chosen for study. these include ubiquitins, actins, tubulins, cytosolic cyclophilin , translational initiation factor, elongation factor, and rrna. searches of the literature revealed that members of all classes have been used as internal controls for studies of plant gene expression using rna gel blots or rt-pcr assays. poplar genes belonging to these gene families were identified via searches of the est database . the expression level of these genes was determined in eight tissue samples  collected over a seven month period from mature female poplar trees growing in plantations in oregon, usa.

within a single experiment, aliquots of the same cdna synthesis reaction were used for real-time pcr amplification of each of the  <dig> genes and all gene primer and cdna combinations were amplified in triplicate in a single pcr run. the entire experiment was then repeated a second time and results combined for statistical analysis. quantitation via real-time pcr is based on cycle threshold . ct is the cycle at which a significant increase in amount of pcr product  occurs, generally the middle of the exponential phase of amplification.

mean ct values  for each gene are given in table  <dig>  we had previously used 18s as an internal control for expression studies using these and other tissue samples and had noticed that 18s ct values sometimes varied considerably . this may have been largely due to the high abundance of 18s transcripts. use of 18s as an internal control for studies of genes expressed at relatively low levels required additional dilution of the cdna templates for 18s amplification relative to the gene being studied. in the present study, the amount of cdna was the same for all pcr reactions, but 18s primer concentrations were  <dig> nm, while all other gene primer concentrations were  <dig> nm. as expected, 18s was the most abundant  housekeeping transcript; tua was the least abundant.

statistical analysis of stability of gene expression level
we used single-factor anova and linear regression analyses of ct values to examine variation among tissues and rt-pcr experiments. examination of the distribution of the residual values from anova indicated that assumptions concerning homogeneity of variance and normality of data were adequately met . the anova f-test of differences among tissues indicated that five of the genes showed significant variation in expression among the tissue samples. the degree of residual variation, as reflected in the mean square error , residuals, or coefficient of variation , varied widely. four genes had cvs below 5%, and two had cvs at or above 25% . the mean absolute value of the residuals  varied  <dig> -fold, from a level of  <dig>  for act <dig> to  <dig>  for ubq. to test whether this variation could be due to chance alone, we tested the variation in size of residuals via levene's test . the variation among genes was highly significant , and the difference in residuals between act <dig> and ubq was also significant based on tukey's studentized range test and the bonferroni t-test at the 5% confidence level.

the mean expression level for each gene in each tissue sample was regressed against the overall means for the different tissue samples. this overall mean provides an index of rna quality and quantity for that tissue sample, much as means over test sites provide an index of site fertility in yield trials  <cit> . the slope provides an estimate of the degree to which the gene is sensitive to general expression-promoting conditions, and the residuals  and mean squared residuals  estimate the degree to which expression of a gene varies unpredictably after linear effects are removed. the residual variation after regression was substantial ; ms-reg varied approximately 14-fold . assuming that both constancy over tissues  and high predictability  are desired, we created a stability index as the product of slope and cv. the genes with the lowest stability index will usually provide the best controls. in this study, ubq had the lowest stability index, a result of both a very low slope and very low cv.

selection of internal controls
in addition to constancy of expression level, the expression level of an internal control compared to that of the genes being analyzed might be important to consider in certain cases. in our study, two of the most stably expressed genes represented opposite ends of the spectrum. ubq is highly expressed , whereas tua is expressed at a much lower level  . for the samples we tested, the high stability of ubq and tua expression indicate that use of either as a single internal control gene is appropriate. however, for some studies, no single gene may be adequate. in these cases, a method for normalization to two or more of the most stable internal control genes identified might be necessary. for example, normalizing to the geometric mean of selected internal control genes  <cit> . a potential strategy to avoid the additional expense and labor of using multiple internal control genes is to design a pcr primer pair that will amplify two or more members of a control gene family, whose combined expression level may exhibit the desired expression level and stability.

our primers were designed based on a limited est set that likely did not include all family members, and ests vary in sequence quality. thus, primers could have amplified more than one family member or primer mismatches due to est sequence errors could have lowered pcr efficiency. although gel and real-time pcr dissociation curve analyses did not indicate that multiple genes were amplified with our primer sets, these analyses might not detect multiple amplicons from different family members that are the same size and have the same pcr efficiency. as discussed above this is not necessarily a detriment–amplification of multiple family members might result in a more stable internal control than single gene amplification. in addition, the upcoming release of a large poplar unigene set and annotated genome sequence  <cit>  will improve gene selection and primer design capabilities.

CONCLUSIONS
using anova and linear regression analysis, we demonstrated that levels of expression stability among a number of potential control genes can vary widely, and that it is not difficult, costly or labor-intensive to test a number of genes. moreover, such validation tests might have the additional benefit of revealing technical problems, such as excessive variability in rt and pcr efficiency due to rna quality or inconsistent pipetting.

for some experiments, choice of an internal control is straightforward. for example, a number of housekeeping genes should be satisfactory controls for comparisons of transgene expression level in the same tissue type from different transgenic lines grown under identical conditions. however, this is not the case for studies that compare gene expression among different tissue or cell types, at different developmental stages, or under different environmental conditions, as were represented in our study of trees in field environments over a period of seven months. for such studies, internal controls should be carefully tested and validated. statistical confirmation of internal controls for qrt-pcr should enable previously indiscernible small changes in expression level to be reliability detected.

