BACKGROUND
studies of fungi  in natural environments often require simultaneous analysis of a broad taxonomic range. for instance, the fungi forming ectomycorrhizal symbioses number over  <dig> species  <cit> . analysis of natural ectomycorrhizal fungal communities traditionally has been a laborious, highly-skilled process with heavy reliance on gross morphological characterization of the ectomycorrhizal root-tips. the laborious nature of microscopic analysis and identification is the driving force behind developing such methods as molecular verification of identified morphotypes by means of pcr-rflp  <cit> . analysis of natural populations of ectomycorrhizas requires high rates of sampling because of the high number of fungal species involved and the high spatial variability observed in natural systems  <cit> . primers allowing simultaneous analysis of all the fungal phyla which are involved in ectomycorrhizal symbioses would be a useful tool in studying the ecology of these fungi. of particular interest for such work is the division dikaryomycota, which includes the subdivisions basidiomycotina and ascomycotina, and encompasses all ectomycorrhizal fungi  <cit> .

the earliest pcr primers to gain wide acceptance for work with fungal internal transcribe sequences  were "its1" and "its4" which amplify the highly variable its <dig> and its <dig> sequences surrounding the  <dig> s-coding sequence and situated between the small subunit-coding sequence  and the large subunit-coding sequence  of the ribosomal operon  <cit> . these primers amplify a wide range of fungal targets and work well to analyze dna isolated from individual organisms, but do not exclude effectively the plant host sequences in mixed, phytosphere dna extracts typical of studies of plant-associated microbiota. subsequently, the plant-excluding primers its1-f and its4-b came into wide use for analyses of fungal its sequences, but these primers were "intended to be specific to fungi and basidiomycetes, respectively"  <cit> . we present here a suite of primers designed to amplify dikaryomycota efficiently, requiring little optimization for use in the hands of even relatively untrained operators.

in addition to the increased efficiency needed for well-established methods such as pcr-rflp analyses of single fungal species  <cit> , robust primers are needed for newer molecular methods currently used to characterize microbial communities: length heterogeneity pcr   <cit> , high-throughput sequencing  <cit> , and terminal restriction fragment length polymorphism   <cit> . lh-pcr is a reliable and effective approach to analyze targets with high variability in overall length. in t-rflp analyses, as with lh-pcr, a fluorescent label on the pcr primer is used for detection, but in this case only the primer-terminal fragments of restriction digested pcr products are detected. these fragments contain the labelled primer and extend to the first instance of a restriction site for the enzyme used. with increased access to capillary-electrophoresis instruments capable of high resolution discrimination of oligonucleotide lengths, these methods have become both rapid and reliable. such methods enable rapid analysis of environmental samples and can provide extensive data on microbial communities as defined or restricted by the specificity range of primers used. these data include both relative abundances of dominant microbial phylotypes and characteristic pcr-product or trf  sizes for these phylotypes. for comparison of fungal communities, either method provides a relatively complete, culture-independent analysis. additionally, where the effort is justified, identified phylotypes subsequently can be taxonomically characterized  with the advantage that resources can be focused on phylotypes that are most important to the study at hand. terminal restriction fragment sizes also can be compared to a database of theoretical restriction fragments derived from sequence information to approximate taxonomic identity  <cit> .

while lh-pcr or t-rflp gives an estimate of relative abundance of phylotypes in a community, quantitative pcr  gives an overall quantification for the target sequence which can then be subdivided mathematically to provide an estimate of absolute population level for individual phylotypes. higuchi et al.  <cit>  developed a method for real-time detection of pcr products to quantify sample target sequences based on fluorescence of the intercalating dye ethidium bromide, and numerous companies now offer kits for such quantification using sybr green i  as the intercalating dye. most of these instruments now include the ability to perform a melting curve analysis on the pcr product after quantification  <cit> , which partially ameliorates uncertainty arising from the inability of the dye to distinguish target amplicons from non-target pcr products.

we describe a set of primers which performs well in all of these analytical approaches. this characteristic of wide applicability to studies of dikaryomycota from diverse environmental samples, particularly those with significant plant tissue content, lends a degree of interoperability between analytical approaches. for instance, real-time pcr analysis of samples can guide the choice of cycle numbers for lh-pcr or t-rflp reactions which are sensitive to late stage pcr. this is important for comparing data between more established approaches and newer methods coming into popular use.

RESULTS
initial work with fungal pcr
we began investigating fungal its primers using its1-f as the forward primer situated at the 3' end of ssu and its4-b as the reverse primer in the 5' section of lsu  <cit> . these primers amplify the entire its region . the reverse primer, its4-b, was not intended to amplify ascomycete targets, however, and based on sequence comparisons, it appears that it can be a poor match to many basidiomycetes. we also investigated reverse primers in the 5' section of lsu developed by egger  <cit> . these primers separately amplify ascomycetes and basidiomycetes. all of these primers have strong positive attributes, but since our morphological analysis of ectomycorrhizal root tips did not distinguish between ascomycetes and basidiomycetes, we developed primers that were capable of amplifying all dikaryomycota simultaneously.

initially, we approached our goal of a reliable pcr amplification broadly targeting dikaryomycota by developing a primer  which works well with its1-f and is close to the annealing site for its4-b. the its1-f/nlb <dig> primer pair effectively excludes plant sequences, amplifies basidiomycete targets, and additionally, amplifies ascomycete targets. we found, however, that its1-f apparently caused spurious product bands from low concentration  dna extracts of our ectomycorrhizas. the source of these bands was verified by reamplification with its1-f alone. the its1-f/nlb <dig> primer pair has been shown to be suitable for mycorrhizal applications in another laboratory  <cit> .

fungal its primer development
in order to obtain a cleaner product for restriction, we developed an alternative to its1-f, resulting in a primer pair which shows greater specificity to the intended fungal ribosomal target . we also developed a robust pair of dikaryomycota-specific primers  that could serve as first round primers in nested-pcr reactions with annealing sites outside those for a second pair of dikaryomycota-specific primers . we have used this nested reaction extensively for pcr-rflp work with ectomycorrhizal root tips. the nlb <dig> primer is identical to the nlb <dig> primer except that it has one additional base at the 3' end  and has a slightly higher calculated melting temperature.

additional primer development allowing for separate amplification of its <dig> and its <dig> produced a final suite of  <dig> primers  specific to dikaryomycota: outer nested-pcr primers , a pair of primers that amplify both its regions  and forward  and reverse  primers in the  <dig> s sequence  for amplification of internal transcribed spacers its <dig> and its <dig>  respectively. the outer nested-pcr primers  work well with all other fungal primer pairs  in this suite and provide greater sensitivity and specificity . two primers specific to plantae were also developed , and for our research can be used to verify that fungal pcr product is not contaminated by plant sequences . these primers are situated at the best estimate of the positions homologous to the fungal primers, nsi <dig> and nlb <dig>  by multiple sequence alignment. the plant primers have been applied successfully to lh-pcr and pcr-rflp analyses of forest plant tissues from above- and below-ground samples and work well at discriminating a representative sampling of plants from a forest in the cascade mountains in oregon usa to the species level. length heterogeneity was sufficient to distinguish more than  <dig> understory species  in an old-growth douglas-fir forest  franco), but the conifers  required pcr-rflp to obtain species level identification.

to ensure that the suite of fungal primers was amplifying the intended target sequences, fungal pcr products were verified in three ways. firstly, pcr-rflp patterns obtained under the current pcr protocol were compared to known patterns derived from sequences for the saccharomyces cerevisiae ribosomal operon  using three restriction enzymes to ensure that fidelity was maintained. secondly, pcr-rflp patterns for its <dig> or its <dig> pcr reactions were checked against the same patterns derived from a nested pcr starting with the nsa3/nlc <dig> first-round primer pair. in this case, insufficient genomic dna was carried over to the second round to amplify on its own so the product of the inner, second-round primers must have arisen from target sequences within the first product and not from another part of the genome. thirdly, for dna extracts with high percentages of plant dna, the plant primers nsip and nlbp were used to characterize the product and/or patterns that would result from amplifying plant sequences because of insufficient stringency. these methods were also incorporated into a quality assurance protocol.

efficacy of the new fungal pcr system
the primer pair nsi1/nlb <dig> has successfully amplified  <dig> species of fungal sporocarps in  <dig> genera collected from geographically diverse locales in oregon . as can be seen in figure  <dig>  the high diversity of the its sequences is evident from the variation in pcr product lengths. these amplifications were used to perform pcr-rflp cluster analysis . the primer pair nsi1/nlb <dig> also has successfully amplified  <dig> species in  <dig> genera of dilution-plate isolated ascomycetous soil microfungi. no zygomycetes glomus species were tested and from sequence data it appears unlikely that they would amplify . the mycorrhizal ascomycetes, cenoccocum  and tuber melanosporum, have amplified well and given restriction patterns consistent with their published sequences . the its <dig> intron is also found in hymenoscyphus ericae  <cit> . occurrence of this its <dig> intron may be widespread enough to affect some studies where the large size of the amplicons  causes technical difficulties. if necessary, the forward primer, its <dig>  <cit> , may be used with nlb <dig> as an alternative since this non-specific primer is downstream of the intron and can be used to avoid amplifying the intron.

the capacity of these primers to amplify fungal targets has encouraged us to develop numerous collaborations where the primers have been applied to a wide range of techniques. examples of applying the primers in current projects include:

1) amplified ectomycorrhizal fungi from more than  <dig> single-root-tip dna extracts  <cit> ,

2) the primer pair nsi1/nlb <dig> has successfully amplified  <dig> species in  <dig> genera of plate-isolated ascomycetous soil microfungi ,

3) pcr-rflp, t-rflp and direct-sequencing analyses of individual morphotypes and whole-core extracts of ectomycorrhizal fungi on loblolly pine grown in north carolina usa  <cit>  ,

4) characterized ectomycorrhizal fungi found on roots of eucalypts grown in uruguay  <cit> ,

5) analysis of epiphytic fungi on agricultural crops by qpcr and lh-pcr  <cit> .

of the two primers situated in  <dig> s, 58a1f gives slightly more robust pcr reactions than 58a2f, but based on sequence comparisons, is more likely to have difficulty amplifying cenococcum targets. both work well with nlb <dig>  the lsu reverse primer used for its <dig> analysis. they both lay within the sequence for its <dig>  <cit>  and are shorter by two bases: 58a1f being shorter on the 5' end and 58a2f being shorter on the 3' end.

xanthogenate/tween rapid extraction method
in this study we also evaluated possible increases in efficiency of analyses by using the xanthogenate/tween  rapid extraction method instead of the ctab/chloroform extraction. we initially tested the x/t method with additions of dnase to confirm the ability of the solution to protect dna . comparing agarose gels showed that dna degradation or loss attributable to dnase were not detectable; the same result was obtained with the ctab extraction. dna yields from single root tips using x/t were sufficient to give useful pcr reactions for more than half of the samples analyzed. around 80% of single root tips extracted by the ctab method yielded amplifiable fungal dna using the nested amplification presented in this study. there are approximately half as many transfers in the x/t method as in the ctab method and fewer centrifugations, so we are able to process four times as many samples in the same time. the fungal tissue of the ectomycorrhizas we were studying is concentrated mostly on the outside of the ectomycorrhizal root tips. by not grinding the samples, and therefore extracting relatively more from the surface than the interior of the ectomycorrhizal root tip, we also decrease the amount of plant dna and phenolics in the extracts. consequently, for the analyses where the goal was pcr-rflp verification of ectomycorrhizal roots first classified using gross morphological traits, only the more healthy mycorrhizas would likely produce strong patterns for the primary fungal symbionts. this was seen potentially as a positive attribute of the x/t extraction procedure. those root tips that failed to yield amplifiable fungal dna by the x/t procedure may have done so after ctab extraction, but also may be senescent roots colonized by saprobic fungi. in other words, the high sensitivity of the ctab extraction in conjunction with the nested pcr carries an increased risk of identifying saprobic fungi as ectomycorrhizal fungi where the ectomycorrhizal fungi are absent, senescent or otherwise poorly amplifiable. it may be that the decreased sensitivity of the x/t extraction procedure along with potential preferential extraction of dna from healthy mycorrhizal fungi would help to overcome this risk. researchers should bear in mind, though, that this bias towards root-surface fungal tissue could lead to underestimating fungal types that primarily reside within the root. the xanthogenate/tween extraction procedure should be seen as a complement to extractions involving tissue homogenization. the combination of these approaches could allow for some interesting possibilities such as localizing fungal distribution on and in the root.

CONCLUSIONS
the new suite of primers for dikaryomycota presented here  is anticipated to serve as the basis for a wide ranging system to analyze microbial communities, particularly in association with plants. in addition to the new plant primers, we are developing homologous primer sets for oomycota and zygomycota. by using the same sequence positions for multiple primer sets, we expect to maintain a high degree of comparability between pcr reactions. this approach also allows us to use an iterative approach to overcoming difficulties inherent in defining the taxonomic range of any particular primer set by developing "homologous" primers with differing target ranges. emergent methods for molecular analysis of microbial communities are allowing for increasingly high sampling rates. increased sampling rates are, in turn, the driving force behind more effectively characterizing these spatially-diverse and complex groups. methods such as the xanthogenate /tween dna extraction procedure similarly allow for rapid screening of large numbers of samples. future studies of microbial communities are likely to rely heavily on methods that can be adapted to large-scale sample processing needed to make efficient use of increasingly rapid and powerful molecular technologies.

