BACKGROUND
poultry farming is one of the fastest growing sectors of animal production in the world with the greatest increases occurring in developing countries in africa and asia  <cit> . the expansion is predicted to continue for at least 30 years, posing enormous challenges for system development and pathogen control  <cit> . in africa, including nigeria, many people depend on small-scale poultry production systems for food, currency, work and business, but diseases such as coccidiosis are a major limiting factor  <cit> . coccidiosis, caused by protozoan eimeria species parasites, is a major recurring disease which exerts a negative effect on profitable and sustainable small-scale poultry enterprises around the world, including in africa  <cit> . seven recognized species of eimeria specifically parasitize the digestive tract of domestic chickens   <cit> . eimeria acervulina, eimeria maxima, eimeria necatrix and eimeria tenella are commonly considered to be most important as a consequence of their occurrence, fecundity and pathogenicity, but all species can undermine chicken health and welfare  <cit> . concurrent infection with multiple eimeria species is common and clinical manifestation of the disease can vary substantially  <cit> . reports of three genetic variants  circulating among poultry in australia has added further complexity  <cit> , with two of these variants also detected recently in sub-saharan africa  <cit> . morphological descriptions of otu genotype oocysts are not currently available. preliminary indications from limited genetic resources suggest otux and otuy are most likely to be divergent strains of e. maxima and eimeria brunetti respectively, while otuz remains annotated as a cryptic species with its genetic relatedness to the seven recognised species unclear  <cit>  and .

reports on the occurrence of eimeria species in nigerian chickens have previously been based on traditional protocols using morphological and pathological criteria in the diagnosis of coccidiosis  <cit> . while effective, these traditional methods can be subjective and unreliable in the diagnosis of natural infections, especially during sub-clinical infection when more than one species is present  <cit> . consequentially, the use of molecular tools for accurate species identification and characterization of regional isolates of this parasite is valuable. using molecular tools can reduce or obviate the requirement for time-consuming, and frequently subjective microscopic analysis, but relies on sequence conservation within the genomic regions targeted by the assays. the impact of genetic variation between isolates of the same species on pcr detection has been described previously for both e. maxima and eimeria mitis, where multiple primer sets have been required for some targets  <cit> . the ability of many current molecular tools to identify parasites of the otu genotypes is untested and may represent a risk of under-detection. pcr assays developed by fornace and colleagues  <cit> , and godwin and morgan  <cit>  have attempted to address this deficit, although the latter requires equipment that is not currently widely available in many laboratories. effective detection of circulating eimeria species is important for proper diagnosis and disease control, and can inform the selection of appropriate anticoccidial drugs and vaccines  <cit> . all seven of the recognised eimeria species have been detected previously in nigeria  <cit> . here, we report the use of species-specific molecular assays to document the occurrence of all three eimeria otu genotypes in nigeria with relevance to poultry husbandry and health.

RESULTS
morphological identification of eimeria species oocysts in commercial poultry
twelve farms found during previous routine veterinary monitoring to harbour coccidial oocysts were sampled. oocysts were assigned putative species identity based upon microscopic morphology  <cit> . briefly, small oocysts were categorised as e. acervulina and/or e. mitis , medium sized oocysts as e. necatrix, e. tenella and/or eimeria praecox  and larger oocysts as e. brunetti and/or e. maxima . nine samples were found to contain oocysts which were capable of sporulation, all of which contained medium sized oocysts consistent with the occurrence of ntp eimeria species . large oocysts, indicative of e. brunetti and/or e. maxima, were also observed in all nine oocyst positive samples . small oocysts, representing e. acervulina and/or e. mitis, were detected in eight samples .table  <dig> identification of eimeria species and otu genotypes recovered from commercial poultry farms in zaria


eimeria occurrence was determined by oocyst morphology before and after in vivo propagation, and species/genotype-specific pcr after propagation. highlighted boxes indicate samples found to contain large oocysts by microscopy after passage and otux and y genotypes, but not e. brunetti or e. maxima by pcr. ea = e. acervulina, eb = e. brunetti, ema = e. maxima, emi = e. mitis, ene = e. necatrix, ep = e. praecox, et – e. tenella. morphological identification: am = small oocysts , ntp = medium oocysts , bm = large oocysts . l = layer breed chicken , b = broiler breed chicken . + = parasite detected, - = parasite not detected



oocysts recovered from all nine positive samples were amplified by in vivo propagation because the original samples yielded low oocyst recovery and poor sporulation. oocysts were harvested at post-mortem directly from the caeca to enrich the putative e. tenella sub-population of each sample for related studies  <cit> . as a consequence, the species complexity was reduced in five of the nine samples . specifically, only four of eight previously positive samples retained detectable am size oocysts, and four of nine samples retained bm sized oocysts. ntp sized oocysts persisted in all nine samples.

occurrence and identification of eimeria using nested species-specific pcr
nested pcr targeting the seven recognised eimeria species confirmed the occurrence of e. tenella in all ntp oocyst positive samples . eimeria praecox was not detected, but three of the nine samples were also found to contain e. necatrix. all four samples found to contain am morphology-group oocysts were shown to include both e. acervulina and e. mitis genomic dna, with two am negative groups also found to contain e. mitis by nested pcr. in direct contrast, all four samples found to contain bm morphology-group oocysts were negative for e. brunetti and e. maxima genomic dna by nested pcr . two amplicons representative of each species detected were cloned and sequenced . blastn comparison against the genbank non-redundant database confirmed species identity for each assay.

detection of eimeria otu genotypes by its- <dig> pcr
all three otu genotypes were detected by otu-specific pcr targeting the internal transcribed spacer   <dig> sequence from mixed populations of oocysts collected in nigeria following in vivo passage and caecal harvest  <cit> . otuy was most common, detected in four of nine samples screened . the otux genotype was detected in three of nine samples , and always in the presence of the otuy genotype. all three otux and otuy positive samples had previously been found to contain large  oocysts . the otuz genotype was detected in two of nine samples screened , both of which were also found to contain otux and otuy genotypes. two amplicons representative of each otu genoptype were cloned and sequenced . blastn comparison against the genbank non-redundant database confirmed genotype identity for each assay.

discussion
the original objective of these studies was to recover e. tenella isolates from nigerian poultry as a step towards population genetic characterisation  <cit> . for this reason samples were initially screened microscopically for the occurrence of oocysts of the ntp size and type   <cit> . the regional prevalence of each eimeria species and genotype has not been calculated since the sample size was limited and the choice of farms sampled was biased, focusing on farms previously identified as coccidia positive. nonetheless, the range of occurrence of each species was comparable to that described previously in the study area and in the southern part of nigeria  <cit> , possibly influenced by collection during the wet season when litter oocyst levels were likely to be elevated  <cit> . the reduction in eimeria species complexity detected in many of the samples after in vivo propagation is likely to be a consequence of harvest by caecal, rather than faecal oocyst recovery 7 days post infection. the detection of eimeria species not known to replicate in the caeca is likely to represent oocysts produced higher up the gastrointestinal track and transiting through the caeca at the time of sampling.

eimeria of the otux and otuz genotypes have previously been detected in sub-saharan africa, but until now the otuy genotype has only been described in australia  <cit> . here, analysis of a small number of field isolates clearly indicated for the first time that all three otu genotypes are circulating within nigerian poultry. four of nine samples tested were found to contain at least one otu genotype , which is comparable to the occurrence detected within australian flocks  <cit> . the risk posed by these genotypes is currently unclear. limited evidence indicates that live vaccines such as eimeriavax® 4 m, formulated to include e. acervulina, e. maxima, e. necatrix and e. tenella, cannot prevent colonisation by otu genotype parasites under field conditions  <cit> . it is likely that current anticoccidial prophylaxis will be capable of controlling these parasites, but it is equally likely that they will be capable of developing anticoccidial resistance as has been shown for other eimeria/drug combinations  <cit> . the absence of severe disease associated specifically with otu genotype parasites in australia indicates that current control measures remain adequate, but as the range of anticoccidial drugs available is reduced, live and possible future subunit or recombinant vaccines may be compromised.

comparison of microscopic observation of oocysts with pcr-based detection of eimeria genomic dna yielded variable results. ntp size-type oocysts were detected in all nine samples by microscopy and were confirmed by the detection of e. necatrix and/or e. tenella genomic dna. eimeria praecox genomic dna was not detected and these parasites may not have been present, although this species reproduces in the duodenal loop with a prepatent period of just 84 h and may have been lost if present during caecal harvest occurring 7 days post infection  <cit> . am size oocysts were detected in four of the nine samples tested following propagation through chickens. molecular analysis confirmed the presence of e. acervulina and/or e. mitis genomic dna in these samples and detected two further positive samples, possibly indicating greater sensitivity, although it should be noted that the pcr employed would have detected parasite genomic dna from all lifecycle stages and would not have been restricted to the oocyst. the greatest inconsistency was detected for bm size-type oocysts. oocyst detection indicated the presence of bm oocysts in four of the nine samples tested, but all were pcr negative for e. brunetti and e. maxima. such variation between the microscopic and molecular approaches may have been associated with the limit of detection for the pcr assay, but the finding that three of the four bm oocyst positive samples contained genomic dna of the otux and otuy genotypes suggests that current molecular diagnostics are inadequate in regions where these parasites may be circulating. thus, the true extent of the occurrence of otu genotype eimeria is unknown.

CONCLUSIONS
application of molecular diagnostics for the occurrence of the seven recognised eimeria species and otu genotypes has detected all three otus circulating in nigerian poultry. inconsistencies between microscopic and molecular diagnostic approaches indicate that molecular tools require updating to include the otux, y and z genotypes. this is the first report of the otuy genotype outside of australia.

