BACKGROUND
understanding time-course changes in gene expression and their complex interplay is a major challenge in gene regulation networks  <cit> . attention has been shifted from mrna steady-state levels towards rates of changes in transcript abundance and their regulation  <cit> . these dynamic of gene expression become even more complex when dealing with the developmental biology of multicellular bodies. indeed, the fact that both temporal and positional cues are known to directly influence transcriptional networks  <cit>  creates the need for a spatiotemporal specification of the changes in gene expression. coordinated gene expression in tissue  at different stages of development has been revealed using technologies such as microarray analyses  <cit> , mutant screening  <cit>  and novel imaging techniques  <cit> . however, these approaches only provide snapshots of gene expression at given times or developmental stages. in these widespread cases, gene expression is mapped in an eulerian specification, using spatial coordinates at a given time. in developing multicellular structures, changes in gene expression occur alongside changes in organ size, shape and anatomy. cell positions thus vary continuously due to cell movements, cell growth and cell death  <cit> . it is thus relevant to follow a cell during its movement over time in the growing tissue to assess gene expression along the developmental trajectory through a material or lagrangian specification. despite evidence of important gene regulations following cell movements  <cit> , there has so far been little research into quantitatively monitoring the rates of changes in expression levels over time and position during the developmental movements.

the question of how cell expansion and cell displacement both influence organ growth and gene expression can be addressed using mechanistic models that consider an organ as a continuum  <cit> . quantifying rates of change in moving elements has been a longstanding issue in continuum mechanics. this approach requires a detailed characterization of the motion velocity field v which can be monitored using video or time-lapse photography  <cit> . based on the conservation of mass in a deforming continuum, the continuity equation properly quantifies the rate of change of a property in a moving element  <cit> . for instance, if the concentration of compound a varies across a growing tissue but not with time  is steady but a is not constant), then the local rate of change ∂a/∂t at any position x is zero. however, there has necessarily been a change in the concentration of compound a in the moving element to match the change between a and a . by the same token, if the element volume has increased between t and t+dt, then a constant a over time means that net synthesis has occurred and compensated the dilution due to volumetric growth. the continuity equation is able to take into account not only the local rate of change but also the consequences of movement and of possible changes in volume on the rate of change of the property  <cit> .

the use of the continuity equation and the underlying kinematic analyses for growth studies was developed in the 1950's  <cit> . it was then introduced to a wider audience  <cit>  and reviewed in  <cit> . plant tissues can easily be considered as a continuum: since plant cells are stuck together by their middle lamella, shear between cells is usually infinitesimal. consequently, cell motion in a growing organ is due to the elongation of other cells pushing it  <cit> . to date, the continuity equation has mainly been applied to gain insights into the physiology of both growth and development of elongating organs. for example, the continuity equation framework has revealed overwhelming convective components of the rate of change of uronide deposition in growing roots  <cit> . it has also been used to assess the effects of stresses on growth  <cit> .

surprisingly, this framework has not yet been applied to gain a spatiotemporal description of the rates of change in gene expression and provide molecular developmental information in growing tissue. in the present work, changes in the rate of gene expression in the apex of poplar roots growing under optimal conditions were quantified at high spatial resolution with real-time polymerase chain reaction . we assessed the developmental regulation of two genes: actin <dig> and elongation factor 1-β. these two genes are widely used as internal controls in real-time pcr  <cit> ; yet both may be under transcriptional regulation in time and/or space in an actively growing organ. we show that the rate of change in gene expression can be quantified in time and space by combining kinematics and the continuity equation with real-time pcr. the resulting fields of expression rate revealed highly contrasted profiles for the control of actin <dig> and elongation factor 1-β during the developmental movement. we highlighted the importance of the convective component for monitoring changes in gene expression. these results underline that careful attention must be paid to growth and its possible alteration induced by changes in the environment before drawing any conclusions from raw transcript profiling in growing organs  <cit> . we demonstrate that the regulation of gene expression can be evidenced in growing tissues without using mutants or reporter constructions. consequently, the proposed framework also constitutes in our view a useful bypass for in-depth analysis of the molecular basis of growth regulation in a wide range of non-model species.

RESULTS
trajectory, velocity and relative elemental growth rate along the growth zone
the growth-velocity profile  was determined in  <dig> roots aged from  <dig> to  <dig> days . as shown by the very low variability around the average profile, neither root age nor the time of the observation along the night  induced significant changes in the growth profiles. a side experiment comparing root growth during the light phase and the night phase did not reveal any change due to direct light signaling or possible nycthemeral rhythm . growth was thus assumed to be steady for a few days in the following. the spatial derivative of velocity - that is, the relative elemental growth rate measuring relative elongation per unit time of elements along the axis, had a skewed bell-shaped distribution peaking at  <dig>  mm from the root tip . the first  <dig> mm, which include the root cap and the meristematic zone, displayed low velocity. velocity increased with distance from the root tip, reaching a plateau of  <dig>  mm min- <dig> at approximately  <dig> mm, corresponding to the elongation rate of the whole root. given the assumption of steady state, the growth trajectory - that is, the mapped position on the root of a meristem-derived tissue element as a function of time was calculated from velocity data. it was found highly non-linear . a tissue element crossed the growth zone in about  <dig> min , but spent more than  <dig> min  in the 1- <dig> mm section - over 80% of total growth duration.

transcript density along the growth zone
as the growth zone shows highly heterogeneous local velocity and relative elemental growth rate , the spatial distribution of molecular entities was analysed at high spatial resolution. the transcript densities of actin <dig> and a putative elongation factor 1-β  were plotted against the current segment position on the root axis . the actin <dig> density profile displayed two peaks at  <dig>  and  <dig>  mm from the root tip with similar spans, but decreasing intensity, and low values in more distal segments. the ef1β density profile differed from that of actin <dig>  displaying a single peak at  <dig>  mm and very low levels in all the more distal segments.

no time trend of the rna profiles can be suspected , suggesting a temporal stability of the rna profiles whatever the age of the root, or the time of the observation during the night phase. consistently with the steadiness of growth, the profiles of transcript density were thus assumed to be steady for a few days in the following . assuming steady growth and steady transcript density, the developmental time-course of the transcript density in a tissue element initially positioned at  <dig> mm from the root tip  was calculated by combining transcript density  with growth trajectory . due to non-linear changes in local velocity, the actual time-course of transcript density in a given tissue element was quite different from what could be expected intuitively from figures 2a and 2b. for actin <dig> , the first peak lasted almost five times longer than the second peak, indicating that the first changes in actin <dig> were smooth and long-lasting, whereas the second peak was a transient shift . however, even these transcript density profiles  cannot be analysed for regulation of gene expression simply by considering position-to-position variations, since as time goes on, each element not only moves but also expands . while the lagrangian specification of transcript density considers the movement of the tissue element, only the continuity equation gives an unbiased view of gene expression during growth, taking into account both cell movement and cell volume expansion.

regulation of gene expression
the material derivative of transcript density d  was calculated from the continuity equation. d corresponds to the net accumulation rate of transcripts in each element along the root. in other words, d reveals the regulation of gene expression resulting from the balance of transcription and decay along the root, corrected for the positional and dilutive effects of growth . from equation , it is possible to plot the two components of d, namely the convective and the dilutive components. under the assumption of steady transcript density, the local rate of change in gene expression δρ/δt is null. the convective rate of change, v.δρ/δx, corresponds to the variation in transcript density in an element moving to a region further away from the root tip . the dilutive component, ρ.δv/δx  assesses potential compensation of the dilution of transcript abundance during expansive growth through net transcript synthesis .

figures 3e and 3f illustrate these net accumulation rates along the root growth zone  for the actin <dig> and ef1β transcripts, respectively. for both genes, the profile of the net accumulation rate of transcripts in tissue elements d was highly dynamic in the zone of increasing relative elemental growth rate . in the distal part of the growth zone , d was generally not significantly different from zero, indicating that the transcript level remained almost constant for both genes. there was an active accumulation of actin <dig> transcripts peaking at  <dig>  mm in cells undergoing growth acceleration, followed by a negative peak of almost the same amplitude at  <dig>  mm  in cells just starting to decelerate their growth . significant peaks of smaller amplitude were observed, showing that actin <dig> transcripts accumulate in cells at  <dig>  mm from the root tip  and in cells that were poised to enter post-growth cell differentiation at  <dig>  mm. in comparison, the ef1β expression is up-regulated closer to the root tip, at  <dig>  mm . as for actin <dig>  this accumulation phase was followed by a phase during which the decay rate overcame the transcription rate. for actin <dig>  the absolute value of d was clearly mainly attributable to the convective component whereas for ef1β the relative contribution of the convective and dilutive components was balanced , meaning that synthesis rates were unequal for both transcripts. note also that net transcript synthesis overreached dilution in the first  <dig> mm - the zone of increasing relative elemental growth rate . beyond  <dig> mm, the dilutive effect was just compensated.

since the density of nuclei and presumably the cellular activity are heterogeneous along the root growth zone  <cit> , the net accumulation rate of total rna was used as a control. the total rna content varied significantly along the growth zone, with a lognormal distribution and a peak at  <dig>  mm from the tip . the net accumulation rate of total rna, calculated using the same formalism as above, was positive in the 1- <dig> mm range and showed a flat and near null profile thereafter . the simulated distribution of d, shown by box-and-whiskers plots, included zero, meaning that the mean value of d can be null by chance. in other words, the net accumulation rate of total rna can not be considered as strictly different from zero beyond the  <dig> mm mark . this location of total rna accumulation adds to the evidence for a high cellular activity of a meristematic zone.

given the calculation of temporal variations using the growth trajectory , net accumulation rates were plotted in space and time . in other words, variations of net accumulation rate were tracked in a tissue element which was originally located at  <dig> mm from the root tip and moved through the growth zone away from the meristem. this spatiotemporal mapping enables to equally perceive kinetic and positional cues. the lagrangian specification is shown here for a single element, but as long as growth and development are steady, all the elements display the same developmental fate  <cit> . figure  <dig> highlights that the variations in net accumulation rate of actin <dig> and ef1β transcripts differed markedly from the dynamics of total rna, thus strengthening the conclusion of a tight regulation of gene expression in any cell crossing the growth zone. given that total rna accumulation rate did not significantly differ from zero beyond the  <dig> mm mark , its dynamics appear more stable than the sharper dynamics of actin <dig>  both transcripts appeared to be under distinct control. the dynamics of ef1β were much slower than the dynamics of actin <dig>  which varied very rapidly in the ageing cell. however, both were maintained at an almost constant rate of net accumulation for approximately  <dig> minutes  at the very tip of the root. these results offer novel insights into the developmental analysis of gene regulation in growing plant organs.

discussion
specification of space, time and age in the study of dynamic processes
the present work focuses on the combination of two dynamic processes: expansive growth and gene expression. the analysis of both processes is influenced by the way space, time and age are considered. this stands as a pivotal point, since it shapes every experimental design and, therefore, drives conclusions. dynamic analyses necessarily involve considering the rates of change in a biological structure . whereas growth studies usually consider the rates of change , many investigations into the control of gene expression are based on the quantification of mrna transcript levels, which are shaped by a dynamic interplay between the rates of synthesis and decay  <cit> . in mature tissues, where cells no longer move nor enlarge irreversibly, the transcriptional regulation of gene expression  is revealed by the temporal derivative of local transcript density. however, a further step is needed in order to capture gene regulation in growing structures by considering movement and expansion, which are taken into account by the input of the partial derivatives and the growth velocity field into the continuity equation  <cit> . the present work is, to our knowledge, the first study to apply this framework to transcript density, providing an unbiased view of the spatiotemporal regulation of gene expression . in a steady growing structure, constant patterns of activity are displayed while material flows through it  <cit> . the developmental changes in net rates of gene expression were revealed by the convective and dilutive partial derivatives, two terms that are usually not considered in typical molecular studies of development.

we studied growth kinematics and gene expression under steady conditions of growth . in these conditions both the growth velocity and transcript density of housekeeping genes were assumed to be time invariant. when transcript density and/or velocity vary over time and are properly quantified at each time step, equation  has to be used . quantification of material derivative through equation  requires a larger experimental effort but is still straightforward . vital imaging of growth and gene expression, as well as high throughput quantitative analyses of gene transcript abundance, will greatly support such measurements in the near future, enlarging the potential uses of the method presented here.

in the present work, mean trends were established from the mean value of three independent measurements of ρ  at every position. rna extraction from very small samples is destructive and missing values prevented analysis at the individual root level. however, the advent of imaging techniques which provide accurate positioning and quantitative measurement of transcript level  <cit>  will enable more detailed analyses of individual organs using the continuity equation. this could be a major breakthrough, as the analysis of single roots have revealed a steep relative elemental growth rate gradient between the meristem and the elongation zone, which is usually smoothed when pooling data from several roots  <cit> . taking such gradients into account should reveal even more dynamic patterns of gene expression rates due to convective and dilutive terms. by the same token, our framework could be used to conduct a more detailed analysis at the level of small cell territories in order to characterize the contributions of different cell types along the root growth zone  <cit> , but would require more advanced three dimensional kinematic and a more complex formalism. for simplification, the growth field of the root apex was considered here as a one dimensional vector field  due to the slenderness of the root and the anisotropy of its growth and to the lack of shear growth . however, two or even three dimensions can be taken into account by using equations developed for appropriate coordinate systems , as given by silk  <cit> . more complex structures with a lower level of symmetry  can also be considered, using natural curvilinear coordinate system and proper tensorial formalism  <cit> . the transcript density would have to be characterized with the necessarily accuracy in the three dimensions. while feasible, it would require a large experimental effort.

once the rates of change have been properly computed, the next significant challenge to reveal regulation processes is the spatial and temporal specifications of these rates. in most studies of growing organs  <cit> , the property of interest is described at a given developmental stage  as a function of the position in the growth zone . this can reveal spatial mechanisms such as those related to highly diffusible or transported chemicals . an even more insightful way to describe this dynamic process is to choose an element and track its properties as it is displaced in space and time and undergoes developmental changes . these three dimensional plots are necessary in order to handle the fact that, in a growing organ, time and space are intimately but non-linearly linked. in the present study, eulerian and lagrangian specifications of dynamic processes highlight different aspects of developmental regulation. the lagrangian time*space specification revealed a long-term steady accumulation of transcripts of the studied genes , as well as total rna in the first  <dig> mm of the root tip  followed by highly dynamic regulation as the cells move away and undergo the accelerating and decelerating phases of expansion growth.

towards a dynamic analysis of transcriptional regulation during development
a deeper understanding of the mechanisms underlying organ growth and development requires quantitative data on three dimensional morphology and gene expression at a variety of stages and scales  <cit> . recent technological advances have made it possible to analyse gene expression in individual cell types, tissues or organs through the use of specific mutants  <cit> . fluorescent proteins can thus be coupled with high-resolution imaging in order to display the expression patterns of a gene at whole-organ level. for example, the expression of the vein marker gene athb <dig> can be used to track the earliest stage of vein development in leaves of arabidopsis seedlings  <cit> . this approach has also been used to study tissue organization and gene expression during phloem development  <cit> . however, even if the analysis of consecutive snapshots reveals changes in gene expression, their spatiotemporal dynamics need to be clarified in order to avoid misinterpretation of the observed variations.

understanding how signals through gene expression generate patterns and govern ontogenic timing is a crucial challenge in developmental biology. coupling quantitative data with mathematical models provides some answers  <cit> . in the present study, real-time pcr associated with kinematic analysis of growth at high spatial resolution gave access to the dynamics of gene regulation . the demonstration was conducted on two widely-studied genes considered to be housekeepers. we chose the gene coding for actin <dig> as this protein is one of the main components of cell architecture. actin microfilaments are involved in many processes such as cell polarity, division and elongation  <cit> . the use of an inhibitor of actin polymerization , at a concentration sufficient to remove a considerable amount of actin, reduced the root growth rate by about 50%  <cit> . using arabidopsis mutants, ringli et al.  <cit>  demonstrated that the actin <dig> gene is involved in root hair growth and bannigan and baskin  <cit>  pointed out that actin microfilaments are crucial for the tuning of cell expansion throughout the organ. in line with these findings, the expression of poplar actin <dig> appears to be tightly controlled along the root growth zone . three pulses of up-regulation were observed, corresponding to:  the division zone;  the accelerating part of the elongation zone; and  to just before the entry into the maturation zone. the putative elongation factor 1-β encodes a subunit of the ef- <dig> complex, an essential enzyme for protein synthesis in eukaryotes  <cit> . ef1α, another part of the same functional ef- <dig> complex, is accumulated in regions of high protein synthesis  <cit> . ef1α is used as a marker for meristematic activity in maize  <cit> . poplar efiβ was found to be up-regulated in the first two mm of the growth zone . the high regulation of actin <dig> and ef1β expression and their patterning along root growth zone pointed out that these genes did not display the expression stability required for their use as endogenous controls in real-time pcr.

CONCLUSIONS
in contrast with the transcript density profiles widely used in the literature  <cit> , the material derivative of transcript density provides key information about gene expression patterns, such as the location and the intensity of gene induction/repression. this framework appears to be very useful, offering rapid tracking of gene regulation, even in non-model species and species that are not-easily transformable. moreover, contrary to green fluorescent protein/β-glucuronidase tracking, the framework makes it possible to analyze many genes in the same biological sample . in addition, this approach can be used:  to test hypotheses on when and where a transduction signal is perceived, which is a key step in rebuilding the between-gene interplays underlying growth;  to unravel the temporal and spatial aspects of gene regulation between treatments affecting the time-course of cells across the growth zone, even under non-steady state situations; and, ultimately,  to assess putative reference genes in the very dynamic context of growing and developing tissues. although illustrated here for plant roots, the method is fairly generic and can be applied to most developing plant or animal organs or tissues, as long as they can be considered as a continuum  <cit> .

