BACKGROUND
lesions of a motor or mixed peripheral nerve lead to short- and long-term reorganization of the motor cortex, as demonstrated in a large number of animal studies  <cit> . similar motor cortex reorganization was shown to result from limb amputation in humans  <cit> . this motor cortex reorganization in amputees was linked to the occurrence and intensity of phantom limb pain  <cit> , but was also observed in amputees without pain  <cit> , as well as in patients with other chronic neuropathic pain conditions  <cit> . the exact relationship between peripheral deafferentation, neuropathic pain and motor cortex reorganization therefore remains still debatable. at least in its early phase, motor cortex reorganization is mainly based on functional changes of synaptic efficacy, involving the removal of local gabaergic inhibition  <cit> , and long-term potentiation-like mechanisms  <cit> . these functional synaptic changes are thought to be reflected by changes in intracortical inhibition  and facilitation  assessed by paired-pulse transcranial magnetic stimulation , as previously demonstrated in limb amputees, who showed a reduced ici and an enhanced icf in the hemisphere contralateral to the amputation  <cit> . in patients with different chronic neuropathic pain syndromes of central and peripheral origin, ici in the motor cortex was found to be reduced, whereas restoration of ici by repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation  applied to the motor cortex was paralleled by a reduction in pain intensity, suggesting a close relationship between ici and chronic neuropathic pain  <cit> . similarly, patients with complex regional pain syndrome  showed a reduced ici, which was more pronounced in patients with higher pain intensity  <cit> . in these patients ici was reduced not only in the contralateral, but also in the ipsilateral motor cortex, which points at differences in the underlying pathophysiological processes.

in the present study, we assessed ici and icf by paired-pulse tms in patients with chronic neuropathic pain due to an incomplete peripheral nerve lesion, and with chronic nociceptive pain due to osteoarthritis. our aim was to examine the relationship between chronic neuropathic pain of peripheral origin and cortical excitability changes in the motor cortex, and to assess possible differences between chronic neuropathic and nociceptive pain conditions.

RESULTS
group characteristics
there was no significant difference between the neuralgia group, the osteoarthritis group and the healthy controls with respect to the patients' age . neuralgia patients did not significantly differ from osteoarthritis patients with respect to current  and mean  pain intensity, whereas maximum pain intensity was significantly higher in the osteoarthritis patients . duration of pain did not significantly differ between both groups .

intracortical inhibition 
comparing ici between the three groups, and looking at the recordings taken from the muscle supplied by the lesioned nerve in the neuralgia group , there was a significant "group" effect , and a significant interaction between "side" and "group" , whereas the factor "side" did not reach significance . post hoc analysis revealed a significantly reduced ici at the neuralgia patients' affected side  as compared to their unaffected side , whereas no significant side-to-side differences were observed in the osteoarthritis patients and the control group. ici did not significantly differ between the osteoarthritis group and the control group. however, ici was significantly reduced at the neuralgia patients' affected side as compared to the controls' left hand , whereas no significant difference was seen between the neuralgia patients' unaffected side and the controls' right hand  .

including the results obtained from the muscle supplied by the unlesioned nerve in the neuralgia group in the statistical analysis , similar results were obtained: anova also revealed a significant "group" effect , and a significant interaction between "side" and "group" , whereas the factor "side" did not reach significance . again, post hoc testing revealed a significantly reduced ici at the neuralgia patients' affected side  in comparison to their unaffected side , but also in comparison to the controls' left hand , whereas no significant difference was seen between the neuralgia patients' unaffected side and the controls' right hand  .

intracortical facilitation 
including the neuralgia group results obtained from the muscle supplied by the lesioned nerve in the statistical analysis , there was no significant effect of the factor "side"  or the factor "group" , and also no significant interaction between both factors . similar results were obtained when the values obtained from the muscle supplied by the unlesioned nerve  were included in the analysis  .

mep amplitudes after single test stimuli
in the paired pulse tms-paradigm used in this study, the intensity of the test stimulus  was adjusted to evoke a mep of approximately  <dig> mv. therefore, a side-to-side-difference or a between-group-difference for the mep amplitudes after single test stimuli should be excluded. this was confirmed by statistical testing including the results from the muscle supplied by the lesioned nerve   as well as from the muscle supplied by the unlesioned nerve  in the neuralgia group .

test stimulus intensity
looking at the ts intensity relative to the motor threshold , and including the neuralgia group results obtained from the muscle supplied by the lesioned nerve  in the statistical analysis, there was no significant effect of the factor "side"  or the factor "group" , and also no significant interaction between both factors . relative ts intensity was  <dig>  ±  <dig> % of mt at the affected and  <dig>  ±  <dig> % at the unaffected side in the neuralgia patients,  <dig>  ±  <dig> % at the affected and  <dig>  ±  <dig> % at the unaffected side in the osteoarthritis patients, and  <dig>  ±  <dig> % at the left hand and  <dig>  ±  <dig> % at the right hand in the control group.

including the results obtained from the muscle supplied by the unlesioned nerve  in the analysis for the neuralgia group, no significant effect of the factor "side" , "group"  or the interaction between "side" and "group"  was detected either. relative ts intensity was  <dig>  ±  <dig> % of mt at the affected and  <dig>  ±  <dig> % at the unaffected side in the neuralgia patients.

motor threshold
there was no significant effect of one of the factors, neither when the results from the muscle supplied by the lesioned nerve  were included in the analysis , nor when the results from the muscle supplied by the unlesioned nerve  were included . mt in the neuralgia group was  <dig>  ±  <dig> % at the affected and  <dig>  ±  <dig> % at the unaffected side when recordings were drawn from a muscle supplied by the lesioned nerve, and  <dig>  ±  <dig> % at the affected and  <dig>  ±  <dig> % at the unaffected side when recordings were drawn from a muscle supplied by the unlesioned nerve. in the osteoarthritis group, mt was  <dig>  ±  <dig> % at the affected and  <dig>  ±  <dig> % at the unaffected side, and in the control subjects  <dig>  ±  <dig> % at the left and  <dig>  ±  <dig> % at the right hand.

in the neuralgia group, comparison between mt in the muscle supplied by the lesioned and the muscle supplied by the unlesioned nerve at the affected side did not reveal a significant difference .

relationship between ici and clinical parameters in neuralgia patients
in order to further differentiate between the repercussion of neuropathic pain and the repercussion of peripheral nerve lesion on ici, patients with peripheral nerve lesion were divided into two separate groups according to their current pain intensity as assessed by numeric rating scale . neuralgia patients with nrs≥ <dig> were considered to have moderate/severe pain, patients with nrs< <dig> to have mild pain  <cit> . two patients with poor german language competence were excluded. when the recordings were drawn from a muscle supplied by the lesioned nerve , motor cortex disinhibition was significantly more pronounced in the moderate/severe pain patients  than in the mild pain patients . recordings from a muscle supplied by the unlesioned nerve  revealed a similar tendency , which however failed to reach statistical significance . further subgroup analysis did not reveal a significant difference in ici between neuralgia patients with or without hypesthesia, dysesthesia, mechanical allodynia or muscle paresis. ici did not differ between patients with lesions of the median and ulnar nerve, neither when considering the recordings from a muscle supplied by the lesioned nerve, nor by the unlesioned nerve.

there was no significant correlation between ici and the relative amplitude of the compound muscle action potential  after supramaximal electrical stimulation of the lesioned nerve at the wrist , neither when the recordings were drawn from a muscle supplied by the lesioned nerve , nor when the recordings were drawn from a muscle supplied by the unlesioned nerve . there was no significant correlation between ici and the pain duration either.

discussion
our main finding was a significant reduction of ici in the motor cortex contralateral to the affected hand in neuralgia patients, whereas painful osteoarthritis patients showed no abnormalities of ici with respect to an age-matched control group.

in patients with entrapment of the median nerve at the carpal tunnel, which constituted a subgroup of patients in our study, it was previously shown that the chronic pathological modification of peripheral sensorimotor inputs leads to an enhanced excitability and a reorganization of the somatotopic map in the contralateral primary somatosensory cortex   <cit> . similar plastic changes were shown to occur rapidly after a transient deafferentation induced by an anesthetic nerve bloc, being therefore more likely based on functional synaptic mechanisms than on axonal sprouting and the formation of new synapses  <cit> . the presence of similar changes in cortical excitability and cortical map somatotopy in the primary motor cortex  of these patients has not been studied so far. however, our results strongly suggest that the reorganization previously observed in s <dig> is paralleled by similar changes in m <dig> of patients with incomplete peripheral nerve lesions.

our results in neuralgia patients resemble the changes of ici observed in the contralateral motor cortex of patients with upper or lower limb amputation  <cit> . given the fact that motor cortex disinhibition is also present in patients with limb amputation who do not suffer from chronic pain  <cit> , it might be argued that the disinhibition is more closely related to the peripheral nerve lesion rather than to the chronic neuropathic pain. however, there are a number of arguments, which favor the chronic neuropathic pain as the strongest determinant of the reduced inhibition in our study: first, dividing neuralgia patients into two subgroups according to their current pain intensity revealed a significantly more pronounced motor cortex disinhibition in the moderate/severe pain  as compared to the mild pain patients. second, the relative cmap amplitude as an indicator of nerve injury severity did not correlate with ici. in addition, ici did not significantly differ between neuralgia patients with or without muscle paresis, indicating that cortical disinhibition was also independent from motor impairment. third, there is evidence from various studies in animal models that an altered cortical excitation including reduction of gaba mediated inhibitory transmission is a crucial pathophysiological mechanism in chronic pain  <cit> . these excitability changes mainly have been demonstrated for the anterior cingulate cortex , but imaging studies revealed a close functional relationship between acc and m <dig> in chronic neuropathic pain conditions  <cit> . finally, in an interventional study using rtms to enhance ici in m <dig> of patients with chronic neuropathic pain of different central or peripheral origin, increased intracortical inhibition was accompanied by reduced pain intensity, emphasizing also the importance of the relationship between motor cortex inhibition and chronic neuropathic pain  <cit> .

in our study, the reduced ici was not restricted to recordings drawn from a muscle supplied by the affected nerve, but was also present when recordings were drawn from a muscle supplied by an unaffected nerve, indicating a more widespread lack of inhibition in the hand area of the hemisphere contralateral to the lesioned nerve. this finding points at reorganizational processes in areas adjacent to the cortical representation of the lesioned nerve. it is in line with findings in patients with upper limb amputation, who also exhibited reorganization in the cortical representation of proximal stump muscles  <cit> . besides, it offers a possible explanation for recent findings in patients with chronic neuropathic pain, showing that rtms applied to a motor cortical area adjacent to the representation of the painful zone is even more effective in pain relief than rtms applied to the motor cortical area corresponding to the painful zone itself  <cit> .

as a possible methodological problem, the mep responses recorded from the apb muscle might have been contaminated by responses from ulnar muscles of the thenar eminence, and therefore contain information from muscles supplied by the lesioned as well as from muscles supplied by the unlesioned nerve. however, since ici did not significantly differ between patients with median and ulnar nerve lesions, this might not have influenced our results.

in previous studies, it has been shown that the intensity of the ts is critical for the assessment of ici, and that differences in ts intensities might confound ici comparisons  <cit> . especially, this would have been critical in neuralgia patients, if the ts intensity required to achieve a mep of approximately  <dig> mv had been elevated due to the peripheral nerve lesion. however, an elevated ts intensity in the neuralgia group due to the peripheral nerve lesion as a potential confounding factor was excluded, since analysis of ts intensities relative to mt revealed no significant difference within- or between-groups. in addition, mt was similar in all groups, including both the muscle supplied by the lesioned and the muscle supplied by the unlesioned nerve in the neuralgia group. finally, the fact that a similar ici reduction was observed when recordings were drawn from the muscle supplied by the unlesioned nerve at the neuralgia patients' affected side strongly supports the assumption that assessment of ici was not confounded when recordings were drawn from the muscle supplied by the lesioned nerve.

motor cortex disinhibition was only seen in the neuralgia group, whereas the osteoarthritis patients did not differ from the control group. in osteoarthritis, pain is thought to arise as a consequence of physiological activation of primary nociceptive afferents by tissue-damaging stimuli and processing of this activity within the nociceptive system, whereas in chronic neuropathic pain such as neuralgia, pain arises by activity generated within the nociceptive system without physiological stimulation of nociceptors  <cit> . this different activation of the nociceptive system leads to differential plastic changes at the level of primary sensory and dorsal horn neurons  <cit> . although it is conceivable that this different activation of the nociceptive system also leads to an involvement of different brain circuitry in distinct pain conditions, the extent of supraspinal reorganization and the factors driving the process are largely undiscovered  <cit> . a morphometric imaging study revealed differences in prefrontal and thalamic gray matter density as an indicator of different cns neuroplasticity between patients with neuropathic and non-neuropathic chronic pain  <cit> . a number of functional imaging studies using fmri or pet showed differences between neuropathic and nociceptive pain conditions with respect to the activated brain regions  <cit> . in addition, the pattern of intracortical inhibition in neuralgia patients did also differ from crps patients, who previously were shown to have reduced intracortial inhibition not only in the contralateral, but also in the ipsilateral motor cortex, suggesting a more widespread and bilateral reorganization of the motor system in crps as compared to neuralgia  <cit> . in this context, our present findings point at pathophysiological differences between chronic neuropathic and chronic nociceptive pain with respect to the involvement of central motor circuitry.

the finding of a pain-related motor cortex disinhibition in patients with chronic neuropathic, but not in chronic nociceptive pain may have an impact on our understanding of the therapeutical use of invasive or non-invasive motor cortex stimulation in chronic pain conditions. the restoration of defective ici might be a crucial mechanism to achieve pain relief in chronic neuropathic pain, as previously demonstrated by means of rtms applied to the motor cortex  <cit> . interestingly, in this previous study only high-frequency rtms led to an enhancement of ici in patients with chronic neuropathic pain, although high-frequency rtms generally is known to reduce ici in healthy subjects  <cit> , supporting the view that rtms effects essentially depend on the state of cortical excitability before stimulation  <cit> . on the other hand, the lack of motor cortex disinhibition in patients with painful osteoarthritis as a chronic non-neuropathic pain condition might allow predicting a therapy failure of rtms applied to the motor cortex in these patients.

CONCLUSIONS
our results suggest a close relationship between motor cortex inhibition and chronic neuropathic pain in the neuralgia patients, which is independent from nerve injury severity. the lack of cortical disinhibition in patients with painful osteoarthritis points at differences in the pathophysiological processes of different chronic pain conditions with respect to the involvement of different brain circuitry.

