BACKGROUND
in precocial birds, such as the duck and chicken, day-old chicks rapidly form a memory of the moving object to which they were first exposed, and show a preference for it by chasing it for at least several days. this behavior, so-called imprinting  <cit> , has attracted much attention as a model for investigating the neural basis of memory formation and recognition linked to emotional and social behavior. the level of incorporation of radioactive uracil into rna in the forebrain roof region was found to be significantly higher in chicks that were trained by exposing them to an imprinting stimulus  <cit> . using autoradiographic techniques, a training-related increase in the incorporation of radioactive uracil or 2-deoxyglucose was observed in the intermediate medial mesopallium   <cit> . moreover, bilateral destruction of these regions before or after imprint training impaired preferences  <cit> . thus, the imm plays major roles in the acquisition and retention of imprinting preferences.

in filial imprinting, chicks learn the ensemble of characteristics presented by the mother hen. in this case, auditory as well as visual elements of the mother hen are important cues. chicks can also be imprinted to a visual object without any auditory stimulus, which indicates that the processing of visual information in order to encode visual characteristics that should be learned before being integrated into the imm may be involved in the establishment of visual imprinting.

birds have two parallel visual pathways  <cit> . in the tectofugal pathway, visual information from the retina is transmitted to the following regions in the order listed: the optic tectum, the nucleus rotundus of the dorsal thalamus, and the entopallium of the telencephalon. a lesion in this pathway results in deficits in a variety of visual discriminations  <cit> . in the thalamofugal pathway, which is another visual pathway in birds, visual information from the retina terminates in the visual wulst of the telencephalon via the nucleus dorsolateralis anterior thalami. the visual wulst has been implicated in learning processes in which visual information leads to the formation of some memory representation, such as reversal learning or navigational behavior  <cit> .

in the present study, we used simplified computer-generated images on a thin-film transistor liquid crystal display , and established a system to induce visual imprinting behavior in chicks directed towards moving images. we identified the role of information processing in the visual wulst in the acquisition and retention of memory by investigating the effects of visual wulst lesions. to elucidate the extent to which the visual wulst is involved in imprinting behavior, we studied using optical recording techniques the effects of imprinting on the neural response patterns of the visual wulst to stimuli. we found that three basic colors are represented in a spatially organized manner in the visual wulst, and that this pattern exhibits plastic changes after imprinting. these results indicate that the plastic alteration of the visual wulst is a prerequisite for the establishment of imprinting behavior in chicks.

RESULTS
chicks can be imprinted to a simple moving image presented on the tft-lcd
chicks were exposed to a computer-generated moving image  on the tft-lcd on the day of hatching  in the training sessions. on the following day, preferences for the training image as well as for novel images were assessed . after training with exposure to the red circle, the chicks approached the tft-lcd showing the red circle on pd <dig> . in contrast, when a blue square, an image they had never seen, was presented, the chicks moved in the opposite direction to the tft-lcd, as if to escape from it. upon exposure to the blue circle, an image that has the same shape but a different color to the training stimulus, the approach or escape behaviors observed depended on the individual . with a red square, an image that has the same color but a different shape to the training stimulus, the approach behavior was observed. similar to the preferences of these chicks, chicks that were trained with the blue square on pd <dig> approached the tft-lcd that presented the blue square but escaped from the red circle . with the red square, the escape behavior was observed. the blue circle induced approach or mild escape behavior. chicks that received no training moved at random  or moved in one direction continuously , independent of the images presented.

acquisition of imprinting is disrupted after generation of the visual wulst lesion
the visual wulst was destroyed before the training session, to investigate its involvement in the learning process of imprinting behavior . for chicks that received the visual wulst lesion on pd <dig> and that were subsequently trained with the blue square, preference for the training stimulus was not observed in this evaluation . most of the chicks showed approach behaviors to all the presented images, regardless of shape or color. differences in the ps for various images were not detected in the visual wulst-lesioned group, although significant differences were observed in the sham-lesioned group. a significant interaction was detected between the operation and the presented images . the mean ps for the new image increased significantly with lesion generation . the destroyed area was determined by dorsal inspection and coronal sections . it covered the apical part of the hyperpallium, the interstitial part of the hyperpallium apicale, and the intercalated as well as densocellular parts of the hyperpallium. we conclude from these results that chicks are unable to learn the imprinting stimulus in the absence of a functioning visual wulst.

effect of the visual wulst lesion after the establishment of imprinting behavior
the effect of bilateral ablation of the visual wulst after the establishment of imprinting behavior  is shown in figure 2e. the mean ps after ablation was comparable to that before ablation , which implies that the wulst lesion does not affect imprinting behavior that is already established. the apical part of the hyperpallium, the interstitial part of the hyperpallium apicale, and the intercalated as well as densocellular parts of the hyperpallium were completely destroyed . in 2/ <dig> chicks, the destruction slightly invaded the nidopallium.

response of the visual wulst to electrical stimulation of the optic papilla, as revealed by optical imaging
the responsiveness of the visual wulst was investigated using optical imaging. initially, the optic papilla of the left eye was electrically stimulated with a bipolar electrode at  <dig>  ma and  <dig> hz for  <dig> s, and an intrinsic optical signal was obtained from the right visual wulst . the intrinsic signal was detected as a band that expanded antero-posteriorly in the anterior medial part of the right visual wulst, surrounded by the central fissure and cerebral veins . the response peaked about  <dig> s after stimulus onset and lasted for several seconds . when the left optic papilla was stimulated, the response was observed predominantly in the right visual wulst, while stimulation of the right optic papilla resulted in a predominant response in the left visual wulst. this response was completely inhibited by the application of glutamate receptor inhibitors,  <dig> μm cnqx and  <dig> μm apv .

using a voltage-sensitive dye, we recorded the neural response of the visual wulst to optic papilla stimulation . the signal was detected in the area in which the intrinsic response was obtained. the response peaked about  <dig> ms after the onset of stimulation.

anatomical evidence for the responsive area of the visual wulst
we labeled the neurons in the visual wulst, to visualize the afferent and efferent connections of neurons that responded to the visual stimuli . when dii crystals were inserted into the center of the region that showed the maximum response to the blue square in the intrinsic optical recording , neurons in the nucleus dorsolateralis anterior thalami pars lateralis in the ipsilateral thalamus were intensely labeled retrogradely . in addition, anterograde labeling was detected in the ipsilateral nucleus geniculatus lateralis pars ventralis.

representation of the three basic colors is spatially organized in the visual wulsts of dark-reared chicks
as we clarified in the behavioral analysis, color is an important component of the imprinting stimulus to determine image preference . therefore, we investigated the intrinsic responses of the visual wulst neurons to colored objects in quasi-dark-reared chicks. using the vsg system, we presented blue or red squares  that moved horizontally across the screen. the blue and red had rgb values of  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  respectively. each color evoked a maximum response in a different location of the visual wulst. since these squares were not isoluminant , we used luminance-adjusted stimuli. figure 4b  shows the intrinsic optical images evoked by three isoluminant  squares of blue, green, and red in the same visual wulst region. in the left images, the colored area corresponds to the peak regions of activation at 70% of the maximal response to each color. a comparison of the activation patterns indicates that different colors activate partially overlapping regions, and that these activations peak at different locations. in all five cases, the peak responses to red, green, and blue were organized spatially in the order of posterior to anterior, and the region that responded to red was confined to the oval-shaped restricted region, whereas the region that responded to blue always extended antero-posteriorly. to confirm that these response patterns were elicited by color differences, we presented isoluminant color gratings. in all three cases in which recordings were made successfully, a similar spatial representation of color was observed in the visual wulst .

representation of colors in the visual wulst is transformed with imprinting
the evoked response area to the three colored squares was compared in the blue square- and red square-imprinted chicks. chicks were trained by exposure to either blue or red squares on pd <dig>  imprinting was evaluated the following day. the chicks that were trained with the blue square showed an obvious preference for the blue square and circle, and were subjected to subsequent optical recordings. for these chicks, the evoked response area to blue was detected in both the anterior and posterior positions of the visual wulst, while the response area to red was restricted to the posterior portion; as a consequence, the blue-responding area entirely covered the red-responding area . in contrast, chicks that were trained with the red square exhibited imprinting behavior to the red square and circle. in these chicks, the blue-responding area was contracted to the posterior direction and was totally enclosed in the red-evoked area, which was enlarged anteriorly . we also recorded the responses of control chicks that experienced the training session without presentation of any image on the tft-lcd . in these chicks, the response patterns to both blue and red squares were similar, extending from posterior to anterior with peak amplitude at the middle portion . the results were qualitatively similar for different criterion levels . to compare the response patterns of blue square-imprinted, red square-imprinted, and no imprinting chicks, we quantified all of the activation patterns . narrow regions  along the antero-posterior axis were identified in each chick, and the signal intensity was plotted against this axis . three small roi  were defined at the anterior, middle, and posterior sites equidistant from each other. when the mean amplitude at each roi was plotted as a function of position , the greatest change was observed in the response to blue in the blue-imprinted chicks. the signal amplitude of the anterior site was larger than that of the middle site, although this was not observed in the other two conditions. similar results were obtained for the response to red in the red-imprinted chicks. the slopes were calculated and plotted, and significant differences were detected .

discussion
in this study, we established a system to induce the visual imprinting behavior of chicks using moving images on a tft-lcd. in previous reports, video images were used to analyze social as well as anti-predator behaviors in chicks  <cit> , and female zebra finches were shown to exhibit behavioral preferences towards males projected on a screen using a video recorder, while male finches sang songs to female images presented on a tft-lcd  <cit> . recently, vallortigara et al. observed a preference to approach biological motion patterns presented on a display  <cit> . these studies indicate that birds are able to recognize images on a display as real objects or as images that resemble real animals. in accordance with this, we successfully imprinted chicks with two-dimensional images presented on a tft-lcd. we presented two types of cues, color and shape, as key factors for discrimination. as the mean ps for the color-matched image was comparable to that for the matched image, we conclude that color is the most important factor for the discrimination of the imprinted image in our system.

we have demonstrated that the visual wulst plays an important role in processing visual stimuli, in order to transmit color and shape as imprint stimuli. it has been reported that reversal learning or sun-compass associative learning in homing pigeons is impaired after the introduction of a visual wulst lesion  <cit> . therefore, it can be concluded that the visual wulst is involved in learning tasks that require complex judgment of visual cues, including visually guided imprinting behavior. in contrast, the entopallium lesion abolished imprinting behavior, even when it was performed after the establishment of the behavior. our results indicate that the entopallium is indispensable for color and shape discrimination. an alternative explanation for these results is that the entopallium is important for maintaining the imprinting behavior. we favor the former explanation, as in the pigeon, the entopallium is known to be involved in various visual discriminations, such as intensity, pattern, and species  <cit> .

the response properties of visual wulst neurons have been well documented by single-unit recordings of the barn owl. pettigrew and konishi  <cit>  have reported a precise retinotopic organization, a high degree of binocular interaction, and neurons with selectivity for stimulus orientation, direction of movement, and binocular disparity, which are in common with the mammalian cortex. these properties are comparable with findings in the pigeon wulst, with the exceptions of binocular interaction and binocular disparity  <cit> . in the chick wulst, retinotopic organization, in which neurons that have localized receptive fields and orientation selectivity are spatially arranged, has been documented  <cit> . recently, for the owl visual wulst, orientation preference maps were obtained using the intrinsic signal optical imaging technique  <cit> . in the present study, we have reported on the spatial representation of color in the chick visual wulst. osorio et al.  <cit>  have shown that domestic chicks have tetrachromatic color vision and have accurate recall of color. in the cortical area v <dig> of macaque monkeys, it has been reported that functional maps of colors are represented by the location of the response peak to each color  <cit> . considering the fact that the sizes of the iso-orientation domains in the barn owl wulst are comparable to those found in the v <dig> areas of the cat and monkey  <cit> , and that the owl visual wulst is important in contour-based form perception  <cit> , the avian visual wulst has properties in common with the extrastriate cortical area, such as v <dig>  in addition to v <dig> 

reflecting the unique layer organization of the wulst, the retinotopy of the chick is complex. the visual field is represented in the anteroposterior as well as the dorsoventral directions of the wulst  <cit> . therefore, the relationship between the precise retinotopy and color-coding map in the chick visual wulst is not clear at the present time. however, considering the fact that color information along with retinotopicity can be transmitted via the tectofugal pathway, this may not represent a serious problem. rather, the processing of visual information in the visual wulst may be specialized in a learning-related aspect.

it is documented that the projection from the thalamus to the visual wulst is lateralized functionally and anatomically, although this lateralization depends on the light condition during incubation and tasks used  <cit> . therefore, it would be interesting to stimulate the eye opposite to the one that we used in the present study and compare the response pattern in the optical recordings.

substantial evidence indicates that the neurons in the visual cortex are sensitive to visual experiences and exhibit plastic changes. in their pioneering work, wiesel and hubel  <cit>  demonstrated that when vision from one eye was deprived during the critical period, the ocular dominance column for the non-deprived eye became dominant. this experience-dependent plasticity was also demonstrated in the orientation column  <cit> . this type of plasticity, which is dependent upon neuronal activity, has also been found in the wulst of the barn owl  <cit> . however, learning-induced plasticity in the visual cortex has only been reported for orientation selectivity  <cit> . in this case, specific groups of v <dig> cells that signal orientation differences increase their discriminatory abilities. in contrast, converging evidence of specific learning-induced plasticity in the primary auditory cortex, as well as the somatosensory cortex has been reported. the first study concerning the plasticity of the frequency receptive fields in the primary auditory cortex used a fear-conditioning paradigm, in which neurons in the auditory cortex shifted tuning towards or to the frequency of the conditioned stimulus  <cit> . moreover, in owl monkeys that performed a frequency-discrimination task, an increase in the area of representation for the trained frequency was observed  <cit> . thus, learning specifically altered the tonotopic map, in which the distribution of the threshold frequency is represented across the cortex. similar expansions of cortical representation have been demonstrated in somatotopic maps of the primary somatosensory cortex  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
in the present study, we reported that in the chick visual wulst, a map representing at least three colors was altered following visual experience as well as imprint learning. the area representing the training-relevant color was altered, as in the case of learning-induced cortical plasticity in the primary auditory and somatosensory cortices. assuming that the chick visual wulst is functionally similar to the mammalian cortex, this result indicates that learning-induced map plasticity is a general phenomenon in the cortical area. however, we cannot exclude the effect of emotional changes in the imprinted chicks that could alter the responsiveness of the wulst neurons to colors. further studies are needed to clarify this point. it has been shown that the visual wulst has a neural connection with the imm  <cit> , which is considered to be a storage site for visual imprinting information  <cit> . therefore, the visual wulst shows plastic changes according to the imprinting stimulus, and relays this information before it is integrated and stored in the imm. this plastic change in the response area to the imprinting stimulus may be indispensable for the establishment of imprinting behavior.

