BACKGROUND
the use of recombinant proteins as drugs has deeply modified the therapeutic approach to many severe diseases. however, a variety of practical problems limits the use of biotechnological protein drugs. stability of the active proteins, need for parenteral administration, and high costs of the final purified materials are among the most significant drawbacks. a way of circumventing these issues is represented by the direct administration of recombinant bacteria, acting simultaneously as cell factory and delivery system for pharmacologically active proteins. this approach has been already extensively experimented for the mucosal delivery of vaccine antigens  <cit> . in recent years, the local delivery of therapeutic antibodies  <cit> , adjuvant cytokines  <cit> , and anti-inflammatory cytokines  <cit>  has been successfully attempted with food-grade bacteria , although limited to the therapy of localised pathologies .

among anti-inflammatory strategies, both at systemic and local level, the use of the il- <dig> receptor antagonist  has received vast attention. il- <dig> is a family of cytokines highly active in the modulation of immune amplification and inflammation. the il- <dig> family includes two agonist proteins, il-1α and il-1β, and one antagonist protein, il-1ra. il-1β is a very potent immunostimulatory and inflammatory cytokine, responsible for initiating and amplifying the host response to invasion. if not properly controlled, il- <dig> can cause fever, acute inflammation, tissue destruction, organ failure, and eventually shock and death . il-1ra inhibits il- <dig> by acting as a competitive receptor antagonist with no detectable agonist activity, thus representing a natural powerful mechanism to control il-1-dependent responses and avoid pathological derangement . in experimental animal models, il-1ra has demonstrated excellent therapeutic effects against acute and chronic inflammatory pathologies, being also effective at high doses in prolonging survival in endotoxic shock  <cit> . in human trials, il-1ra has been administered to patients with septic shock, rheumatoid arthritis, graft-versus-host disease, and multiple sclerosis . while only a modest benefit was achieved in patients with septic shock  <cit> , il-1ra had a clear beneficial effect in reducing joint destruction in rheumatoid arthritis  <cit> . from the clinical experience with purified recombinant il-1ra it became clear that most of the problems of variability of efficacy were due to difficulties in adequate timing and dosage of the drug  <cit> . to overcome these problems, gene therapy with adenoviral vectors carrying the il-1ra gene has been attempted in experimental animals, yielding promising results in models of type  <dig> diabetes and ischemic brain damage  <cit> . the clinical application of the gene therapy approach may however meet with difficulties for safety reasons, besides the problems of controlling drug release, concentration, and localisation.

based on previous experience of using recombinant bacteria as in vivo cell factory, here we describe a novel system of local delivery of il-1ra, able to achieve systemic effects. the system exploits the ability of certain bacteria  to undergo autolysis in non-permissive conditions  thereby releasing the cytoplasmic proteins. intra-colon instillation of b. subtilis expressing recombinant human mature il-1ra induces significant serum levels of the recombinant protein in rats and rabbits, and prevents the inflammatory effects of systemic il- <dig>  intra-peritoneal administration of recombinant b. subtilis in the mouse could inhibit lps-induced shock and death. further experimental evidence with a b. subtilis strain producing human il-1β demonstrates that this delivery system can be generalised to other recombinant proteins.

RESULTS
the ability of b. subtilis to generate spores by autolysis of the cell wall, thereby releasing cytoplasmic proteins, was exploited as system for delivery of proteins in vivo. following a sporulation signal  bacteria undergo an autolytic process with release of most of their cellular components and formation of a highly resistant spore containing dna and few essential proteins . as already shown in a previous study  <cit> , in vitro sporulation of b. subtilis engineered for endocellular expression of human il-1ra  caused the release of large amounts of intact and active recombinant protein within a few hours after the sporulation signal . the in vitro release of intracellular recombinant il-1ra was equally evident in psm <dig> spo+  and spo- bacteria, i.e. genetically modified cells which, in response to the sporulation signal, start the autolysis process but are unable to form a complete spore thus undergoing complete cell destruction . both spo+ and spo- strains of psm <dig> were used in subsequent in vivo experiments with identical results.

the il-1ra recovered after b. subtilis autolysis in vitro retained full biological activity, with a specific activity of  <dig>  ×  <dig> inhibitory units /mg vs.  <dig>  ×  <dig> iu/mg of reference standard il-1ra  <cit> . to assess whether the recombinant protein could also be released in vivo by engineered b. subtilis, the bacterial strain engineered with il-1ra was administered intra-peritoneally in the mouse, in the small and large intestine of rats, and in the rabbit distal colon. the presence of human il-1ra was assessed at different times after administration, both locally and in the serum of treated animals, by western blotting, elisa, and biacore analysis . intact human il-1ra was found locally at high levels  <dig> hours after administration of recombinant bacteria and persisted for several hours. in the serum, intact human il-1ra could be found at measurable levels when b. subtilis was administered intra-peritoneally  or in the colon , but not when bacteria were administered in the small intestine .

the delivery of il-1ra at the intestinal mucosal level was examined. live cells of the il-1ra-producing psm <dig> strain were instilled in the rat distal colon, a non-permissive environment that does not allow b. subtilis vegetative life  <cit> . as a control, animals received equal numbers of the psm <dig> strain, i.e. b. subtilis cells transformed with the β-lactamase-expressing control plasmid psm <dig>  data in figure  <dig> show that the presence of intact il-1ra can be measured both locally  and in serum for several hours after intra-colonic inoculum of the il-1ra-producing b. subtilis strain psm <dig>  whereas serum of animals receiving b. subtilis psm <dig> remained negative. as a control, psm <dig> bacteria delivered in the small intestine released detectable amounts of il-1ra locally, but no il-1ra could be found at the serum level . the serum pharmacokinetic parameters of il-1ra released by recombinant b. subtilis, as compared to the purified protein administered intra-colonically, show a few differences . the cmax was higher and the tmax quicker for the purified protein, as compared to il-1ra released from intra-colonically administered b. subtilis. on the other hand, the auc/dose was almost identical. administration of control bacteria psm <dig> intra-colonically together with the purified protein did not significantly change the pharmacokinetics parameters of il-1ra, except for a slight decrease of the total dose absorbed, indicating that the physical presence of bacteria has little effect on il-1ra absorption. it is concluded that engineered b. subtilis delivered intra-colonically releases, conceivably by autolysis, the cytoplasmic recombinant protein, which is subsequently absorbed and can be detected intact at measurable levels in the bloodstream.

to verify that il-1ra found in serum after b. subtilis administration at the mucosal level is functional, its ability to inhibit il- <dig> was evaluated both in vitro and in vivo. in vitro, activity of standard il-1β was assessed with the classical co-stimulation assay on thymocytes of lps-unresponsive c3h/hej mice. inhibition by il-1ra was evaluated as capacity to decrease il-1-induced thymocyte proliferation. the presence of biologically active il-1ra was measured as inhibition of il-1β-induced thymocyte proliferation by the il-1ra-containing serum of rabbits administered psm <dig> intra-colonically. the presence and amount of il-1ra was measured by elisa in the serum of psm539-treated rabbits and of control psm214-treated or untreated animals. as shown in figure  <dig>  il-1ra-containing serum from psm539-treated rabbit  was as effective in inhibiting il-1β activity as the same concentrations of standard purified recombinant il-1ra , whereas the same dilutions of serum from psm214-treated or from untreated animals  did not possess any il-1-inhibiting activity . to confirm that the il-1β-inhibiting activity observed in sera of psm <dig> treated animals is indeed due to il-1ra, data in the figure  <dig>  show that the inhibitory capacity of psm <dig> serum is significantly decreased or abolished by an antiserum against human il-1ra. thus, it can be concluded that the il-1ra present in serum after intra-colonic administration of psm <dig> is biologically active.

the in vivo efficacy of il-1ra released by intra-colonic psm <dig> was evaluated in antagonising the effects of parenterally administered il- <dig>  <cit> . as shown in figure  <dig> , the increase in body temperature induced in rabbits by i.v. administration of  <dig> ng/kg human il-1β was significantly reduced by preventive intra-colonic treatment with  <dig> ×  <dig> cells of b. subtilis psm <dig>  the reduction of il-1β-induced fever was more pronounced with lower doses of il-1β , but it was still highly significant when fever was induced by  <dig> ng/kg il-1β  . to confirm these data, the effect of intra-colonic treatment with il-1ra-producing psm <dig> was evaluated on other inflammation-related parameters induced by il-1β, i.e., granulocytosis and decrease of blood glucose and iron concentrations. as shown in figure  <dig> , the increase in circulating pmn induced in rats by il-1β i.p. was abrogated by previous intra-colonic administration of il-1ra-producing psm <dig> but not by the control strain psm <dig>  likewise, the il-1β-induced decrease in the blood levels of iron  and glucose  was still evident in animals administered control psm <dig> bacteria but was significantly reduced by intra-colonic instillation of il-1ra-producing psm <dig> bacteria. it is inferred that human recombinant il-1ra delivered in vivo by intra-colonic administration of engineered b. subtilis is biologically active and able to counteract the systemic inflammatory effects of il- <dig> 

that il-1ra delivered by b. subtilis can have an anti-inflammatory protective effect in vivo was shown in a model of shock and death induced by bacterial endotoxin  in the mouse , an acute syndrome in which il-1β plays a major role  <cit> . lps-sensitive c3h/heouj mice receiving recombinant psm <dig> bacteria intra-peritoneally  <dig> hours before administration of a lethal dose of bacterial lps could survive significantly longer than mice administered the control psm <dig> bacteria or pbs, in agreement with previous data on the efficacy of il-1ra in inhibiting lps-induced shock  <cit> .

to validate the concept of delivery of bioactive recombinant proteins via the colonic mucosa by means of recombinant b. subtilis, another b. subtilis strain was constructed  and administered in vivo to rabbits. as shown in figure  <dig>  the intra-colonic administration of  <dig> ×  <dig> live cells of b. subtilis psm <dig> induced a significant increase in body temperature, superimposable to that caused by intra-colonic instillation of purified recombinant il-1β. furthermore, in agreement with the systemic effects of massive doses of il-1β administered parenterally  <cit> , intra-colonic administration of psm <dig> caused shock and death in 9/ <dig> animals . it is concluded that the mucosal delivery of engineered b. subtilis in the large intestine is a suitable system for attaining significant blood levels of bioactive recombinant proteins and systemic effectiveness.

discussion
the use of live bacteria is very common in particular in vaccinology, where attenuated or mutant bacteria have been employed for decades as antigen carriers. the advantage of live bacteria relies on their capacity of colonising the host and enter the host organs/tissues with the same modalities as their virulent counterparts, thus eliciting the relevant immune response and immune memory, at variance with killed bacteria or purified bacterial components. thus, attenuated strains of salmonella, listeria monocytogenes, mycobacterium tuberculosis, vibrio cholerae are being developed and used as vaccine carriers  <cit> . a further development in the use of live bacteria as antigen carriers in vaccination exploits the technologies of genetic engineering for introducing multiple antigens from different micro-organisms into a single non-virulent bacterial carrier , with the possibility of including t- and b-stimulating epitopes from different antigens, and also to engineering into the same carrier adjuvant sequences derived for instance from an immunostimulating cytokine  <cit> .

among bacterial systems developed for antigen delivery in vaccination, some strains of non-pathogenic, food-grade or gras  bacteria have been examined for the topical delivery of pharmacologically active protein drugs, after cell engineering with the dna coding for the protein of interest. this is the case of lactococcus lactis and of streptococcus gordonii, which have been engineered to produce recombinant antibodies, adjuvant and anti-inflammatory cytokines, and used to deliver these proteins locally at the mucosal surface after oral administration  <cit> . the goal of these delivery approaches was that of making the recombinant proteins available for therapy of local pathologies or for local effects: antibodies for passive immunotherapy of local infections  <cit> , cytokines as adjuvants for mucosal vaccines  <cit> , inhibitory cytokines for anti-inflammatory therapy of localised chronic inflammatory diseases   <cit> . although undoubtely promising and susceptible of vast applications, the method of mucosal delivery of therapeutic protein through recombinant bacteria acting as cell factories needs further and deeper investigation. this should include the central issue of safety and contained/controlled release of recombinant micro-organisms  <cit> , the problem of assessing the mucosal permanence of bacteria  and the extent of protein release, and the issue of pharmacodynamics of the delivered protein in particular for its systemic effects, beyond the boundaries of the local delivery environment.

the delivery system proposed here is not based on the permanence/colonisation capacity of bacteria in the host mucosal surfaces, but it relies on the capacity of sporulating bacteria of releasing intracellular proteins in non-permissive environments. b. subtilis cells engineered to produce human il-1ra were able to release the recombinant protein  following a sporulation signal in vitro  <cit> . this observation could be repeated in vivo, when recombinant b. subtilis cells were inoculated in the intestine of rats or rabbits . the recombinant protein could be detected locally shortly after administration of bacteria and persisted at measurable levels for several hours. release and recovery of recombinant il-1ra was much more abundant and consistent in the large intestine as compared to the small intestine. most interestingly, the recombinant protein released from sporulating bacteria delivered in the large intestine was absorbed in the bloodstream at detectable levels, whereas no circulating il-1ra could be found after bacterial delivery in the small intestine. il-1ra present in the blood was intact, as judged by its molecular mass in western blotting, and retained full il-1-inhibiting activity, as judged by its capacity of dose-dependent neutralisation of il-1β in vitro. the passage of an intact protein from the intestinal lumen to the bloodstream is not a new concept. indeed, transcytosis has been extensively described in intestinal epithelial cells, and allows transport of intact proteins and macromolecules from the intestinal lumen to the circulation through an endocytic non-degradative pathway in physiological conditions of integrity of the intestinal mucosal barrier  <cit> . this mechanism of transcytotic transport, quantitatively scarce as compared to the degradative pathway of protein absorption, may have a role in physio-pathological passage of antigens, allergens, and toxins.

delivery of il-1ra through engineered sporulating bacteria apparently had some pharmacokinetics advantages as compared to the purified protein. whereas the absorption into the bloodstream was quick after administration of the purified protein , il-1ra released from intra-colonically administered b. subtilis had a much slower kinetics of absorption , as expected by the fact that the protein must be released from bacteria before being absorbed. furthermore, although the cmax was decreased for b. subtilis il-1ra , the auc/dose were almost identical. thus, il-1ra delivered intra-colonically by b. subtilis is absorbed into the bloodstream at a slower and more constant rate than the purified protein delivered in the same site, which is absorbed quickly into the bloodstream and rapidly disappears thereafter. thus, it appears that bacteria do not undergo sporulation all at the same time , but release the protein constantly from the moment of administration for about  <dig> h. this would allow a controlled and sustained circulating level of the protein, thus a more favourable pharmacodynamic profile, with a single administration.

the protein selected for in vivo delivery with b. subtilis is the il- <dig> receptor antagonist il-1ra, a competitive non-activating ligand of the il- <dig> receptor with il- <dig> inhibitory activity  <cit> . il- <dig> is a potent inflammatory cytokine which, in pathological conditions, is responsible of chronicisation of inflammation, tissue destruction, organ failure, hypotensive shock  <cit> . anti-il- <dig> strategies have been attempted in acute an chronic inflammatory diseases with the use of recombinant il-1ra protein  <cit> . the poor outcome of clinical trials in septic shock has highlighted the problems of a therapy based on the systemic administration of a purified recombinant protein, whose efficacy is hampered by its rapid pharmacokinetics  <cit> . at present, experimentation of therapeutic il-1ra is being targeted to slowly progressive chronic diseases with defined organ/tissue targets   <cit> . to achieve sustained il-1ra levels, gene therapy approaches have been attempted with promising results in animal models of experimental arthritis, ischemic brain damage, autoimmune diabetes  <cit> . however, the risk remains of side effects due to the uncontrolled inhibition of the physiologically important il- <dig> activity. indeed, a precise balance between between il-1β and il-1ra should be maintained for achieving proper tissue homeostasis, as shown for the intestinal mucosa  <cit> .

the drug delivery strategy here described merges the well-known approach of vaccination with live bacteria with that of gene therapy. the delivery of pharmacologically active proteins by live sporulating bacteria, as described here, presents a series of advantages over other similar approaches. at variance with conventional gene therapy, the gene coding for the drug protein is introduced in a bacterial carrier rather than in host cells, a situation that would allow a complete control of its permanence in the body. in a previous study, intragastric or vaginal administration of streptococcus gordonii engineered to release human il-1ra resulted in a prolonged local delivery of the protein, consequent to the capacity of s. gordonii to colonise the mucosal surfaces  <cit> . mucosal delivery of il-1ra  also had a local therapeutic effect in a model of ulcerative colitis  <cit> . the delivery system with sporulating bacteria described here differs from that with s. gordonii, as it causes rapid local release of the recombinant protein , followed by absorption into the bloodstream. in preliminary experiments in the mouse, il-1ra-expressing bacteria were also administered intragastrically or subcutaneously. this achieved appearance of human il-1ra in the serum, and systemic effects of inhibition of lps-induced shock and death . this is a new finding, that opens the possibility of exploiting localised bacterial administration  for systemic drug delivery. the amount of protein released at the mucosal site directly correlates with the number of administered bacteria, since the internal body environment does not sustain bacterial replication but induces sporulation. this allows an exact control of the dose of drug delivered and, based on the pharmacokinetics parameters, of the blood levels that can be reached. the same result could not be easily obtained with s. gordonii, as amount and timing of protein release may be influenced by variation of the colonisation capacity depending on variations of environmental conditions of the host tissues.

a problem that should be faced when using recombinant bacteria in vivo for therapy or vaccination is that of safety and contained release of genetically modified organisms . the use of suicidal genes or the deletion of genes vital for survival outside the host organism have been explored with very promising results  <cit> . the bacterial system proposed here can be modified in the sporulation mechanism for the control of its survival. in preliminary experiments, the recombinant b. subtilis psm <dig> strain was engineered in order to inactivate a gene involved in sporulation control. as a consequence, in response to in vitro sporulation signals  the mutated spo- strain could regularly initiate the sporulation process, undergoing cell autolysis and release of the cytoplasmic proteins , but it was incapable of eventual spore formation and further survival. likewise, release of the recombinant protein from spo- in vivo was comparable to that of spo+ bacteria, but spores could never be recovered from intestinal lavage and faeces . this suggests that the system can be optimised to full biological containment and environmental safety without altering its delivery properties.

CONCLUSIONS
the novel system of protein drug delivery here proposed links some of the advantages of gene therapy  to the possibility of controlled release in terms of timing and protein amount. exploitation of the mechanism of bacterial autolysis in non-permissive environments allows release of intracellular proteins, including the known amount of the pharmacologically active recombinant protein drug. the release is persistent for several hours, allowing to maintain more constant protein levels in the bloodstream. the system is simple, cheap, and can be developed to full environmental safety .

the concept that pharmacologically active proteins released at the colonic mucosal surface can be absorbed and reach the circulation intact and retaining full activity  opens promising avenues to the use of local delivery for the therapy of systemic diseases.

