BACKGROUND
tuberculosis  remains a critical public health problem where  <dig>  million incident cases were noted in  <dig>  within this same time frame, greater than  <dig>  million deaths had been attributed to tb  <cit> . infection with mycobacterium tuberculosis  most often occurs via the pulmonary route with varying intra- and extrapulmonary pathologies noted in humans  <cit> . several animals have been studied to mirror tb disease pathology including mice, guinea pigs and rabbits  <cit> . rabbits are particularly appealing given the similar immune response noted in this population of naturally-resistant animals  <cit> .

we have developed a rabbit model that utilizes a bronchoscopic model of infection to reliably produce lung cavities. the model also demonstrated the unique extrapulmonary dissemination among animals infected with either mycobacterium bovis  af <dig> or m. bovis ravenel  <cit> . all rabbits that were infected were sensitized with heat-killed m. bovis to maximize the probability of cavity formation. the importance of sensitization in our experiment was based on classical studies by wells and lurie who demonstrated pulmonary cavities in rabbits pre-sensitized with heat-killed m. bovis and challenged with low-dose m. bovis  <cit> . ratcliffe and wells further expanded on the importance of sensitization when they noted cavity formation in rabbits that underwent low dose m. bovis infection and were subsequently infected with high-dose m. bovis  <cit> . yamamura et al. had also elucidated the importance of sensitization when he published a series of studies that described the reliable production of lung cavities in 30- <dig> days. only rabbits pre-sensitized at regular intervals with heat-killed m. bovis formed cavities when undergoing intrathoracic infection with live or heat-killed mycobacteria  <cit> .

the present report explores the varying thoracic and extrapulmonary pathology secondary to sensitization using heat-killed m. bovis in the bronchoscopic model of infection. the primary aim was to determine if a modified scoring system, initially employed in the cynomolgus macaque model of tuberculosis, could be utilized to quantitatively depict and standardize the gross differences that exist on necropsy in two types of experimental rabbit populations  <cit> . such a numerical means of description, which has never been performed in the rabbit model of tuberculosis, would allow for a rapid and reliable means of enhancing the description of tb disease pathogenesis. the quantitative intrapulmonary and extrapulmonary differences attributed to sensitization were validated against traditionally employed modalities of cfu counts and descriptive observations.

RESULTS
varying lung pathology based on sensitization status
sensitized rabbits were injected at regular intervals using heat-killed m. bovis with all converting their tuberculin skin tests positive  <dig> days after the last sensitization injection . positive reactions were concluded if any measurable reaction was observed. non-sensitized animals did not undergo skin testing prior to infection due to the lack of exposure to the sensitizing agent. sensitized rabbits were observed for an average of  <dig> days . the shortest time period of observation was in rabbit bo <dig> and the longest elapsed time was in sensitized rabbit bo <dig>  non-sensitized rabbits were observed for an average of  <dig> days .

two strains of m. bovis were utilized with similar pathologic endpoints observed in both non-sensitized and sensitized rabbits. select sensitized rabbits were followed up to  <dig> days post-infection. non-sensitized rabbits were observed up to  <dig> days after bronchoscopic infection. intradermal skin testing was performed prior to infection on sensitized rabbits  <dig> days after the last sensitization injection to confirm successful acquisition of delayed-type hypersensitivity  immunity. non-sensitized animals did not undergo skin testing prior to infection due to the lack of exposure to the sensitizing agent. varying dosages and duration of infection were seen in the sensitized and non-sensitized rabbits based on initial experimental objectives prior to the application of this retrospective study.

all sensitized m. bovis af <dig> and ravenel infected rabbits yielded cavity formation at the site of bronchoscopic infection . the sole exception was rabbit af <dig> which formed multiple coalescing granulomas at the infection site. cavity walls possessed various amounts of necrosis and fibrosis. non-sensitized animals did not develop any lung cavities despite over  <dig> days of observation. the right lower lobe contained caseous material in all non-sensitized rabbits but no signs of liquefaction were observed.

a tuberculoid pneumonia characterized by complete destruction of the lung parenchyma by the infectious process was isolated to the right lower and middle lung lobes in both rabbit populations . the right ipsilateral lung developed multiple granulomas distributed throughout the visceral surface. the contralateral lung also yielded similar formations of numerous granulomas on its surface regardless of sensitization status. multiple granulomas, of various sizes, were appreciated on all lung lobe segments in both populations of rabbits. a larger proportion  were more frequently noted on the ipsilateral surface. dissection into the lung parenchymal structure in the right upper and contralateral lungs yielded no pneumonic process.

mean pulmonary cfu counts reveal the largest bacterial load in the caseous lesions found at the site of bronchoscopic infection . sensitized rabbits had greater than  <dig>  log bacterial load in the caseous contents compared to non-sensitized animals. cavitary wall cfus were apparent in only sensitized rabbits and yielded one log fewer bacilli as compared to liquefied cavitary caseous contents. ipsilateral and contralateral lung cfus were higher by approximately one-half log in non-sensitized rabbits. varying lung granuloma sizes and numbers among both sensitized and non-sensitized rabbits did not appear to correlate with greater bacillary load. only the presence of cavitary lesions were indicative of a greater number of bacilli.

relative uniformity of extrapulmonary dissemination in m. bovis infected rabbits
as noted in previous published work by nedeltchev et al, m. bovis uniquely disseminates to extrapulmonary locations as compared to m. tb  <cit> . all rabbits in this study also displayed extrapulmonary dissemination with detectable cfus most prominently noted in the spleen, liver and kidney. no cavitary formation was appreciated in any extrathoracic organ. gross pathology revealed granulomas on each kidney of both sensitized and non-sensitized rabbits. corresponding with the greater observed kidney pathology were more detectable cfus . the kidneys of non-sensitized rabbits had approximately  <dig>  log more cfus. splenic lesions were noted in three sensitized rabbits 3) and one non-sensitized rabbits . the mean spleen cfus were slightly higher in rabbits undergoing sensitization. fewer splenic cfus were noted, though not significant , when compared to kidney cfus in non-sensitized rabbits. this observation is contrary to the findings in our previously published work  <cit> . spleen counts were noted in prior studies to have the highest amount of detectable extrapulmonary bacillary load due likely to its role as a key reticuloendothelial organ. differences between observed cfus and gross pathology were noted in the liver where detectable cfus could be found in both rabbit populations but tuberculomas were not observed at necropsy. the liver had the lowest cfu counts among all observed organs and tissues. no involvement of the cecum was noted in non-sensitized rabbits which would correspond with the lack of cavitary formation. granulomas of the appendix were noted in all sensitized rabbits with the exceptions of af <dig> and af <dig> 

correlation of grossly observed outcomes with numeric scoring system
a numerical scoring system was initiated to provide a consistent means to evaluate gross pathology . the scoring system was based on the methodology utilized by lin et al. for the cynomolgus macaque model  <cit> . based on detailed photographs obtained at necropsy, rabbits were assigned a quantitative measure of their disease pathology. the maximum score assigned was  <dig>  the organs or tissues chosen were determined from previous studies that utilized descriptions of each respective site as a means of characterizing disease outcomes  <cit> . lesions from each lobe were enumerated based on the number of granulomas or extent of tuberculous pneumonia. the right lower lobe was of particular focus with the description of a cavitary process at the site of infection being assigned the greatest numeric score . a lung cavity was given the highest score based on its primary significance on the ultimate mortality and morbidity of the animal. previous work by nedeltchev et al. had shown that the bronchoscopic route of infection was ideally utilized for generating the maximum amount of intra and extrapulmonary pathology due to its ability to consistently reproduce lung cavities  <cit> . pleural lesions were characterized by either the absence or presence of adhesions or parietal granulomas which are often observed in the context of a bronchopleural fistula. extrapulmonary dissemination was quantified by the presence and number of granulomas in the liver, spleen, appendix and kidneys. the sole lymph node sites evaluated included mediastinal and thymic tissues. the mediastinal and thymic tissues were classified together due to the difficulty of individually separating these closely located anatomic sites.

the intrapulmonary spectrum of disease was greater in sensitized rabbits which uniquely developed lung cavities . all sensitized rabbits had greater total scores invariably due to the assigned numerical importance of these lesions. rabbits bo <dig> and bo <dig> had the highest total scores in sensitized rabbits due to the observed extrapulmonary granulomas in the spleen and appendix. the enumeration of extrapulmonary pathology was approximately equivalent in both species. discrepancies between observed cfus and gross pathology were notable in the liver where detectable cfus could be found in both rabbit populations but tuberculomas could not discerned at necropsy. statistical significance was achieved  when comparing the mean gross pathology scores among the two rabbit populations. the observed necropsy findings and cfu counts appear to correlate with the employed numeric scoring system.

discussion
the primary purpose of this paper was to explore the validity of a modified scoring system, which was initially developed for the cynomolgus macaque model of tuberculosis, to be employed in disease outcomes in sensitized and non-sensitized rabbits. the scoring system correlated well with the observed differences noted in our two experimental population of animals. sensitized rabbits uniquely generated lung cavity formation when challenged with live m. bovis bronchoscopic infection. non-sensitized rabbits consistently generated significant bilateral granulomas with a focal tuberculoid pneumonia in the right lower lung area of infection. multiple granulomas, of varying sizes, were appreciated in all lung lobes with the greatest frequency appreciated in the ipsilateral site of infection. diffuse extrapulmonary dissemination was seen in all rabbits with minimal intrasubject variability noted.

the importance of sensitization in the development of cavitary lesions was best elucidated by the work of yamamura et al  <cit> . sensitization was undertaken using heat-killed m. bovis suspended in freund's adjuvant, paraffin oil and anhydrous lanolin. rabbits were injected subcutaneously  <dig> to  <dig> times with heat-killed m. bovis at intervals of  <dig> to  <dig> days. after one month from the first sensitization, rabbits were infected with a live m. bovis via intrathoracic injection. with this methodology, lung cavities developed between 30- <dig> days post-infection with reproducibility. pulmonary cavities were also produced post-sensitization when either whole heat-killed bacilli, paraffin-oil extracts of heat-killed bacilli or mycobacterial proteolipid components were utilized  <cit> . the researchers also demonstrated that desensitization to mycobacterial lipoprotein could inhibit the lung cavity formation  <cit> .

the significant clinical outcomes noted with sensitization is intriguing given the numerous instances in which sensitization may occur in the human setting. humans may be sensitized by being exposed either repeatedly to m. tb. in their environment or immunization with the bacille calmette-guérin  vaccine  <cit> . the instances in which resulting cavitary formation occurs is critical since this is the key means of disease transmission  <cit> . this paradigm may also hold true for nontuberculous mycobacteria which has been attributed to increasing cases of human disease  <cit> .

however, the need for sensitization in developing lung cavities is not absolute given the work by converse and dannenberg who had developed an aerosol model that reliably produced cavities in non-sensitized rabbits. moderately low doses of m. bovis  yielded lung cavities in  <dig> of  <dig> rabbits. higher doses m. bovis infections  generated cavitary lesions in all  <dig> animals studied after  <dig> weeks of observation  <cit> .

lung cavities seen in this study in sensitized m. bovis-infected rabbits showed central caseation and liquefaction that were also noted in our prior work  <cit> . all rabbits showed a fragile, non-homogenous caseum. cavity walls had a variable amount of necrosis and fibrosis. cfu counts had expectedly shown the largest number of bacilli in the cavitary center and wall with greater than  <dig> log of bacilli yielded at each site. our previous work had also noted that sensitized rabbits had generated diffuse intrapulmonary dissemination with multiple bilateral granulomas. non-sensitized rabbits had produced similar pathology with diffuse granulomas appreciated in all but the focal area of bronchoscopic infection. in the right lower lung lobe, all non-sensitized rabbits had their parenchymal architecture replaced by a tuberculoid pneumonia. in select non-sensitized rabbits, the right lower region showed a caseating lesion that did not undergo liquefaction. these caseous areas yielded greater cfus than any other evaluable anatomical site. the increased amount of bacilli in these central areas are to be expected given the host's limited immune response characterized by reduced macrophage function and entry. human pulmonary cavities can generate approximately 107- <dig> bacilli in their liquefied caseum  <cit> .

our previous work also described a key difference between m. bovis and m. tb. bronchoscopic infection where extrapulmonary dissemination was noted more prominently in m. bovis infected rabbits  <cit> . however, classical studies that utilized an intravenous route of infection displayed extrapulmonary dissemination in both non-sensitized m. tb. and m. bovis  <cit> . both species showed spread to the spleen, liver and kidneys. but only rabbits infected with m. bovis-infections showed continued disease pathogenesis that could not be controlled by the rabbit's innate immune system. the current experiment described extrapulmonary dissemination in both non-sensitized and sensitized rabbits. the kidneys displayed the greatest amount of cfus with both animal populations having approximately one log greater bacilli compared to the spleen. splenic cfus were notably fewer  which is contrary to our expectations given the spleen's role as a key reticuloendothelial organ  <cit> . we suspect that the difference in cfus may have been due to the selected regions used for plating culturable splenic and kidney cfus. if full tissues specimens had been utilized, then the results may have been comparable in both studies. non-sensitized rabbits in general had also fewer cecal lesions that were likely attributable to the absence of pulmonary cavity formation. rabbits with cavitary lesions were noted to have approximately  <dig> log greater cfu in sampled gastrointestinal sites. expectorated bacilli from lung cavities are suspected to be swallowed by the rabbits to yield intestinal lesions  <cit> . however, the possibility of intestinal lesions being derived from extrapulmonary dissemination via the bloodstream or contiguous spread via the retroperitoneal/gastrointestinal space must also be considered.

this experiment further validates the bronchoscopic infection methodology and expands our understanding of tb pathogenesis in the rabbit model. the classically utilized descriptions of disease outcomes including gross pathology and microbiology appear to correlate with our adapted scoring system. this quantitative approach has allowed us a statistical means by which to classify disease outcomes. differences in total gross pathology scores had been noted on necropsy in this study between sensitized and non-sensitized rabbits. the significant findings were largely attributable to the unique formation of cavitary lesions on gross pathology which is supported by subsequent enumeration of cfus. with the sole exception of notable cfus in the liver where no tuberculomas were seen on necropsy, the observed gross pathology score on necropsy was a reliable means by which to base disease outcomes.

our scoring system is modified from an earlier one published by lin et al. for the cynomolgus macaque model of tb. our numerical system allows for a greater score to cavitary disease  and eliminates select pathology that is not of immediate relevance to the rabbit model. clinical based outcomes, specifically signs of respiratory distress, were not added to our system but appeared to be a reliable tool of disease progression. however, temperature and weight changes obtained on a biweekly basis did not appear to differ significantly between our two populations of rabbits. our employed methodology would ideally be used with cfu data with the benefit of providing rapid quantitative results at necropsy. immediate analyses of the disease process could enhance the evaluation of vaccines or drug studies.

limitations in the work include the use of the gross scoring system undertaken in a retrospective manner. the scoring system was adopted after necropsy had been undertaken. we had utilized a retrospective design by analyzing multiple angle photos and detailed notes to determine pathology scores. future prospective usage of the scoring system may include variables not utilized in our study but originally included in the lin et al. model. these include lung granuloma sizes, additional lymph nodes sites and non-abdominal extrapulmonary organs. a second limitation is the lack of immunologic and molecular based assays as an alternative means to validate our scoring system. sharpe et al. also has noted in the rhesus macaque model of tb that mr imaging is an accurate and simple means to standardize disease outcomes  <cit> . future experiments may be able to incorporate imaging as another quantitative approach to enhance our methodology. a final limitation is the varying time of observation from infection to necropsy and differing dosage of infection in non-sensitized versus sensitized rabbits. this disparity in time was largely due to the different objectives for the original experiments that the rabbits had been studied. the earlier period of necropsy due to respiratory distress in non-sensitized rabbits may not have been due to simply progressive gross pathology but a product of greater sedation and frequent endotracheal intubation required for experimentation. future characterization of disease pathology may differ in non-sensitized rabbits if observed for longer time intervals with less frequent airway manipulations. longer durations of infection may increase bacterial loads and alter the gross pathology which underlies our scoring system. standardization of the dosage of infection may also allow for a more accurate interpretation of the differences in pathology between the two populations of rabbits. moreover, upcoming experiments could use different sensitizing agents to determine if qualitative and quantitative differences could be observed on necropsy. the use of various sensitization compounds could be insightful into the role of the host's immune response to disease outcomes.

CONCLUSIONS
the quantitative scoring system adapted for the rabbit model of tuberculosis may be a valuable tool for future animal studies to standardize observable outcomes of disease. the numeric-based methodology may allow for a reliable and rapid means of detecting the varying pathology seen in our animal experiments. sensitization using heat-killed m. bovis uniformly promotes the development of cavitary formation when rabbits are exposed to high dose infection using live m. bovis. lung pathology in non-sensitized rabbits consistently yielded a tuberculoid pneumonia at the site of bronchoscopic infection. the contralateral lung formed multiple granulomas and showed a similar pathology in both animal populations. both sensitized and non-sensitized rabbits displayed extrapulmonary dissemination with the most notable difference being the lack of intestinal lesions in non-sensitized rabbits. the scoring system correlated well with the described findings at necropsy and may be used in a modified form in the future to enhance our studies in the rabbit model of tuberculosis.

