BACKGROUND
gene expression profiling based on microarray technology has been applied widely on monitoring global transcriptome changes in biological samples. in cancer research, one of the major microarray applications is to identify genes, or features, whose expression patterns can discriminate samples with distinct states . these identified genes form an expression signature that can be used to assist clinical management decisions such as clinical trail risk assessment, treatment selection, or cancer prognosis  <cit> .

to acquire a good expression signature, supervised methods are more appropriate than unsupervised approaches. basically, a supervised prediction method consists of three common processes: 1) feature selection, 2) computation of weights for selected features, 3) creation of a prediction rule  <cit> . by using the cross-validation method such as n-fold or leave-one-out cross-validation , the discrimination capability of a signature can be evaluated. recently, many classification algorithms  combining cross-validation and heuristic searching to acquire an optimal expression signature have been proposed  <cit> . furthermore, those algorithms have been incorporated into hassle-free tools to aid the acquisition of an optimal signature. for example, m@cbeth  <cit>  is a web-based tool aimed at finding the best prediction among different classification methods. prophet  <cit> , another web-based tool, can automatically build classifiers using a strategy that renders unbiased cross-validated errors. the class prediction modules in genepattern  <cit>  also supports several supervised learning methods. moreover, for improving the efficiency and the accuracy of an acquired signature, several feature selection tools based on statistical analysis have been developed: rankgene is a feature selection suite based on statistical ranking analyses  <cit> , hykgene  <cit>  and mrmr  <cit>  are tools to minimise redundancy of genes.

although the aforementioned feature selection and classification tools are quite useful for acquiring an optimal signature, a tool assisting signature evaluation is still in high demand. in clinical practice, the ability to distinguish a patient group from others based on a smaller number of specific genes is of tremendous value and, thus, tools that assist to narrow down on candidate genes  is central to the identification of unique signatures. on the other hand, it is sometimes desired to investigate the discriminative power of genes of interest, such as those deduced from biological experiments or, perhaps, based on other consideration such as the availability of antibodies and reagents. bearing these in mind, we developed a simple and flexible java standalone tool, the signature evaluation tool , to fulfill the needs of clinical evaluations. set both accepts and creates a "user-defined" signature and then utilize a visualization module to present the classification consequences. set not only accelerates the feature evaluation process but can also predict the groups of unknown samples.

in set, we adopted the weighted voting algorithm published by ramaswamy et al. and loocv  <cit>  to evaluate the discrimination power of features. the signal-to-noise score was used:

 sx= / 

sx: the weighted value for the each feature x

μ: mean of expression in group i  or group ii 

σ: standard deviation of expression in group i  or group ii 

the signal-to-noise statistics reflects how well a feature correlates with a particular group distinction . also, it penalises features which have higher variance in both groups more than those having high variance in one group but low variance in another . this bias is useful for biological samples: for example, in cancer research, genes in normal tissues work normally and the regulation of which are strict. however, in tumours, genes are dysregulated and the levels of gene expression vary widely  <cit> . the weighted voting algorithm has been compared with other class prediction methods  using three microarray datasets , and it was the one with the best performance  <cit> .

in order to avoid over-interpretation of the error rate value produced by weighted voting algorithm, there is a visualization module in set to present the prediction strength  information for all samples  <cit> :

 ps = / 

   vgi and vgii represent the total votes for gi and gii respectively

the ps value ranges from - <dig> to + <dig>  with higher absolute values reflecting stronger prediction. the prediction strength for each sample shows the margin of victory in either direction of two supervised groups. the visualization of uncertainty will provide important information about prognosis, such as the progression of tumour metastasis or the estimated survival time  <cit> .

implementation
set is a standalone java application that deploys java web start technology, providing a flexible platform for researchers to evaluate gene signatures based on expression datasets. it enables users to analyze unpublished profiles locally with the most up-to-date version of the program. results are visualized by jfreechart, an open-sourced java chart library, which displays the line chart of error rate distribution and the scatter plot of prediction strength analysis. this software exhibits several unique presentations and user-friendly elements by following four simple steps:

step1: grouping arrays by supervised knowledge
first, the user prepares and uploads two tab-delimited text files, one containing a gene expression matrix that has been normalised, filtered or transformed; and another containing a list of genes that are potential classification markers. in both files, individual genes  are represented in rows while array samples or user-defined attributes are displayed in columns. to increase flexibility set implements parsers to recognize a variety of popular data formats including normalised outputs from expression console™, bioconductor or dchip; and accepts published analytical results as gene list input or it can be user-defined. upon uploading the files, array samples are assigned into two groups  under the "sample grouping" panel. samples of unknown identity can be assigned to the "testing" group and their identities can be predicted in the latter step of prediction strength analysis. samples to be excluded in latter analyses can be assigned to the "ignore" group .

step 2: error rate distribution
by default, the uploaded genes are ranked according to the absolute values of corresponding signal-to-noise scores in a descending order, but can be user-defined to be ranked by other attributes such as p-values. genes are included into a signature one at a time based on the order of ranking. the error rate for each new signature is estimated by the weighted voting algorithm and loocv  <cit>  and can be monitored by an error rate distribution plot . subsequently, based on the error rate information, the user can select an appropriate composition of discriminating genes, for instance, a composition with the lowest error rate.

step 3: signature evaluation
genes within the chosen composition are ranked and displayed by their signal-to-noise scores and the user can manually select or de-select genes as appropriate . gene titles and gene symbols can be incorporated in this step if the annotations of an array platform are supported by our arrayfusion database, which currently supports annotations for the majority of affymetrix arrays and several agilent arrays  <cit> . the potential of selected genes to distinguish between two supervised groups can be evaluated by cross-validating error rate information, where a lower error rate reflects a superior distinguishing potential. the significance of error rate is estimated by  <dig>  times of group permutations to ensure that the error rate is not a result of random chance  <cit> . the expression signature can be arbitrarily modified during the analysis and the corresponding error rate can be recalculated repeatedly.

step 4: prediction strength
the result of prediction strength  analysis for each sample is shown once a signature is defined. the ps values range from - <dig> to + <dig>  where higher absolute values reflect stronger predictions  <cit> . an overview of the results for samples in both "supervised" and "testing" groups is illustrated by the ps plot for the selected signature, and the results can be used to evaluate and predict the certainty of group identity for individual sample . to increase the flexibility of evaluation, samples can be re-grouped  and signature genes can be re-selected repeatedly . results of the analysis provide the user candidate genes for further experimental validation.

further details are illustrated in the tutorial file on the website, please see the availability and requirements section.

RESULTS
serial signature evaluation
set provides a rational way of narrowing down genes with optimal discriminative power. unlike other feature selection tools such as hykgene  <cit>  or mrmr  <cit> , which select non-redundant genes based on statistical calculations, set adopts a speedy signature evaluation approach that ranks the gene list according to the contribution value  of individual genes and, additionally, plots the distribution of cross-validated error rate for signatures with increasing number of genes. based on the distribution, the user can easily narrow down the number of genes with superior discriminative power; however, the approach is not without limitations. it is also possible that a subset of genes could generate lower error rate, albeit bearing lower weights. to avoid missing crucial genes, the user may commence by narrowing down the genes to a manageable quantity and subsequently select/de-select genes to further examine the power of the individual signature. here, users are reminded that set is a tool for signature evaluation rather than a machine learning tool for building an optimized prediction rule; in other words, the estimated error rate is only applied to the defined signature rather than to the signature building procedure that includes the feature selection process  <cit> .

a flexible evaluation platform
as described in implementation  to , set provides a signature evaluation platform that can adapt signatures from a variety of sources including third party analyses or candidates of interest that are deduced by biological knowledge. the ability to re-select/de-select genes following error rate distribution analysis enables the user to further choose genes from the narrowed down list , and rapidly re-evaluate and re-adjust the discriminative power of the new signature .

with the accumulation of microarray experiments, researchers nowadays may have more than one gene expression dataset. to evaluate the applicability of a specific signature between different datasets, researchers can import two datasets into set separately but select the same signature members to carry out the evaluation step. alternatively, researchers can merge two datasets into one expression matrix, upload it into set, and then perform a two-step evaluation procedure proposed by gloub et al.  <cit> . in this case, one dataset can be set up as "supervised" groups while the other as "testing" group. the first step evaluation tests the selected features by cross-validation on samples of the "supervised" group, and the second-step applies the built signature to assess its accuracy on the "testing" group. both results can be shown in the ps analysis.

here, we demonstrate an example of applying set to quickly identify diagnostic markers associated with colorectal carcinoma  metastasis.  <dig> affymetrix u <dig> plus  <dig>  microarray data downloaded from the expo  project  were subjected to molecular signature analysis according to a pipeline we have previously used  <cit> .  <dig> genes were significantly  q <  <dig> ) differentially expressed between primary and metastatic crc. by further applying set, it was found that the top  <dig> genes had a similar discriminative power to that of more than  <dig> genes  . among those top  <dig> genes several were known metastasis markers, such as osteopontin and nexin  <cit> , supporting the reliability of our result. when those  <dig> genes were applied to another dataset from expo  they, again, had a good discriminative power  . by application of the two-step evaluation procedure on these two datasets, the error rates were  <dig>  and  <dig> , respectively .

to further validate the reliability of the tool, we further applied set to analyse a signature of  <dig> genes related to breast cancer metastasis based on the data published by van de vijver et al.  <cit> . using the same  <dig> breast cancer samples set reduced the gene number to a 49-gene signature without declination of prediction power . we further divided the dataset into two smaller datasets according to their lymph node status from pathology report: among the  <dig> patients,  <dig> had lymph-node-negative disease  and  <dig> had lymph-node-positive disease  <cit> . for lymph-node-negative samples, we found the top  <dig> genes had a similar discriminative power to that of the  <dig> genes . for lymph-node-positive samples, we found the top  <dig> genes had a similar discriminative power to that of  <dig> genes . these results further consolidate the power of set.

visualization of prediction strength  for evaluation and prediction
given that the prediction uncertainty is not revealed by estimation of error rate, the incorporation of the ps index in the analysis is of importance. the ps presentation methods used by macdonald et al.  <cit>  and ye et al.  <cit>  were integrated into set, but a new way of displaying the ps information for each sample was devised . the ps visualization module conveniently enables the user to trace back samples incorrectly grouped, or samples that have lower prediction certainty . furthermore, the module would be of substantial value in clinical research when clinical parameters, such as disease progression, are taken into consideration. for example, in figure  <dig>  some primary tumour samples were grouped together with metastatic tumours. not only does the tool enable re-validating the reliability of the features used, but also back tracking to the clinical information of those primary tumours, allowing potential discovery of patients with inferior clinical outcome or higher metastatic risk.

as described in implementation, arrays in the same matrix can be annotated as "supervised" or "testing" samples in set. visualization of their ps information in the same plot enables the user to re-evaluate the discriminative power and validate the prediction power of a signature simultaneously.

application on multi-class datasets
for datasets containing multiple phenotypes, one-versus-all comparisons can be performed to filter associated markers. this strategy has been proven successful in several high-quality microarray experiments  <cit> , and the incorporation of algorithms designed for multivariate issues into the next version of set is currently in progress.

set and biological relevance analysis
albeit it is of logic to assume biological correlation of signature genes between one another  the identification of the biological relevance of input or output genes, however, is not the primary function of set. this tool is principally aimed at providing a gene filtration threshold for gene identification. upon identification of a gene set of interest, the candidate genes can be applied to other biologically/clinically relevant analyses  to determine the biological significance of those genes.

CONCLUSIONS
set provides a gene filtration threshold for gene identification between biological/clinical analyses and typical feature selection tools. set is focused on the "evaluation" of input/selected genes to suggest their prediction/classification power. it rapidly narrows down candidate diagnostic markers from numerous signature genes and offer prediction information. the application of set to filter out a smaller number of diagnostic markers from publically accessible databases was exemplified in this report. taken together, the flexibility and reliability makes set a valuable tool for various evaluations in clinical research.

availability and requirements
project name: set

project home page: 

operating system: platform independent

programming language: java and java web start

other requirements: java  <dig> . <dig> or higher

license: free

authors' contributions
hw conceived the tool is valuable for clinical cancer research. cj, ty, ct, cl, mh, and hw suggested desired features and algorithmic approaches. cj and ty carried out the implementation. ct, ss, and hw collected and analyzed microarray datasets. the online documentation and manuscript were written by cj, ty and hw, and all authors read and approved the final manuscript.

