BACKGROUND
numerous traits influence mate choice that may produce non-random mating patterns in many species. although most studies have focused on morphological and behavioral traits  <cit> ), there is rapidly growing evidence of multiple genetic criteria of mate choice . for example, females might choose the most heterozygous males  <cit> , which may increase the resistance of offspring to parasites  <cit> . alternatively, females might choose males carrying alleles that are compatible with their own genotypes. the main driving forces of mate choice would then be to maintain equilibrium between co-adapted genes  <cit>  or alternatively, to enhance the genetic variability of offspring  <cit> .

in species with biparental care, both sexes should be choosy in selecting a mate  <cit> . blomqvist et al.  <cit>  reported that in socially monogamous shorebirds, both sexes obtained extra-pair fertilizations when mates were genetically similar. in blue tits , females acquired extra-pair fertilizations that enhanced the heterozygosity and fitness of their offspring  <cit> . in superb starlings , the benefits of extra-pair fertilizations may differ according to the genetic similarity of the extra-pair partner  <cit> . however, few studies have focused on the mating patterns in genetically monogamous species which lack extra-pair fertilizations to diminish the costs of pairing with a suboptimal mate.

the black-legged kittiwake  is a long-lived, monogamous seabird with no extra-pair fertilizations  <cit>  and high between-year repairing rates  <cit> . in this species, mate choice may thus profoundly affect reproductive success throughout an individual's lifetime. to examine whether mating patterns in kittiwakes are influenced by genetic criteria, we assessed individual heterozygosity and genetic similarity of mates with microsatellite markers.

our first aim was to examine three hypotheses of mating patterns driven by individual genotypes. breeders may be paired with:  heterozygous mates ,  genetically dissimilar mates, in order to increase the genetic variability of offspring , or  genetically similar mates, in order to preserve the link between locally co-adapted genes . according to hypothesis  <dig>  the most heterozygous mates are of better quality because they may provide direct benefits  and/or indirect benefits in term of more heterozygous offspring. the hypothesis predicts that paired individuals are more heterozygous than unpaired ones, and that there a positive correlation between male and female heterozygosity  <cit> . hypothesis  <dig> predicts that the observed mean genetic similarity between pair members is lower than expected through random matings. hypothesis  <dig> is the reverse of hypothesis  <dig> and predicts that mates share more alleles than expected by chance, meaning that the observed mean genetic similarity between pair members will be higher than expected through random matings.

our second aim was to examine the fitness consequences of breeding with genetically similar or dissimilar individuals. we searched for possible relationships between genetic characteristics of pairs and fitness components such as clutch size and hatching success  <cit> . because genetically similar pairs are more likely to produce homozygous offspring than dissimilar pairs, we also examined predicted relationships between offspring heterozygosity and their growth and survival.

microsatellites are generally assumed to be neutral genetic markers and have been widely used to estimate relatedness, individual heterozygosity and population level of inbreeding  <cit> . if heterozygosity at certain selected loci enhances fitness  <cit> , heterozygosity at microsatellite loci may be a good surrogate of the overall genetic quality of an individual, especially in wild species where little is known about genes under selection. however, lieutenant-gosselin & bernatchez  <cit>  and tiira et al.  <cit>  have shown that global heterozygosity might be highly influenced by heterozygosity at certain specific loci. such loci may be physically linked to fitness loci, and one should therefore distinguish effects of global heterozygosity from effects of heterozygosity at each microsatellite marker. thus we performed our analyses both with the global heterozygosity and with the heterozygosity at each locus in order to distinguish the effects of global heterozygosity from that of specific loci that might be physically linked to fitness loci.

RESULTS
we monitored  <dig> genotyped adults in  <dig> and 2004:  <dig> were seen alive in  <dig> and  <dig> in  <dig>  adults formed  <dig> pairs in  <dig> and  <dig> in 2004; the remaining adults for each year corresponded to unpaired adults or adults paired with non-genotyped mates. all these adults were included in the bootstrap analyses because they were alive in the considered year and thus potentially available for pairing.

for chicks with genotyped parents, we found that phmxy of the parents was closely related to all indices of offspring heterozygosity , confirming that phmxy might be a reliable estimate of the probability of a given pair of producing homozygous offspring. furthermore, phmxy of pairs used in our study exhibited a wide, six-fold range of variation .

mating pattern and genetics
to correct for linkages between loci, ohw loci and k <dig> were excluded from calculations of h, sh and ir, but results did not differ with all loci. the "preference of heterozygous mates" hypothesis  predicted assortative mating by heterozygosity. however, male and female h were not correlated for any year . results were the same for sh  and ir . heterozygosity of paired and unpaired individuals did not differ .

the "genetic similarity avoidance" hypothesis  predicted that observed pairs comprise less genetically similar individuals than expected by chance. to test this, for each year we ran  <dig>  bootstraps using the observed individuals. for each run, we used either a calculation across all loci, or excluding ohw loci . we found a significant difference in terms of genetic similarity between observed and simulated pairs in  <dig> and  <dig> , indicating that pairs were formed of more genetically dissimilar individuals than expected by chance.

distributions of phm estimated by performing  <dig>  random repairings of p pairs among the n possible adults and calculating the simulated mean genetic similarity between mates. for each estimate, the first provides the observed mean genetic similarity between mates for the population and the second line reports the simulated mean, the last line is the p-value calculated as the proportion of bootstraps having a mean genetic similarity between mates lower than the observed mean. significant p-values are in bold. the first column contains the results for both years combined , the second contains the results for all years combined using only pairs breeding together in both years .

when pooling pairs seen in  <dig> and  <dig> , we still found a significant difference in genetic dissimilarity between observed and simulated pairs. results were similar when taking only pairs of kittiwakes breeding together both years . because of a low divorce rate, we lacked a sufficient sample to compare the genetic similarity of divorced versus reunited pairs.

the "genetic similarity preference" hypothesis  predicts that mates share more alleles than expected by chance. this means that observed pairs should comprise more genetically similar individuals than expected by chance. we would then expect to have a p-value for phmxy higher than  <dig> , which we did not find .

reproductive success and genetic similarity
we used only  <dig> data to determine the number of eggs laid and the number and proportion of eggs hatched, because the reproductive success of some of the pairs in  <dig> and subsequent years may have been affected by other experiments after pair formation. genetic similarity indices were computed without ohw loci and k <dig>  the number of eggs laid was not correlated with pair genetic similarity . however, for pairs that laid eggs, the number of hatched chicks was correlated with phmxy , with the mean number of chicks hatched being lower in more genetically similar pairs . similarly, hatching rate was also negatively correlated with phmxy .

offspring growth and survival in relation to offspring heterozygosity
chicks were not genotyped for k <dig> . in  <dig>  we assessed the survival and growth in body weight, tarsus and wing length of  <dig> chicks until age  <dig> days. these life history parameters were highly correlated to hatching rank . the hatching rank*chick heterozygosity interactions were non-significant for all heterozygosity indices  and were thus discarded from the models. chick survival was positively correlated with chick heterozygosity for all indices , but became non-significant when removing ohw loci and k <dig> from the computation of chick heterozygosity .

when analyzing chick growth in body weight, wing and tarsus length, we found a significant interaction of age*chick heterozygosity*hatching rank . this effect of chick heterozygosity on chick growth was however only evident for b-chicks .

we used aic for model selection. parameters: a , h  and r . for heterozygosity indices: h, sh and ir are calculated over all loci, while h', sh' and ir' are calculated without ohw loci and k <dig>  with either heterozygosity index, the structure of the selected model was: a+h+r+ah+hr+ahr+a <dig> plus the random effect of chick identity. since the interaction a*h*r was significant, we also tested the significance of the a*h effect in each rank . p-values below  <dig>  are in bold. .

local effects and global effects of microsatellite loci
for mating patterns in  <dig>  we found that pairs were formed of genetically dissimilar individuals according to three of the  <dig> loci . hatching success was negatively correlated to genetic similarity of pairs in  <dig> for two loci . chick heterozygosity and survival until  <dig> days  were positively correlated only for rbg <dig> . for chick growth, we found that the parameters associated with the interactions age*heterozygosity and age*heterozygosity*rank were significant in explaining chick growth in body weight and wing length when chick heterozygosity was estimated through three of the nine loci . similarly, the parameters associated with the interactions age*heterozygosity and age*heterozygosity*rank were significant in explaining chick growth in tarsus length when chick heterozygosity was calculated with two loci .

discussion
our main objective was to examine predicted relationships between genetic variables and mating patterns in a genetically monogamous species. selective pressures on mate choice may be stronger in such species, which do not mitigate the costs of homozygous offspring with extra-pair fertilizations. to our knowledge, there is only one other study of this kind of genetically monogamous species, the new zealand robin  and saddlebacks , in which pairings were random in relation to genetic similarity of mates  <cit> . our findings in kittiwakes therefore appear to be the first evidence in a strictly monogamous species for the genetic similarity avoidance hypothesis.

indeed, we found that kittiwake breeders were not paired randomly, but with mates that were less genetically similar than expected by chance. observed pairs had a lower probability of producing homozygous offspring than expected, a finding that fits the predictions of the "genetic similarity avoidance" hypothesis. in contrast, the "genetic similarity preference" hypothesis predicted opposite results, and the "preference of heterozygous mates" hypothesis predicted assortative mating according to heterozygosity, a pattern we did not find.

our findings show that genetically monogamous species may avoid pairing with genetically similar mates. non-random mating with respect to genetic similarity has been reported in three shorebird species  <cit> , ruffs , sand lizards , mice  <cit>  and humans  <cit> . in contrast, some other species behave consistently with the "good-genes as heterozygosity" hypothesis , or with the "genetic similarity preference" hypothesis , while other species display no significant relationships between mating patterns and genetic dissimilarity indices .

as expected, we also found deleterious effects of genetic similarity and homozygosity of offspring. this set of results  is statistically independent of results about mating patterns, but are biologically linked and consistent. genetically similar pairs hatched fewer offspring than more dissimilar pairs , which is similar to studies that found significant effects of inbreeding on egg hatchability  <cit> . likewise in these studies, hatching success was found to correlate negatively with pair genetic similarity. this pattern could be due to at least two non-exclusive effects. first, because both sexes incubate, cooperation between mates may be maximized when the genetic quality of the pair is high. second, the overall genetic quality of heterozygous offspring may be higher and thus increase the success of early development. given the relatively weak relationships between measures of reproductive success and genetic similarity, further evaluations of these hypotheses are warranted. another apparent cost of homozygosity is that more homozygous offspring were less likely to reach  <dig> days of age than less homozygous ones. again this pattern may be explained by different effects. for example, more heterozygous individuals may cope better with pathogens  <cit> . furthermore, homozygous offspring are more likely to be produced by genetically similar pairs that may invest less in chick rearing, thus reinforcing the deleterious effects of homozygosity on chick growth and survival. we also found that chick growth slowed as homozygosity increased, which may also explain the observed differences in survival: slower growing chicks may be in worse condition than faster growing chicks and are thus less efficient at defending themselves against pathogens and environmental stress. interestingly, this effect was only evident in second hatched chicks , which might be explained by the fact these chicks suffer from more severe selective pressures due to sibling competition and brood reduction .

the use of multi-locus estimates of heterozygosity and genetic similarity has been criticized by authors arguing that global heterozygosity-fitness correlations may be driven by certain loci that are physically linked to fitness-affecting loci  <cit> . however, such local effects are expected to be weak in this population, since we found no locus that correlated with all components of fitness. we are also aware that the number of microsatellites we used  is low given that the number of loci needed to achieve an accurate estimation of individual global heterozygosity may be much higher  <cit> . however, a small number of microsatellite loci should diminish our capacity to detect any relationship between heterozygosity and fitness components, making our analyses conservative. the fact that we found negative effects of genetic similarity and homozygosity on different components of fitness  despite our relatively small number of loci suggests that genetic similarity is costly, and therefore selected against, in this population.

little is known about mate choice in kittiwakes, and the pattern we describe here may result from different mechanisms. it could be due to a passive process with, for example, genetically similar pairs being more likely to fail in their breeding attempt, which in turn would make them more prone to divorcing than successful pairs. in our population, this seems unlikely since divorce after reproductive failure is not systematic  <cit> . furthermore, the correlation between genetic similarity of mates and reproductive success may not be strong enough to make divorces significantly correlated to genetic similarity. alternatively, kittiwakes may choose to pair with individuals from different areas within a structured population, but we think this is unlikely. genetic structuring is low at the scale of the whole north atlantic kittiwake population  <cit> ). at a local scale, movements due to re-nesting of previously failed breeders into new areas are likely to diminish preexisting genetic structuring in this population. a third mechanism could be that prospective breeders may actively search for genetically dissimilar mates. the evolution of this strategy could be driven by the fitness costs of genetic similarity. active mate choice would allow individuals to encounter a more adaptive mate faster than a passive process. however, experiments are needed to demonstrate that active mate choice has produced the observed pattern. long-term monitoring and genotyping may also allow us to compare pairs that divorced with pairs that stayed together in relation to the genetic similarity of the first and second mate.

active choice of genetically dissimilar mates has been demonstrated in mammals  where genetic similarity is detectable 2ecause of correlations between mhc alleles and body odors . although the use of smell remains poorly known in birds, antarctic prions  have been shown to recognize their mates through odors  <cit> . genetically driven odors have not yet been shown in birds, but various aspects of social interactions in kittiwakes may allow them to recognize and choose their mates according to odor. experiments are needed to determine the potential mechanisms for birds to estimate their relatedness to potential mates.

CONCLUSIONS
black-legged kittiwakes pair with individuals that are genetically more dissimilar than expected by chance, a pattern that is consistent with our observation of the existence of potential costs of producing homozygous progeny, such as decreases in hatching success and survival. in such genetically monogamous species, mate choice therefore seems to be under selection. thus, the genetic criteria of mate and extra-pair mate choice in various genetically polygamous species may also be a general feature in genetically monogamous species. indeed, breeders of strictly monogamous species may experience the highest selective pressure to choose genetically dissimilar mates.

