BACKGROUND
dried blood spots, or guthrie cards are obtained routinely from newborns in many developed countries to screen for metabolic disorders  <cit> . these specimens also provide a long-term, cost-effective and convenient alternative to freezing blood  <cit>  and have been used by many large epidemiological studies such as the melbourne collaborative cohort study  <cit> , the breast cancer family registry  <cit>  and the iarc biobank . given the size of these studies, the ability to use this source of dna with current genetic research platforms will enable them to make a considerable contribution to our understanding of the genetics of human disease. the successful use of dna from dried blood spots  for downstream genome-wide applications such as microarray-based snp genotyping has been occasionally reported  <cit> .

the significance of dna methylation marks to human health is an emerging field. for instance, aberrant dna methylation marks both loci-specific and globally are associated with virtually all cancers  <cit> . their significance has led to the development of techniques enabling “epigenome-wide” measures. commonly employed methods include medip-seq  and mbd-seq , which involve the enrichment of methylated dna using antibodies or methyl-binding domains  <cit> . these methods rely on an efficient affinity between the molecules and, thus, require a large amount of starting dna and may be prone to potential biases. the infinium humanmethylation <dig>  beadchip array , the successor to the hm <dig>  enables the detection of dna methylation levels at  <dig>  cpg dinucleotides across the genome and is one of the most comprehensive microarray methods to date for investigating the “methylome”  <cit> . early reports have shown this platform to be highly reproducible  <cit>  and to require a relatively small amount of dna  making the utility of limited dna available from dried blood spots feasible. like many other dna methylation assays, this platform is based on sodium bisulfite conversion of dna  <cit> . although bisulfite treatment can cause extensive degradation to dna, a few studies have already demonstrated the successful use of dna extracted from dried blood spots as well as archived tissue specimens for pcr-based loci-specific detection of methylation  <cit> . furthermore, beyan and colleagues recently reported a successful use of dried blood spot dna for genome-wide dna methylation detections  <cit> . however, a systemic comparison between guthrie dna and their matched frozen counterpart still remains to be addressed.

in this study, we tested the feasibility of using dna extracted from dried blood spots for genome-wide methylation profile assessment on the hm <dig> platform. dna from five individuals was extracted from three year old archived dried blood spots, bisulfite converted and hybridised onto the hm <dig> platform. the results from this processing regimen were compared with those derived from dna extracted from matched frozen buffy coat samples. the quality of data, reproducibility, and correlation between the two sample types were assessed.

RESULTS
although dried blood spots provide a valuable bioresource for research, dna from this source has been shown to deteriorate with prolonged storage  <cit> . the potential use of dna from dried blood spots for genome-wide epigenetic applications has, thus, remained speculative. here, we have successfully demonstrated the utility of dried blood spot dna for measuring genome-wide dna methylation using the infinium hm <dig> beadchip platform. we have also compared these methylation measurements against those of matched dna extracted from buffy coats from the same individuals  to investigate the commonality of methylation profiles as influenced by the method of sample storage.

quality of the samples and reproducibility of the platform
no sample analysed exceeded a mean detection p-value of  <dig>  across all probes . the majority of all individual probes  for each sample met the commonly accepted quality control detection p-value of  <dig> , indicating high quality data were obtained from both sample groups, but the analysis of blood spot dna generally showed slightly higher mean detection p-values than buffy coat dna, with fewer probes having a detection p-value below the conventional level of  <dig>  . wilcoxon signed rank test on mean detection p-values revealed significantly higher quality data were obtained from buffy coat dna than from dried blood spot dna . this could potentially be due to the poorer quality of dna obtained from blood spots. after removing probes with higher detection p-values of  <dig>  and probes on the x and y chromosomes, a total of  <dig>  analysable probes, common across  <dig> samples, remained for subsequent analyses. strong correlations, which is calculated across all probes  were observed for β values between  <dig> pairs of technical replicates, indicating the platform’s highly reproducible data from both dried blood spots and frozen buffy coat dna, respectively.

consistency of dna methylation between dried blood spot and buffy coat dna
dna methylation profiles were compared between dried blood spots and frozen buffy coats collected from the same individuals. unsupervised clustering analysis of the most variable  <dig>  probes  revealed strong similarities between the two sample types within each individual. dna methylation differences between individuals were apparent and sufficient to discriminate matched pairs from unrelated samples . when this was repeated on the entire probe set, a similar pattern was detected, where most matched pairs closely clustered . these effects were also reflected in the pearson’s correlations . the means correlation across all probes was higher between technical replicates  when compared with matching dried blood spot and buffy coat samples . the means correlation was lowest between unrelated individuals . these findings suggest that dna from dried blood spots could be used as a representative alternative to that derived from buffy coats for genome-wide dna methylation profiling.

although dried blood spots and buffy coats displayed considerably concordant dna methylation profiles, their correlation scores were slightly lower than for the technical replicates. given this, we further investigated the consistency of these discordant probes between the two groups. the f-test was performed on the full dataset which revealed a subset of  <dig>  probes with q-values  of  <dig>  or less . the number of differentially methylated probes  might be fractional to the full set of >  <dig>  probes but it is possible that there is a small but consistent change in methylation signature due to differences in preparation methods and/or storage conditions between the two sample types. we also cannot rule out the possibility of the differences in cell population between buffy coat and blood spot samples .

we visualised these dmps on scatterplots and confirmed highly consistent patterns between the two groups . these probes were located at almost identical spots on the scatterplots for different individuals. interestingly, the majority of these probes was apparently hypermethylated for both groups but was slightly less methylated for dried blood spots. nevertheless, the discordance in β values of these probes generally did not exceed the platform’s commonly accepted sensitivity of  <dig>  β values   <cit> . these probes were neither discordant between technical replicates, nor in the same sample types between unrelated individuals . processing the data using other normalisation methods , transformed the data significantly but the large proportion of these probes was still present .

it is possible that these dmps represent technical artefacts arising from the method of sample storage. of the  <dig>  probes,  <dig>  were not associated with any gene, while the rest were associated with  <dig>  different genes. the greatest proportion of these dmps was located within a gene body, not associated with a cpg island, and were infinium type ii design probes . a proportion  of these probes also overlapped a snp  and some probes covered more than one cpg dinucleotide. many of these covariates on the hm <dig> platform can potentially influence hybridisation efficiency, thus influencing the resulting measurements, and are the topic of ongoing discussion  <cit> . further studies are required to address such potential technical artefacts.

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, we have demonstrated the utility of dna extracted from archived dried blood spots for detecting genome-wide dna methylation profiles using the infinium humanmethylation <dig> platform. although dried blood spot dna can degrade, especially over prolonged storage times/period  <cit> , we were able to obtain high quality data comparable to those obtained from dna derived from matched frozen buffy coats. we also report that the majority of probes showed highly comparable methylation patterns within matched samples, suggesting that dried blood spot samples are suitable for these types of analyses. furthermore, although we used dna isolated from twenty  <dig>  mm dried blood spot punches in this study, this could potentially be reduced to a few punches where starting material is limited. our findings will greatly increase the scope of biological resources suitable for epigenome wide association studies   <cit> .

