BACKGROUND
an emerging pattern among european biotas is that the accentuated environmental instability that occurred during the pleistocene did not lead to increased speciation rates, with many species and populations originating during the miocene and proceeding through the quaternary  <cit> . in many species, population fragmentation was triggered by the beginning of the messinian salinity crisis, a short  but crucial period that occurred between  <dig>  and  <dig>  mya during which the mediterranean sea desiccated almost completely, producing a general and drastic increase in aridity around the mediterranean basin  <cit> . as a result of this increased aridity, forests continued to be replaced by more open and arid landscapes forcing the mesic species to retreat to the moister atlantic-influenced areas and to the mountainous regions, leading to high speciation in some groups  <cit> .

various studies have attempted to unravel the different roles that the global aridification at the end of the miocene and the pleistocene glacial cycles have played in the diversity and distribution of european faunas  <cit> . however, little is known about the effects that these climatic changes had on species living further south, in the african continent. recent assessments of central african chameleons have uncovered evidence of long-isolated evolutionary histories, with the survival of palaeoendemics leading to considerable diversity  <cit> . in general, reptiles are excellent model organisms to assess the relative role that the pre-quaternary and quaternary major climatic events have played in the origin, evolution and distribution of species  <cit> . available data from some herpetofauna indicate that a similar pattern to the neighboring iberian peninsula exists in north africa, with deep lineages originating at the end of the miocene . however, the lack of informative nuclear markers in most of these studies may prevent the recovery of the true evolutionary history of the group [eg.  <cit> , and makes it difficult to ascertain if these lineages correspond to species complexes or not. since there is a strong likelihood of discordance between gene trees and species trees  <cit> , information from different genetic markers  is thus necessary for delimiting evolutionary lineages, as well as for establishing phylogenetic relationships.

despite being key concepts in the fields of systematic and evolutionary biology, recognizing and delimiting species are highly controversial issues . recognizing species is not only a taxonomic challenge, but is also essential for other biological disciplines such as biogeography, ecology and evolutionary biology  <cit> , and has serious consequences for conservation biology and the design of effective conservation plans  <cit> . delimiting species is also the first step towards discussing broader questions on evolution, biogeography, ecology or conservation. recently, thanks to intellectual progress made in the field with the aim of identifying a common element among all the different species concepts, a single, more general, concept of species known as general lineage species concept has been suggested  <cit> . this unified species concept emphasizes the common element found in many species concepts, which is that species are separately evolving lineages. therefore, properties like reciprocal monophyly at one or multiple loci, phenotypic diagnosability, ecological distinctiveness, etc. are not part of the species concept but are used to assess the separation of lineages and to species delimitation  <cit> . this separation between species conceptualization and species delimitation and the proposal of a unified species concept has concentrated efforts in the development of new approaches for species delimitation, as for example with “integrative taxonomy”  <cit> , among others]. under this new approach, species delineation is regarded as an objective scientific process that results in a taxonomic hypothesis. therefore, the level of confidence in the taxonomic hypothesis supported by several independent character sets is much higher than for species supported by only one character  <cit> . such an integrative view is especially useful in the case of taxonomic groups that are morphologically conservative, where cryptic species have probably been overlooked  <cit> .

normally, high altitude species carry signatures of the expansion and contraction cycles occurred during glacial and interglacial periods  <cit> . because of this, they are of particular interest to study historical responses to climate change, since they are adapted to a small window of environmental changes, and usually present low tolerance to high temperatures  <cit> . in europe, high altitude species often seem to have persisted through glacial periods by short movements to lower altitudes rather than to the classic "southern refugia" of lowland species. in this way current ranges may primarily reflect postglacial expansions  <cit> . however, it is not clear if the same phenomenon occurs in african montane taxa.

atlantolacerta andreanskyi  is a lacertid lizard endemic to the western and central parts of the high atlas mountains of morocco. it is restricted to areas above 2400 m  <cit> , where it is frequently found in the vicinity of small watercourses or plateaus in the top of the mountains that retain some water from rain or snowmelt. habitat is normally screes and areas with boulders, meadows and, in particular, the base of cushion-like thorny plants in these places  <cit> ; personal observation]. although a. andreanskyi had initially been placed in several different genera within the subtribe lacertini  <cit> , recent phylogenetic analyses based on mitochondrial dna and a combination of mitochondrial and nuclear markers  <cit>  suggest that a. andreanskyi is a member of the subtribe eremiadini, and apparently sister to the remaining eremiadini. this position would conform to this species lacking the synapomorphies that characterize most other eremiadini, namely a derived condition of the ulnar nerve and the presence of a fully developed armature in the hemipenis, which has folded lobes when retracted. it is also distinctive within the eremiadini regarding the presence of enlarged masseteric scale  <cit> . because of its phylogenetic position, without close relationship to any other genus of eremiadini and its distinctive morphology it was recently placed in a new monotypic genus, atlantolacerta <cit> . atlantolacerta andreanskyi is distributed across  <dig> km  of mountainous terrain, with the different populations presenting an apparently disjunct distribution . as with many montane species, the situation observed in a. andreanskyi is similar to an archipelago, with the different “islands” being represented by mountaintops disconnected due to areas of unsuitable habitat below 2400 m. as a result of this scenario, minimal gene flow is currently expected between the different populations; however, it is not known how the different climatic events occurred during the miocene and pleistocene have affected this species. even though some aspects of the biology of a. andreanskyi are already well known [e.g.  <cit> , the genetic structure of the different populations, as well as the relationships between the different populations have never been assessed before.

therefore, in order to shed some light on the previous questions and attempt to assess the evolutionary history of the species and identify the number of lineages, we sampled the distribution area of the species and performed several combined phylogenetic reconstructions and clustering analyses, using both mtdna and nuclear markers.

RESULTS
mitochondrial genealogies
a total of  <dig> base pairs  of concatenated mtdna  were obtained for  <dig> a. andreanskyi. the concatenated alignment of the ingroup sequences revealed  <dig> haplotypes  and contained  <dig> variable sites, of which  <dig> were parsimony informative.

analyses of the concatenated mtdna data were mostly congruent . seven well-supported lineages were recovered from these analyses , corresponding to the populations from j. awlime, j. sirwa, tizin tichka, j. azourki, outabati, j. ayache, and oukaimeden and nearby toubkal that were grouped together. regarding the relationships among these clades, we could distinguish three main groups, oukaimeden and toubkal with j. sirwa from the southern end of the distribution range; j. ayache with outabati from the northern distribution, and tizin tichka with j. azourki from the central distribution range. the population from j. awlime, from the extreme south of the range, is a genetically distinct lineage related to the northern group, although, both ml and bi analysis weakly support this topology .

all the populations present a low level of diversity in the mitochondrial dna , and a very high level of genetic divergence between populations .

 genetic distance  between all the populations and  between main groups; and  divergence time estimates, calculated using beast with nd <dig> and trna-his. the the diversity of each population is below the population's names.

nuclear genealogies
a total of  <dig> specimens of a. andreanskyi were sequenced for five nuclear genes. the acm <dig> was 447 bp long, presenting  <dig> haplotypes and  <dig> polymorphic sites,  <dig> of them parsimony informative; c-mos was 534 bp long, with  <dig> haplotypes and  <dig> polymorphic sites, all of them parsimony informative; mc1r was 635 bp long, with  <dig> haplotypes and  <dig> variable sites,  <dig> of them parsimony informative; pdc was 441 bp long, with  <dig> haplotypes and  <dig> variable sites,  <dig> of them parsimony informative; rag <dig> was 528 bp long, with  <dig> haplotypes and  <dig> variable sites,  <dig> of them parsimony informative.

the differences in the genetic distances between the lineages are congruent with the geographic distance between them, supporting the grouping of the lineages in three main groups as seen in the analysis of mitochondrial sequences.

the concatenated analyses of the  <dig> unphased nuclear markers are congruent with the results obtained in the mitochondrial dna tree, although with some differences . despite recovering the three main groups observed in the mtdna analysis, according to the nuclear markers the j. awlime population is not sister to the northernmost populations but branches off inside a polytomy with the westernmost lineages at the base of the tree. it is possible to distinguish some of the lineages, although in some cases they are not monophyletic. the j. ayache population is monophyletic but makes outabati paraphyletic. the same happens with tizin tichka, which makes the population from j. azourki paraphyletic. the population from oukaimeden is polyphyletic.

concatenated analysis 
the results of the ml and bi analyses of the mtdna and ndna  support the same seven lineages as recovered in the mitochondrial analysis, although in this case j. awlime is sister to the central and northern lineages  instead of being sister to only the northernmost lineages . as in the mtdna analysis , the relationship of j. awlime with the central and northern lineages is very poorly supported. this result was expected, given the higher resolving power of the mtdna that contributed with  <dig> variable sites versus the  <dig> from the ndna.

nuclear networks
as show in figure  <dig> and table  <dig>  there is a moderate degree of haplotype sharing between populations, with most of them lacking private alleles for the nuclear genes analyzed.

clustering analysis and individual assignment
in our study, the obtained k differs with the combination between the ancestry model and the allele frequency model. when combined the no admixture model  with the allele frequencies independent model  the best resulting k values where for k = 3: south , center  and north  groups. with the other three combinations between the models the best result were for k = 6: j. sirwa, tizin tichka, j. azourki, outabati, j. ayache, and a group formed by oukaimeden, toubkal and j. awlime .

species tree and divergence time estimates
the results of the clustering analysis with k =  <dig> were used to define the species for the species tree analysis in starbeast. the tree inferred with information from mitochondrial and nuclear markers   recovered the same topology as in figure 2c, with all the relationships between the lineages supported by previous analyses.

the divergence time estimates were calculated for the six populations . high effective sample sizes were observed for all parameters in all beast analysis  and assessment of convergence statistics in tracer indicated that all analyses had converged. maximum clade credibility tree for nd4 + trna-his was identical in topology to those produced by bayesian and ml analyses. according to the inferred dates resulted from beast , the two main mitochondrial lineages of a. andreanskyi  split approximately  <dig>  ma  interval  <dig> - <dig>  ma). the populations that are grouped in the three main clades  split approximately at the same time, being tizin tichka and j. azourki the first to split at about  <dig>  ma , followed by oukaimeden and j. sirwa  <dig>  ma , and outabati and j. ayache  <dig>  ma . tizin tichka and j. azourki diverged from outabati and j. ayache approximately  <dig>  ma .

discussion
extreme mtdna diversity in a. andreanskyi
several recently published analyses of north african herpetofauna have revealed high levels of endemism and cryptic species  <cit> . in this analysis, the surprising result was the extreme diversity of mitochondrial dna found between almost all the populations analyzed the genetic differentiation observed between populations  is similar and, in some cases, higher than the divergence found between iberolacerta species , a lacertid genus with most of its species occurring in the mountains of the iberian peninsula  <cit> . initially considered one species, there are now seven recognized species of iberolacerta in the iberian peninsula. genetic differentiation between these species is lower than between the different populations of a. andreanskyi.

although the mitochondrial phylogeny supports the existence of seven distinct groups, the clustering analysis only supports the existence of six lineages . toubkal samples were always part of the same lineage as oukaimeden, although, they show some divergence at least at the mitochondrial dna level . this is not unexpected, as these populations are geographically very close and are part of the high atlas mountains, where interconnectivity between populations could occur. the mitochondrial phylogenetic analyses supported the existence of a seventh isolated lineage, j. awlime, however clustering analysis and the nuclear phylogeny did not support the distinctiveness of this population, possibly because of the small sampling size. unfortunately, despite multiple attempts to sample in this remote region, only three individuals were captured. the analyses also could not recover the genetic relationship between j. awlime and the other populations, because its position in the trees fluctuated between the two main groups , without support in any of the trees.

non-reciprocal monophyly in nuclear markers and species delimitation
in the phylogenetic analyses of the concatenated nuclear loci, some of the lineages supported by mtdna data were not monophyletic. this was observed only between the geographically closest lineages, as in the case of oukaimeden and j. sirwa; tizin tichka and j. azourki; and outabati and j. ayache, that presumably were in contact more recently than the others. this may be due to the larger effective population size of the nuclear dna compared to the mitochondrial dna and the consequent stronger effect of the incomplete lineage sorting at each single nuclear loci  <cit> . additionally, the slow evolutionary rate of some of these markers may be a factor. the conjugation of these two effects probably explains the absence of concordance in the single nuclear gene trees , although the same general topology was recovered in the concatenated nuclear phylogeny. reciprocal monophyly is one of the primary criteria to delimit species  <cit> . although it is possible to delimit species without observing monophyly in gene trees, since a considerable amount of time must pass after the beginning of divergence of species until they show reciprocal monophyly at a sample of multiple loci  <cit> . pinho et al. <cit>  have shown that podarcis from the iberian peninsula and north africa have a similar pattern  but in a smaller time window and using faster evolving nuclear loci and, in contrast to our case, some populations are in contact.

although we are aware that the determination of k, in structure, is only an ad hoc guide to describe consistence between models and the data  <cit> , the program has been commonly used for this end  <cit> . several methods based on bayesian clustering have been developed  <cit> , however, structure is the most widely used, and various studies show its efficiency in assigning individuals to their population of origin  <cit>  and its ability to construct an appropriate clustering hypothesis  <cit> . however, in the present example the analysis was limited because it was based only in haplotype information. the obtained k differ with the combination model used, but in most of the combinations the analysis supports a k =  <dig> corresponding to the geographical populations and to the results recovered by the other analyses. this analysis also placed the samples from the j. awlime population together with the oukaimeden lineage, possibly due to the limited haplotype sampling. similarly, the concatenated phylogenetic tree, based on all the genes, supports the existence of  <dig> lineages giving once more a low support to the relationship between j. awlime and the other lineages.

the networks of the individual nuclear loci show high percentage of private alleles in some of the lineages, which fluctuate depending on the gene.

dating the trees
all the lineages are grouped in two main clusters, the northern group composed by j. ayache, outabati, j. azourki and tizin tichka; and the southern group that includes oukaimeden and j. sirwa. the divergence obtained for these two lineages was around  <dig>  mya, , which coincides approximately with the time of the final closing of the rifian strait . during the miocene, tectonic activity in the region was intense and included the uplift of the atlas mountains that occurred around  <dig>  mya  <cit> . it was more or less at the same time that podarcis invaded north africa  and the iberian clade of iberolacerta started to fragment . the split of the six lineages must have occurred later, probably during the quaternary glaciations . however, the confidence intervals obtained were very large, increasing the time window for the events and the associated error. determination of the time of the speciation events is important to understand the evolutionary biogeography of species  <cit> . however, it is difficult to estimate ages in phylogenies without several sources of error. clearly the lineages of a. andreanskyi are pre-pleistocenic and, as found in central african chameleons  <cit>  can be considered paleoendemics. however, without better calibration points it is difficult to date the split of the lineages more precisely than this.

CONCLUSIONS
phylogeographic assessments of several taxa in northwest africa have indicated the presence of cryptic diversity in organisms ranging from scorpions  <cit>  to mammals  <cit> , and reptiles are not an exception [e.g.  <cit> . what is exceptional in the case of a. andreanskyi are the high levels of mitochondrial divergence between almost every sampled populations, ranging from  <dig>  up to  <dig> %  between populations separated by low geographic distances . six of the eight analyzed populations are highly distinct based on both mtdna and multiple nuclear markers. this raises the issue not of whether a. andreanskyi is a species complex, but just how many species may occur within the group. presumably, far more than the six possible species identified in this study, since, probably, many populations remain unsampled. however, preliminary morphological analyses suggest that all the different populations included in the present study are very homogeneous . this may imply the presence of cryptic diversity, but definitive conclusions should wait until a complete morphological study is carried out .

current models of reptiles species accessed for the region indicate low levels of diversity across much of the high atlas mountains  <cit> . indeed only a few species are recorded at altitudes above 2000 m; typically a. andreanskyi, quedenfeldtia species , chalcides montanus and vipera monticola [e.g.  <cit> . however, the finding of high genetic diversity in a. andreanskyi indicates that unidentified lineages occur, and that the other high mountain species should also be assessed as possible cryptic species candidates. our results are also essential from a conservation point of view, as many forms may actually have smaller ranges than currently thought, and small isolated populations on high mountains have been identified as those of high concern under typical global warming scenarios  <cit> . given these results it is necessary to increase the sampling in order to understand the relationship of j. awlime with the other populations and try to find new populations. furthermore it is very important to conduct a through morphological study to determine if there is phenotypic variation, and then to revise the taxonomy of the genus atlantolacerta.

