BACKGROUND
penicillin g acylases , are enzymes widely distributed among micro-organisms in the living world. the physiological role of these enzymes is still unclear, but in escherichia coli the pga expression is regulated both by temperature and by phenylacetic acid, suggesting that the enzyme could be involved in vivo in the assimilation of aromatic compounds to be used as carbon source  <cit> . in e. coli, pga is a periplasmic enzyme organized as a αβ heterodimer. the two subunits, α  and β , are produced through a complex maturation process of a pre-pro-pga polypeptide precursor of  <dig> kda: at the n-terminus, the signal peptide that directs the export of the enzyme, is removed to give pro-pga; this step is followed by an auto-proteolytic cleavage of a  <dig> residues spacer peptide  <cit> .

it is believed that an appropriate folding status of pre-pro-pga and pro-pga should be obtained for subsequent processing, and that such a folding process may possibly be assisted by chaperons. during the steps of gene expression , a balanced protein synthesis flux should be properly maintained in order to avoid the accumulation of any protein species within the protein formation pathway  <cit> .

during the overproduction of the enzyme, the final yield is limited by misfolding of pre-pro-pga and pro-pga, which results in the aggregation of insoluble precursors as inclusion bodies and in an inefficient maturation that consequently limits the formation of active pga. xu et al.  <cit>  demonstrated that the cytoplasmic overexpression, the folding and the processing of pga can be improved by co-expressing pga with cytoplasmic chaperones such as trigger factor, groel/es and dnak/j-grpe. their results suggest that the chaperone team of trigger factor and groel/es collaboratively facilitated the proper folding of leaderless pro-pga, by protecting pro-pga from proteolysis, which improved the pro-pga maturation. the same results were obtained by the co-expression of periplasmic degp chaperone  <cit> .

structural characterization of mature pga and of its precursor has elucidated the catalytic properties and the processes of maturation  <cit> .

pga from e. coli atcc  <dig>  ec  <dig> . <dig>  is a commercially valuable enzyme which is used as a catalyst for the production of β-lactam nuclei, starting from penicillin g  and semi-synthetic cephalosporin g, and for the kinetically controlled synthesis of several semi-synthetic antibiotics  <cit> . the expression of the pac gene for pga in native and recombinant e. coli has been studied and improved to obtain a higher production of the enzyme  <cit> .

the recovery and reuse of pga as the catalyst in synthetic applications is routinely performed by using the immobilized enzyme on a solid support by covalent interaction  <cit> ; alternatively, reversible immobilization on ionic exchangers, which is improved by site directed mutagenesis, offers simpler and inexpensive immobilization protocols  <cit> .

other advantages of immobilized enzymes are the enhanced stability of the resulting derivatives and the possibility to modulate their catalytic properties  <cit> . these properties may be affected by the orientation of the enzyme as well as by the microenvironment of the support around the active site. these effects become particularly important if the enzyme is immobilized with the active site near or facing the surface of the support. many efforts have been made to control the orientation of immobilized enzymes of commercial use such as subtilisin, for example by binding it through a predetermined site of the protein surface  <cit> .

several insoluble supports can be used to exploit different functional groups that are distributed on the enzyme surface for immobilization. some of the most studied and employed supports are glyoxyl activated supports, in which the immobilization proceeds by interacting with the richest lys area of the protein surface  <cit> .

in pga, lys residues are uniformly distributed on the enzyme surface, and a few are also present near the active site  <cit> : if the binding to the solid support occurs through one of the latter, pga may undergo a structural distortion which can hamper the accessibility of the substrates into the active site that leads to a partial loss of activity. the increase in lys content far from the active site has been shown to be a suitable approach to increase the number of bonds between the mutated pga and the glyoxyl-support, leading to a more stable derivative  <cit> .

this result seems to indicate that the immobilization of this pga mutant preferentially occurs through the enzyme surface which is enriched with the three "extra" lys residues; consequently, the active center is oriented toward the opposite side of the support surface. the "preferential" arrangement of the enzyme should reduce any diffusion problem as glyoxyl-derivatives make the active site more accessible to the β-lactam nuclei. in fact, similar results were obtained when a  <dig> gly - <dig> lys tag was added at the c-terminus of the β subunit  <cit> .

to verify this hypothesis, we designed different aminoacid substitutions on the enzyme surface which is opposite to the active site, and we tested some of these immobilized derivatives along with the three lys enriched enzyme derivative  <cit>  in kinetically controlled acylation of 7-aca. the acylation assay should highlight the difference in the access of the nucleus between the immobilized mutant and the immobilized wt pga . the newly mutated enzymes, together with other mutated pac gene products, which were obtained by site directed mutagenesis of the e. coli atcc  <dig> gene, have been evaluated for their expression and maturation in recombinant e. coli and for their activity in solution and after immobilization.

RESULTS
site directed mutagenesis
the crystal structure of the native pga clearly shows that lys residues are uniformly distributed on the surface of the enzyme  <cit> . aminoacid substitutions of flexible superficial residues were designed in order to increase the number of lys in an opposite region to the active center. site directed mutagenesis reactions of the pac gene were performed on plasmid petpac  <cit>  by using mutagenic overlapping primers extension for the pcr reaction . single, non-conservative substitutions that replace acidic and basic residues  were obtained by using the primers that are shown in table  <dig> and by using the petpac plasmid. the new petpac-e194k plasmid was then used as a template to obtain the double mutant . the other mutants with two substitutions,  and , were created by single step mutagenesis. the triple mutant pga-3k was obtained from the poaf3mut plasmid  <cit> . the mutants with four and five substitutions were obtained by using the poaf3mut plasmid as a template and the oligonucleotides d494k for and d494krev, r495kfor and r495krev, and d216k-g219k. all the mutations were confirmed by dna sequencing. the residues substituted by lys in the structure of the mature pga are depicted in figure  <dig> 

enzyme screening and assay
 <dig> ml cultures of e. coli bl <dig> cells, which were transformed with the corresponding plasmid, were used to overexpress the mutated and native enzymes. total cellular proteins were analysed by sds-page. the results are summarized in table 2: with the exception of the double mutant pga-αn202k/αn205k, all the recombinant proteins were overexpressed, but only pga-αe194k, pga-d403k, pga-βd494k, the double pga-αe194k-βd494k mutant and the triple, pga-βd13k-e272k-r276k  <cit>  mutant enzymes, also named herein 2k and 3k respectively, were found in the periplasmic extract in the processed and mature α and β subunits form. the presence of the other mutant acylases in soluble periplasmic or cytoplasmic extracts was negligible; they were mainly localized in the pellet as inclusion bodies of pre-pro-enzyme precursor. the double substitution of residues n <dig> and n <dig> of the α subunit dramatically affected the expression of the acylase. no enzyme was observed in the periplasmic, cytoplasmic, and pellet fractions; the presence of rearranged pet-pac-αn202k-αn205k expression vectors indicated a possible selection against the production of a toxic protein.

aenzyme processing means presence of the two  <dig> and  <dig> kda subunits in the sds-page analysis of periplasmic extract.

bu, units are μmol of nipab hydrolyzed min- <dig> ml- <dig> of periplasmic extract.

cn.d., means not detectable enzyme activity.

as previously observed  <cit> , overexpression, processing and maturation can be severely affected by temperature and this drawback can be enhanced by the presence of single residue mutations. we used 22°c for the induction which has been reported to be the ideal temperature also in the case of a mutated gly-lys tagged pga  <cit> . other substitutions βs1c, βs1t, βs1r, βs1g, h26g, q118e, s9e, v97k  <cit>  have been previously demonstrated to be detrimental for the correct maturation and activity of pga. our data indicate that the two surface residues asn  <dig> and  <dig> in α, and the two arg  <dig> and asp  <dig> in the β subunit cannot be substituted by lys without destabilizing the enzyme structure : in the case of the latter two substitutions, the precursor proteins of  <dig> kda are expressed but not translocated and cleaved in the periplasm. the additional substitution of asp  <dig> with lys in the β chain, which alone leaves the autocatalytic transport and localization properties unimpaired, also affected the stability when the three mutations d13k-e272k-r276k were present in the same chain. whereas, substitution of asn  <dig> and asn  <dig> at the c-terminus of the α subunit seems to be more dramatic. in this case, the overexpression of the unprocessed enzyme was affected, probably because the substituted residues which are located near one of the auto-proteolytic sites, i.e. the a209-a <dig> peptide bond which is hydrolyzed to eliminate the spacer peptide during the maturation process, interferes with the correct maturation process by producing a by-product polypeptide highly toxic for the host cell.

the hydrolytic activity of periplasmic extract of all the mutant acylases was evaluated by using the nipab assay  <cit> . activity  was found only in the periplasmic extract of the acylases whose processing was verified by sds-page electrophoresis analysis . in the periplasmic extract of the other recombinant acylases, the activity was undetectable: neither the cytoplasmic extract, nor the pellet, which was resuspended in the same buffer, showed the presence of hydrolytic activity. the absence of activity, and the fact that the acylases were found mainly in the pellet as non-mature enzymes suggest that the aminoacid substitutions were incompatible with a successful maturation, probably as a consequence of an incorrect folding that leads to the formation of non-soluble inclusion bodies.

enzyme purification and characterization
the five acylases that resulted active and the wt enzyme were overproduced from scaled-up 1l cultures and purified to be subsequently immobilized. the purified native and recombinant enzymes  were assayed for the hydrolytic activity by using both nipab  <cit>  and penicillin g potassium salt  as substrates . all the recombinant acylases in solution showed hydrolytic activities comparable to the one of the native enzyme . the presence of a secondary band of less than  <dig> kda in the two pga-αe194k and pga-αe194k-βd494k purified enzymes could be explained by the presence of a contaminant peptide or a maturation by-product, both, in some way, dependent on the presence of the αe194k substitution. in order to define this aspect, the n-terminal sequence of this secondary band was determined by automated sequencing, which confirmed the sequence of the α subunit and suggested a c-terminus processing that reduces the polypeptide size.

au, μmol of substrate hydrolyzed min- <dig> mg- <dig> 

enzymes immobilization and determination of the activity
the native and modified pgas were immobilized on aldehyde agarose, i.e. agarose activated with glyoxyl groups. since the extreme alkaline conditions  which are necessary to obtain the optimal yield of immobilization  <cit>  may affect the stability of the mutated enzyme, a preliminary stability study was performed. the results are shown in figure 3: at ph  <dig> and 25°c, all the mutated acylases were unstable and lost up to ~50% activity in less than three hours, but the activity was retained up to 100% simply by lowering the temperature to 4°c. in these conditions, the amount of immobilized protein was quantifiable for all the acylases . after immobilization, the pgk activities of all the acylases decreased, but the mutants were able to retain more than 50% of the activity, while the native enzyme usually loses up to 50% of its activity.

athe enzymes were immobilized on agarose beads activated with aldehyde groups at ph  <dig> and 4°c.

bu, μmol of pgk min- <dig> mg- <dig> 

cactivities of immobilized enzymes are expressed as units  per gram of agarose beads.

determination of the vs/vh <dig> ratio
the soluble enzymes and their immobilized derivatives were tested as catalysts in the kinetically controlled n-acylation of  <dig> mm 7-aminocephalosporanic acid  in the presence of  <dig> mm r-mandelic acid methyl ester , by evaluating the ratio between the initial rate of synthesis  and the ester hydrolysis   <cit> .

in the kinetically controlled synthesis, the yields depend on the balance of three different reactions shown in figure  <dig>  these reactions are the synthesis of the β-lactam compound , the hydrolysis of the activated acyl donor  and the hydrolysis of the synthesized antibiotic . the higher achieved yields are transient and are dependent on the saturation degree and on the affinity of the enzyme active center for the nucleophile. in particular, the ratio between the rate of synthesis and the ester hydrolysis  is strictly dependent on the affinity of the enzyme for the β-lactam nucleus and is a parameter for the ability of the catalyst to adsorb the substrate into the active center.

the results are shown in figure 5: all of the soluble mutant pgas exhibited a vs/vh <dig> ratio similar to the one of the native enzyme . thus, the effect of the aminoacid substitutions on the catalytic properties is negligible.

on the other hand, after immobilization the mutant pgas showed higher vs/vh <dig> ratios than the wt, which seem to increase proportionally with the number of lys introduced: from a value of  <dig> , for the native enzyme, to  <dig> , for the pga3k, and of  <dig>  for pga2k. these data, if compared to the results that were obtained with the soluble acylases, indicate that after immobilization the recombinant enzymes allow a better diffusion and adsorption of the β-lactam nucleus into the active site than the one observed with the wt enzyme.

we propose the following hypothesis to explain our observations: the enrichment of lys on the enzyme surface enhances the immobilization of a higher amount of pga molecules with a "preferential" orientation, which leaves the corresponding active centers exposed to the reaction environment and more easily accessible to the β-lactam nucleus.

CONCLUSIONS
the present results demonstrate that glyoxyl supports are suitable to induce a preferential orientation during immobilization of pga mutants with an increased number of lys in a specific area of the protein surface. these results are in agreement with those previously reported  <cit> .

this effect has not been obtained with other methods of immobilization such as ionic or covalent interactions based on a different binding chemistry  <cit> .

we have designed and obtained four new acylases which are characterized by an increased content of lys on the surface of the protein, which is localized on the opposite side of the active center. we compared the performances of these new immobilized and mutated pgas with those of the three lys mutants 3k that were described by abian et al.  <cit> .

the kinetically controlled reactions performed by the immobilized mutants and the immobilized wild-type pga showed that the increasing number of lys residues on the surface that is localized on the opposite side of the active site, positively correlates with a proportionally higher diffusion of the β-lactam nucleus in the catalytic site.

this effect was particularly evident when two or three lys were introduced by mutagenesis. the obtained results seem to indicate that these substitutions enhance the immobilization of pga through the lys enriched part of the surface, and allow the immobilized catalysts to expose the active site to the reaction environment .

although these substitutions have been found to decrease the specific hydrolytic activity of the soluble enzymes, if compared with the native enzyme, they had negligible effects on the vs/vh <dig> ratio. when assayed in the kinetically controlled acylation of 7-aca, the glyoxyl-agarose derivatives with two and three lys showed a higher vs/vh <dig> ratio, than the soluble enzymes . these results can be explained if we suppose that the enzyme immobilization was driven by the lys-enriched surface, which exposes the enzyme active site to the reaction environment, therefore easily accessible for the substrate. we are setting up maldi-tof analysis of peptides obtained by tryptic digestion of the enzyme which is immobilized on glyoxyl-agarose and epoxydic resins, derivatives which involve a different binding chemistry. this approach can directly demonstrate the effective role of the mutations in the enzyme orientation.

we have also obtained six other new mutant pac genes which resulted inactive in nipab assay in crude extracts when overexpressed, and which showed a sds-page pattern typical of misfolded and aggregated expression products. these proteins were found as precipitated inclusion bodies that were formed by unprocessed precursor. these data demonstrate an enhancement of the previously observed behaviour for the wild-type enzyme when overexpressed  <cit> .

we think that the lys substitution of residues of the β subunit , severely impaired the enzyme folding and the stability in an overexpression system that has been demonstrated to be crucial even for the wild-type pga  <cit> , because it blocks the following autocatalytic steps of enzyme maturation and periplasmic translocation. the same effect was observed when asp  <dig> was substituted by lys in the three lys enriched mutant of abian et al.  <cit> .

these substitutions are located far from the autocatalytic site of the precursor and on the opposite side of the precursor structure, in the same way that all the other mutations we planned  <cit> .

it is noteworthy that, in three cases the simple addition of a lys residue near the substitutions that were compatible with the maturation and the activity, leads to the impairment of the enzyme maturation.

the double substitution of asn residues  <dig> and  <dig> with lys, at the c-terminus of the α subunit, gave rise to the more dramatic effect of the total absence of an overexpressed protein, even as unfolded aggregate in the pellet fraction. this dramatic effect was probably due to a higher toxicity of the mutant versions of the enzyme precursor in the producer host and to its consequent negative selection.

we could overcome the problems found in the expression of these mutants, and finally test their performances as immobilized derivatives, by using the engineered strains and the two-step protocols described by de marco et al.  <cit>  that recently have been demonstrated to strongly enhance the solubility of several overexpressed proteins.

