BACKGROUND
basic cellular functions  are regulated in response to environmental and nutritional signals. for this reason, sensing and transduction of these extracellular and intracellular signals is of critical importance for survival. many of the signaling and regulatory proteins involved in responding to environmental cues have a modular composition of specialized domains  <cit> . one of these specialized domains is the per-arnt-sim  domain, which is distributed throughout all genera of life. pas domains are identified by particular patterns of secondary structures and they have important roles as sensory modules for environmental and nutritional signals, such as voltage, gases, light, metabolites or redox potential  <cit> . in addition to regulating physiological processes, several pas domain containing proteins are involved in regulating virulence determinants in pathogenic bacteria  <cit> . the wide-distribution of pas domains, the diversity of signals they transduce, and the array of regulatory pathways in which they are involved are reflected in their extremely divergent amino acid sequences  <cit> . our interest in pas domain-containing proteins is due to their involvement in sensing and responding to changes in concentrations of dicarboxylic acids  <cit> .

bacterial survival depends on their ability to regulate transcription of genes in response to changing environmental and nutritional conditions. in pathogenic bacteria, the response to changes in nutritional or environmental conditions often includes activating transcription of virulence genes  <cit> . the genus staphylococcus includes both pathogenic and non-pathogenic species that live in diverse environmental conditions such as the anterior nares , the skin , and in dry sausages   <cit> . the medical and economic importance of staphylococci has generated considerable interest in how these bacteria “sense” and respond to changes in their environment. in part, the medical interest stems from a desire to control staphylococcal infections, while the commercial interests involve understanding the role of primary and secondary metabolites in flavoring fermented meats. this interest in environmental sensing and the importance of pas domains in regulating responses to environmental and nutritional signals led us to examine eight genomes of seven staphylococcal species for the presence of pas domains. specifically, we wanted to identify potential dicarboxylic acid sensing proteins that could link changes in tricarboxylic acid cycle activity to transcriptional alterations that affect virulence factor synthesis  <cit> . to gain insight into the potential functions and evolutionary relationships of these domains, we compared the staphylococcal pas domains to those of a diverse group  of bacteria representing five phyla.

pas domains are typically between 100– <dig> amino acids in length; however, some are larger  <cit> . the core of a pas domain is a five stranded β-sheet, and interspersed within this core are α-helices that provide ligand/signal specificity  <cit> . the position of α-helices can vary depending on the cellular location; specifically, cytoplasmic pas domains have an α-2β-4α-3β topology  and extracytoplasmic pas domains have a 3α-2β-1/2α-3β-α topology   <cit> . these extracytoplasmic pas domains are typified by the phoq, dcus, and cita proteins, and are referred to as pdc domains  <cit> .

pas domains share less than 20% amino acid sequence identity  <cit> ; hence, identifying pdc/pas domain containing proteins across diverse genomes has been difficult. taylor and zhulin  <cit>  used position-specific iterative blast   <cit>  to identify  <dig> pas-containing proteins from eleven bacterial genomes. of the eleven genomes, only six were found to have pas-containing proteins and several of these proteins included multiple pas domains. an analysis of sixteen bacterial species using psi-blast similarity search revealed a wide distribution of small-molecule binding domains, including pas domains, in signal transducing proteins, transporters, and enzymes  <cit> . in a search of pas domain containing proteins in two genomes of cyanobacteria , narikawa et al. <cit>  used profile hidden markov models  to identify a total of  <dig> pas domains. more recently, using the fold and function assignment system  algorithm  <cit> , chang et al. <cit>  found that eleven out of thirteen sensor kinases in the bacillus subtilis genome possessed pdc domains.

in order to expand our understanding of pdc and pas domain distribution in bacteria and their evolutionary history, we chose to use more sensitive search methods, on a more diverse array of bacterial genomes. specifically, we used the recently developed sensitive search method based on hmm-to-hmm comparisons   <cit> . using this approach, we identified a total of  <dig>  pdc/pas domain containing proteins  in  <dig> diverse bacterial genomes, including both gram-negative and gram-positive bacteria. the number of pdc/pas proteins varied across these genomes  and more pas domains  were identified than pdc domains . interestingly, the number of pdc/pas proteins also varied among the eight staphylococcal genomes; as an example, staphylococcus saprophyticus had six pdc/pas proteins, while staphylococcus carnosus had nine. lastly, these data provided an opportunity to examine the evolution and function of staphylococcal pdc/pas proteins.

RESULTS
pdc/pas domains in evolutionarily diverse bacteria
the importance of pas domains in bacterial signal transduction systems and the abundance of staphylococcal genomic dna sequences provided an excellent opportunity to analyze staphylococcal genomes for the presence of pdc and pas domains. in order to understand the molecular evolution of staphylococcal pdc and pas domains within the bacterial kingdom, we identified these domains from a diverse set of  <dig> bacterial genomes, including seven species of staphylococcus . due to the availability of multiple s. aureus genomes and their medical importance, two strains  of s. aureus were included in the analyses. the domains were classified based on the predicted secondary structure as pas  or pdc  folds . a total of  <dig>  pas/pdc domains in  <dig>  proteins were identified, of which  <dig>  were pas folds and  <dig> domains were pdc folds. consistent with the ubiquitous nature of pas domains, all bacteria examined had pas domains. similarly, pdc domains were found in all genomes examined except for lactococcus lactis. as previously observed  <cit> , the filamentous cyanobacterium nostoc punctiforme had the greatest number of total pdc/pas domains , as well as the greatest number of pas domains  while vibrio cholerae had the most pdc domains  . in general, smaller bacterial genomes had fewer pdc/pas proteins, hence fewer pdc/pas domains, while larger genomes had more pdc/pas proteins and more pdc/pas domains. to determine if a correlation existed between the total number of proteins and pas domains, we calculated a correlation coefficient for these two variables. as expected, a significant positive correlation was found between the total number of proteins and the number of pdc/pas proteins .

afor those included in our phylogenetic analysis, abbreviations for species names are shown in parentheses.

b1: pathogenic, 0: non-pathogenic.

c1: motile, 0: non-motile.

dtotal number of proteins in the genome.

etotal number of pas/pdc-containing proteins identified in the genome.

ftotal number of pas domains identified.

gtotal number of pdc domains identified.

hone of the pdc/pas-containing proteins in staphylococcus haemolyticus  does not have the pdc domain identified by hhblits nor hhsearch, although all other staphylococcus phor homologs have clearly identified pdc domains. however, as noted in supplementary table s <dig>  a very weakly conserved pdc-like region was identified in this protein based on the predicted secondary structure. this potential pdc domain is not included in this table nor in our analysis.

previously, a hypothesis was put forward that non-pathogenic bacteria have more pdc/pas proteins than do pathogenic bacteria  <cit> . to test this hypothesis, we grouped bacteria based on its pathogenic status and determined if the two groups  have a significant difference in regard to the pdc/pas protein numbers . the average numbers of pdc/pas proteins were  <dig>  for  <dig> pathogenic bacteria and  <dig>  for  <dig> non-pathogenic bacteria. this difference was minimally significant . when we removed the effect of over-representation of staphylococcus genomes by removing  <dig> of the  <dig> genomes, all pathogenic , no significant difference was observed . comparisons of the total protein numbers between the two pathogenicity groups had the same results. although non-pathogenic bacteria tend to have more pas domains, the non-significant difference suggests that acquisition and/or loss of pas domains is largely independent of pathogenicity. in addition, these data suggest that another selectable phenotypic trait is responsible for the variation in the number of pdc/pas domains in bacteria.

one of the earliest bacterial pdc/pas proteins identified in escherichia coli was a methyl-accepting chemotaxis protein  <cit> . these proteins link changes in chemotactic effector concentrations with the flagella necessary to move bacteria toward or away from that effector. the involvement of pas domains in chemotaxis led us to examine if a correlation existed between the number of pas domains and bacterial motility. for this analysis, a bacterium was considered motile if any part of its life-cycle involved motility . average numbers of pdc/pas proteins were highly significantly different between motile  and non-motile  groups . the mean number of the pdc/pas proteins in the motile groups was approximately  <dig> times the mean in the non-motile group. although variances were significantly different  between motility groups for the number of the pdc/pas proteins, the test results were the same with and without the equal variance assumption. using the non-parametric mann–whitney u test, where normal distribution of data can be violated, median numbers of pdc/pas proteins as well as total proteins were highly significantly different between the motility groups . the average total numbers of proteins  were also significantly, although weakly, different . the test results were virtually the same when all  <dig> genomes were included in the analysis. while motility explains a substantial amount of the variation in the numbers of pdc/pas as well as total proteins, the variation in the number of pdc/pas proteins in bacteria must also involve other selectable phenotypes  <cit> .

pdc/pas domain distribution in gram-positive bacteria
to focus the scope of this study, we limited our detailed analysis of pdc/pas proteins to gram-positive bacteria because they represent major health challenges in the hospital and the community  <cit> . similar to gram-negative bacteria, the percentage of pdc/pas proteins in gram-positive bacteria as a function of the total number of proteins was low . also similar was that pdc/pas proteins having a single pdc or pas domain were the most common in both gram-negative and gram-positive bacteria . one remarkable difference was that gram-negative bacteria had approximately  <dig> times more pdc/pas proteins that contained more than two pdc and/or pas domains. also consistent between gram-negative and gram-positive bacterial species was that the number of pdc/pas proteins varied between genera and species . there was also variation in the number of single and multiple pdc/pas proteins between closely related bacteria . for example, streptococcus pneumoniae and streptococcus pyogenes have  <dig> and  <dig> proteins, respectively, that contain pdc and/or pas domains. two of the  <dig> pdc/pas proteins in s. pyogenes contain two pdc domains , while s. pneumoniae has one protein containing two pdc domains . similarly, s. pyogenes has one protein containing both one pdc and one pas domains , while s. pneumoniae has none. overall, our analysis found that gram-positive bacteria tend to have fewer total pdc/pas proteins than do gram-negative bacteria and that gram-positive pdc/pas proteins infrequently have greater than  <dig> pdc/pas domains. in addition, there was remarkable diversity within genera in the number of pdc/pas proteins.

evolutionary relationships of pdc/pas domains in gram-positive bacteria
in order to understand the evolutionary relationships among pas and pdc domain sequences in bacterial genomes, we performed phylogenetic analysis using each domain sequence separately. figure  <dig> shows the maximum likelihood phylogeny based on pas domains. as indicated with very short branch lengths, pas domains are in general highly conserved. the phylogeny also shows that pas domains from proteins with similar predicted functions, possibly orthologous proteins, tended to cluster together. as examples, the walk/vick/yycg orthologs  are part of bacterial two-component systems that regulate cell wall biosynthesis and resistance to antibiotic stress  <cit> . the walk ortholog proteins include either one pas or one pas and one pdc domain . the pdc domain found in walk is the pas-like fold identified by szurmant et al. as being in the extracellular loop  <cit> . the pas domains for these walk orthologs form a large clade that encompasses those from all species examined. similarly, the “pdc pas” containing dicarboxylate sensors   <cit>  cluster together, as do the sensor kinases rese and srrb of the two-component anaerobiosis regulatory systems resde and srrab  <cit> . interestingly, in the phor cluster, we observed that the bacillus anthracis phor protein contains only a single pas domain. in other words, the pdc domain must have been lost during the evolution of the bacillus lineage; however, their protein functions were likely retained. another good example of pas conservation can be found in proteins having two or more pas domains. the two-component sensor histidine kinases, kine, in b. subtilis  and b. megaterium  each have four pas domains . all these pas domains form a single cluster , indicating that the duplication of these domains must have occurred prior to the divergence of these two species. very different evolutionary relationships are found among multiple pas domains identified in another kinase, kina. the b. subtilis kina has three pas domains  whereas the other bacillus kina proteins have only two pas domains . only the first pas domains of b. authracis , b. cereus , and b. megaterium , and the second pas domains of b. authracis and b. cereus  form clusters. while the second pas domain of b. megaterium  and the second and third pas domains of b. subtilis  appear to share some similarity, the first pas domain of b. subtilis  is highly diverged from any of these kina pas domains. this is interesting because this particular b. subtilis pas domain  is involved in binding atp and regulating the sporulation phosphorelay system  <cit> . another interesting observation can be seen with two types of transcriptional regulators found in the bacillus genomes, bkdr and rocr. bkdr proteins have two pas domains  and rocr proteins have a single pas domain . the pas domains of these proteins form a single cluster where the pas domains of rocr are more similar to the second pas domains of bkdr, illustrating a dynamic evolution of these pas-containing transcriptional regulators. specifically, after the duplication of pas domains in the ancestral bacillus bkdr proteins, the ancestral rocr protein was derived from the second pas domain region of the bkdr protein. as both rocr and bkdr are involved in regulating amino acid catabolic pathways   <cit> , this evolution may be linked to their functions.

compared to the pas phylogeny, pdc domains are significantly more divergent as indicated by the much longer branch lengths in figure  <dig>  reflecting their higher degree of divergence, the clustering patterns shown in the pdc phylogeny are much more complex. for example, phor and walk ortholog proteins, both are clustered individually in the pas phylogeny , but are found in dispersed locations in the pdc phylogeny . some proteins we examined contain two pdc domains and they are shown as "proximal" and "distal" in figure 5a . interestingly, the majority of the "proximal" pdc domains form a single large cluster indicating their monophyletic origin. on the other hand, the "distal" pdc domains are more divergent and show evolutionary patterns distinct from the "proximal" domain.

in order to understand how phylogenies obtained from pas and pdc domains individually correlate with the entire protein evolution, we used the walk ortholog proteins as an example. we reconstructed three phylogenies from  <dig> walk proteins: from pas domain, from pdc domain, and from the entire protein sequences . for this analysis, the walk orthologs from lactococcus lactis and streptococcus sp. were excluded due to the absence of a pdc domain in the extracellular loop. the entire walk proteins are approximately  <dig> amino acid  length, while their pas and pdc domains are between 88– <dig> aa. the entire walk protein phylogeny shows three clearly supported clusters: the walk proteins from macrococcus caseolyticus and the staphylococcus sp., those from bacillus sp. and listeria monocytogenes, and those from lactobacillus casei and enterococcus sp. as described before, pas domains of walk proteins are much more conserved than their pdc domains, and their phylogenetic clustering was completely congruent with the entire protein relationship. in striking contrast, with the exception of the staphylococcus domains, no clear clustering pattern was found in the pdc phylogeny. taken together, these data suggest that pas domain evolution is more conserved and protein/function-specific, while pdc domains are highly divergent and possibly contributed to a more dynamic protein function evolution.

pdc/pas domains of staphylococci
the medical importance of staphylococci and our interest in dicarboxylic acid sensing led us to examine the staphylococcal pdc/pas proteins to gain insight into their potential function. as stated earlier, the number of pdc/pas proteins correlates well with motility, such that motile bacteria have  <dig> times as many pdc/pas proteins as do non-motile bacteria. the staphylococci are non-motile bacteria that are closely related to the motile bacterial species in the bacillus genus . based on the maximum likelihood phylogeny of the 16s rdna sequences in figure  <dig>  when the staphylococcaceae  diverged from bacillus megaterium it appears that motility was lost. prior to that divergence, all of the related bacteria  were/are motile . interestingly, the staphylococcus sp. are most closely related to macrococcus caseolyticus, which is a non-pathogenic and non-motile bacterium found in milk and on animal skin, suggesting that the transition from free-living bacterium to being host-adapted coincided with the loss of motility. the genus staphylococcus is comprised of species that have between  <dig>  and  <dig>  proteins having one or more pdc/pas domains, while the bacillus genus contains species having between  <dig>  and  <dig>  pdc/pas proteins . the loss of pdc/pas proteins by staphylococci is consistent with the transition from a motile life-style to a non-motile life-style; however, the loss of motility is unlikely to be the complete explanation for the evolutionary loss of pdc/pas proteins. a second phenotypic difference between the staphylococcus and bacillus genera is the ability to sporulate, with the bacillus sp. able to form spores but not the staphylococci. four of the kinases  that regulate sporulation in bacillus sp.  <cit>  all contain pdc/pas domains . in contrast to the bacillus sp., staphylococci have an oxygen-sensing two-component system  that regulates transcription of the nitrate and nitrite reductase systems  <cit> . nreb, the sensor histidine kinase portion of the two component system, uses a pas domain to coordinate binding of an oxygen-labile 2+ iron-sulfur cluster. lastly, it was shown that the number of pdc/pas proteins correlates with the presence of electron transport proteins  <cit> . bacillus sp. and staphylococcus sp. all possess active electron transport systems; hence, the difference in the number of pdc/pas proteins is unlikely to be due to the changes in electron transport. in total, these observations suggest the transition from a free-living bacterium to a host-adapted bacterium coincided with the loss of most pdc/pas proteins from the staphylococcus genus through reductive evolution.

while reductive evolution likely led to the loss of many pdc/pas proteins in staphylococci, all staphylococci in this study maintained orthologs of six pdc/pas proteins; specifically, walk , srrb, phor, arls, hsss, and gdpp. five of these proteins are members of two component signal transduction systems that are important for oxygen-sensing   <cit> , response to phosphate-limited conditions   <cit> , regulation of hemin transport   <cit> , autolysis   <cit> , and the regulation of cell wall biosynthesis   <cit> . the sixth conserved pdc/pas protein, gdpp, has recently been described as being a cyclic-di-amp phosphodiesterase that suppresses a mutation in s. aureus lipoteichoic acid biosynthesis  <cit> . importantly, these sensory proteins not only regulate physiologically essential processes, but they also influence staphylococcal virulence and antibiotic resistance  <cit> . although these six proteins are conserved in staphylococci, the evolutionary divergence of the pdc domains can be seen in staphylococci where a weakly conserved pdc-like region was identified in the ortholog of phor from s. haemolyticus and the hsss of s. lugdunensis  lacks the pdc domain.

as mentioned before, all staphylococci included in this study, with the exception of s. saprophyticus, have nreb orthologs . similarly, four additional pdc/pas proteins were identified that are present in some staphylococcus species and whose functions are unknown. s. aureus, s. epidermidis and s. pseudintermedius have a protein containing two pdc domains , s. lugdunensis has a pdc domain containing protein , and s. carnosus has two pas domain containing proteins . the two pdc domains of the or <dig> orthologs in s. aureus, s. epidermidis and s. pseudintermedius cluster in two separate clades: the “distal” pdc domains are close to the pdc domains of hsss that is involved in regulating hemin transport, while the “proximal” pdc domain forms a cluster that also contains the single pdc domain of sl. <dig> . to gain more insight into the potential functions of these proteins, the protein sequences were analyzed by gene ontology  and blastp/psi-blast similarity search. these analyses revealed both proteins as having similarities to histidine kinases with “two–component sensor activity”  and containing typical domains of histidine kinases . the possibility that both proteins are sensory histidine kinases of two component systems is supported by the presence of putative cognate response regulators adjacent to the corresponding genes. interestingly, the genes coding for the or <dig> proteins and their cognate response regulators are predicted to be co-transcribed with an upstream gene that is predicted to code for abc transporter iron-binding proteins. taken together, the genomic organization and the close phylogenetic relation of the or <dig> pdc domain with that of hsss, suggest that or <dig> may function in regulating iron homeostasis.

go analysis of the s. carnosus sc.8/yp_ <dig>   protein, which contains two pas domains, suggests it has two-component system sensor kinase activity, with some of the top blastp/psi-blast hits from bacillus sp. being an ethanolamine two-component sensor histidine kinase. consistent with this suggestion, there is a putative ethanolamine transporter  located adjacent to the genes coding for the putative two component system. the pas domain of the second pdc/pas protein of unknown function in s. carnosus  belongs to a highly supported cluster including six other single-pas containing proteins . two of the pas domains in this cluster, lc.3/yp_ <dig>  and spn.4/yp_ <dig> , are annotated as flavoproteins having oxidoreductase activity. the top hits in psi-blast for sc.9/yp_ <dig>  all have a sensory box in the c-terminus that is predicted to be a hemerythrin-binding domain. hemerythrin-binding proteins are non-heme oxygen-binding proteins that are found in marine invertebrates  and some bacteria. interestingly, in firmicutes, hemerythrin-binding proteins are primarily present in anaerobic bacteria, such as the clostridia; thus, it may be that sc.9/yp_ <dig>  is important for s. carnosus in the adaptation to an anaerobic environment.

CONCLUSIONS
bacterial evolution has led to huge variations in the number of pdc/pas proteins within all genera. several hypotheses have been put forth to explain this variation as associated with pathogen status, genome size, or the presence of electron transport proteins. undoubtedly, all of these bacterial traits contribute to variation in the number of pdc/pas proteins; however, our analysis suggests that the number of pdc/pas domains correlates to bacterial motility. this observation partially explains the selective loss of pdc/pas domains in the genus staphylococcus after its divergence from the genus bacillus.

