BACKGROUND
the maintenance of genetic polymorphism is a challenging question for evolutionary biologists because its adaptive value is controversial  <cit> . the major histocompatibility complex  contains the most variable set of genes of known function in vertebrates, and, as such, it offers a unique opportunity to test competing evolutionary hypotheses of molecular adaptation . as the system plays a crucial role in immune defence, the most important hypothesis of mhc polymorphism proposes that the selective pressure of parasites influences the population genetics of the mhc  <cit>  at the levels of both substitution rate and allelic variation. this can act either via the selective advantage of heterozygous over homozygous individuals  <cit>  or via negative frequency-dependent selection by which rare mhc alleles incur benefits against pathogen strains that evade common alleles  <cit> . accumulating evidence from wild populations that show that non-synonymous substitution rates are higher than synonymous substitutions demonstrate that the mhc underwent balancing selection  <cit> . moreover, field studies repeatedly report a link between the presence of particular alleles and individual fitness in terms of freedom from pathogens  <cit> . however, the number of alleles present in a population, may not be only influenced by parasite pressure, but may also be influenced by population size effects, gene flow, drift, bottleneck effects  <cit> .

independent of the selective pressures operating, nucleotide substitution rate and allelic variation are different phenomena, as the former defines the probability of nucleotide exchange in the dna sequence, while the latter describes the number of alleles that are preserved functioning in the population or species. hence, selection forces favouring mhc variability can affect substitution rates, which may have consequences for the accumulation of functioning alleles, but there may be various genetic mechanisms that generate new alleles. it remains difficult to elucidate the evolutionary causes and consequences of mhc polymorphism, mostly because the molecular mechanisms underlining its extreme allelic variation remain unknown. the functional part of the molecule that accomplishes peptide presentation  and displays most of the polymorphism is generally thought to be driven by pathogen-driven selective pressures  <cit> . the abs contact residues exhibit a consistently higher rate of non-synonymous than synonymous substitutions, which is generally interpreted as evidence that mutations altering amino acid sequence are being positively selected, in contrast to silent mutations  <cit> . although, the higher rate of non-synonymous over synonymous substitutions provides evidence that selection processes are operating that favour the establishment of polymorphism, such evidence does not demonstrate what the exact genetic mechanisms are. for example, it does not prove that different substitution rates at the abs contact residues are particularly favoured by parasites or that high substitution rates directly promote allelic variation, e.g. through point mutations at the abs contact residues. substitution rates may also be resulted from gene flow or bottleneck effects, while the adaptive number of alleles and antigen-specificity should not be determined exclusively by alterations at the abs contact residues. changes in amino acid sequences in the protein binding groove may affect stereochemistry, and substitution rates within the groove but outside of the contact residues may have consequences for the three-dimensional positioning of the abs contact residues  <cit> . moreover, certain regions, such as the contact region with the t-cell receptor , may also display polymorphic residues. hence, substitution at the tcr binding sites may affect the stability of mhc peptide-receptor complex and the subsequent intrathymic selection of the responding t-cell repertoire that ultimately determines antigen-specificity  <cit> . importantly, not only single codons and mutations may be involved; it should also be considered that the exchange of longer stretches of nucleotide sequences via recombinations may generate allelic polymorphism  <cit> .

although selection in space and time of specific alleles  can in theory be manifested in the accumulation of many different alleles, it is not crucial to expect that selection pressures  always enhance a tight evolutionary link between rates of nucleotide substitutions and allelic variation that is preserved at the population or species level. accordingly, it does not necessarily mean that a high substitution rate can be translated into genetic polymorphism. if individuals with specific mhc allele or allele combinations enjoy selective advantages in a given environment, the fitness benefit accrued to a certain mhc genotype may not only lead to the accumulation of alleles but a certain allele  can also undergo directional selection and fixation  <cit> . therefore, even if high substitution rate and the generation of new alleles is linked, it is not necessarily reflected by the maintenance of high allelic polymorphism that can be observed at the population level in terms of the number of alleles accumulated. furthermore, the strength of selection on a single allele depends on the presence and net effect of other alleles within individuals  <cit> . the typical distribution of mhc alleles across individuals follows haplotype polymorphism , as due to past gene duplication events, individuals can possess more than two mhc alleles of the same lineage that are sometimes linked and that can only occur in specific combinations  <cit> . hence, copy number variation and linkage can buffer or amplify the selective advantage/disadvantage of specific alleles . consequently, an entire suite of evolutionary mechanisms that operate within the mhc genome may exist, which could shape observed levels of both substitution rates and allelic polymorphism.

for a better understanding of the evolution of mhc polymorphism, studies are needed that establish a link between substitution rates and allelic variation. here, we accomplish this task and demonstrate a comprehensive analysis of exon  <dig> of the primate drb gene. the drb region exhibits the most elaborate polymorphisms in mhc class ii genes, and these have been extensively characterised in primates, due to their importance in immunological research  <cit> . based on an extensive survey of the literature, we counted the number of alleles relative to the number of animals sampled across  <dig> species, and sorted the corresponding nucleotide sequences into lineages . sequences that are derived from common ancestry in different species, that have known gene products and peptide-binding grooves that are highly similar, and that could therefore select the same peptide for t-cell activation, were considered to belong to the same lineage  <cit> . based on the available sequences within each lineage, we characterised substitution rates at different sites in each species. we predicted that if elevated rates of non-synonymous substitutions at abs contact residues generate allelic variation, there should be a positive relationship between these traits. we predicted a similar relationship for substitution rates at the non-contact residues, because substitutions or recombination events at these sites could be functionally important. we also predicted positive correlations between substitution rates at the abs contact and non-contact residues, as selection exerted by pathogens can cause the joint evolution of nucleotide substitution and recombination events.

statistically, we focused on variation within lineages, because comparisons between different heterologous or paralogous lineages may be difficult due to their incomparable function and physical position within the genome . the main question was whether if for any reason a given lineage displays a high substitution rate at the abs contact or non-contact residues, it also displays a high degree of allelic variation. therefore, we performed our analyses at the lineage level, and used a general linear model  design to control for the fact that non-independent, multiple data were used from the same species and from the same lineage. this statistical setup also allowed us to assess the importance of species-specific and lineage-specific effects. such effects, if detected, could reveal that a particular species maintains a more or less constant substitution rate across the possessed drb lineages, or that a particular lineage displays similar substitution rates in those species in which it is present. the outcome of such a complex statistical design may be difficult to interpret, and is not completely independent of phylogenetic inertia due to the evolutionary relationships between species and lineages. hence, we chose a single lineage  to demonstrate the same relationships between substitution rates and allelic polymorphism in an interspecific context, when phylogenetic effects can be held constant. additionally, we dealt with the fact that mixing data from different populations of the same species may yield systematically higher substitution rates and allelic diversity, because of population-specific selection factors that favour different mhc characteristics at each location  <cit> . to control for this unwanted within-species variation, we run additional analyses that used data from strictly single population-level studies. finally, as a contrasting analysis, the predictions about relationships between different substitution rates and allelic variation by focusing on lineages of potentially non-functional loci  were tested. if the corresponding nucleotide sequences are not translated into gene products and are thus not favoured by natural selection, one would expect that such nucleotide substitutions should be neutral. therefore, it was predicted that in such non-functioning lineages, there would be no selection for high rate of non-synonymous substitutions that could result in correlations between different substitution rates and allelic variation. in the entire set of analyses, we controlled for differences in data quality by using statistical weights. this was necessary, as different studies screened different numbers of individuals raising heterogeneity in sampling effort.

RESULTS
patterns of substitution rates
the level of non-synonymous substitution rates along the abs contact residues was on average  <dig>   substitution, range  <dig> – <dig> , n =  <dig> . the level of synonymous substitution rates at the same sites was on average  <dig>   substitution, range  <dig> – <dig> , n =  <dig>  thus, the synonymous rate was on average  <dig> % of the non-synonymous substitution rate. on the basis of sites that do not correspond to the abs contact residues of the molecule, the patterns of distribution of substitution rates showed the following figures: non-synonymous, mean ± s.e. =  <dig>  ±  <dig> , range =  <dig> – <dig> ; synonymous, mean ± s.e. =  <dig>  ±  <dig> , range =  <dig> – <dig>  . the amino acid variability  of different sites of the molecule is shown in figure  <dig> 

species- and lineage-specific effects
we found that synonymous and non-synonymous substitution rates at different sites of the primate drb molecule showed consistent within-species and within-lineage variations . this indicates that there are species that systematically display higher substitution rates than others across a list of different lineages. however, there are lineages that can be typified by their high tempo of substitution in a range of species, while others are less variable. the species-specific patterns were robust because these were apparent when we only focused on hla-orthologue lineages . nevertheless, the lineage-specific patterns may be caused by differences between the hla orthologues and non-orthologous lineages , since after the exclusion of the 'w' lineages, the systematic within-lineage variation appeared noticeably weakened .

results form one-way anova, when including all lineages and only human orthologues .

the repertoire of lineages may vary in a species-specific manner, as primates closely related to humans are more likely to have orthologous hla-drb lineages, while prosimians basically have w lineages only. as a result, species-specific and lineage-specific effects may partially overlap, and thus species-specific effects may emerge via lineage-specific roles and vice versa. therefore, we assessed the importance of these effects simultaneously in the same statistical model by using a glm design, in which one factor can be controlled as a random effect. when we estimated species-specific effects independent of lineage-specific effects, we still found that variation at the species level explains a significant amount of variation in sequence polymorphism . similar patterns emerged in the reciprocal situation, when species effects were kept constant and the independent effects of lineages were estimated . however, as we also found in the one-way anova design, these latter effects were sensitive to the exclusion of w lineages.

glm results, when including all lineages and only human orthologues 

these results imply that further analyses of substitution rates should consider species-specific and lineage-specific effects, which are applied in the following sections in addition to the control for heterogeneous sampling.

association between substitution rates at different sites
as a strong indication for positive selection, the degree of non-synonymous substitution rates at the abs contact residues was systematically higher than that of synonymous substitution rates at the same residues . the mean of the dn:ds ratio was  <dig>  . a positive correlation between dn and ds indicated that lineages that have a relatively large value for non-synonymous substitution rates also have a relatively large value for synonymous substitution rates . this may imply that selection favouring the accumulation of non-synonymous substitutions within a lineage also favours the accumulation of synonymous substitutions. however, the slope of the regression was significantly smaller than one , suggesting that a unit increase in dn is accompanied by an increase in ds that corresponds to a smaller degree of change . non-synonymous substitution rates at the abs non-contact residues were also higher than synonymous substitution rates at the same residues, but these differences were less robust . we also observed a positive relationship between dn and ds , with the slope being smaller than could be expected from an isometric relationship between the two traits .

effect sizes in the form of pearson's correlation coefficient as derived from the corresponding glm model, which included species and lineage as random effects and was weighted by sample size . all relationships are significant at the  <dig>  < p level, except *, which corresponds to p <  <dig> .

interestingly, when variation between species and lineages was held constant and the analyses was weighted by sample size that balances differences in data quality between studies, the association between substitution rates was prevalent across the abs contact and non-contact residues, and also in comparisons of substitutions of the same type . therefore, synonymous and non-synonymous substitution rates throughout the whole exon  <dig> sequence of the drb molecule seem to covary with each other at the within-lineage level. notably, these relationships were very similar when we focused on hla-orthologues lineages . the only difference observed was that synonymous substitution rates at the abs non-contact residues were higher than non-synonymous substitution rates when w lineages were excluded . the same comparison for the abs contact residues showed the opposite pattern when only human orthologues lineages were used .

substitution rates and allelic variation
if high rates of non-synonymous substitutions generate allelic variation within a given lineage, we predict a positive relationship between dn and the number of alleles relative to the number of animals sampled. accordingly, we found that the degree of non-synonymous substitutions at the abs contact residues was positively related to allelic variation estimated as a relative allele number, when we controlled for species-specific and lineage-specific effects and also for heterogeneous data quality by using statistical weights to correct for differences in sampling effort . this covariation at r ~ <dig> – <dig>  was also prevalent when w lineages were excluded, but was not significant due to the much lower sample size reducing statistical power .

we also examined the possibility that the relationship between relative allele number  and substitution rate might be mediated by an artefact caused by the sensitivity of the estimation of dn to the number of alleles screened. we selected dn estimates that were derived from analyses of exactly five sequences. this threshold of five alleles was decided based on the balance between precision and sample size, as such samples may provide dn estimates of sufficiently high precision, and are available for a number of lineages that allow statistical analyses . hence, when the number of sequences is forced to be equal, it does not inflate the estimation of substitution rates. however, the corresponding sample size in terms of the number of animals screened for the detection of these five alleles showed considerable variation, and can be used to reflect allelic variation. if many animals have been analysed to detect these five alleles, it indicates that only a few alleles are present in a large population, which is equivalent to low allelic variation. in the opposite case, if five alleles are present in only a few individuals, one may assume that there are several alleles present in a larger sample, which implies that allelic variation is high. therefore, when the number of alleles is held constant, the number of animals screened is an inverse estimate of allelic polymorphism. as such, this should correlate negatively with non-synonymous substitution rate if the latter affects allelic variation. indeed we detected such a relationship . due to the low sample size available, we were unable to deal with variation between species and lineages. however, this correlation may show that the relationship between relative allele numbers and substitution rates is unlikely to have been caused by the number of alleles analysed.

given the high degree of association across different substitution rates and across different sites , we predicted finding associations between allelic variation in terms of relative allele number and different substitution rates. these predictions were supported statistically . when w lineages were excluded comparable effect sizes emerged, but were non-significant probably due to the resulting low sample size . therefore, the exclusion of w lineages raised issues about statistical power, but the magnitude of the relationships of interest remained unaffected.

removing phylogenetic effects: comparative analyses of drb1* <dig> polymorphism across species
although employing random factors in the glm models can eliminate the problem of the use of multiple entries from the same species and lineages that would cause pseudoreplication, species  may share a phylogenetic history that can still render data points to be statistically non-independent of each other. to handle this potentially confounding effect of phylogenetic inertia, we repeated the above correlations at the interspecific level by controlling for the phylogenetic associations between species and by using the drb1* <dig> lineage. therefore, the common descent of species can be eliminated by modern comparative methods, while a strict focus on a single lineage does not require considering problems that are due to the relationship between lineages.

to perform interspecific analyses, we therefore selected the best-characterised lineage and tested the same predictions about the evolution of mhc-drb lineages across species. at least two alleles within the drb1* <dig> lineage were available in  <dig> species, for which we had information on nucleotide substitution rates . as expected, the dn at the abs contact residues was consistently higher than ds , leading to the mean of dn:ds ratio of  <dig>  . however, when focusing on the non-contact residues, we found the reverse .

similar to our earlier findings, estimates of substitution rates were strongly intercorrelated, when the phylogenetic relatedness and the heterogeneous sampling of species were controlled in an appropriate pgls model . moreover, we could confirm that the slope of the dn-ds regression line corresponding to the abs contact residues was smaller than unity . in contrast, this was not the case for the regression based on non-contact residues, which appears to be isometric .

abs: contact residues, non-abs: non-contact residues. effect sizes as estimated from the pgls model that adjusted for the phylogenetic relationships of species and used statistical weights  in a combination that offered the best fitted to the data based on maximised log-likelihood. ***: p <  <dig> ; **: p <  <dig> ; *: p <  <dig> ; † <  <dig> .

we tested for the relationship between substitution rates and allelic variation. again, we used the number of alleles relative to the number of animals sampled as an estimate of allelic polymorphism, and found that it was positively related to dn at the abs contact residues . this pattern was also seen in relation to the other substitution rates .

it has been claimed that only alleles of the drb1* <dig> lineage from humans, apes and old world monkeys are orthologous, and in new world monkeys and lesser primates all drb1* <dig> alleles are generated by convergent evolution  <cit> . however, when we applied a more narrow sense criterion for orthology and restricted our analyses to lineages from catarrhine species only, the detected patterns were very similar in terms of the magnitude of the effect detected . in general, a strict focus on the drb1* <dig> lineage in combination with statistical control for phylogenetic relationships and heterogeneous sampling of species provides very similar results as to the drb-wide analyses  that factored out variations due to species-specific and lineage-specific effects.

removing effects due to within-species variation: analyses at the population level
in previous approaches, we included data that originated from different populations. however, sampling more than one population per species may result in the detection of more alleles and higher substitution rates, simply because different populations are adapted to different environments with different mhc characteristics. to remove this confounding effect of within-species variability, we restricted our analyses to clear population level studies. however, using such a restriction caused a considerable amount of information loss and a reduction of statistical power, because only a few studies were available for this purpose .

we found  <dig> different lineages across  <dig> species that could be divided into well-characterised populations, and resulted in n =  <dig> independent data points . we calculated nucleotide substitution rates that were similar to those we obtained in the above analyses . again, the dn at the abs contact residues was consistently higher than ds , and the analogue comparison at the non-contact residues revealed the opposite tendency . we could also replicate the generally positive relationship between different estimates of substitution rates, when species-specific effects were held constant and when we controlled for differences in sample size by using statistical weights . finally, we also found a positive association between the number of alleles relative to the animals sampled and dn at the abs contact residues . these results remained qualitatively unchanged, when we excluded data from gorilla populations, in which one dominant male may father the majority of offspring that may be a confounding factor .

contrast analysis with the drb <dig> locus
the above series of analyses was repeated by using potentially non-functional nucleotide sequences. we found  <dig> different drb <dig> lineages with at least two alleles  across  <dig> species providing us with a sample size of  <dig> species-specific combinations of lineages. based on the presence of several shared characteristics  <cit> , we assumed that these sequences are non-functional. confirming this assumption, the calculated nucleotide substitution rates at the contact residues of the abs were lower than in the case of functional lineages . moreover, the dn at the abs contact and non-contact residues was not consistently higher or lower than ds at the same residues . contrary to previous results with potentially functioning drb lineages, there was no indication for a generally strong positive relationship between different estimates of substitution rates at the abs contact residues, when lineage-specific effects were held constant and when we controlled for differences in sample size by using statistical weights . finally, we found no association between the relative number of alleles and dn at the abs contact residues .

discussion
relying on the information currently available in the literature and the annotated sequences in the nhp-mhc and genbank databases, we processed a comprehensive dataset on mhc-drb allelic polymorphism and nucleotide substitution rate in primates. we collected mhc data from  <dig> scientific studies representing exactly  <dig> animals and  <dig> sequences. our aim was to determine the degree of correlation between different estimates of substitution rate and allelic polymorphism within lineages. we found that substitution rates along exon  <dig> of the mhc-drb gene vary consistently both within species and lineages. the same species appear to display similar degrees of substitution across different lineages, while the same lineage also possesses similar nucleotide variations in different species. therefore, we adopted a glm design, in which we could control for such species-specific and lineage-specific effects, and thus could focus statistically on variations between alleles, which drive polymorphism within a lineage. in addition, by using statistical weights in the analyses, the confounding effect of heterogeneous data quality arising from that different numbers of animals were screened for mhc alleles in different species was removed. these controlled analyses revealed that non-synonymous substitution rates at sites that correspond to the contact residues of the antigen-binding pocket of the translated protein were consistently higher than synonymous substitution rates at the same sites. the existence of such patterns was not so obvious at abs non-contact residues, as dn:ds ratio varied across analyses. however, it is remarkable that in all tests a strong relationship between substitution rates of different types and at different sites was observed. furthermore, different estimates of substitution rates also predicted allelic variation. additionally, we demonstrated that such relationships were present, when we focused on a single lineage  and simultaneously controlled for phylogenetic relationships of species and heterogeneous sampling by modern comparative approaches. these patterns also emerged when we restricted our analyses to population-specific data. contrary, these correlations were absent in a series of contrasting analyses, in which we focused on the well-characterized lineages of the drb <dig> pseudogene. our findings indicate that any selection factor that has consequences for the substitution rate at a given site may also have consequences for the substitution rate at another site and also for the generation of new alleles within a functional lineage. therefore, this is the first study that shows that different traits of genetic polymorphism evolve together, which has important implications for the evolutionary ecology of the mhc.

extensive sequence variation at sites where antigen recognition occurs is a typical feature of the mhc  <cit> . this indicates that balancing selection operates on this region of the genome, and that the recognition of pathogens may have played a key role in the evolution of mhc polymorphism. at the abs contact residues, almost all primate lineages with available data exhibited a dn:ds ratio greater than one , with at least a threefold difference on average between non-synonymous and synonymous substitution rates. this should be considered robust when compared to other genes, such as reproductive or metabolic genes  <cit> . sequence polymorphism at the abs contact residues have been suggested to persist over a long period, and some evolutionary constraints may have favoured each species at a certain period to maintain a set of alleles that allow diverse amino acid composition  <cit> . interestingly, selection pressures that favour a high degree of substitution rates to alter the amino acid sequence of the functionally important part of the molecule also favour substitution rates of different types at the abs non-contact residues. this joint evolutionary response in terms of the accumulation of substitutions may be a genetic mechanism that ultimately generates new alleles.

although sequence variation at the abs non-contact residues was less emphasised than at the contact residues, it showed substantial correlated variation. hence, selection factors affecting sites outside the contact residues should also accompany selection factors that generate mhc allelic variation. therefore, increased rates of non-synonymous substitutions at the abs contact residues are not the only mechanisms that result in variable sequences or/and more alleles. first, non-synonymous changes in non-contact residues may alter the contact region with the t-cell receptor, with consequences for antigen specificity  <cit> . the mhc class ii molecule per se shows, as compared to the mhc class i molecule, limited specificity and is known to be more promiscuous  <cit> . the perfect discrimination of antigens is accomplished during the maturation of the immune system, when the peptide-mhc complex is recognised by highly specific t cells. indeed, even a single change in the mhc sequences that influence receptor binding may be deleterious for recognition  <cit> . second, the results showed that not only the effect of non-synonymous substitutions but that of synonymous changes should also be considered, as such substitutions occur parallel to increasing allelic variation. variation in synonymous rates may be driven by differences in generation time or variable dna damage due to distinct metabolic rates  <cit> . as such, for an adaptive allelic variation to be maintained even at a constant non-synonymous substitution rate, species may need to decrease generation time or metabolic rate or to introduce effective error-correcting machinery. third, the accumulation of synonymous substitutions escorting the accumulation of non-synonymous substitutions may also be caused by genetic hitchhiking-like effects, whereby polymorphism at selectively natural sites tightly linked to sites experiencing strong selection may be affected  <cit> . fourth, changes in dn and ds along the molecule do not exclusively cover alterations at single codons, but they can reflect the role of intragenomic recombinations, which may involve longer nucleotide sequences  <cit> . particularly high levels of recombination may exist in mhc genes, which can be an important means of producing high allelic variation  <cit> .

in any case, the possibility that the correlation between synonymous and non-synonymous substitutions occurs because they diverged and accumulated over the same period can be excluded. the slope of the corresponding regression line was systematically different from unity , which suggests that one substitution trait increased considerably less than the other. this is in contrast to time effects that would have raised symmetrical selection pressures on different substitution rates and would have resulted in isometric correlations. moreover, our analyses focusing on the interspecific variation of drb1* <dig> variability showed that the relationships were present when we controlled for the phylogeny of species. this phylogenetic control also applies statistical control for the divergence time of species, as the used phylogenetic tree relied on estimated divergence times  <cit> .

we demonstrated that measures of sequence polymorphism vary in a species-specific manner. other studies have observed remarkable patterns of interspecific variation in mhc variability, and have suggested that these differences must be interpreted in the context of life history, demography and ecological niches of species  <cit> . in particular, pathogens have been long suspected to be responsible for maintaining allelic variation at the mhc  <cit> . for example, nematode burden is connected with distribution of mhc-drb alleles in several taxa  <cit>  including primates  <cit> . heavily parasitised species maintain more mhc alleles to function against pathogens, which can be a result of altering host-parasite cycles that favour the preservation of different alleles at varying frequency  <cit> . therefore, species-specific pressure due to disease risk may be a likely candidate that should select for allelic polymorphism and that should have consequences for nucleotide substitution rates that maintain such polymorphism. however, parasitism is not the only factor that necessitates the maintenance of allelic variation. another set of fundamental hypotheses of allelic polymorhism concerns the importance of mate choice for particular genotypes or gene combinations that enhance parasite resistance or outbreeding  <cit> . as a result, selection for increased reproductive success via advantageous mhc traits should not exclusively favour the functional  sites of the molecule but all genetic traits that lead to more alleles. as such, inbreeding avoidance can promote increased substitution rates at other parts of the molecule. however, the key evolutionary factors that shape interspecific variation in substitution rate and allelic polymorphism remain to be identified. phylogenetic comparative approaches  may offer a powerful tool to relate components of life history, sexual selection and parasitism to species-specific estimates of mhc polymorphism at different levels. our results showing consistent within-species variation may provide a starting point for such studies, as they prove that species-specific estimates make biological sense.

we also found some evidence that selection pressures may act differently on distinct lineages. most importantly, the strongest diversification appears between lineages that are orthologous and that are not orthologous with the hla lineages. we know little about the status of mhc sequences with workshop numbers, as they may involve loci/lineages for which no obvious equivalents are known in the hla system. therefore, the lineage-specific patterns may be explained by the fact that different lineages represent various loci with dissimilar functions . in any case, we statistically controlled for any noise that could arise from the between-lineage variation.

although, we processed an enormous amount of information on mhc sequence polymorphism that is currently available in the primate literature and considered several confounding factors at the analytical levels, some limitations that currently cannot be treated quantitatively warrant attention. for example, it may be that some of the primate species included in this study have experienced severe bottlenecks and, as a consequence, current levels of mhc diversity may not be the result of pathogenic selective pressures but may instead be the result of other microevolutionary forces. however, our study was not designed to specifically test the effect of parasites, but to identify correlations between mhc traits whatever the selective factor is in the background. further investigations are needed to demonstrate how selection forces due to parasites and/or other factors can contribute to the correlated evolution of substitution rate and allelic variation at the mhc. moreover, recently, it became evident that the drb genes in primates may represent relative young entities, and must have arisen from a complex series of duplications  <cit> . as a consequence, some primates may appear to have two alleles of an apparently similar locus on one chromosome. however, the exon  <dig> sequences of these genes represent old entities predating primate speciation, and during primate evolution, they are continuously sprinkled over the duplicated genes by recombination-like processes  <cit> . the identification of gene duplications and the degree of haplotype polymorphism requires the screening and genotyping a large number of animals, a criterion with which only few model species meet. detailed haplotype studies in rhesus macaques recorded only limited evidence for haplotypes harbouring drb genes with exon  <dig> sequences grouping into the same lineages  <cit> . as such the performed analysis with exon  <dig> sequences of the drb genes seems to be a legitimate approach. if more information have been gathered on the distribution of expressed alleles across individuals at the population level, the appropriate control for gene duplication will be possible.

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, we have shown that nucleotide substitution rates at exon  <dig> of the mhc-drb gene can be dependent on the species and the lineage considered. despite this, there was a clear indication that mhc allelic variation and nucleotide substitution rates follow parallel evolutionary routes. allelic variation can be achieved by mechanisms that involve regions with both abs contact and non-contact residues, and affect both synonymous and non-synonymous substitution rates. hence, if a drb lineage is selected for any reason , and such selection factors shape nucleotide substitution of any kind, it will have consequences for substitution rates at different sites, as well as on the number of alleles generated within the lineage on an evolutionary time scale and maintained at the population level. the comprehensive analysis of mhc polymorphism of primate lineages generally supports theories that concern the concerted evolution of genetic traits. further analyses are needed to identify the selection factors that are responsible for the correlated evolution of mhc traits, and to correct for potentially confounding factor of gene duplication.

