BACKGROUND
programmed cell death, or apoptosis, is a fundamental physiological process in multicellular organisms. it plays a critical role in normal development where it is required for proper morphogenesis and tissue homeostasis, as well as serving a protective mechanism against extracellular pathogenic agents  <cit> . apoptosis is also seen in pathological conditions such as when cells are deprived of survival signals. the biochemical pathway involved in apoptosis has been shown to be conserved from lower organisms, such as drosophila, to mammals. the activation of apoptosis can be elicited by numerous signalling pathways.

drosophila eye development is one of the best models for studying mechanisms of apoptosis  <cit> . the compound eye is composed of about  <dig> units called ommatidia. each ommatidium has eight photoreceptor cells and six supporting cells, all differentiated from epithelial cells in the larval eye imaginal disc  <cit> . during late pupal development, excess cells that are not recruited for differentiation are removed by apoptosis. thus, mutations which cause excessive or insufficient apoptosis will disrupt pattern formation during eye development and, consequently, the highly precise structure of the adult eye. previous work has revealed two antagonizing pathways regulating apoptosis during eye development. notch signalling is required for apoptosis  <cit> , while the egfr/ras pathway is required for cell survival  <cit> .

in drosophila, ras signalling is thought to inhibit apoptosis by antagonizing the activity of hid, which promotes apoptosis through the degradation of the drosophila inhibitor of apoptosis protein  <dig>   <cit> . as a consequence of ras signalling, not only is hid expression reduced, but the hid protein itself is phosphorylated and becomes inactivated  <cit> . interestingly, although ubiquitous expression of a dominant active form of ras could inhibit a majority of cell death that occurs normally in the fly embryo, cell death is not completely eliminated even in embryos mutant for a hid null allele  <cit> . this observation suggests the possibility of a hid-independent pathway regulating apoptosis, which can be suppressed through other means besides ras. one of the candidate signals is the pi3k/akt pathway, which has been shown to regulate apoptosis in mammals and to be a major downstream target of activated ras  <cit> . however, so far there is no evidence to support this hypothesis in drosophila.

c-jun n-terminal protein kinase  signaling is involved in the regulation of morphogenesis, cell proliferation, cell differentiation, cell migration, and apoptosis, including tumor progression and metastasis  <cit> . in the fly, jnk-induced apoptosis has an important role in the morphogenesis of the wing imaginal disc during development  <cit> . during eye development, the overexpression of eiger, the drosophila homolog of mammalian tnf, triggers jnk signaling causing the loss of eye tissue as a result of excessive apoptosis  <cit> . cross-talks have been found between the ras/mapk and jnk pathways in regulating cell survival and apoptosis  <cit> . in cultured mammalian cells, raf- <dig> has been shown to promote cell survival by antagonizing ask <dig>  <cit> , a jnk activator  <cit> .

here we report the isolation of a new loss-of-function ras allele, raskp, which causes excessive apoptosis in the drosophila eye. our analysis shows that, in addition to hid, jnk pathway plays a significant role in mediating cell death in the eye and is antagonized by ras antiapoptotic activity. in contrast to its effect in the eye, we also show that ras regulates organ size in the developing wing by affecting cell size, indicating the developmental output of ras signalling is highly context-dependent.

RESULTS
a new loss-of-function ras allele affects ras expression level
we isolated a spontaneous recessive mutation which causes a reduction of body size in the adult flies . although about 60% of the mutant homozygotes die at the pupal stage , there are a small percentage of escapers that survive. viable mutant females, however, are found to be partial sterile.

by meiotic recombination and deficiency mapping, we localize the mutation to the cytological position 85d19- <dig> on the third chromosome, which spans a 50-kb region containing  <dig> genes  . pcr amplification and sequencing of exon sequences of these genes from mutant animals reveal a 1165-bp kp element insertion in the second exon  of the ras <dig> gene  . quantitative pcr  showed ras mrna level was significantly reduced  in homozygous mutant larvae  and adults . complementation tests of the mutation with four known ras loss-of-function alleles, rasd38n  <cit> , ras85delb  <cit> , rasΔc40b, and ras Δc17b  <cit> , failed to rescue ras dependent lethality. these results suggest that the mutation is a partial loss-of-function ras allele. this is further supported by the rescue of the mutant phenotype by ubiquitous expression of wild-type ras driven by act-gal <dig> . thus, we named this new mutation as raskp.

raskp mutation reduces wing size mainly by affecting cell size
although there are no obvious differences in body size between raskp mutant and wild-type larvae , survived mutant adult flies show a significant body weight reduction . homozygous mutants also have a  <dig> % reduction in wing size owing to a decrease in cell size and not cell number .

loss of ras function causes apoptosis in the drosophila eye
during drosophila eye development, ras contributes positively to the regulation of cell growth  <cit>  and cell differentiation  <cit> , but negatively to the regulation of apoptosis  <cit> . such diverse biological effects are thought to be achieved through different levels of ras activity  <cit> . raskp homozygous mutants have small and rough eyes . to determine the developmental basis of the phenotype, we compare the growth of third instar larval eye imaginal discs of raskp mutant and wild-type. both were of similar sizes , suggesting that growth was unlikely to be the major reason for the small eye in the mutant adult. neuronal differentiation in the eye discs, as revealed by anti-elav antibody staining  <cit> , do occur in raskp third instar larvae . however, sections of the adult mutant eyes indicate ommatidia are largely disorganized though the majority of them with correct number of out photoreceptor cells and missing the r <dig> photoreceptor cells , indicating that differentiation is affected. acridine orange staining in eye discs of the third instar larvae reveals a substantially increased number of dying cells in mutant animals . cell death occurs mainly in two regions, a band anterior to the morphogenetic furrow  and a broad region in the posterior part of the eye disc. these results indicate that the rough and small eye phenotype is caused mainly by abnormal apoptosis in the raskp mutant.

apoptosis in raskp mutant is partially suppressed by disrupting hid activity
in drosophila, ras has been shown to promote cell survival by both down regulating hid expression and inactivating hid protein through phosphorylation  <cit> . in order to test whether raskp-induced apoptosis in the eye is mediated by hid, we completely removed hid function by using a null allele in a raskp mutant and see if it could suppress the small eye phenotype. we would expect a strong suppression if, indeed, ras acts solely on hid to promote cell survival. however, as shown in figure 4c, there is only a marginal suppression as compared to raskp mutant alone . consistent with this result, the expression of the baculovirus caspase inhibitor p <dig>  which has been shown to completely block hid-induced apoptosis  <cit> , also only partially suppresses the small eye phenotype of raskp mutant flies . when assayed for cell death in the eye discs of gmr-p35; raskp larvae by staining with acridine orange, many apoptotic cells are still observed posterior to the mf . the data suggests that raskp-induced cell death is mediated by additional apoptotic pathway independent of hid function.

inhibiting the jnk pathway appreciably suppresses raskp-induced apoptosis
to reveal which pathway mediates anti-apoptosis signalling from ras, we tested for genetic interaction between ras and components of several major signalling pathways involved in growth and survival. one prominent candidate is pi3k which has been shown to be a critical effector of ras in providing an universal survival signal in mammals  <cit> . pi3k activates akt which further phosphorylates a number of substrates involved in the regulation of apoptosis  <cit> . in the fly, there is also evidence to suggest that the activation of the pi3-k/akt pathway has antiapoptotic activity during embryonic development  <cit> . to address whether pi3k/akt activation can rescue the raskp-induced cell death, we expressed p <dig>  which encodes pi3k, or akt in raskp mutant flies. as shown in figure 4d and 4e, gmr-driven expression of pi3k or akt cannot significantly suppress the raskp small eye phenotype. thus, ras is not likely to transduce the survival signal through pi3-k/akt in the drosophila eye. we tested another candidate antiapoptotic pathway, which utilizes a drosophila bcl-2-like protein encoded by the buffy gene  <cit> . in mammals, the bcl- <dig> protein prevents the release of cytochrome c from mitochondria, and consequently inhibits the formation of the apaf- <dig> apoptosome  <cit> . as with pi3k/akt, the overexpression of buffy also cannot suppress the apoptotic eye phenotype of raskp .

in drosophila, the erk pathway has been shown to serve as a survival signal that antagonizes jnk signaling from inducing apoptosis  <cit> . thus, it follows that, being an upstream activator of erk, ras antiapoptotic activity may lie in its ability to inhibit jnk signaling. to address this possibility, we ask whether the raskp mutant phenotype can be suppressed by the loss of jnk signalling. we take the approach of using rna interference  to down regulate the expression of genes involved in jnk signalling in the raskp mutant. these genes include dtraf <dig> and dtraf <dig> , hep , and dtak <dig> . the reduction of jnk signalling through any of these genes significantly suppresses the apoptotic phenotype of raskp . the genetic interaction is specific for the raskp allele since the expression of these rnai constructs by themselves has no phenotypic consequences. in addition to these results, the overexpression a dominant-negative form of drosophila jnk, bskdn, also slightly suppresses the apoptosis caused by raskp . the activation of the jnk pathway can be achieved by the binding of eiger to wengen, which encode, respectively, the mammalian homologs of the tumor necrosis factor tnf and its receptor tnfr  <cit> . we find that rnai downregulation of eiger or wengen also partially rescues the apoptotic eye phenotype of the raskp mutant . as with the regulation of hid activity by ras, we ask if jnk activity is also affected. when eye discs from raskp mutant are stained with an anti-phosphorylated jnk, there is indeed a significant increase in jnk activity . these data are consistent with the notion that ras could down regulate jnk activity to inhibit apoptosis.

jnk and hid signalling cooperate in raskp-induced cell death
since the reduction of either hid or jnk activity alone can have only a marginal or partial suppression of the raskp-induced cell death, it raises the possibility that both jnk and hid activities could cooperate to fully induce the apoptosis associated with raskp. to address this hypothesis, we simultaneously reduce both hid and jnk activities in the raskp eye by co-expression of both p <dig> to block hid-dependent cell death and rnai downregulation of jnk signalling. indeed, the reduction of both hid and jnk activity strongly suppresses the raskp eye phenotype as compared to the suppression by each alone . the suppression was specific to raskpsince the reduction of both activities together in a wild-type background has no phenotypic effect on the eye . the phenotypic eye suppression is further corroborated by the almost complete absence of dying cells in the posterior region of the eye imaginal discs as detected by acridine orange staining . however, due to the restricted expression pattern of the gmr promoter to only postmitotic cells, apoptotic cells anterior to the mf are not affected. it is possible that expression of p <dig> don't completely block hid-dependent apoptosis. we thus further show that when jnk signalling is down regulated in the raskp, hidnull double mutant background, the apoptotic eye phenotype is also strongly suppressed . these data indicate that ras could inhibit both hid and jnk-mediated apoptosis.

discussion
in this report, we present the genetic evidence that ras could antagonize jnk signaling, in addition to hid, to promote cell survival in the developing drosophila eye. both the genetic interaction and the upregulation of jnk activity in the raskp mutant support the view that jnk pathway serves as a target of ras antiapoptotic activity. raskp-induced apoptosis in fly eye is significantly suppressed by down regulating jnk pathway components using an rnai strategy. we further stained the raskp eye disc with an anti-phospho-jnk antibody and found jnk phosphorylation was increased, which is consistent with the notion that jnk signaling is activated in raskp eye disc.

previous work has suggested that the jnk pathway control cell death by regulating hid expression  <cit> . this notion implies that the impact of ras signaling on the jnk pathway might also converge on hid activity. in raskp, hidnull double mutant flies with downregulated jnk signaling, the suppression of the apoptotic eye phenotype is much stronger than the suppression when either jnk pathway or hid activity is inhibited alone. these results indicate that the two pathways have separate effects on cell survival, and that ras inhibition of jnk-mediated cell death is in part hid-independent.

previous work has shown that the forced activation of jnk signaling in the developing eye disc can cause widespread cell death  <cit> . however, the normal physiological role of jnk signaling during development is still not clear. the isolation of the raskp allele has permitted us to examine the role of jnk signaling when it is activated in cells that are deprived of the ras/mapk survival signal leading to the induction of apoptosis. studies using this new loss-of-function ras allele will provide further insight into how ras regulates jnk signaling.

CONCLUSIONS
ras is known to mediate antiapoptotic signals by inhibiting hid activity in the drosophila eye. here we analyze a new ras loss-of-function allele, raskp, which reveals an additional target independent of hid in the regulation of apoptosis. this new function is likely to be mediated through the jnk pathway since the inhibition of jnk signaling can significantly suppress raskp-induced apoptosis, whereas the removal of hid only weakly suppresses the phenotype. however, the reduction of jnk signaling together with the expression of the baculovirus caspase inhibitor p <dig>  which blocks hid activity, strongly suppresses the raskp cell death. in addition, we find a strong correlation between raskp-induced apoptosis in the eye disc and the activation of jnk signaling. thus, in the drosophila eye, ras may protect cells from apoptosis by inhibiting both jnk and hid activities. surprisingly, reducing ras activity in the wing, however, does not cause apoptosis but rather affects cell and organ size. thus, in addition to its requirement for cell viability, ras appears to mediate different biological roles depending on the developmental context and on the level of its expression.

