BACKGROUND
the postnatal development of visual cortex is guided by visual experience during early postnatal life. the clearest example of such environmental effects on visual cortical development is monocular deprivation, a condition that leads to dramatic anatomical and physiological abnormalities  <cit> . in normal development, sensitivity to monocular deprivation is limited to a "critical period," which in cats, begins several weeks after birth, peaks at about 5- <dig> weeks, gradually declines to low levels at  <dig> months and disappears at about  <dig> year of age  <cit> . mice show a similar critical period for monocular deprivation but with a shorter time course  <cit> .

rearing in total darkness from birth maintains many properties of the neonatal visual cortex in cats  <cit>  and mice  <cit> . thus, visual cortical neurons of dark reared animals show reduced responsiveness, enhanced response habituation and reduced selectivity for the orientation and direction of movement of a visual stimulus compared to age matched normally reared animals. when subsequently exposed to the visual environment, normal neuronal response properties emerge and more importantly, dark rearing also extends the critical period for effects of monocular deprivation far beyond its normal age limit in both cats  <cit>  and mice  <cit> . electrophysiological results indicate that the effect of dark rearing is to slow the time course of the entire critical period. at young ages  normal animals are more plastic than dark reared, while at later ages  dark reared animals are more plastic  <cit> . thus, a stringent criterion for identifying genes that control plasticity in visual cortex is that they show opposite direction differences in their levels of expression between normal and dark rearing in young versus older animals.

we have completed a differential display pcr  screen of visual cortex of normal and dark reared cats at  <dig> and  <dig> weeks to identify such candidate plasticity genes. northern and western blots were used to verify opposite direction effects of dark rearing in young versus older cats and mice. we have repeatedly found two patterns of differential expression in cat and mouse visual cortex. one pattern   <cit>  is an elevation in normal animals at the peak of the critical period  and an elevation in dark reared animals at the nadir of the normal critical period . this pattern could represent genes that activate plasticity mechanisms. the other pattern is the opposite: elevation in dark reared animals at the peak of the normal critical period and elevation in normal animals at its nadir   <cit>  and could represent plasticity repressor genes.

here we report the identification of another novel gene, α-chimaerin, as a candidate visual cortex critical period plasticity gene. there are two alternatively-spliced α-chimaerin transcript variants, α <dig> and α <dig>  both isoforms are expressed in postnatal and adult brain but only α <dig> in embryonic brain  <cit> . chimaerins have been implicated in axonal guidance and nmda dependent dendritic spine regulation  <cit> . both isoforms showed elevated expression in dark reared animals at the peak of the normal critical period and elevation in normal animals at the nadir of the critical period.

RESULTS
identification of α-chimaerin as a candidate plasticity gene in cat visual cortex
sequencing was done to establish the identity of the bidirectionally regulated gene. the  <dig> bp ddpcr fragment showed 91% identity with the 3' end of human α-chimaerin. 5' race was done to extend the sequence to  <dig> bases of the cat gene  which included the complete coding region. blast search of the coding region indicated 98% identity to the human chimaerin gene on chromosome  <dig> 

bidirectional regulation of α-chimaerin protein in cat and mouse visual cortex
to extend the mrna results to protein, western blots in cat and mouse visual cortex were done. as shown in figure 1c, the antibodies developed as described in materials and methods to the two isoforms of α-chimaerin  each labeled a single band of appropriate size . α1-chimaerin was expressed in visual cortex, frontal cortex and cerebellum. α2-chimaerin was expressed in the two neocortical structures but not detected in cerebellum. these regional differences in expression between the two protein isoforms match the regional differences in their mrna expression  <cit>  further confirming the specificity of the antibodies.

bidirectional regulation of α-chimaerin protein expression is not found in frontal cortex
an important issue is whether the bidirectional regulation of α-chimaerin is specific to visual cortex and not a generalized phenomenon throughout the brain. if α-chimaerin is important for visual cortical plasticity, bidirectional regulation of its expression by age and dark rearing should be specific to or elevated in visual cortex. to answer this, we determined the effects of age and dark rearing on protein expression of both isoforms in mouse frontal cortex, as shown in figure  <dig>  levels of α-chimaerin isoform expression were similar in all rearing/age conditions. densitometric analysis on three independent groups of mice indicated no statistically significant effects for either isoform in frontal cortex. bidirectional regulation of α-chimaerin expression due to age and dark rearing was not a generalized effect throughout neocortex.

discussion
current findings
the present ddpcr gene screening identified a novel candidate gene, α-chimaerin, as a candidate for a role in critical period neuroplasticity of the cat visual cortex. western blot analysis confirmed that both α1- and α2-chimaerin proteins showed similar bidirectional regulation due to age and dark rearing in cat and mouse visual cortex and that this effect did not occur in frontal cortex. these combined results implicate both α-chimaerin isoforms as candidate molecules for neuronal plasticity during the visual cortical critical period. the pattern of bidirectional regulation shown by α-chimaerins was opposite to that shown by physiological plasticity  <cit> . like munc13- <dig>  <cit> , α-chimaerin showed elevation in dark reared compared to normal animals at the peak of the normal critical period and elevation in normal compare to dark reared at the nadir. genes that show this pattern could represent repressors of visual cortical plasticity. the present results provide the scientific basis for functional analyses of the effects of chimaerin gene mutation on visual cortical plasticity.

relation to previous gene screening studies
a growing number of gene screening studies have investigated postnatal age changes in gene expression or have manipulated neuronal activity levels to identify candidate neuronal plasticity genes. these approaches have yielded important information on a number of genes  <cit>  that are responsive to visual input, developmentally regulated during the critical period, and/or involved in structural and functional plastic responses . all of these approaches confound changes in neuronal activity and changes in neuronal plasticity. the present bidirectional screen, based on the effects of age and dark rearing on physiologically assessed visual cortical plasticity, provides a promising alternative approach that more directly focuses on neuronal plasticity. bidirectional regulation of gene expression is difficult to explain in terms of neuronal activity level. dark rearing reduces the responsiveness of visual cortical neurons in both young and older cats  <cit> . spontaneous activity is lower in young dark-reared animals and comparable in older dark-reared animals  <cit> . therefore, the overall level of activity  in light-reared animals is higher than in dark-reared animals at all ages. if the expression of a gene reflected only neuronal activity level, it would be expected that dark rearing would have the same effect in both young and old animals and not show bidirectional regulation.

α-chimaerin in neuronal development and plasticity
the two isoforms of α-chimaerin, α <dig> and α <dig>  are alternatively spliced products of a single gene. both isoforms are expressed in postnatal and adult brain; only α <dig> in embryonic brain  <cit> . chimaerins are rhogtpase-activating proteins  which activate or inactivate signaling pathways depending upon whether they are bound to gtp or gdp. the functions of chimaerins in the nervous system are just beginning to be understood  <cit> . recently convergent evidence from three laboratories  <cit>  implicated α2-chimaerin as an essential mediator of ephrinb3/epha4-dependent motor circuit formation. mutations of ephrinb <dig>  epha <dig> or α2-chimaerin produce a characteristic hopping rabbit like gait. this gait is due to a failure of α2-chimaerin mediated ephrin <dig> axonal guidance cues, resulting in bilateral corticospinal projections.

α2-chimaerin has also been implicated in semaphorin induced growth cone collapse  <cit> . the interaction of chimaerins with semaphorin raises another possible mechanism by which age/dark rearing and their regulation of α2-chimaerin could regulate neuronal plasticity. semaphorins are also critical factors in angiogenesis  <cit> . in addition to its well documented effects on visual cortical neuronal function, dark rearing also affects astrocytes  <cit>  and vasculature  <cit> . thus, the entire neuronal-glial-vasculature network could be involved in the contribution of chimaerin to neuronal plasticity. this concept is central to the brain/cognitive reserve hypothesis which has been proposed to explain neuronal plasticity induced by pathology or trauma  <cit> .

α1-chimaerin has been implicated in regulation of in dendrites and spines. increased expression of α1-chimaerin expression results in pruning and suppression of α1-chimaerin in expansion of dendritic spines and branches  <cit> . α1-chimaerin is present in dendrites and spines, where it binds to the nmda receptor nr2a subunit and the ability of α1-chimaerin to modulate dendritic spines is dependent upon an interaction with the nmda receptor  <cit> . α-chimaerins are promising newly identified players in axonal development and synaptic plasticity. the present results extend this evidence by implicating α- chimaerins as candidate molecules for a role in postnatal critical period plasticity of visual cortex.

CONCLUSIONS
the present results identify α-chimaerin as a candidate molecule for a role in the postnatal critical period of visual cortical plasticity. electrophysiological results had shown that dark rearing slows the entire time course of this critical period, such that at  <dig> weeks of age, normal cats are more plastic than dark reared cats, whereas at  <dig> weeks, dark reared cats are more plastic. ddpcr, northern blotting and sequencing identified a novel gene, α1-chimaerin, as a candidate visual cortex critical period plasticity gene that showed such bidirectional regulation of expression due to age and dark rearing. western blotting extended the evidence for bidirectional regulation of expression of both visual cortical α-chimaerin isoforms to protein in cats and mice. α1- and α2-chimaerin were elevated in dark reared compared to normal visual cortex at the peak of the normal critical period and in normal compared to dark reared visual cortex at the nadir of the normal critical period. genes that show this pattern could represent repressors of visual cortical plasticity. the present results provide the scientific basis for functional analyses of the effects of chimaerin gene mutation on visual cortical plasticity.

