BACKGROUND
the sulfur atom of methionine residues is susceptible to oxidation by reactive oxygen species. oxidation of methionines may affect protein structure and function and has been implicated in various processes, such as oxidative stress, accelerated aging, and neurodegenerative diseases . this oxidation generates a diastereomeric mixture of methionine-s-sulfoxide and methionine-r-sulfoxide. in contrast to irreversible protein oxidation, such as carbonylation, methionine sulfoxide can be reversibly reduced back to methionine by repair enzymes, methionine sulfoxide reductases. there are two known classes of these enzymes: msra  and msrb . although the catalytic mechanisms for msra and msrb are similar, these enzymes have different folds.

most organisms from bacteria to humans encode msra and msrb genes in their genomes, however, some hyperthermophiles lack msra, msrb, or both genes  <cit> . msra and msrb genes in several bacterial species are clustered with each other and appear to form an operon. in addition, msra and msrb proteins are often linked to each other via direct domain fusion  <cit> . single msra and msrb genes are present in yeast  and many other species   <cit> . on the other hand, multiple genes of msra and msrb have been found in members of the plant kingdom, arabidopsis thaliana  <cit>  and chlamydomonas reinhardtii  <cit> .

human and mouse genomes contain one msra and three msrb genes  <cit> . the three mammalian msrb products are located in different cellular compartments  <cit> . msrb <dig>  is a cytosolic and nuclear protein. msrb <dig>  is targeted to mitochondria. human msrb <dig> gives rise to two forms generated by alternative first exon splicing, which are targeted to the endoplasmic reticulum  and mitochondria  <cit> , whereas there is no evidence for alternative first exon splicing in the mouse msrb <dig> gene  <cit> . although only a single msra gene is found in mammals  <cit> , the corresponding protein is localized in both cytosol and mitochondria  <cit> . recently, we reported that the mouse msra containing the n-terminal mitochondrial signal peptide is targeted to cytosol, nucleus, and mitochondria  <cit> .

alternative splicing is viewed as a major mechanism responsible for multiplicity of protein forms in higher eukaryotes  <cit> . herein, we have found and characterized a new splice form of msra in mouse and human. we also report on alternative splicing of msra and msrb genes in insects. our data are consistent with the idea that alternative splicing is a conserved mechanism to regulate subcellular distribution of methionine sulfoxide reductases in mammals and other animals.

RESULTS
alternative splicing variants of human and mouse msra
as indicated in the background, only a single msra gene is present in human, mouse, and rat genomes. the 374-kb human and 317-kb mouse msra genes consist of  <dig> exons, which generate a previously known form of the enzyme. this msra form contains an n-terminal mitochondrial signal peptide . however, its subcellular location is complex. in addition to mitochondria, this protein is localized in cytosol and nucleus  <cit> . to identify whether additional msra forms are present in humans and mice, non-redundant and est sequence databases were searched using the known msra sequences and the identified cdnas were mapped on the genomic sequences. several alternatively spliced variants were detected in both humans and mice. the most relevant alternative spliced form was generated by alternative first exon splicing . it was mostly found in brain ests, especially in early developmental stages . this alternative variant of mouse msra had an orf of  <dig> residues , of which residues 5– <dig> corresponded to residues 47– <dig> of the mitochondrial msra form . this form was designated as msra. additional alternative forms were also detected, but these were likely enzymatically inactive. for example, an alternative form devoid of exon  <dig> was identified . however, this form lacked the active site and it was not detected  in several mouse tissues tested and in mouse fibroblast nih 3t <dig> cells by western blot analyses . an additional alternative form has also been detected, in which exon  <dig>  the last exon, was replaced with a segment of an unknown gene . this form shared the first exon with the mitochondrial msra form, but it is likely catalytically inactive due to lack of the last exon which contains two cysteine residues critical for catalysis. other detected forms contained just some of the msra exons.

msra is enzymatically active and localized in cytosol and nucleus
we prepared a recombinant msra form and characterized its catalytic activity. in parallel, we measured the activity of the mitochondrial msra form for comparison. the specific activity of msra was  <dig> ±  <dig> nmol/min/mg protein, which is 3-fold lower than that of the mitochondrial msra . the km value of msra was  <dig>  ±  <dig>  mm, which is 4-fold higher than that of the mitochondrial msra . to characterize subcellular localization of msra in mammalian cells, we generated an expression construct containing a full-length msra. the construct, pmsraΔgfp, was transfected into cv- <dig> cells, and msra location was determined by immunofluorescence using polyclonal msra antibodies. as shown in figure  <dig>  the protein was located in cytosol and nucleus. the presence of msra in these compartments was also confirmed by transfecting cells with a gfp-fusion construct, pmsra-gfp.

previously, we demonstrated that msra derived from the protein form containing the mitochondrial signal peptide is localized in cytosol and nucleus as well as in mitochondria and proposed that the subcellular localization of msra is controlled on a post-translational level  <cit> . to test whether msra can be detected in mouse tissues, we carried out western blot analyses. based on size comparison with bacterially-expressed his-tagged mitochondrial msra and msra that served as internal controls, we did not detect the msra form in any of the mouse tissues tested  . however, the msra with the higher molecular weight  was easily detected in cytosol and mitochondria of these tissues. as described previously  <cit> , the cytosolic form was slightly smaller than the form found in mitochondria, but both of them were larger than the recombinant msra. it is likely that the expression level of msra is too low to be detected or this form occurs in tissues not tested in the current study. however, this form is clearly detectable in est databases in various organisms. in addition, a recent review by hansel et al.  <cit>  stated that an alternative form of msra mrna was detected by rt-pcr in human hek  <dig> embryonic kidney cells.

alternative splicing forms of msra and msrb in drosophila
single msra and msrb genes were identified by blast searches in d. melanogaster. known msra  and msrb  proteins are thought to be represented by cytosolic forms  <cit> . we searched for possible additional forms of these proteins in est and cdna sequence databases and identified an alternative splicing variant of msra  and msrb . these forms were generated by alternative first exon splicing. they contained a predicted mitochondrial signal peptide at the n-terminus  and were predicted to be mitochondrial proteins. the genomic structure consisting of  <dig> exons and the alternative splicing pattern of msra were similar to those of msrb . however, as shown in deduced amino acid sequences , the translation initiation codon of the cytosolic msrb was located in exon  <dig> 

we suggest that the two alternatively spliced forms of d. melanogaster msra and msrb repair oxidized methionine residues in the cytosol and mitochondria, which are the locations that correspond to the occurrences of mammalian msra and msrb in these compartments. we also analyzed additional insect sequences and found that the alternative d. melanogaster forms are conserved in d. yakuba and d. pseudoobscura. in addition, the predicted cytosolic and mitochondrial forms of msra were represented by glossina est sequences. although further studies on the expression levels of msra and occurrence of this protein form in various mouse tissues require more sensitive assays that are currently not available , it seems remarkable that the same mechanism is used to regulate subcellular distribution of msra in such different organisms as fruit flies and mammals, and that in each case, cytosolic and mitochondrial forms are synthesized.

CONCLUSIONS
this study shows that in some animals alternative splicing is a common mechanism to regulate subcellular distribution of methionine sulfoxide reductases, allowing targeting the system for repair of oxidized methionine residues to different compartments.

