BACKGROUND
understanding how genes are regulated within neural networks to produce and modify behavior is a major goal in neuroscience and behavioral genetics. one strategy for achieving this objective is to use model systems for identifying changing patterns of gene expression under different behavioral states. exemplars include circadian rhythms in flies and mice e.g., , alternative foraging and aggressive behavioral states of honey bees e.g.,  <cit> , and vocal-acoustic systems of songbirds e.g.,  <cit> . here, we used transcriptome analyses to investigate the genetic underpinnings of reproductive state- and steroid-dependent plasticity in auditory sensitivity of a teleost fish, the midshipman.

midshipman hearing is an excellent model of neural plasticity for several reasons. first, midshipman exhibit reproductive state-dependent behavioral responses to playback of advertisement calls  <cit> . second, these behavioral changes are paralleled by concurrent changes in peripheral auditory sensitivity, both at the level of hair cells and eighth nerve, ganglion cell afferents, especially for the advertisement call's upper harmonics . third, auditory hair cell plasticity can be explained, in part, by changes in the abundance of ion channels that underlie frequency tuning  <cit> . fourth, reproductive state-dependent variation in eighth nerve encoding of frequency is steroid-dependent  <cit> , providing a model for steroid-sensitive hearing variation in humans, in which age-related auditory deficits in post-menopausal woman can be ameliorated with estrogen therapy  <cit> . fifth, the ease of collecting and housing midshipman fish in captivity facilitates downstream testing of identified candidate genes in a wild population of vertebrates.

to date, we have successfully employed hypothesis-driven approaches to identify neuro-molecular mechanisms of seasonal variation in peripheral auditory function, namely in the hair cell epithelium and eighth nerve afferents of the saccule, the main auditory division of the inner ear in many teleost fish including midshipman  <cit> . this has included examining the function, location, and abundance of ion channels and steroid receptors in the auditory periphery  <cit> . neurophysiological studies show that either estrogen or testosterone can transform the frequency sensitivity of the saccular afferents of non-reproductive animals to that of summer animals  <cit> . aromatase  and estrogen receptors are expressed within ganglion cells and the hair cell saccular epithelium, respectively  <cit> , indicating that steroids can act directly within the peripheral auditory system. neurophysiology combined with pharmacology, quantitative reverse-transcriptase pcr, and immunohistochemistry also indicates that large-conductance potassium  channel expression in saccular hair cells plays a key role in regulating the observed seasonal plasticity in auditory sensitivity  <cit> .

though our hypothesis-driven approach has been fruitful, it provides a limited view of the cascade of events underlying steroid-dependent, seasonal auditory plasticity. advances in next-generation sequencing and high-throughput analyses can provide a global view of gene expression. here, we use transcriptome sequencing to uncover seasonal and reproductive state-dependent differences in transcript abundances within the auditory saccular epithelium. we identified a suite of candidate genes and pathways with known auditory function in midshipman fish, and vertebrates in general, that likely underlie seasonal and reproductive state-dependent variation in hearing. the results have been reported, in part, in abstract form  <cit> .

RESULTS
transcriptome characterization
midshipman have two male reproductive morphs; we used type i males here because they are the most abundant during collections and have the most dynamic vocal repertoire  <cit> . given the lack of sex  <cit>  and male morph  <cit>  differences in auditory hair cell physiology, the use of only type i males should not impact our results. here, we focus on the subset of transcriptome sequences from the auditory saccular epithelium  of reproductive  and non-reproductive  type i males that were previously used for physiological examination of auditory sensitivity  <cit> .

we sequenced and annotated transcriptome libraries produced from the se, along with libraries derived from the vocal motor nuclei  and the hindbrain region surrounding the vmn. the vmn and hindbrain samples were used for a comprehensive companion study that identified daily and seasonal variation in gene expression patterns in the vmn, the final node of the vocal control network that sends a command signal to the vocal muscles  <cit> . in that study, the rna-seq determined expression patterns of  <dig> genes were validated using quantitative pcr, showing a strong correlation between the two measures of transcript abundance  <cit> .

we obtained approximately  <dig> million total paired-end reads; over  <dig> million reads were produced from each pooled se sample . using the trinity software package  we assembled all the reads together into a final set of  <dig>  unique transcripts  after filtering for quality of reads and of assembled transcripts  <cit> . the final transcriptome assembly, reported in our companion study  <cit> , had a mean length of  <dig>  ±  <dig>  bp  with  <dig>  genes  across brain and se samples. the assembled transcriptome is available on the ncbi transcriptome shotgun assembly and sequence read archive databases under bioproject accession number prjna <dig>  using blast2go, we found significant annotation hits for  <dig>   of our assembled transcripts, with most top blast hits being to teleost fish . mapping individual reads back to the assembled transcriptome and comparing fpkm  values showed that most transcripts were expressed  in all examined tissue types, though the se possessed the largest number of tissue-specific transcripts that had no expression  in either vmn or hindbrain . this likely reflects the different developmental trajectory and cell types of the inner ear  relative to the vmn and hindbrain  .table  <dig> number of saccular epithelium reads by reproductive state before and after quality filtering

fig.  <dig> common and unique transcripts among tissues. the venn diagram illustrates the common and unique transcripts across saccular hair cell epithelium , vmn, and hindbrain tissues  <cit> . most transcripts were shared among all tissues, while se had the largest number of unique transcripts, consistent with their unique  tissue type



reproductive-state specific expression
we first examined top expressed transcripts and pathways in reproductive and non-reproductive se, regardless of differential expression. for transcripts with significant blast2go annotations,  <dig> of the top  <dig> most highly expressed transcript annotations were common to both reproductive and non-reproductive se although they varied in expression levels . four of the top  <dig> most abundant transcripts in the reproductive se encode ribosomal proteins, while only one of those in the non-reproductive se encodes a ribosomal protein. the translationally controlled tumor protein , which functions to prevent cell death  <cit> , was among the most abundant transcripts in the reproductive se and may play a role in the increased hair cell numbers previously reported in the reproductive se  <cit> .table  <dig> top  <dig> most highly expressed annotated saccular epithelium transcripts



we also identified the top  <dig> kegg  pathways based on the number of annotated transcripts that mapped to each pathway for reproductive and non-reproductive se . it is noteworthy that each of the top kegg pathways for the reproductive se are represented by far more transcripts, on average, than the top non-reproductive kegg pathways. this may have resulted, in part, from completely "turning off" more complex pathways in the non-reproductive se and/or decreased transcription of certain genes. for example, among the highly represented kegg pathways in reproductive se were processes involved in cellular respiration, including oxidative phosphorylation, glycolysis, tca cycle, and pyruvate metabolism. while cellular respiration unquestionably occurs in the se throughout the entire year to support year-round hearing  <cit> , the reduced transcript representation of these cellular respiration kegg pathways in non-reproductive se suggests a higher energetic demand in the reproductive state that corresponds to greater se auditory sensitivity  <cit> .table  <dig> top  <dig> kegg pathways in the saccular epithelium by number of transcripts



we examined the differential regulation of gene expression in the se across reproductive states by performing differential expression analyses of genes  and transcripts . we compared transcript abundances across all the se, vmn and surrounding hindbrain tissue groups using a false discovery rate  threshold of  <dig>  and a minimum four-fold differential abundance cutoff . based on pairwise comparisons of differential transcript abundances, the samples were more similar between time points for a single tissue type than between tissues. furthermore, in all tissue types, transcript isoforms showed greater differential expression than gene components across time points, suggesting that variation across seasons was determined more by differential splicing than by turning the expression of a given gene on or off. the substantial expression change parallels the observed neurophysiological change in se auditory sensitivity between reproductive and non-reproductive individuals  <cit> . furthermore, the se showed higher seasonal differentiation in both gene and transcript expression relative to either vmn or the surrounding hindbrain , suggesting that at the level of hair cells and motoneurons, seasonal variation in hearing sensitivity requires greater transcriptional changes than the vocal motor system.fig.  <dig> heatmaps of tissue specific expression. heatmaps showing normalized expression of differentially expressed  genes and  transcripts among saccular epithelium  and brain tissues. differential expression is based on a minimum 4-fold differential variation among tissues with a maximum false discovery rate  of  <dig> . while samples grouped by tissue type, the se showed strong differentiation by season. the se columns, the focus of this study, are highlighted by a black box. abbreviations: r-se, reproductive saccular epithelium; nr-se, non-reproductive saccular epithelium; wnh, winter night hindbrain; smh, summer morning hindbrain; snh, summer night hindbrain; wnv, winter night vmn ; smv, summer morning vmn; snv, summer night vmn

fig.  <dig> spearman's correlation of gene and transcript expression. sample relationships based on  gene and  transcript expression were scaled to a color gradient based on spearman's correlations among tissue groups. as in fig.  <dig>  the saccular epithelium  tissues grouped together, but still showed strong differentiation between seasons. this difference is much more apparent at the level of the transcripts than the genes. the se columns, the focus of this study, are highlighted by a black box. abbreviations are as in fig. 2




focusing specifically on transcripts differentially expressed between reproductive and non-reproductive se, we identified  <dig> and  <dig> upregulated in reproductive and non-reproductive se, respectively. performing the same analysis with genes rather than transcripts produced  <dig> and  <dig> genes upregulated in reproductive and non-reproductive se, respectively. we employed a fisher's test for gene ontology  term enrichment with blast2go to determine whether there was an overrepresentation of any classes of functionally similar transcripts that were differentially regulated across seasons. many go terms were over-represented among transcripts upregulated in reproductive se, while none were over-represented among transcripts upregulated in non-reproductive se . the most significantly enriched go terms were primarily related to translation  and cellular respiration, supporting results of the overall most abundant transcripts  and most supported kegg pathways  discussed above.table  <dig> enriched go terms among upregulated transcripts in reproductive saccular epithelium

p
enrichment was based on a one-tailed fisher's exact test with p-values < 10− <dig>  transcripts involved in translation and cellular respiration were notably upregulated in the reproductive saccular epithelium. no go terms were enriched among non-reproductive, upregulated transcripts



as a control for our differential analyses in the se, we performed comparable seasonal analyses for sample groups of the hindbrain region surrounding vmn that were used in our companion study of the vocal motor system  <cit> . using the same differential expression criteria, we found that  <dig> and  <dig> transcripts were upregulated in reproductive and non-reproductive hindbrains, respectively. there were  <dig> and  <dig> genes upregulated in the reproductive and non-reproductive hindbrain, respectively. among the differentially expressed transcripts, only a single go term, “protein-binding”, was significantly enriched in the reproductive hindbrain. thus, transcript abundance and go term enrichment differences did not reflect ubiquitous seasonal or reproductive state variation, but rather se-specific transcriptional regulation.

taken together, the results identified broad changes in gene expression between reproductive and non-reproductive states of high and low saccular activity, respectively. the substantially greater number of transcripts and genes upregulated in reproductive relative to non-reproductive samples suggested a general increase in transcriptional activity. the absence of this pattern in the hindbrain region surrounding vmn indicated that the increased transcription in the reproductive state is an se-specific phenomenon. furthermore, the enriched go terms  of the differentially expressed transcripts pointed to a much greater translational and metabolic activity in the reproductive se than the non-reproductive se, consistent with the most abundant annotations and kegg pathways reported in tables  <dig> and  <dig>  we thus conclude that the se is transcriptionally, translationally, and metabolically more active in reproductive than non-reproductive individuals.

candidate gene identification
the overarching goal of this study was to identify candidate genes that may influence seasonal variation in auditory frequency sensitivity. while the analyses above suggested broad changes in activity and metabolism across reproductive states, we hypothesized that the known physiological changes in auditory sensitivity likely depend predominantly on changes in a smaller subset of genes important for neural function and neuronal excitability e.g.,  <cit> . while our approach here may have missed variation of low abundance transcripts and small magnitude expression differences, we identified numerous candidate genes for further study. furthermore, many of the identified candidates have previously been implicated in vertebrate auditory function .table  <dig> differentially expressed candidate genes in the saccular epithelium with reported auditory functions and comparison to mouse hair cell expression

neuronal acetylcholine receptor subunit α-9-iia
these differential expressed transcripts have previously been implicated in peripheral auditory function. shown are the top blast hit descriptions, the season during which transcript abundance was highest , and a citation for the auditory role of that gene. in cases where both seasons are listed, different isoforms were upregulated in both seasons. the "mouse hc" column represents comparisons of the average normalized mrna transcript abundances of fac sorted hair cells to that of surrounding cells from embryonic day  <dig> and postnatal days  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> mouse cochlea  <cit> . we indicated whether expression in hair cells was not substantially different , > <dig> fold higher , or > <dig> fold lower , than in the surrounding cells of the cochlea. the first  <dig> transcripts in this table were further supported by an examination of postnatal day  <dig> mouse organ of corti  <cit> . aneuronal acetylcholine receptor subunit α-9-ii  is not present in mammals; comparable genes chrna <dig> and chrna <dig> transcripts are both more abundant in hair cells than surrounding cells. bdiaphanous homolog  <dig> is not reported in  <cit>  and this comparison is based only on  <cit> 



candidate genes upregulated in the reproductive se that support prior studies of midshipman auditory function included estrogen related receptors , neuronal acetylcholine receptor subunit α-9-ii, insulin gene enhancer protein isl- <dig>  and diaphanous  <dig>  the ability of estrogen to enhance auditory sensitivity in the midshipman se is well established  <cit> , and estrogen receptors have been localized to the se  <cit> . errs exert estrogen-like actions by activating genes regulated by estrogen-response elements in the absence of the ligand , and mutations of errs have been implicated in hearing impairments in mice and humans . increased err expression may serve as a supplemental or alternative means to estrogenic actions in regulating genes important for maintaining high-frequency auditory sensitivity.

the neuronal acetylcholine receptor subunit α-9-ii, also upregulated in reproductive se, is expressed in hindbrain neurons that directly innervate the inner ear  of teleosts  <cit>  that have been shown in midshipman to be part of a vocal corollary discharge pathway linking the hindbrain vocal pattern generator to the auditory saccule  <cit> . in mammals, which lack the α-9-ii receptor, acetylcholine receptor subunits α- <dig> and α- <dig> are highly expressed in auditory hair cells  <cit>  and form heterotetramers at the auditory efferent synapses with cochlear hair cells , likely regulating the dynamic range of hearing and protecting against environmental or self-generated acoustic trauma. in midshipman, acetylcholine receptor subunit α-9-ii may either be involved in setting the auditory sensitivity thresholds across frequencies or help protect the se in the potentially more acoustically active tidal environment inhabited during the reproductive summer compared to the deep water environment inhabited during the non-reproductive winter. ambient sound levels during the summer reproductive period may be higher due to increased vocal activity especially in and close to nests  <cit> , as well as increased noise levels in the shallow water environment e.g.,  <cit>  where midshipman build nests and spawn  <cit> .

the insulin gene enhancer protein isl- <dig> is an interesting candidate gene based on recent work by huang et al.  <cit> , which showed that over-expression of isl- <dig> in mouse hair cells prevented age-related and noise-induced hearing loss resulting from hair cell apoptosis or neural degeneration. another candidate gene with similar implications for auditory sensitivity and hair cell proliferation is diaphanous  <dig> whose mutation contributes to progressive hearing loss  <cit> . products of the diaphanous genes contribute to cytoskeletal function including establishing cell polarity and shape . both of these candidate genes could contribute to the increased auditory sensitivity at high frequencies as well as the reported increase in hair cell number in the reproductive se  <cit> .

there was little overlap between the candidate genes identified in this study and those that are activated during regeneration following acoustic trauma in zebrafish  <cit> . given the seasonal variation in hair cell abundance in midshipman  <cit> , we might expect some overlap among these processes. the presence of some similar classes of genes, such as myosin genes and orthologous nuclear receptors, in both analyses may stem from the regeneration of new hair cells in both model systems. however, the amount of hair cell regeneration and the underlying mechanisms may vary substantially between trauma-induced and naturally occurring seasonal regeneration.

there were additional upregulated genes in the reproductive se that have not previously been directly implicated in auditory function but still serve as important candidates for consideration and future validation. these included steroid related genes such as the transcript hydroxysteroid 11-β-dehydrogenase  <dig>  which converts cortisol to the inactive metabolite cortisone , as well as transcripts encoding glucocorticoid receptors . though cortisol has not been directly implicated in auditory function, there is extensive evidence for a role of glucocorticoids in hearing  and in lateral line hair cell regeneration  <cit> . in teleost fish, hydroxysteroid 11-β-dehydrogenase also converts 11-beta-hydroxytestosterone to 11-ketotestosterone , a non-aromatizable androgen detectable only in reproductive type i males  <cit> . while 11kt has an effect on vocalization  <cit> , its role in auditory physiology has not been examined. the auditory sensitivity of primary afferents innervating the se of non-reproductive fish can be shifted to that of reproductive fish by testosterone  <cit> , which may act via local conversion to estrogen by aromatase in the ganglion cells  <cit> . this mechanism would compete with the conversion of testosterone to 11kt, which could only act by direct activation of an androgen receptor . in situ hybridization shows arβ mrna in the region directly adjacent to saccular hair cells  <cit> . transcripts of both arα and arβ are detectable by qpcr at approximately equal abundances in the se of all reproductive morphs , but seasonal variation in expression of either ar has not been directly tested and was not detected in our results here. many genes like hydroxysteroid 11-β-dehydrogenase  <dig> could be critical for the physiological changes across reproductive states in midshipman se, but have not been studied in the context of auditory plasticity prior to this transcriptome differential expression analysis.

neurophysiology shows that ion channels and steroid hormones are critical to the increased auditory sensitivity in reproductive midshipman fish  <cit>  . to take a more targeted approach for our candidate gene search, we identified  <dig> ion channel transcripts and  <dig> steroid-related transcripts within our entire assembled transcriptome and performed differential expression analyses with each of these transcript subsets. this approach reduced the number of pairwise comparisons, allowing us to potentially increase our sensitivity to detect differentially expressed transcripts with functional importance. as with the whole transcriptome, substantially more steroid-related  and ion channel  transcripts were upregulated in reproductive compared to non-reproductive se.

among the ion channels upregulated in reproductive se were large conductance, calcium-activated potassium  channel transcripts  that have been localized to saccular hair cells in midshipman, shown to vary in abundance across seasons and to regulate auditory sensitivity in midshipman adults and zebrafish larvae  <cit> . numerous other potassium channel transcripts were also differentially regulated across seasons , which may be necessary for the fine-tuning of auditory thresholds, as demonstrated in other vertebrates  <cit>  and suggested by our auditory physiology studies of the se  <cit> .

one steroid-related and several channel transcripts identified as upregulated in reproductive se were also upregulated in the hindbrain and/or vmn of reproductive state fish  . the common reproductive-state dependent regulation of these transcripts may support broadly shared motor and sensory functions. two channel transcripts that showed reproductive upregulation in the vmn and se, but not the hindbrain, connexin  <dig>  and calcium-activated potassium channel subunit α - <dig>  , are particularly interesting in light of our previous neurophysiological examinations of midshipman vocal and auditory systems. connexins are gap junction proteins that contribute to electrical coupling between cells and are abundant in glia  <cit> . though not yet tested, cx <dig> might support the known electrical coupling between vmn motoneurons and, in turn, the extreme, population level synchronicity observed for vmn  <cit> . in the inner ear, cx <dig> occurs between supporting cells in the cochlear hair cell epithelium; mice lacking cx <dig> show severe hearing loss  <cit> . there is evidence for gap junctions between supporting cells of the se and possibly between hair cells and supporting cells in toadfish from the same family as midshipman  <cit> . bk channels, as noted earlier, are more abundant in the se of reproductive midshipman, playing a prominent role in the sensitivity of se hair cells to the full ~100-400 hz spectral range of their vocalizations  <cit> . bk channels may also contribute to high fidelity firing in vmn that codes for vocalization pulse repetition rates and fundamental frequencies of ~100-110 hz  <cit> . in support of this potential vocal function, recent studies demonstrate a role for bk channels in high fidelity firing  by purkinje cell axons in the cerebellum  <cit> . the co-regulation of such genes in two highly divergent neural systems, one sensory and one motor, is compelling given the importance of sender-receiver/vocal-auditory coupling in the acoustic communication system of the plainfin midshipman  <cit> .table  <dig> channel and steroid-related candidate genes upregulated in the vocal system

transcripts of these candidate genes, upregulated in reproductive se, were also more abundant in vocal regions of the cns of reproductive type i males  <cit> . some transcripts were upregulated throughout the hindbrain and vmn , some were upregulated only in the vmn , and others had increased abundance restricted to vmn at night , the time of peak vocal activity



CONCLUSIONS
we uncovered the molecular underpinnings of reproductive state-dependent variation of auditory sensitivity in midshipman fish. our results suggested broad changes in transcriptional, translational, and metabolic activity occurring in the se across reproductive states, with higher activity in the reproductive state. in addition to these broad changes, differential expression analyses identified a number of potential candidate genes underlying seasonal changes in auditory physiology. some of these genes, such as potassium channels and steroid biogenesis enzymes, are highly consistent with our previous work, while others, like insulin gene enhancer protein isl- <dig>  neuronal acetylcholine receptor α-9-ii and diaphanous  <dig>  are implicated in mammalian hair cell function and thus provide novel targets for future investigation in fish model systems.

we have previously shown that the magnitude of the seasonal change in hearing thresholds in the se is significantly greater for encoding the higher frequency, upper harmonics of the male advertisement call . midshipman fish migrate from nest sites in the shallow intertidal zone to deep off shore sites during the non-reproductive winter season e.g.  <cit> . despite the apparent attenuation of transcription, translation, and metabolic activity in the non-reproductive se that we report here, the se retains robust sensitivity to low frequency sound  . such low frequency sensitivity in deep water sites has been proposed to be important for detection of the brief , low frequency agonistic grunts of conspecifics that are produced all year long  <cit>  and the low frequency calls of marine mammals, both of which will have a greater transmission distance in deeper water . seasonal changes in hearing are not observed in a closely related species of toadfish that does not migrate to deeper waters during the non-reproductive season  <cit> . perhaps the basal condition for toadfishes is high sensitivity across a wide range of frequencies and spectral peaks. in this case, selective pressure may have actively suppressed sensitivity to high frequencies while maintaining sensitivity for low frequencies in the non-reproductive winter se of midshipman fish, rather than actively enhancing the higher frequency hearing in a summer reproductive fish. while this does not drastically change our questions regarding seasonal variation in auditory sensitivity, it can inform our thinking about how and why species like midshipman evolved the physiological and genetic mechanisms underlying frequency-dependent seasonal plasticity in hearing.

