BACKGROUND
the appropriate choice of an internal standard is critical for quantitative protein and rna analyses. glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase  is a glycolytic enzyme that possesses diverse functions that are independent of its role in glycolysis  <cit> . gapdh is a multifunctional enzyme overexpressed in many tumors and induced by hypoxia in normal and malignant cells. the degree to which hypoxia transcriptionally activates gapdh is cell- type specific  <cit> .

gapdh is considered to be a "housekeeping gene". previous contributions showed that gapdh expression is regulated by a variety of factors like calcium  <cit> , insulin  <cit> , and hypoxia  <cit> , although the transcription factor hypoxia-inducible factor- <dig>  regulates the expression of genes which are involved in glucose supply, growth, metabolism, redox reactions and blood supply. the hif family comprises the hif-1α, hif-1β, hif-2α, and hif-3α subunits  <cit> . under normoxic conditions, the hif-1α subunit is undetectable because it undergoes rapid ubiquitination and proteosomal degradation  <cit> .

hypoxia is characterized by inadequate oxygen delivery to the tissue with a resulting imbalance between oxygen demand and energy supply  <cit> . as a consequence, hif-1-regulated hypoxia-induced genes are transcribed  <cit> . many of the proteins encoded by these genes are involved in adaptive responses counteracting a detrimental impact of hypoxia, including erythropoiesis, angiogenesis, iron homeostasis, glucose and energy metabolism, as well as cell proliferation and survival decisions  <cit> .

there are two types of hypoxia: transient and chronic hypoxia. transient hypoxia is a temporary reduction in oxygen availability. the inadequate vascular geometry relative to the volume of oxygen-consuming tumor cells creates diffusion-limited o <dig> delivery, which results in chronic hypoxia  <cit> . cells in the hypoxic environment shift from aerobic citric acid cycle  to anaerobic metabolism , as a consequence to chronic hypoxic conditions. the response to low o <dig> levels is given by up-regulating the synthesis of hif  <cit> . tumors typically contain hypoxic regions, since tumor vasculature is dysfunctional and unable to meet the metabolic needs of rapidly proliferating cancer cells  <cit> . tumor cells are resistant to therapeutic approaches, like ionizing radiation and chemotherapy. for ionizing radiation the dose required to produce the same amount of cell killing is up to three times higher for hypoxic cells than for well-oxygenated cells  <cit> . in glioblastoma, the modification of tumor oxygenation and thus radiosensitivity is an attractive approach to improve the prognosis of glioblastoma patients currently tested in clinical trials  <cit> .

in previous work, it has been shown that gapdh expression increases as a repose to the hypoxic development in endothelial cells  <cit> . regulation of gapdh by hypoxia appears to be cell- type specific. for instance, gapdh expression is induced to a much lesser extent in fibroblasts and smooth muscle cells than it is in endothelial cells  <cit> .

in the present study we addressed the question whether gapdh expression is regulated by hypoxia in human glioblastoma cells in vitro and in human glioma tumor samples. the answer of this question will provide insight into practical applications of gapdh as an internal standard in investigations of hypoxia-inducible gene expression or as a target for tumor therapeutic approaches in human glioblastoma. we also aimed to determine the validity of two further housekeeping genes for their use as internal standards in experimental cancer research.

RESULTS
gapdh mrna expression is not regulated by hypoxia, neither in vivo in human glioma tissue, nor in vitro in human glioblastoma cell lines
both gapdh and β-actin mrna was expressed in 22/ <dig> brain tumor samples  and in 3/ <dig> normal brain tissue samples, as shown by semiquantitative rt-pcr . densitometric analysis did not show any differences in gapdh mrna expression between the two tumor types with different levels of tumor oxygenation . each value was normalized to the corresponding expression of the housekeeping gene β-actin.

to investigate the effect of controlled hypoxic conditions on gapdh mrna expression, we performed in-vitro cell culture assays with 5%, 1% and  <dig> % o <dig> with and without reoxygenation. no regulatory effect of these different oxygenation conditions on gapdh expression was detectable by semiquantitative rt-pcr in the human glioblastoma cell lines u <dig>  u <dig> and gamg . the densitometric evaluation confirmed these results . together, these data suggest that the known formation of hypoxic regions within gliobastoma tumor tissue is not accompanied by an upregulation of gapdh mrna.

hypoxic conditions do not influence gapdh protein expression in vivo in human brain tumor samples or in vitro in glioblastoma cell lines
to exclude translational regulation of gapdh protein expression by hypoxic conditions, western-blot analysis was performed using lysates from the same tumor samples described above. again, gapdh, β-actin and as an additional housekeeping gene γ-tubulin was detected in all samples analyzed . expression of all three proteins was very homogenously distributed among the two tumor entities, low-grade astrocytoma with known modest tumor hypoxia and glioblastoma with known severe hypoxia .

glioblastoma cell lines gamg, u <dig> and u <dig>  which were cultured under different hypoxic conditions as described above, did not show any regulation of gapdh protein expression . therefore, gapdh mrna and protein expression is not modified in response to different oxygenation, hypoxia or reoxygenation conditions in vitro in the tested cell lines and not differently expressed in human tumor glioma samples with known different levels of hypoxia.

hif-1α regulation in response to hypoxia
semiquantitative rt-pcr revealed that hif-1α is evenly expressed in normal brain and astrocytic tumor tissues and that there is no upregulation of hif-1α mrna in glioblastoma samples in comparison to low-grade astrocytomas .

in a representative in-vitro example in gamg cells cultured under different oxygenation conditions, hif-1α mrna expression was not influenced by hypoxic conditions . in contrast, hif-1α nuclear protein clearly responded with upregulation under hypoxic and downregulation under reoxygenation or normoxic conditions in u <dig>  u <dig> and gamg . hif-1α was strongly expressed after  <dig> h at  <dig> % o <dig>  still increased after  <dig> h hypoxia and showed stable reduced expression upon reoxygenation up to  <dig> h .

these results confirm oxygen-dependent regulation of hif-1α at the protein level in the experimental models of the present study and reassure that the experimental settings for expression analysis of gapdh were suitable to evaluate regulatory events by hypoxic conditions.

discussion
it has been postulated that gapdh protein expression is regulated as a consequence of the hypoxic development of the cellular environment in vitro  <cit> . several authors showed in their models that gapdh mrna expression was regulated during hypoxic events. some also presented that the application of 18s-, 28s-rna or β-actin instead as a loading control for experiments involving reduced oxygen concentration is more suitable for this purpose than gapdh. housekeeping genes are normally present in all cells and their expression levels should remain relatively constant under different experimental conditions. it is logic that no single housekeeping gene always possesses stable expression levels under all experimental conditions. therefore, it is necessary to characterize the suitability of various housekeeping genes to serve as internal rna controls under particular experimental conditions where transcription effects are being tested.

to exclude a potential influence of oxygen concentrations on gapdh expression as a confounding factor we have previously employed an additional control, 18s rna, in experiments of hypoxia-inducible gene expression  <cit> . in these experiments, expression of gapdh under different oxygen concentrations , was compared to the 18s rna detected. they showed that gapdh was not significantly regulated under hypoxic conditions in a panel of human tumor cell lines in vitro, and the expression of the gene examined was not altered after substitution of the gapdh by the 18s rna band with subsequent densitometric evaluation  <cit> .

gapdh induction by hypoxia in endothelial cells occurs via mechanisms other than those involved in other hypoxia-responsive systems  <cit> . a lack of regulation of gapdh mrna in response towards hypoxic events has also previously been demonstrated in the case of articular chondrocytes  <cit> . table  <dig> summarizes literature data about gapdh expression in response to the hypoxic development of the cellular environment by several tumor and non-tumor cells.

- peroxisome proliferator activated receptor – γ
our data did not reveal any correlation between hypoxia induced hif-1α protein overexpression and gapdh regulation on mrna and protein level in vitro in human glioblastoma cell lines. although we did not measure oxygenation levels directly in the human tumors, samples of which were analyzed regarding gapdh expression, we considered low-grade astrocytoma and glioblastoma as tumor entities characterized by modest hypoxia and severe hypoxia, respectively. this has been suggested by experimental findings of needle electrode measurements of human glioma  <cit>  and by immunohistochemical studies using hif-1α or carbonic anhydrase ix  as an endogenous hypoxia marker  <cit>  or ef <dig> as an injectable hypoxia marker  <cit> . furthermore, our own recent studies showed significant mrna overexpression of known hypoxia-regulated genes in glioblastoma, as compared to low-grade astrocytoma  <cit> . based on these findings from other studies, our present results suggest that there is also no hypoxia-dependent regulation of gapdh in astrocytic tumors in vivo.

CONCLUSIONS
therefore, we can conclude that the regulation of gapdh mrna and protein expression as a response to the hypoxic development in the tumor cell enviroment in vitro and in vivo is not an absolute phenomenon, but occurs as a cell-specific post-transcriptionally regulated event. expression of gapdh represents one of the alternatives of a housekeeping gene and can be used as a loading control in experiments with glioma cells. therapeutic strategies for treatment of human astrocytic tumors involving gapdh as target molecule do not represent a valid approach in conjunction with tumor hypoxia in the human brain.

