BACKGROUND
in an analogous manner to the maturation of rna-seq methodologies, single-cell rna-seq  is now in its infancy and requires new computational tools to realize its full potential for dissecting and understanding the functional meaning of cell-to-cell heterogeneity  <cit> . visualization methods provide an effective strategy for inspecting and characterizing the phenotypic diversity between cells. in a typical scenario, the analysis begins with a matrix of expression levels of thousands of genes in hundreds of cells. an appealing way to make sense out of this immense data is to project it into a two dimensional scatter-plot, where each cell is represented by a single point. while such representations provide an easy way to see obvious stratification of cells into a taxonomy of discrete types, they can also provide more nuanced views of gradual transitions, reflecting for instance, developmental processes  <cit> , physical locations  <cit> , or the cell cycle  <cit> . indeed, supplementing these two-dimensional views with additional, phenotypical information  can be used to provide the correct context, and make the observed diversity between cells interpretable  <cit> ).

there are three main challenges in making effective use of such visualizations for scrna-seq data. the first challenge is selecting an appropriate method for dimensionality reduction  among candidates such as principal component analysis   <cit> , independent component analysis   <cit>  or various non-linear methods such as t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding   <cit> , each of which may highlight different aspects of the data. once a projection is created, a second challenge is to interpret its biological significance, namely which cellular phenotypes  <cit>  or processes  <cit>  are most responsible for the resulting arrangement of cells. lastly, scrna-seq can be difficult to correctly interpret due to technical confounders such as differences in gene capture rates  <cit> . performing functional interpretation on the input data without accounting for this effect may lead to incorrect interpretation of the biological meaning of cell-to-cell heterogeneity.

introducing fastproject
to address these issues, we have developed fastproject, a software tool for the visualization and interpretation of scrna-seq data. fastproject allows the user to explore a gene expression matrix using a plethora of two-dimensional visualization methods. to interpret these two-dimensional plots, we use the concept of biological signatures - sets of genes that represent either a collection of genes with a common associated function  or a dichotomy between two cellular states of interest  <cit> . we evaluate the extent to which these phenotypic dichotomies are reflected in the projections , and highlight the significant projection-signature pairs. this analysis is made possible in single cells by modeling the probability that a missed transcript was actually expressed in the cell, and using these probabilities when evaluating signature scores on samples to minimize the effect of variable capture rates between cells. as a source for biological signatures, we use publicly available datasets that consist of comparative information from hundreds of studies , which can be supplemented by the user to include any other gene signatures of interest. through this automated analysis, fastproject therefore provides a systematic view of the main axes of variation in the data, along with their possible biological meaning.

compared with currently-available software, fastproject is unique in the combination of methods it employs. visualization software such as visne  <cit> , although designed for cytometry data, allows for the integrated visualization of transcript levels overlaid on a two-dimensional tsne projection. however, visne does not incorporate the use of gene sets or provide a method to systematically search for biological variation within a two-dimensional projection. another method, pagoda  <cit> , makes use of gene sets, but does so in the context of a clustered heatmap of expression data, not a 2-dimensional embedding.

it is important to clarify up-front that fastproject is not a normalization tool. indeed, it has been observed by us and others that without proper normalization scrna-seq data can be heavily confounded by technical factors such as library depth and complexity  <cit> . we strongly advocate the use of scrna-seq normalization tools  prior to any downstream analysis, and we assume that the data has been normalized prior to input to fastproject. nevertheless, since scrna-seq measurements tend to be characterized by strong zero-inflation, we conduct our biological signature analysis while aiming to minimize the effect of gene dropout events .

when running fastproject, processing is done upfront, producing dozens of projection maps  and their functional annotation, which can be inspected through an interactive html report. on a typical data set, consisting of around  <dig> cells, processing time is typically between  <dig> and  <dig> min . because processing is performed upfront, the user can quickly switch between different projection maps in the output report as well as share the results with colleagues who would not themselves need to install fastproject. importantly, fastproject has been written to be easily extensible so that it may serve as a general platform for deploying and evaluating new gene filtering schemes, false-negative estimation methods, or projection techniques. instructions for developers on how to augment fastproject are detailed in the fastproject wiki hosted at https://github.com/yoseflab/fastproject/wiki.

implementation
overview
the steps involved in the fastproject processing pipeline are depicted in fig.  <dig> 
fig.  <dig> the fastproject pipeline. a diagram describing the fastproject pipeline. a gene expression matrix is taken as input , and the resulting output report  combines low dimensional-representations of the input with gene signatures to highlight signatures which best explain features in the data. b configurations for the projection that can be selected among in the output report



the software starts with an evaluation of false negative rates, later used to down-weight the effect of drop-outs on the biological signature analysis. it then selects sufficiently variable genes for further analysis using increasingly stringent criteria. with these genes in hand, fastproject uses  <dig> different projection methods  to calculate two dimensional coordinate for each cell. based on a user-provided database of gene signatures it then computes a score for every cell/signature pair and uses a randomization test to identify statistically significant projection-signature associations. importantly, the confounding effect of missed transcripts is mitigated by estimating the probability that each undetected gene was actually expressed in the cell, and down-weighting the contributions of these measurements in downstream analysis . altogether, fastproject outputs  <dig> possible projections  along with their functional annotations, which can be interactively inspected through a user-friendly html report . the results are also provided in the form of text files , which can be used for downstream analysis.


false-negative estimates
to account for expressed transcripts that are not detected  due to the limitations in sensitivity  <cit> , an initial step in the processing pipeline is to evaluate these detection rates so that the subsequent analysis can down-weight the contribution of less reliably measured transcripts. more specifically, it has been observed that the detection probability for a transcript varies with the transcripts relative abundance measurement as well as the total amount of rna in the sample  <cit> . to characterize this, we calculate a false negative rate curve which estimates the probability of detection based on a gene’s abundance. a separate curve is estimated for each cell individually so that varying levels of library quality and cell integrity can be accounted for.

to perform this estimate, our procedure utilizes a set of human housekeeping genes  <cit>  under the assumption that these housekeeping genes are constitutively expressed in all cells and only missed due to technical errors. importantly, as the appropriate set of constitutively expressed genes may differ from study to study and between organisms, fastproject can accept a user-defined housekeeping list.

our estimation of false negative rates is built on and extends upon our previous work  <cit> . for each housekeeping gene, we estimate its mean expression level by taking the average of non-zero measurements for the gene. we then use the estimated means to group the genes into  <dig> quantiles, and denote the mean of genes in quantile 1≤q≤ <dig> as μq. for each cell j and quantile q, we then compute fjq as the proportion of genes from q that are not detected by j. based on our assumption of constitutive expression, we treat fjq as an empirical estimate to the dropout rates . we use the fjq values to fit a sigmoid function f^j that describes the observed dropout rates as a function the genes’ average expression when detected : 
  <dig> f^j=1/)) 

where the estimated parameters αj and βj minimize the residual sum of squares  term: 
  <dig> ∑q=130−fjq) <dig> 

applying the fitted function globally for all genes, we estimate the conditional probability for a dropout event for gene i in cell j as: p=f^j where μi is the average of gene i’s expression level when detected. finally, we estimate the prior probabilities for detection and expression of each gene in order to evaluate weights for the missed transcripts, p, as described in the methods section. these probability estimates are used further in the pipeline to reduce the effect of missed transcripts when evaluating signature scores and generating projections. as a first step in validating the efficacy of this approach, a set of simulations were performed  in which fastproject’s weighting procedure was able to distinguish between true negatives  and false negatives .

the fitted sigmoids f^j can also be used to provide an overall evaluation of the abundance of false negatives in each cell j by taking the area under the curve. this in turn provides a way to identify and exclude poor quality samples, assuming that such samples have higher dropout rates. such quality control filter  is available in fastproject and can be enabled when running the pipeline . with this option enabled, samples that score  <dig>  median absolute deviation  units worse than the median quality score are removed prior to calculating signatures and low-dimensional projections.

generating 2-dimensional projections
gene filtering
selecting an informative set of genes is necessary for obtaining biologically meaningful patterns of variability between cells. to this end, fastproject applies a strict pre-filtering step that discards genes detected in less than a threshold number of cells. the default threshold is  <dig> % of the input cells, however this is configurable as an input option. subsequently, fastproject produces projections that derive from all pre-filtered genes as well as subsets thereof, calculated using either of two filtering schemes. the first filter option selects bimodal genes, a characteristic which in the past has been useful in isolating biological variation . in fastproject bimodal genes are selected using the hartigan’s dip test . the second filter option selects highly-variable genes, based on their fano-factor . an increase in the fano factor past a value of  <dig> indicates a departure from a poisson statistic, which is the steady state distribution expected of constitutively expressed genes  <cit> . to select candidates with high fano-factor, similar to the procedure in  <cit> , genes are first stratified into  <dig> quantiles according to μ, and within each quantile genes are retained if their fano-factor is more than  <dig> mad above the quantile’s median fano-factor.

projection methods
the variety of methods available for the task of dimensionality reduction each come with strengths and weaknesses. for instance, projections of scrna-seq data based on pca  <cit> , provide an appealing guarantee about the preservation of variation, and makes the contribution of individual genes readily interpretable  <cit> . however, the underlying assumptions of pca may not necessarily be supported by single cell data. in particular, pca is a linear transformation, which may not be able to accurately capture non-linear relationships in the data . additionally, pca posits that the projection axes should be uncorrelated, which again may not necessarily result in the most informative representation. the same criticisms apply for other linear methods such as ica  <cit> . a complementary, and commonly used approach  uses a non-linear projection that aims to preserve the structure in the data locally. however, while this method aims to ensure that points that are close in the high dimensional space will be close  in the low dimensionality embedding, more global relations are not directly interpretable from the results. to avoid the issue of choosing up-front between these different options, fastproject uses these methods plus additional non-linear projection methods, including: isomap  <cit>  , pca with a radial basis function  kernel , multi-dimensional scaling , and spectral embedding  <cit>  . for the linear pca we consider three combinations of principal components ; and for tsne we use two perplexity values , totaling in  <dig> projection methods overall. all methods are run as implemented in the scikit-learn package for python  <cit> . after each projection, the resulting sets of 2-dimensional coordinates are mean-centered and scaled such that the average r2=2+ <dig> equals  <dig>  this standardization is performed so that signature-projection scores  are more comparable between projections.

incorporating false-negative estimates into projections
non-linear methods such as t-sne have been shown to effectively combine with pca. in this approach, pca is performed first to reduce high-dimensional data to an intermediate number of dimensions, and this intermediate representation is further reduced to  <dig> or  <dig> dimensions by the non-linear method. the procedure is effective, assuming that the initial pca operation preserves the main structure of the data while discarding unnecessary components.

fastproject makes use of this procedure to allow for a general method of incorporating weights  into nonlinear projections. prior to a non-linear projection, a weighted-pca is performed by using a weighted covariance matrix . entries in the weighted covariance matrix are calculated as: 
  <dig> cov=∑jwajwbj∑jwajwbj 

where xij is the log-transformed expression of gene i in cell j and w represents the matrix of weights of equivalent size, defined as: 
  <dig> wij=pxij=01xij≠ <dig> 

to select the number of components to retain, following weighted-pca, the software employs a randomization scheme, as described in  <cit> , to select the top principal components with statistically significant  contribution to the overall variance . all the subsequent non-linear projections are evaluated on this reduced-dimension matrix. to provide a way for evaluating the effects of this reduction, fastproject also runs each non-linear projection method on the original, non-reduced matrix, allowing the user to switch between these representations in the output report.

signature-based analysis
to interpret the biological meaning of the organization of cells in the resulting two dimensional maps, fastproject incorporates domain knowledge through the input of gene “signatures”  <cit> . the signatures can reflect a comparative analysis between two conditions of interest and consist of a set of genes, each of which is labeled as either “up-regulated” or “down-regulated” in that comparison. signatures, such as these, are based off of annotations of cell states obtained from public databases , or provided by the user. for each signature, a score is computed against each cell by aggregating over the weighted expression level of its genes. specifically, for signature s and cell j, the respective signature score rs is calculated as: 
  <dig> rs=∑i∈ssigns·xij′·wij/∑i∈swij 

where xij′ is the standardized  log expression level of gene i in cell j,wij is the estimated false-negative weight , and signs=− <dig> for genes in the "down-regulated" set and + <dig> otherwise. notably, signatures can also be undirected, in which case the sign value is set to + <dig> for all member genes.

projections vs. signatures
a signature-projection consistency score is calculated to evaluate how well each projection reflects the phenotypic variation that is captured by each signature. to this end, for each pair of signature, s, and projection, p, we compute a signature consistency score representing the extent to which neighboring points in the projection have similar signature scores. this is done by calculating for each cell j, an estimated signature rank r^sp based on its location in the two dimensional plot: 
  <dig> r^sp=∑k≠jrseΔjk2/α2∑k≠jeΔjk2/α <dig> 

where Δjk is the euclidean distance between cells j and k in the projection, α defines an effective neighborhood size , and rs is the rank of the signature score for cell j . the signature-projection consistency is then determined by the respective goodness of fit: 
  <dig> consistency=1−mediantotalcellcount 

in this way, each signature/projection pairing is scored based on how similar signature scores are for samples located nearby in the projection space. to identify significantly consistent signature/projection pairs, we use signatures of randomly selected genes to create empirical background distributions of signature scores. we compare the consistency scores computed for the original signatures with those of the random ones , obtaining p-values using a z-test and correcting for multiple hypothesis testing using the benjamini hochberg procedure. we observed that the distribution parameters of scores generated by random signatures varied with the number of genes in the signature. to account for this, separate distributions are generated for different signature sizes  and when assessing the significance of a signature score, the score is compared against the background distribution with the most similar number of genes. in the output, we report all the signatures that had a significant match  with at least one projection.
fig.  <dig> behavior of signature scores. behavior of signature scores calculated on the human glioblastoma scrna-seq data from patel et al.,  <dig>  <cit> . a distribution of signature/projection consistency scores across four different types of signatures, signed , unsigned , random signed , and random unsigned . lower panel shows distributions from the same signatures, run on data in which gene expression levels have been shuffled within each cell. comparing these, it can be seen that biological signatures tend to have higher consistency scores than random signatures and this distinction disappears using shuffled data. b distribution of the pearson’s correlation coefficient between signature scores and a confounding variable - the proportion of undetected genes in a sample. upper plot shows correlations when signature are calculated by simply taking the unweighted average of log expression level for genes in the signature. lower panel shows the effect of using the weighted method presented here



RESULTS
software
fastproject has been implemented as a command line python package. as an input the software receives:  an expression matrix in a tab-delimited format .  a set of gene signatures, using the standard gmt format. such sets of directed signatures are publicly available from various databases, such as msigdb  <cit>   and netpath  <cit>  . un-directed gene sets are naturally more abundant, and can be drawn from resources such as gene ontology  <cit> , kegg  <cit> , and msigdb  <cit>  . importantly, the user can also upload his/her own signatures that reflect a phenotype of interest. for instance, in the example below, we study glioblastoma cells, and use signatures derived from microarray experiments, which define different tumor sub-types. fastproject also accepts pre-computed signatures, namely, an association of cells with pre-computed values. these can be categorical ; or numerical .

fastproject will calculate projections, signature scores, and their associations, covering all the options above . to examine the extent to which the projections are affected by zero values, fastproject treats the sample quality score , and the percentage of genes with zero expression as pre-computed signatures and evaluates their association with each projection method. the output is provided as an html file , where projections, signatures and their associations can be inspected interactively. additionally, a data export feature embedded in the html report allows the generation of tab-delimited text files that depict the output projection coordinates, signature scores, and other relevant information. the source code, running, examples and user manual are bundled with this manuscript submission and also hosted at https://github.com/yoseflab/fastproject.
fig.  <dig> fastproject output report. a screenshot of fastproject interactive output report. 1) controls for changing which genes were used when generating the projection and whether or not pca was applied first. 2) table displaying significance of the consistency score for each signature/projection pairing. each row represents a signature and each column, a projection method. clicking a cell in the table selects a signature and projection. 3) scatter plot showing the selected projection annotated  with signature scores from the selected signature. 4) heatmap showing average expression level of genes within each cluster. the clustering method can be changed through the dropdown menu in the same panel. b corresponding scatterplot when selecting projection tsne <dig> and the patient signature. c scatterplot for a signature representing response to the ppar γ agonist rosiglitazone



extending fastproject
fastproject has been designed using a modular architecture so that new projection methods or criteria to filter genes can easily be added to the pipeline. since dimensionality reduction is still an active research area, this allows new methods to easily be compared against more traditional approaches. for example, the recently proposed zifa algorithm  <cit>  can be added by appending the following lines to projections.py:



this is documented in the software wiki, hosted with the project repository at https://github.com/yoseflab/fastproject/wiki.

proof of concept
we applied fastproject to a recently published data sets of tumor cells from five glioblastoma patients  <cit> . the analyzed data, consisting of  <dig> single cells with mrna abundance in units of transcripts per million  and normalized as described in  <cit> , was downloaded from the gene expression omnibus, accession number gse <dig>  we applied fastproject on this data, using a large collection of both “signed”  and “unsigned” signatures from msig db , h , and c <dig>  collections) and netpath  <cit> .

as a first check, we explored the distributions of signature consistency scores obtained for the original vs. random signatures, and compared the results to an application of fastproject on randomized datasets, where the entries in each column  were shuffled . as expected, we see pronounced differences between the original input signatures and the randomized ones when fastproject is applied on the non-shuffled data, and these differences disappear when we apply fastproject on the randomized data. as a second test, we evaluated the extent by which the signature consistency scores are biased by the abundance of zero-values in the analyzed cells. as expected, when we do not down-weigh the potential false negative entries, the signature consistency scores highly correlate with the amount of zeroes in each cell; namely the analysis primarily reflect what might be a result of technical dropouts. conversely, down-weighing the false negatives reduces this bias . we repeated this procedure using a second dataset of scrna-seq data from mouse dendritic cells responding to antigen stimulation  <cit> , obtaining similar results .

examining the output report of fastproject , we first observe that the various projection methods correctly stratify the cells according to their respective donors . more importantly, fastproject automatically picks up on several of the most important features in this data, providing a proof of concept for its utility as an unbiased analysis tool. specifically, the two dimensional position of the cells is highly consistent with their scoring according to an epithelial to mesenchymal transition signature, which is a strong marker of poor prognosis  <cit> . the two dimensional positions are also associated with signatures of other key pathways altered in cancer, including immune and hypoxic responses as detailed below. while these observations were made using a general database of signatures , we supplemented our analysis with case-specific signatures - in this case gene signatures from tcga that are predictive of glioblastoma subtypes  <cit>  to provide further support. as expected we see high level of concordance between the tcga-derived scores of the mesenchymal tumor sub-type and the epithelial to mesenchymal transition signatures from msigdb. we also see the mirror image of the cell ranking when we consider the tcga-derived signature of the proneural tumor subtype of glioblastoma.

in addition to the html report, fastproject outputs all the cell-signature scores in textual format. taking advantage of this feature, we were able to more closely inspect the relationship between the different pathways that were highly correlated with the two dimensional positions and reveal new associations in the data. considering the top ranked signatures , and filtering overlapping signatures , we observe a clear pattern of signature clusters . interestingly, the mesenchymal signature is positively correlated with the expression of coagulation/complement genes . both signatures are also correlated with the tnf α signaling, which supports previous findings concerning the role of this pathway in mesenchymal emergence  <cit> . on the other hand, the mesenchymal signature is negatively correlated with a hypoxia signature. while hypoxic regions are characteristic in solid tumors  <cit> , this inverse correlation is surprising and possibly aligned with the up-regulation of angiogenetic markers in mesenchymal glioblastoma tumors  <cit> . finally, we see a strong negative correlation with a signature of response to the ppar γ agonist rosiglitazone, which aligns with previous observations of beneficial effects ppar γ agonists have in glioblastoma . in addition to the inter-donor variation, fastproject’s visualization also highlights potentially important variation within a tumor. indeed, the cells from patient mgh <dig>  are clearly divided in accordance to the two programs mentioned above - with cells with low mesenchymal and high hypoxic score on one side and the mirror image on the other.
fig.  <dig> discovering correlations between signatures. fastproject makes its data amenable to further analysis by outputting signature scores and projection coordinates in text format. shown here is a covariance matrix between top-ranked signatures  after removing overlapping signatures  revealing signatures with similar patterns of expression



the glioblastoma case study underscores the utility of fastptroject as a tool for scrna-seq data exploration. starting from a normalized input matrix of gene expression in single cells, and a generic set of signatures, it clearly highlighted some of the main sources for phenotypic variation between cells, and the relation between these sources. such insights provide an important first step in working with data sets an immense and as complex as the one presented here.

CONCLUSIONS
fastproject is a flexible, comprehensive, and automated pipeline that combines multiple techniques for the analysis of scrna-seq. it provides a first glance on the main axes of variation in the data  and their biological meaning . the tool was designed with a flexible api in mind, with the aim of establishing a general platform that will be used by the scrna-seq research community for deployment and evaluation of future methods, such as normalization, batch correction, removal of undesired effects , gene/cell filtering, and dimensionality reduction.

