BACKGROUND
the mammalian order chiroptera serves as an excellent example of how molecular phylogenetics has influenced the taxonomy of a seemingly well resolved group. genetic data invalidated the traditional subdivision of bats into suborders megachiroptera and microchiroptera when teeling et al.  <cit>  provided molecular evidence supporting sister position of one clade of microbats, rhinolophoidea, with megachiroptera. for that reason, the actual content of the rhinolophoidea and phylogenetic structure of that clade became a matter of considerable interest. in the traditional view  <cit> , rhinolophoidea included rhinolophidae, hipposideridae, megadermatidae, and nycteridae. molecular evidence  <cit>  has suggested that nycteridae is not a member of that clade, but a sister group to emballonuridae, whereas molecular data have brought two previously unassociated groups, rhinopomatidae and craseonycteridae, traditionally arranged together with emballonuridae in the superfamily emballonuroidea, into the rhinolophoidea. the molecular taxonomy of craseonycteridae has also been dealt with briefly  <cit> , but rhinopomatidae has remained one of the few mammalian families not re-examined from the perspective of molecular genetics  with an exceptionally large geographic range covering a considerable part of tropical subsaharan africa and most of the southern mediterranean, middle east, and southern asia   <cit> . among monotypic families of mammals, only rhinolophidae, equidae and manidae occupy such extensive geographic ranges. in contrast to rich data on the history and relationships of the other two families, no such information is available for rhinopomatidae: there is no fossil record of the family  and the relationship of the family to other bats has traditionally been unresolved. rhinopomatidae bear a unique set of morphological plesiomorphies for which they were often regarded as the most primitive group of microchiroptera close to the common ancestor of microbats and megabats  <cit> . after recent shaking of the chiropteran tree by molecular phylogenetics, rhinopomatids retained their basal position – in morphological respects they are still the most primitive clade within rhinolophoidea and, thus, also the most primitive extant clade within the yinpterochiroptera in the sense of teeling et al.  <cit> . for all these reasons, rhinopomatidae are an extremely attractive subject for a detailed study. yet, these bats are quite rare throughout their range and recent records from many important regions are simply not available. consequently, very few authors succeeded in comprehensive investigation of this taxon and its current taxonomy reflects numerous uncertainties about its actual content.

the present paper provides the first phylogenetic study on the family rhinopomatidae based on the samples subsequently collected from the regions situated in the centre of the family range, i.e. levant, arabia, iran, india and ne africa . the results suggest that the taxonomic structure of the group is rather more complicated than commonly expected. in previous taxonomies, the genus rhinopoma was divided into two to seven species and several local forms, for which at least  <dig> names are available. the detailed taxonomic review  demonstrates complicated and often opposing viewpoints and illustrates that attempts to reconstruct the structure of this family on the basis of classical markers alone were seldom persuasive. the most recent and comprehensive revision of the group  <cit>  established a set of diagnostic morphological characters which splits the genus into four separate species sharing a broad range of sympatry. this arrangement has become the standard taxonomy  and it is adopted as the null hypothesis in the present paper . the phylogroups revealed by our investigation are distinguished by roman numerals , their nomenclatorial assignments summarized in table  <dig> and explained in additional file  <dig>  we also report the first neogene fossil record of rhinopomatidae and discuss the history of this unique family of bats.

the molecular phylogroups covered by this paper are denoted by roman numerals , those not covered but referred to populations of expected taxonomical significance are denoted with an asterisk  similarly as absence of a taxonomic opinion.  refers to a 'topotype' population, + to a fossil taxon.

RESULTS
morphometry
despite using a considerably extended set of morphometrical characters and applying multivariate morphometric analyses  our results revealed the same pattern of variation as reported in detail by van cakenberghe and de vree  <cit> , and benda et al.  <cit> . rhinopoma microphyllum, r. hardwickii, and r. muscatellum are distinct with partial overlap between the latter two . these phenotypic groups  were found to be internally homogenous in their diagnostic characters, with r. hardwickii having the pronounced intraspecific variation, particularly in metrical components of body size .

molecular analyses
we obtained  <dig> sequences from ingroup taxa of the first  <dig> bp of the cytochrome b gene. ninety-nine positions were variable,  <dig> were parsimony informative, and all mutations were base substitutions. the rhinopoma samples analyzed fell into  <dig> haplotypes. the sequences exhibited a low level of saturation at the first and second codon positions, with a deflection from linearity at third codon positions. we used a gtr + i + g distance correction model with gamma distribution shape parameter =  <dig> .

all tree-building methods resulted in recognition of five clades, highly supported by bootstrap values and posterior probabilities :  iranian haplotypes of r. hardwickii;  middle eastern and north african haplotypes of r. hardwickii;  yemeni haplotypes of r. muscatellum;  iranian haplotypes of r. muscatellum; and  haplotypes from the two available specimens of r. microphyllum.

the middle eastern and north african haplotypes of r. hardwickii  were subdivided into four geographic regions:  the levant ;  yemen and socotra;  upper egypt; and  northern libya. in contrast to the morphometric data that suggested considerable variation within that clade and support the distinctness of its traditionally recognized subspecies  the genetic data demonstrated an unexpected homogeneity in clade ii. a shallow but distinct divergence  was found between the north african haplotypes  and those from the levant and yemen . no genetic difference was found between  and , which represent the most distinct forms of the clade in terms of morphometry , and only  <dig> % genetic distance was found between  and , which are the most distant geographically. in contrast to the inner shallow cline of genetic variation, clade ii is separated from the iranian one  by a relatively deep genetic gap . deep divergence was also found within the r. muscatellum lineage. the yemeni haplotypes  and the haplotypes identified in iran  differ by a genetic distance of about 8–9%. although the two available specimens of r. microphyllum  represented very distant geographic regions  and the local forms have traditionally been considered to be distinct subspecies or even separate species , their genetic distance was very small .

interestingly, reconstruction of the topology of deep branches within the family using outgroup rooting resulted in sister positions for r. microphyllum and r. muscatellum lineages . the molecular clock analysis provided the minimum estimate of radiation of the family, i.e. the separation of the r. hardwickii lineage, to be approximately  <dig>  ma. the next step, the splitting of the r. microphyllum and r. muscatellum lineages, was dated minimally to about  <dig>  ma. the split between clades i and ii happened about  <dig>  ma, and the split between clades iii and iv about  <dig>  ma.

fossil record
we found a rich sample of fossil remains unquestionably belonging to rhinopoma sp. in a lithified infilling of a limestone karst cavity in elaiochoria . the fauna indicates an early turolian age, late miocene , some 8– <dig> ma. the analysis of the record  shows that:  the fossil material contains the all the morphological features that clearly distinguish rhinopomatidae from other chiropteran families and, moreover, it falls within the variation of the recent forms of the genus;  the morphology corresponds to the recent rhinopoma hardwickii in the fine details of the dentition, in the shape of the distal epiphysis of the humerus, and in the shape of the proximal epiphysis of the radius; and  the fossil material shows relatively large size variation and seems to exceed the range of variation in the recent r. hardwickii, both in mean values and in the highest values .

discussion
even with the present analysis, the family rhinopomatidae remains an enigmatic group whose history, taxonomic content, patterns of variation and phylogenetic relationships are far of being properly comprehended. nevertheless, the data summarized here substantially improve the scarce information on these subjects. we will discuss them in regard to  composition of the group,  possible phylogeographic patterns and  evolutionary history.

composition of rhinopomatidae
the analysis of the family rhinopomatidae by van cakenberghe and de vree  <cit>  demonstrated that the genus consists of four species that differ in the shape of the palatal incision, the rostral ridges, the narial swellings, in the relative length of the tail, and in overall body size. the most distinctive in all these characters was r. microphyllum, whereas the differences between the remaining forms were less pronounced, exhibiting a broad measure of overlap in most metrical characters. our analysis  provided the same picture . all of these data suggest that the major phenotypic divergence within the genus is that between r. microphyllum  and the remaining forms, which thought to be closely related to a medium-sized species, r. hardwickii , see  <cit> .

our mtdna study confirmed the existence of the same three deep lineages recognized as morphospecies by koopman  <cit> , hill  <cit>  and van cakenberghe and de vree  <cit>  . in addition, we found  deep divergence within the r. hardwickii lineage,  incongruency between genetic and phenotypic phylogeographic patterns in clade ii,  deep divergence within the r. muscatellum lineage,  a very shallow distance between the samples of r. microphyllum, suggesting an unexpected genetic homogeneity of that species. last but not least, we demonstrated that  r. muscatellum  is not a sister group of hardwickii, but of microphyllum. all these results contradict the standard view of the taxonomic structure of the family , as well as of its distributional history  and call for a brief comment.

phylogeographic patterns
 the genetic divergence found within r. hardwickii s.l. splits the corresponding morphospecies into an iranian clade i  and afro-arabian clade ii . while there is a clear genetic continuity between the levantine and yemeni populations , the much smaller geographic distance between the levantine and iranian samples  is combined with deep genetic dissimilarities . we expect the divergence between these two groups represents real phylogeographic structure, a break crossing the middle east from the north-west to the south-east. the boundary might be situated along the southern part of the zagros mountains, which represents a significant distribution barrier to many clades  <cit> . unfortunately, knowledge of the distribution of bats in upper mesopotamia is too scarce  <cit>  to allow further discussion. thus, we are unable to answer whether there is continuous distribution of haplotype frequencies with a clinal transition between geographic extremes, whether there are two allopatric ranges separated by a distinct geographic gap, or whether the ranges meet at a distinct zone of parapatry or sympatry. because of the extent of the genetic dissimilarity, we are rather skeptical about the first alternative. rather, we expect that clades i and ii are entities separated at species level. we propose a separate species status for the two clades as per the genetic species concept  <cit>  which sets a cutoff based on empirical data  of about 5% of corrected sequence divergence . these two groups have almost double that divergence with 9% corrected divergence.

 within the clade ii, a divergence of about 3% separates african and asian haplotypes of r. hardwickii. within the african group, our genetic data contradict the groupings proposed by previous studies , which stress a separate status for the populations of the central sahara . the genetic relatedness of these small bats to the largest form in libya suggests an unexpected degree of phenotypic plasticity in these bats, apparently driven by temporary local conditions rather than by the genotypic backgrounds of the respective populations. here, the selection pressures of the extreme conditions of desert habitats may have played a key role. a similar pattern of morphological bimodality has been observed in other desert or semi-desert species of bats  <cit> , such as taphozous nudiventris cretzschmar,  <dig>  rhinolophus clivosus cretzschmar,  <dig>  asellia tridens , or pipistrellus kuhlii , and such an explanation could be also invoked with respect to the smaller arabian form, rhinopoma microphyllum asiriensis nader and kock,  <dig> 

 our study has revealed that the morphospecies r. muscatellum is composed of two distinct clades: clade iii in yemen and clade iv in iran and, supposedly, in oman. this split is supported by morphometric differences . recent allopatry is more obvious in this case because clades iii and iv are geographically isolated by the arabian desert. however, geographic positioning of major genetic breaks in r. hardwickii and r. muscatellum lineages coincides with this division . with respect to the genetic species concept, it is reasonable to consider species status also for clades iii and iv .

 considering the relatively deep genetic divergences within the morphospecies r. hardwickii and r. muscatellum , the surprisingly low degree of geographic divergence of mtdna in r. microphyllum calls for a comment. at least two qualities of this species are worth discussing in this connection:  its larger body size, and  the well-pronounced seasonality of its life cycle and reproduction, including regular seasonal movements . both of these factors may contribute to increases in vagility and the rate of gene flow.

 the sister status of the r. microphyllum and r. muscatellum phylogroups contradicts traditional arrangements of the family where r. hardwickii and r. muscatellum are considered as the most closely related taxa based on similarities in narial morphology and body size   <cit> . the morphological polymorphism in genetically uniform populations of r. cystops  and r. microphyllum  does, however, indicate that the body size can undergo rapid rearrangement regardless whether in reaction to environmental conditions or as a character displacement due to interspecific interactions. worth mentioning in this context is the large body size of the fossil rhinopoma aff. r. hardwickii, which clearly exceeds the limits of the recent r. hardwickii to which the fossil form is linked by its morphological characters. all these cases suggest that body size, traditionally applied as a significant character in taxonomy of the genus  is controlled by ecological factors rather than by a strict taxon-specific developmental constraint.

evolutionary history
the evolutionary history of rhinopomatidae is a subject of particular interest, one which makes the group one of the most enigmatic clades of chiropterans. in the traditional view, rhinopomatidae were regarded as the most primitive group of extant bats, the closest to the common ancestor of microbats and megabats  <cit> . indeed, compared to other families of yangochiroptera and yinpterochiroptera, the family rhinopomatidae exhibits a set of unique plesiomorphies:  the trochiter of the humerus  is small and does not permit the scapulo-humeral lock found in other bats;  the wing tip index has the lowest value of all chiroptera;  medial phalanx of the second wing finger is complete and well-ossified;  the last cervical and first throracic vertebrae are free ;  individual sacral vertebrae have distinct boundaries;  the uropatagium is incomplete;  the calcar is absent;  tail is long and mouse-like, not entirely integrated to the uropatagium;  the premaxillae are not attached to each other or to maxillae; and  the premaxillae are developed at the palatal plane only. a few of these characteristics  are shared with craseonycteridae, while the others are unique among both yangochiroptera and rhinolophoidea, partly resembling the condition in pteropodidae .

in contrast to the major clades of yinpterochiroptera , rhinolophidae , hipposideridae , and pteropodidae , the family rhinopomatidae is much less diversified  <cit> . in that respect it is similar to megadermatidae  and craseonycteridae , which are the sister clades of rhinopomatidae according to the recent molecular data  <cit> .

the present paper dates the beginning of radiation of extant clades of rhinopomatidae , to about  <dig> ma in the oligocene. nevertheless, the datum is apparently not relevant for the beginning of the family which arose with the earliest divergence of rhinolophoidea, which molecular clock studies place at 50– <dig> my  <cit> in the early eocene. in contrast to other groups of rhinolophoidea, whose early divergence is well represented in the fossil record, no such information is available for rhinopomatidae and craseonycteridae. in contrast to creaseonycteriae, rhinopomatidae occupies quite a large range comparable to that of other rhinolophoid families. at least for that reason, the absence of fossil record is unusual and calls for comment, at least as a background story to the discussion on meaning of the first neogene record of the family reported in this paper.

despite the fact that the fossil record of bats is sometimes regarded as being quite a poor  <cit> , it is actually rich enough to enable discussions on major differences in phylogeny and early paleobiogeography of particular chiropteran clades at least in europe and northern africa. the remains of bats, including rich and taxonomically diversified assemblages, have been found in more than  <dig> european and north african sites of the late eocene, oligocene and early miocene age  <cit>  and current views on the structure of chiropteran fauna and the history of particular clades during that period  <cit>  can be considered relevant and reliable. among rhinolophoidea, hipposideridae and rhinolophidae are particularly rich in their fossil record and, with a number of divergent clades, they have predominated the fossil assemblages in europe, africa, and even australia since the late eocene  <cit> . in contrast, no relevant fossil record is available for craseonycteridae or  for rhinopomatidae. the situation with megadermatidae is more intricate. the first evidence of appearance of true megaderma in europe comes from the upper oligocene  and a number of further records are of miocene and pliocene age  <cit> . in contrast to hipposiderids or nycterids, the family is absent from african oligocene sites  and most probably does not belong to that stock. the absence of rhinopomatidae and the late first appearance datum of megadermatids in the fossil record contrasts with the fact that other groups such as emballonuridae, hipposideridae, rhinolophidae, molossidae, and vespertilionidae s.l. are constant components of the western palaearctic and african fossil record since the late eocene  <cit> . all had already produced a number of subclades during the oligocene and early miocene  <cit> . the absence of any rhinopomatids in the fossil record is surprising because these bats differ from all others in a number of conspicuous dental and skeletal specificities by which they are easily distinguishable, even based on a single fragmentary tooth. moreover, rhinopomatids are cave-dwellers, which predisposes them to be particularly common in the fossil record. under such conditions their absence in fossil record can be interpreted as a real fact which most probably reflects actual absence of the group in the western palaearctics prior to the miocene.

the fact that the phenotype of rhinopomatidae  is composed almost exclusively of the ancestral characters not affected by adaptive rearrangements common in other chiropteran families, in contrast to other chiropteran families  <cit> , suggests that  the clade was established at a very early stage of chiropteran radiation , and  that rhinopomatids were relatively little affected by the same adaptive processes that affected other all bat families, which all evolved under constant competitive pressure from other microbat clades. the latter could happen only under conditions of long-term isolation of rhinopomatids from other bats. an analogous case is the extinct clades of palaeochiropterygidae and hassianycteridae, which extensively diversified in central europe during geographic isolation of that region in the early and middle eocene  <cit> . these endemic groups were radically replaced by modern bat families soon after their invasion during the late eocene "grand coupure"  <cit> . the respective modern clades, hipposideridae, rhinolophidae, modern emballonuridae, vespertilionidae, molossidae , arrived either from africa and or asia, and their early radiations most probably took place there . the complete absence of rhinopomatids in the fossil record and the lack of coevolutionary influence on their phenotype suggest that this group was absent in europe and probably also in africa and asia. of course, tanzanycterididae with tanzanycteris mannardi from the early lutetian  of tanzania  <cit>  may ultimately be shown to be closely related to rhinopomatidae. unfortunately the characters available in the specimen of tanzanycteris provide only tentative support for such a possibility .

the first appearance datum of megadermatidae s. str. is nearly synchronous with dramatic rearrangements of the european mammalian fauna, with the appearance of the asiatic elements  and a considerable contribution of non-mammalian taxa from the indian and indomalaysian provinces such as gavialosuchus, tomistoma, and varanidae. the spread of these taxa into europe has been dated to ca.  <dig> ma  <cit> . recent paleogeographic analyses  <cit>  supplement the picture with further data that show continuity between the mediterranean-iranian and the eastern indian-east african marine provinces until the final disappearance of the western tethyan seaway in the early miocene.

in case of rhinopomatidae, no such evidence is available. the late miocene fossil record reported in this paper is apparently not related to the early history of the clade. nevertheless, the results of molecular studies provide valuable information. the first dated split within the family  shows no phylogeographic signal – both clades are broadly sympatric. nevertheless, the next cladogenetic events  have clear phylogeographic correlates. in the later events, the phylogeographic signals are even more pronounced: clades i vs. ii : iran vs. levant to africa, and clades iv and iii : iran vs. yemen. according to traditional biogeography  <cit> , the region with the largest concentration of taxonomic diversity is the most likely candidate for being the source area of the group in question. in the case of rhinopomatids, the present results would suggest iran to be such a candidate. at the very least, these results suggest that iran was an area of paleoendemism that played host for the ancestral clades more than  <dig> ma ago. nevertheless, the terrestrial conditions appeared in the respective region first at the time of oligocene/miocene transition  <cit>  and thus the source area of the clades that colonized at in that time was apparently situated in other regions.

based on the above discussion, we proposed the following biogeographic hypothesis :

 rhinopomatidae originated during the eocene from the early diversification of rhinolophoid bats that remained isolated from competitive pressure of other chiropteran clades somewhere in the archipelago south of the western tethyan seaway or in india.

 the group evolved in isolation until the oligocene when the marine barrier between the mediterranean and indian tethys provinces disappeared. endemic adaptation to major chiropteran foraging strategies in ancient rhinolophoids produced clades whose ecomorphological design was much different corresponding foraging specialists on neighbouring continents. some of those ancient clades survive now: rhinopomatids as aerial foragers, craseonycterids as foragers of small prey in cluttered habitats, and megadermatids as ground gleaners.

 the land between iran and western india, uplifted during the oligocene, was subsequently invaded by rhinopomatids and became the key location of their early neogene radiation. the westward invasion was from the south, then to arabia  with the r. muscatellum lineage, and perhaps later to the northern part of the iran and to the mediterranean with the r. hardwickii lineage. the paleobiogeographic analyses of rodents  <cit>  suggest that the respective westward migrations may begun even much earlier – in the late eocene and early oligocene via archipelagos south of the western tethyan seaway.

 extension of the paleogeographic and paleoenvironmental rearrangements of the middle east during the vallesian and turolian stage, ca.  <dig> ma , fixed the already established divergences among the clades within both r. hardwickii and r. muscatellum lineages.

 the extension of the range of the large-sized indian r. microphyllum may have appeared quite late after these events, possibly even during the quaternary under the influence of more pronounced seasonality in the climate  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
this first genetic study dealing with the family rhinopomatidae has enabled us to put forward phylogenetic hypotheses that differ considerably from the concepts resulting of previous morphological studies. contrary to what was expected, we found deep allopatric genetic divergences within the r. hardwickii and r. muscatellum lineages, which suggests a separate species status for the afro-arabian branch of r. hardwickii  and for the yemeni branch of r. muscatellum. in contrast, we found a surprisingly high genetic homogeneity in r. microphyllum . morphological polymorphism in the genetically uniform r. cystops and r. microphyllum and the characteristics of the fossil taxon suggests plasticity of body size in this group. considering information on the recent and past ranges and the genealogy of the group, we expect that history of the family included  an early isolation in archipelago south of western tethyan seaway or in india,  a northward- and westward spread into mediterranean after disappearance of the marine barrier in the late oligocene and  retreat from there after the miocene climatic optimum.

