BACKGROUND
pre-implantation genetic diagnosis  is used in human fertility clinics, mainly to detect genetic disease factors that may have been passed on to the embryo . such diagnostics can be carried out using polar bodies or embryonic cells collected by biopsy . extraction of the genome from polar bodies is less invasive than a blastomere biopsy but yields poorer quality gdna and ignores the effects of the paternal genome, leading to less precise information . in livestock, embryonic genotyping is generally performed on trophoblast cells at the blastocyst stage and is used primarily for sex determination. this procedure is performed routinely, on-site and involves the detection of a y-chromosome-specific sequence by different means of dna amplification . in addition to sex determination, embryonic cell sampling and dna amplification may be used to determine genotypes at specific loci.

the development of high-throughput platforms capable of genotyping up to ten thousand  <cit> , tens of thousands  and even several hundred thousand  <cit>  of single-nucleotide polymorphisms has led to the development of whole-genome-based selection of livestock  <cit> . currently, an emerging trend in the dairy cattle industry involves determining genetic merit at birth using breeding values from genotypic information provided by these high-throughput genomic platforms. for the purposes of further increasing selection pressure and reducing generation interval, there is an increasing demand in determining breeding values readily on early  embryo genomics before embryos are transferred into recipients. by doing so, it is possible to identify high-genetic-merit individuals before transfer and thus decreasing the number of embryo transfers which represents considerable economic value  <cit> . however, the challenges arising from genotyping a handful of candidate loci are exacerbated when large numbers of loci are distributed across the entire genome.

because an embryo biopsy typically contains about  <dig> to  <dig> cells, whole-genome amplification  is necessary in order for enough material to be available for genotyping. current wga methods involve one of two approaches: pcr-based  and non-pcr-based   <cit> . several pcr-based wga methods have been developed, such as primer extension pre-amplification , degenerate oligonucleotide-primed pcr , tagged random primers  and ligation-mediated amplification  pcr. these vary in efficiency, coverage and range of applications and have different limitations such as amplification bias, generation of relatively short products , which may not be suitable for downstream applications, incomplete genomic coverage and a high possibility of randomly introducing point mutations into the products  <cit> . the most recent pcr-based wga technology for single-cell amplification is quasi-random primed library synthesis followed by pcr amplification . this approach has been used to support human in vitro fertilization by providing pre-implantation genetic screening for aneuploidy and genetic testing for familial single-gene disorders. studies have shown that qpls-pcr technology overcomes limitations generally associated with pcr-based wga and can be applied successfully to very limited genomic dna samples such as embryo blastomeres or oocytes . among the non-pcr based methods, multiple displacement amplification  protocols are the most commonly used and have been developed for non-specific dna expansion. this isothermal reaction uses random primers  to initiate dna replication by a bacteriophage dna polymerase such as the phi <dig> enzyme, which exhibits strong dna displacement capabilities  <cit> . low error rate and low amplification bias, consistent dna amplification and longer products  than obtained using pcr-based wga approaches are the main advantages of the mda. however, mda is more sensitive to dna quality and quantity as well as stochastic effects, leading to reduced genome coverage which in turn results in missing genotypes and allele dropout at heterozygous loci  <cit> . another technology based on single-primer isothermal amplification  has been introduced, comprising a linear dna amplification process that uses a dna/rna chimeric primer containing the tag sequence to initiate dna polymerization which is followed by cycles of primer replacement through the removal of the rna portion of the spia primer using rnase h.

considering the diversity of available wga technologies, the current challenge is thus to identify a wga technology that reliably amplifies entire mammalian genomes, starting from a biopsy containing  <dig> or fewer embryonic cells, that is, less than 100 pg of genomic dna. the objectives of this study were therefore:  to compare the performance of mda, qpls-pcr, lma and spia in whole-genome amplification using samples of standardized source and size,  to evaluate the fidelity of the selected methodology by comparing whole-genome genotypic data obtained from an embryo biopsy to unamplified dna collected post-natally from the corresponding calves, and  to use the wga-derived genotypic data to generate accurate evaluations of the genetic merit of pre-transfer embryos.

RESULTS
sample production
in order to compare different whole-genome gdna extraction and amplification technologies using standardized samples, a bovine fetal fibroblast primary culture was set up as the sole source of cells. female holstein fetal tissue was selected because of the importance of female embryo selection in the commercial context and of the predominance  of the holstein breed in the canadian dairy herd  <cit> . four sample sizes were examined:   <dig>  μg of gdna for unamplified reference genotypes;  approximately 420 ng of gdna from  <dig>  cells for testing the genomic dna extraction systems on large samples;  10 ng of gdna for testing the systems using the manufacturers’ recommended input, ;  and the quantity of gdna extractable from  <dig> cells to represent an embryo biopsy .

identification of the most efficient genomic dna extraction methods
to identify the most efficient genomic dna extraction method, four commercial kits and two homemade methods were examined using samples containing about  <dig>  cells. recovery was estimated at 42–62% for dneasy blood & tissue kit, 53–63% for qiaamp dna mini kit, 72–83% for chargeswitch gdna micro tissue kit, 35–40% for the proteinase k treatment, and 33–46% for proteinase k followed by phenol extraction. since gdna integrity strongly affects wga quality, the extracted samples were run on agarose gels to estimate the extent of gdna fragmentation, as illustrated by dna smear. our results showed that the chargeswitch gdna micro tissue kit system yielded the most intact gdna . it was identified as the best overall for the recovery of large gdna input and was used as the reference gdna extraction procedure. therefore, except for the ovation wga system, the chargeswitch gdna micro tissue kit system was used for all of the wga technologies with high  gdna input. in the case of low  gdna input, the chargeswitch gdna micro tissue kit was only used with the lma-based wga method, since the mda-based and qpls-pcr-based wga methods each have their own built-in gdna extraction technique. for the spia-based wga method, quick gdna microprep kit was used and exhibited fairly satisfactory gdna extraction in comparison with the chargeswitch gdna micro tissue kit . therefore at comparable gdna quality and quantity, differences in the output from the amplification reactions are attributable solely to the wga systems.figure  <dig> 
fragment size of genomic dna extracted from different gdna extraction kits. m: dna molecular size marker. lane 1: chargeswitch gdna micro tissue kit; lane 2: quick gdna microprep kit. the cropped image is not representative of genomic dna yield, since end volumes differed.



impact of gdna input on the performance of different wga technologies
to assess which approach performed best, different performance metrics were calculated for all wga methods on both high  and low  gdna inputs . to be considered suitable for embryonic genotyping, the methods must not only provide as much information as possible, but do so reliably and robustly. therefore, genomic coverage as well as overall error rate and extent of variability between technical replicates were considered.figure  <dig> 
performance metrics for all tested wga methods. a) call rate, the proportion of loci where a call was provided, correct or not. b) error rate, split into the three possible categories of errors: allele drop-out , heterozygosity gain  and homozygous reversal . the error rate is calculated relative to the number of calls provided by the method. here error bars represent the standard deviation of the overall error rate, and not of individual types of errors. c) proportion of correct calls, or loci where the method provided the correct genotype. a “no call” where the reference provided a genotype is considered a failure to provide the correct call. error bars represent one standard deviation. bars with different letters represent data that are significantly different , as determined by post-hoc analyses using games-howell test. lma: ligation-mediated amplification; mda: multiple displacement amplification; qpls: quasi-random primed library synthesis followed by pcr amplification; spia: single primer isothermal amplification.



– impact on call rate

the call rate of a method is the proportion of loci where the method provided a genotyping call, regardless of its correctness. for high gdna input, mda-based wga technology performed better or equally well to spia-based wga methodologies, which in turn performed better than qpls-based wga technology . the lma-based wga methods exhibited the lowest call rates with very high variability. with low gdna input, most methods generated notably less genotyping call rates than they did with high gdna input, with the exception of the qpls-based wga system. the mda-based  and the spia-based  wga methods were the most impacted by the reduction in gdna input. for the latter, given the different gdna extraction methods used for each types of gdna inputs, the drop in performance for the spia-based wga systems could also be explained by a dna incompatibility brought by the extraction process. overall, the mda-based wga illustra genomiphi v <dig> dna amplification kit offered a better genomic coverage with the low gdna input  than the qpls-based wga, which in turn performed better than both the spia- and lma-based wga systems .

– impact on the overall error rate

error rates represent the proportion of incorrect calls including allele drop-out events  as well as allele drop-ins . these errors arise mainly from imbalances in template representation and from random introduction of point mutations caused by copying errors. the loss of genomic information only becomes apparent if the original genotype was heterozygous whereas copying errors can create new alleles that were absent in the original sample.

overall, error rates followed the same trends as call rates. with the manufacturers’ recommended minimal gdna input , mda-based wga technologies performed better or equally well than the spia-based wga systems, followed by qpls-based wga. all of the lma-based wga methods trailed far behind, with error rates of about 40%. it is interesting that the error rates for the two methods  used to extract gdna for the spia-based wga  varied widely  clearly showing the impact of the gdna extraction step on wga performance.

at low gdna input, the mda-based wga illustra genomiphi v <dig> dna amplification kit and the qpls-based wga single cell wga kit performed very similarly, though the former exhibited an abundance of allele drop-out, while the latter suffered mostly from heterozygosity gains . both kits still performed much better than the repli-g mini kit  or spia-based wga, whose error rates increased significantly with the reduction of gdna input. all of the lma-based wga methods had an equally poor performance with the  <dig> cells gdna input as it did with the 10 ng gdna input. one particular lma-based wga method, with an overall error rate of 61%, had almost the same overall error rate as would be expected from randomly generated genotypes  .

a very rare type of error is homozygous reversal, which means a shift from one homozygous genotype to another . although the frequency of this event was low  for mda-, qpls- and spia-based wga methods , it was relatively high for the lma-based wga methods with ranges of 6 ~  <dig> for high gdna input , 3 ~  <dig> for low gdna input , and averages of 7 ~  <dig> for all methods . this was unexpected, since the mechanism by which it occurs requires both dropout and drop-in of alleles.

– impact on the proportion of correct calls

the call rate is the most straightforward metric because it is directly measured by the genotyping platform while error rates are more discrete since they can only be detected if the correct genotypes are known. therefore, focus was given to identify the platforms that yielded the best absolute proportion of correct genotyping calls. to estimate genetic merit, a lower genomic coverage could be compensated by a low error rate and vice versa since in practice, genotyping errors are prone to escape correction since the true genotypes are unknown. at 10 ng dna input, the same performance order as for genomic coverage  can be observed, with mda- > spia- > qpls- > lma-based wga technologies . with the gdna input of  <dig> cells, the mda-based wga illustra genomiphi v <dig> dna amplification kit showed the best performance. although its mean is not significantly different from the repli-g mini and single cell wga kits, its much lower variance makes it the most attractive candidate for commercial embryo genotyping. the qpls-based wga performed better than all of the spia- and lma-based wga methods, which consistently generated a lower number of correct calls .

– locus-specific biases on the call rates and error rates

as expected, the variance among unamplified samples was very low with  <dig> % of the potential targets generating a positive signal  for all three replicates . moreover,  <dig> % of all potential targets generated a positive signal on at least one of the three reference replicates. we believe that the remaining  <dig> % represent defective probes.table  <dig> 
locus-specific biases on the genomic coverage and error rate of the studied wga systems using high gdna input 



a: genomic coverage or call rates is the proportion of target loci giving positive signals over background over the overall number of loci accounted for on illumina’s bovine 50 k snp chip. b: error rate is the proportion of erroneous genotype calls relatively to the non-amplified reference; all replicates : % of loci which consistently covered in all performed replicates; at least 2/ <dig> replicates : % of loci which consistently covered in at least 2/ <dig> performed replicates; any replicate : % of loci which consistently covered in any performed replicate; lma: ligation-mediated amplification; mda: multiple displacement amplification; qpls: quasi-random primed library synthesis followed by pcr amplification; spia: single primer isothermal amplification.
locus-specific biases on the genomic coverage and error rate of the studied wga systems using low gdna input 



a: genomic coverage or call rates is the proportion of target loci giving positive signals over background over the overall number of loci accounted for on illumina’s bovine 50 k snp chip. b: error rate is the proportion of erroneous genotype calls relatively to the non-amplified reference; all replicates : % of loci which consistently covered in all performed replicates; at least 2/ <dig> replicates : % of loci which consistently covered in at least 2/ <dig> performed replicates; any replicate : % of loci which consistently covered in any performed replicate; lma: ligation-mediated amplification; mda: multiple displacement amplification; qpls: quasi-random primed library synthesis followed by pcr amplification; spia: single primer isothermal amplification.



to determine whether the loci which failed to provide a genotyping call varied randomly between replicates of a method or resulted from a systematic sequence based/locus effect, the number of loci giving positive signal in any, at least  <dig> or all replicates were compiled . we compared these with the expected number of such an occurrence under a binomial process where the errors are randomly distributed amongst loci and the success rate is equal to the mean call rate of the method. no difference between the two measurements was found , indicating an absence of locus-specific effect on genotyping call rate. applying the same test on the global error rates showed a significant difference , most likely due to the varying error rates between the different error types  which can only occur when the reference genotype is either heterozygous or homozygous, respectively.

impact of gdna output from whole-genome amplification on genotyping performance
the dna yields following wga were measured for mda- and spia-based wga technologies . the amount of dna produced by wga approaches did not follow the same patterns as genotyping performance across those same methods, ruling it out as a limiting factor. for instance, while the gdna output for illustra genomiphi v <dig> dna amplification kit  was significantly lower  than the repli-g mini kit , it still produced the most satisfactory genotyping performance.figure  <dig> 
yield of amplified gdna using different combinations of commercial gdna extraction kits and wga technologies. when starting with the recommended minimal input , all kits performed well, however spia-based wga systems produced the most high quantity outputs than the mda-based wga systems. whereas with gdna obtained from  <dig> cells, only the repli-g mini kit  and quick gdna microprep-ovation wga system  offered the best amplified gdna output. error bars represent one standard deviation. bars with different letters represent data that are significantly different , as determined by post-hoc analyses using games-howell test. mda: multiple displacement amplification; spia: single-primer isothermal amplification.



correlation between the genotyping call rate and error rate
given that, for example, a loss of gdna template on an heterozygous locus can lead to either an absence of genotyping call  or an allele drop-out , it is expected that the genotyping call rates and error rates will be at least partially correlated. a significantly high negative correlation  was found between the genotyping error rate and call rate of the examined wga technologies under both types  of gdna inputs. this indicates that for any wga method, a higher call rate will also lead to a much smaller error rate .figure  <dig> 
correlation between the genotyping call rate and error rate. dotted lines join replicates from the same method together. a significant high negative correlation  exists between the genotyping call rate and error rate of the examined wga technologies, indicating that higher call rates also lead to smaller error rates. pearson’s product moment correlation coefficient calculated to determine the relationship between the genotyping call rate and error rate. lma: ligation-mediated amplification; mda: multiple displacement amplification; qpls: quasi-random primed library synthesis followed by pcr amplification; spia: single primer isothermal amplification.



determining genotyping quality score threshold
since the illumina platform generates a quality score for each locus, we hypothesized that it would be possible to establish a minimal quality cut-off value that would eliminate most of the erroneous genotypes. to test this, the distribution of errors in relation to their call quality score was plotted . errors were shown to be distributed across the entire range of quality scores, and it was therefore not possible to determine an effective quality score threshold that would eliminate most errors.figure  <dig> 
density plot quality scores for erroneous and correct genotypes. the mda row represents the results obtained from the illustra genomiphi v <dig> dna amplification kit . lma: ligation-mediated amplification; mda: multiple displacement amplification; qpls: quasi-random primed library synthesis followed by pcr amplification; spia: single primer isothermal amplification.



impact of poor genotype precision on gender determination
the gender of the samples was correctly determined from the genotype information using all four wga technologies with 10 ng of dna. however, when the gdna input was limited to the gdna obtained from  <dig> cells, erroneous sexing was observed in the case of the mda-based wga  technology . these sex determination errors are attributable to erroneous genotypes.

impact of genotyping errors on calculation of genetic merit, the importance of the genotyping reference and imputation
to test the effectiveness of genetic merit determination from an embryonic biopsy, the procedure that resulted in the best overall performance was used . a total of  <dig> embryo biopsies were obtained for genotyping . since genomic coverage was incomplete, the missing genotypes were imputed using the known genotypes of the parents or the common haplotypes found in the holstein population when parental genotypes were not available. all missing calls were thus filled-in and over 95% of errors were found and corrected, going from a total of  <dig>  ±  <dig>  errors  to only 266 ±  <dig> errors  in pre- and post-imputation, respectively.

embryos  were then transferred and post-natal genotypes were generated from tail hair follicle gdna collected from the corresponding calves , providing sufficient material to make wga unnecessary. genetic merit values were calculated both from the imputed wga-derived embryo genotypes and from the corresponding post-natal genotypes . there was a 99% correlation  between the genetic values calculated from the embryonic biopsy  and from the corresponding calf hair follicles. the remaining genotype imprecision resulted in a mean divergence of 106 ±  <dig> pts of direct genetic value. these minor variations did not have any impact on genetic merit ranking.figure  <dig> 
embryonic biopsy specimen obtained from trophoblast cells of day  <dig>  bovine embryos. the removed trophoblast cells provide the gdna that was subjected to the selected wga procedure. following analysis, the genotypic information in conjunction with the genomic imputation were used to estimate bovine genomic breeding value.
the correlation of genetic values between the bovine embryo and the corresponding post-natal calf. the scatter chart showing the divergence between the estimated breeding values based on gdna obtained from embryonic biopsy  and based on the gdna obtained from corresponding calf tail hair follicles after birth . the pearson correlation coefficient calculated to determine the relationship between the genetic values between the bovine early embryo and the corresponding post-natal calf. dgv: direct genomic values; lpi: life profit index.



discussion
the advent of the bovinesnp <dig> genotyping beadchip  has revolutionized dairy cattle selection  <cit> . commercial providers of cattle embryos are now under increasing pressure to determine the genetic makeup of their product. this information increases bovine early embryo value and reduces costs by ensuring the transfer of only high-merit bovine early embryos of the desired gender.

embryo biopsy is routinely performed for various applications, such as sexing or detection of single-gene defects and coat color. these biopsies remove about  <dig> cells, representing approximately 10% of the cells present in the trophoblast at the blastocyst stage. however, providing reliable evaluation of genetic merit on a routine basis using only the minute amount of material that can be obtained from an embryo biopsy has been challenging . since a diploid mammalian cell contains approximately 6 pg of genomic dna, only 90 pg can be obtained from a  <dig> cells biopsy. the current “minimum” input required by the majority of available commercial kits is generally around 10 ng, a thousand times more. the challenge is therefore to find or adapt a robust genetic analysis system for working with such small amounts of starting material. in the present study, we examined the performance of different pcr-based and non-pcr-based wga technologies, namely mda, qpls, lma and spia, as means of amplifying whole-genomes extracted from very small biopsies for the purpose of calculating the breeding value of pre-transfer bovine embryos.

in vitro culture of cells from biopsy has been proposed as a means of increasing the amount of starting material  <cit> . we examined this approach prior to testing the different wga options. however, two out of three biopsies  failed to grow in culture . this failure was likely due to the small number of biopsied cells. better success was achieved when starting with larger biopsies , thus obtaining about  <dig>  cells in culture, quite sufficient for wga. however, larger biopsies also significantly compromised embryo viability  <cit> , which is unacceptable from commercial point of view.

in agreement with others, our evaluation of the different amplification procedures determined that mda-based wga generated the best results . although, in our study, the illustra genomiphi v <dig> dna amplification kit exhibited the best results when starting with low gdna input while the qpls-based wga produced satisfactory results. by contrast, the lma-based methods proved to be less efficient. this older technology may be suitable for genotyping a restricted panel of selected loci, but amplification from the ends of genomic fragments is definitely more restrictive than random priming. difficult templates  cannot be amplified efficiently when initiation of dna polymerization occurs solely at the ends. indeed, premature termination of the reaction will not allow the production of a complete template which should contain the priming sequence in order to initiate the next dna duplication event. in contrast, all methods based on random priming can reinitiate amplification from incomplete templates, thereby providing a more complete genomic coverage.

the process by which a very small sample can be copied in sufficient numbers to allow downstream analysis is composed essentially of two steps, namely extraction of genomic dna and whole-genomic amplification. the choice of the extraction process must take into consideration the amount of starting material and the number of samples  <cit> . in this study, we showed that using the same wga technology  with different extraction methods resulted in different gdna outputs after amplification as well as different genotyping performance. successful sample production involves maximizing yield at both steps , since incomplete release of gdna from the cells necessarily leads to low genomic coverage at the amplification step, even with the most efficient dna amplification system.

very low amounts of gdna as starting material for wga can lead to randomly biased amplification, which may eventually introduce various genotyping errors . as expected and regardless of the applied method, amplifying whole-genome extracted from only  <dig> cells resulted in less genomic coverage and higher error percentages than when nanograms of gdna were amplified, which is in agreement with other studies  <cit> . the most common metrics used to evaluate wga platforms are the genotyping call rate and allele dropout rates  <cit> . although widely used, genomic coverage or the genotyping call rate is proving to be an incomplete genotyping metric as it does not provide information on the introduction of errors. in practice, low but reliable coverage would be preferable to high but erroneous coverage. evaluation of the rate of allele dropout, in which a known heterozygous genotype becomes homozygous, requires previous knowledge of the actual genotype which is not available in non-experimental samples. in the present study, the use of an unamplified genotypic reference carried out in three replicates provided the basis for the precise calculation of error rates. using gdna recovered from samples containing  <dig> cells resulted in an overall increase in allele dropout as well as allele drop-in, in which a known homozygous genotype unexpectedly generates a heterozygous call.

one possible explanation for the apparent creation of new alleles could be the mis-attribution of the detected signals by the analysis software due to a high “signal-to-noise” ratio. it is important to note that for platforms such as the illumina beadchip the clustering step applied prior to genotype calling can have a large impact on the generated genotypes . compared to unamplified material, gdna subjected to whole genome amplification will have a larger dynamic range of signal as well as an abundance of missing loci. this makes clusters generated using the former type of samples sub-optimal when calling genotypes with samples of the latter type, as signal that should be rightfully considered as “noise” for amplified material falls within the acceptable calling thresholds for unamplified dna. the occurrence of genotypes reversion from one homozygous state to another as observed in the present study represents an extreme manifestation of such errors. this could explain the abundance of genotyping errors in all low gdna input samples, regardless of the applied wga technology. however, by generating appropriate wga-specific cluster files it would be possible to optimize detection thresholds and improve call rates. it would require a large number of samples  and this template could be used for all subsequent samples. the number of replicates in this study does not allow for these optimizations. as such, all wga approaches were tested using basic parameters. other parameters could have benefited other wga methodologies. overall, lowering the input dna negatively affected all wga by increasing the signal-to-noise ratio.

another line of evidence for the high signal-to-noise ratio origin for most erroneously called loci is the negative correlation observable between the genotyping call rate and the error rate of a particular method. in contrast with most other microarray methods in which an “absent” measure is the result of intensities falling below a background threshold, in the context of the illumina beadchip platform “no call” indicates that the intensities fell outside the bounds of the clustering regions defined for aa, ab and bb genotypes, even if those intensities were high. noisier data will result in a more random distribution of points, which will both cause points to fall outside of any bounded region  or within a random region .

variable genomic coverage and erroneous identification of genotypes will have different impact depending on the targeted application. when the goal is to detect precise point mutations in specific target loci, genomic coverage is not a factor as long as the target loci are covered, while genotype precision is crucial. however, for detection of large chromosome defects, genomic coverage is important while precision may be less so, since the high number of data points may compensate for a lack of precision. in the case of sex determination, genotype precision is not crucial, since the test essentially involves detecting the presence of the y chromosome. however, the snp panel of the illumina bovine 50 k snp chip does not contain specific y chromosome loci. sex determination is performed by comparing the average proportion of heterozygous genotypes on autosomal chromosomes to that on the x chromosome. male embryos should not have heterozygous genotypes on the x chromosome. using this method, sex determination errors will occur more frequently when the allele dropout rate is high, since this reduces the overall number of heterozygous loci. it was therefore not surprising that the repli-g mini kit , which showed the highest dropout for low gdna input, consistently failed to identify embryo gender.

based on these comparisons, the selected wga platform was then tested using embryo biopsies, which may differ in cell content and gdna quality compared to the standardized in vitro culture samples containing  <dig> cells each. precision was measured by comparing bovine embryo whole genotypes to corresponding post-natal calf genotypes, the latter data obtained from unamplified gdna. since the information obtained from the biopsies was incomplete, genotype imputation was applied to fill-in the gaps using embryo sire and dam data  or data from the general population of genotyped individuals. genotype imputation based on parental genotypes or genotypes from the general population is already in usage when lower density snp panels are used  <cit> . although data imputation completes the dataset, the presence of erroneous genotypes poses a greater challenge since they are not identifiable in the absence of reference genotypes. the imputation algorithm used in the present study was designed not only to fill-in the missing calls but also to detect and correct most of the errors based on parent information. the remaining errors  led to a correlation of  <dig>  between the genetic merit of the embryo and that of the corresponding calf.

CONCLUSIONS
not all wga platforms exhibit equal performance especially with low gdna input. the very small quantity of input gdna obtained from embryo biopsies challenges the limits of all current technologies. even the best-performing wga platform generated incomplete and erroneous genomic information. these errors cannot be neglected since their sum is sufficient to translate into imprecise genetic evaluations. genotype imputation, including the correction of genotype errors based on information from parents, is effective and necessary for palliating the limitations of wga. in our experiments, the average difference between the genetic merit of the bovine embryo and of the corresponding calf was 106 ±  <dig> pts of lpi, which is only about one seventh of the population averaged standard deviation for lpi. this confirms that this method is robust and provides precise information.

