BACKGROUND
evolutionary interests of males and females are often different over reproduction . such difference may emerge from divergent optima over the number of matings  <cit> , or over provisioning the offspring by the parents  <cit> . since the benefit of rearing young is shared approximately equally by the biological parents , whereas each parent pays the cost of caring itself, the best interest of parents is often to shunt care provisioning to their mate  <cit> . one of the most obvious manifestations of sexual conflict between parents is offspring desertion whereby one parent leaves the burden of care provisioning to its mate  <cit> .

offspring desertion occurs in a variety of organisms including insects, fishes, amphibians, birds and mammals  <cit> . typically one sex abandons the young, for instance, in mammals it is usually the male that withholds care, whereas in majority of fishes the female does so  <cit> . desertion is beneficial for the deserting parent, since it improves his/her chances for reproduction in future, whereas it is costly for the abandoned mate in terms of time and energy spent on reproduction  <cit> . in a handful of species, however, either the male or the female may abandon the young, and leave the provisioning of full care to its mate  <cit> . in these species, behavior of an individual may depend on the behavior of its mate as well as behavior of other individuals in the population  <cit> . therefore, full understanding of care and desertion patterns requires a game-theoretical analysis that includes  costs and benefits and the process of interactions  <cit> .

in any given population, variation in parental care behavior may emerge in three ways. first, individuals may have different propensities to desert or care, and this propensity is consistent for a given individual over a breeding season, or over its lifetime. second, each individual exhibits variable behavior, and this variation is driven by environmental cues, such as differences in day length , habitat quality, or operational sex ratio . third, each individual behaves randomly. although understanding parental decisions is fundamental for predicting breeding systems and the evolution of sex roles  <cit> , it is striking that no study has yet tested the consistency of caring/deserting decisions in a natural population.

we investigated the repeatability in caring/deserting behavior in a species with unusually variable breeding system, the eurasian penduline tit remiz pendulinus. in this small passerine bird  both sexes are sequentially polygamous, and either the male or the female may desert the clutch and leave the full task of incubation and brood-rearing to its mate during egg-laying, before incubation starts . the deserting parent often re-mates shortly after abandoning the nest, so that both males and females may have up to seven mates in a single breeding season  <cit> . a striking feature of penduline tits' breeding system is the high frequency of biparentally deserted clutches . these biparentally deserted  clutches appear to be the outcome of intense sexual conflict  <cit> , whereby each sex attempts to increase its own reproductive success even if this is costly to its mate. consistent with this suggestion is that desertion is beneficial for the deserting individual, although costly to its mate  <cit> . for instance, desertion by the male increases his own, but reduces his mates' total number of nestlings in the season. interestingly, the sexually antagonistic interests are mirrored by the sexes, so that desertion by the female is beneficial for herself, but costly to her mate  <cit> .

in all populations a single penduline tit  cares for the eggs and chicks. biparental care is extremely rare  <cit> , and it was not found in any of these studies. note the high frequency of biparental desertion in all populations.

here we use a three-year data set of eurasian penduline tits in southern hungary to investigate the repeatability of caring/deserting behavior in two contexts. first, we investigate whether desertions by males and females are consistent between subsequent nests . we prefer the term 'consistency' over 'repeatability', because in repeatability analysis the traits typically have normal distribution, so that general linear models  can be used to separate within- and between-individual variations  <cit> . caring/deserting, however, is a binomially distributed trait and we used monte carlo simulation  <cit> . second, we tested whether ambient environment influenced caring/deserting behavior. specifically, we tested whether individual behavior changes over the breeding season . since both abiotic and biotic variables  and the social environment  often vary over the breeding season, desertion behavior, if it depends on some of these variables, should reflect seasonal variation.

RESULTS
consistency of parental care
caring/deserting behavior of males was over-randomized ; thus if a male deserted one of his nests, he was more likely to care for his next nest. female behavior, however, was consistent between nests .

seasonal trend in parental care
concordantly with the results of consistency analysis , males changed their behavior with advance of the breeding season. males uniformly deserted early in the season although some males cared later in the season . female behavior, however, did not change over the breeding season .

discussion
we revealed sexual differences between parental care decisions of male and female penduline tits. our findings are in line with recent studies of repeatability and genetic differences of parental behaviors  <cit> , and a further step to understand parental care decisions and the evolution of breeding systems in nature.

our main results are that female penduline tits are consistent in their desertion behavior, and male behavior is predicted by ambient environment, in terms of early versus late season. female behavior varied little between subsequent nests, and they either cared or deserted consistently regardless of time in the season. we propose three explanations for this pattern. first, female penduline tits may vary in some traits linked to mating success, and this, in turn, would affect their care decisions. for instance, attractive  females may desert more frequently than non-attractive  ones, since they are likely to re-mate sooner. to investigate this proposition, further work focusing on female attractiveness, fecundity and male preference is needed. second, energy demands of various stages of reproduction may be different, and this predicts state-dependent parental decisions  <cit> . in line with the latter suggestion, weather conditions have frequently been reported to predict offspring desertion in various species  <cit> , besides, in a recent study bleeker et al.  <cit>  found that offspring desertion is influenced by body condition in penduline tits. therefore, it is possible that body condition of female penduline tits changes slower than that of males, and this results in consistent parental behavior in females while not in males. third, consistent parental decisions of females may be the result of fixed genetic effects and/or imprinting in parental behavior  <cit> . for instance, by crossing two types of sticklebacks gasterosteus aculeatus with a different propensity to care, blouw  <cit>  demonstrated that parental behavior is heritable in laboratory circumstances. testing heritability of caring/deserting in penduline tits, however, is challenging in nature, because offspring recruitment is low .

in contrast to females, parental behavior of male penduline tits depends upon the timing in the season. we suggest this seasonal trend reflects changes in circulating hormonal levels, or seasonal variation in the sensitivity of the receptors of breeding-related hormones  <cit> . studies with passerine birds show that individuals breeding early in the season have higher testosterone levels than those breeding later  <cit> . testosterone level is a key component in the trade-off between male mating effort and parental care, because high testosterone levels stimulate sexual behavior , whereas it suppresses paternal care  <cit> . testosterone also plays a role in the development of ornaments  <cit> . consistently with these studies, male penduline tits  molt late in the season  when their testosterone level is presumably low  <cit> . therefore, timing of molting corresponds to male care, thus seasonal change in testosterone levels seems a promising candidate for explaining the change in male parental care  <cit> .

different physiology of male and female penduline tits may contribute to the different individual strategies we showed here. female penduline tits continue producing eggs throughout the breeding season which is unusually long, approximately  <dig>  months in hungary. if sexual hormones  are associated with egg-laying, then these may maintain consistent behavior throughout the season. males, however, may have high testosterone levels early in the season that helps them to acquire mates, and as the breeding season progresses, their testosterone level may gradually decline. coupled this with the declining number of females that are available , the propensity of males may change from desertion to provide care. in order to test these propositions, we need to investigate the physiological mechanisms responsible for desertion, and/or manipulate circulating hormone levels.

how are the different strategies maintained in a population? we propose two explanations for the existence of different male and female strategies. first, the seasonal trend in males, and the consistent behavior in females may be an optimal pair of strategies. for a male, deserting early in the season is beneficial, since if his female is a 'caring' type his offspring will be catered for, whereas if his female is a 'deserting' type she may carry his sperm and fertilize eggs in her new clutch. late in the season, however, both of these benefits of desertion diminish for the male. currently we are testing this proposition by genotyping chicks and adults . from the female perspective, deserting early in the season looks like a costly strategy that may be balanced out by the benefit of deserting late in the season – when males are more likely to care. for females of the caring type, these costs and benefits may be reversed over the breeding season: they benefit early in the season but pay a cost later. whilst these arguments have their intuitive appeal, a proper understanding of the penduline tit breeding system requires a full game-theoretic model .

second, the observed strategies may not be optimal, and the low breeding success reduces population viability. fully fixed behavioral strategies  would not be stable in the population, because the other sex was to exploit the fixed strategy due to sexual conflict. the high frequency of biparentally deserted nests in different european populations, however, suggests that the reproductive success of these populations is not at the maximum . biparental desertions can be viewed as 'mistakes', since each sex assumes the other sex will care for the clutch, whereas in reality it may have already deserted. we are currently pursuing the latter proposition by analyzing the behavior of males and females immediately preceding desertion . biparental desertion occurs during egg-laying, and it implies that the male wastes his energy and time  building a sophisticated nest, and then the female wastes her effort on producing the clutch of up to  <dig> eggs. our analyses suggest that the high frequency of biparental desertion emerge when the population consists of many females from the 'deserting' phenotype, and it is early in the season so that the males also desert. further studies by monitoring penduline tits' population dynamics may reveal whether immigration/emigration of females with different tactics contribute to the observed patterns of offspring desertion.

our results contribute to the different repeatabilities of male and female parental behavior reported in other studies. potti et al.  <cit>  showed that female pied flycatchers ficedula hypoleuca spend repeatable amount of energy on parental care between breeding seasons, whereas the energy expenditure of males was not repeatable. schwagmeyer and mock  <cit>  and nakagawa et al.  <cit>  reported food provisioning levels to be repeatable in male house sparrows passer domesticus, but not in females. however, maccoll and hatchwell  <cit>  found both male and female feeding rates of long-tailed tits aegithalos caudatus were repeatable. in addition, a recent study by charmantier et al.  <cit>  showed high heritability in cooperative behavior in male western bluebirds sialia mexicana. these studies together with our findings suggest that individuals of one sex may be more variable in their parental care, thus sexual differences may emerge over the repeatability/flexibility of parental care.

establishing the repeatability  of behavior does not negate the influences of environment on parental behavior. for instance, food availabilities, predation, and operational sex ratio may all be involved influencing care provisioning . in addition to these ecological traits the behavioral interactions may also influence conflict resolution. recently we showed that at biparentally deserted nests the male and female desert on the same day  <cit> . the latter result raises the intriguing possibility that desertions may not be independent by males and females  <cit> . to explore this proposition, one needs larger sample sizes for powerful statistical analyses that can distinguish between competing theoretical scenarios. we suspect that ecological variables and genetic  predispositions may interact, and this further underlies the significance of larger datasets than those we currently have, and the need of experimental manipulations.

CONCLUSIONS
we analyzed within-population variation in offspring desertion in a small passerine bird that exhibits one of the most complex parental care systems in birds. we showed that female penduline tits have consistent parental decisions regardless of time in the breeding season, whereas male behavior is largely driven by timing in the season. therefore, within-population variation in parental care emerges differently for males and females, since variation in female behavior at population level mainly emerges by between-individual, whereas variation in male behavior is mainly due to within-individual variation. these contrasting strategies suggest complex evolutionary trajectories in breeding behavior of species with variable breeding system.

