BACKGROUND
the evolution of metazoan body plans remains highly controversial due to persisting uncertainty regarding the phylogeny of major animal clades. in this context, the phylogenetic position of the three lophophorate lineages, namely ectoprocts, brachiopods and phoronids, which are mainly marine invertebrates characterized by an eponymous filter apparatus, has proven to be particularly elusive. based on ontological and morphological data, they were initially considered the sister or, alternatively, the paraphyletic stem-group of deuterostomia  <cit> . however, molecular phylogenetic analyses changed our views about the relationships of the lophophorate lineages. based on analyses of 18s rdna sequences, halanych et al.  <cit>  were the first to recognize that the lophophorate lineages are more closely related to annelida and mollusca than to deuterostomes. as a consequence, they united lophophorata and trochozoa to form lophotrochozoa. since then, the monophyly of lophotrochozoa has been confirmed by further analyses of rdna sequences  <cit> , single nuclear protein-encoding genes , hox genes  <cit> , mitochondrial protein sequences  <cit> , multiple nuclear protein-encoding sequences  <cit>  and by phylogenomic approaches  <cit> . the only potential morphological apomorphy of lophotrochozoa found so far is a larval apical organ with serotonin expressing flask-shape cells  <cit> .

while the monophyly of the lophotrochozoa has meanwhile been widely accepted, the discussion concerning the phylogenetic relationships within lophotrochozoa is still ongoing. halanych et al.  <cit>  suggested that lophophorates are polyphyletic, because ectoprocts formed the sister group of all other lophotrochozoans in their tree. moreover, they proposed that phoronids are the sister clade of articulate brachiopods, making brachiopods also paraphyletic. it turned out that their clustering of phoronids and articulate brachiopods was an artifact probably caused by a chimeric sequence  <cit> . still, the monophyly of brachiozoa  including brachiopods and phoronids was later independently corroborated by analyses based on rdna  <cit>  and sodium-potassium atpase α-subunit sequences  <cit> , multiple nuclear protein-encoding sequences  <cit> , total evidence analyses  <cit>  and phylogenomic approaches  <cit> . the relationships within brachiozoa are, however, in dispute. whereas some rdna analyses indicate that brachiopods are paraphyletic and phoronids are the sister group of inarticulate brachiopods  <cit> , brachiopods come out as monophyletic in analyses of morphological data  <cit> , of multiple nuclear protein-encoding sequences  <cit> , and of phylogenomic datasets  <cit> .

furthermore, phylogenomic analyses suggested that phoronids and brachiopods form a clade with nemerteans  <cit> , named kryptrochozoa  <cit> . finally, phylogenomic analyses indicated that ectoprocts are the sister group of entoprocts and cycliophorans. as a consequence, the old polyzoa  hypothesis was revived  <cit> , which has been supported by a few morphologists  <cit> , and which has recently also been corroborated by analyses of rdna sequences  <cit> , albeit with weak support.

the relationships of kryptrochozoa and polyzoa to other lophotrochozoan phyla could, so far, not be decisively resolved. this is despite the fact that numerous est and genome projects have resulted in an improved taxon sampling and an increase of the number of available genes  <cit> . while phylogenomic studies are likely to reduce the influence of random errors and gene specific influences on phylogenetic inference  <cit> , they cannot cope with the fact that model violations such as compositional biases in the data can confound accurate tree reconstruction  <cit> . that a biased amino acid composition indeed affects phylogenetic analyses of the metazoan phyla has been demonstrated by nesnidal et al.  <cit> . two main strategies have been proposed for dealing with compositional heterogeneity in the data. the most straightforward procedure is the exclusion of particularly affected partitions from the analysis. alternatively, one can rely on phylogeny reconstruction methods that can account for compositional heterogeneity, and thus ameliorate their confounding influence. the outcome of the tree reconstruction varies with the chosen method to cope with the bias. whereas some approaches supported the monophyly of polyzoa including ectoprocts and entoprocts, other strategies, such as the exclusion of taxa with the most deviating amino acid composition surprisingly revealed monophyletic lophophorata  <cit> .

in this study we investigated the relationships among the lophophorate lineages and other lophotrochozoans together with potential sources of systematic errors that might affect these phylogenetic analyses, namely contaminations, incorrect orthology assignments and compositional bias. we base our analyses on a new dataset comprising  <dig> proteins from  <dig> bilaterian taxa.

RESULTS
relationships of the lophophorate lineages
the complete dataset that we compiled for the phylogenomic analysis of the relationships of the lophophorate lineages comprised  <dig> genes from  <dig> metazoan taxa. the corresponding super-alignment spans  <dig>  amino acid positions and has  <dig> % data coverage. a phylobayes analysis of this dataset with the cat model  revealed strong support for the monophyly of lophophorata :  <dig> ) and the monophyly of ectoprocta + phoronida . a maximum likelihood analysis with the lg model  confirmed these relationships, albeit without statistical support or only weak support  for lophophorata: 37%; for ectoprocta + phoronida: 55%). a selection of those positions from the complete dataset where data are available from at least 50% of all included taxa increased data coverage to  <dig> %. the percentage of known character states increased especially in the less well-covered smaller phyla that are the focus of our study . this can also been seen in density distributions of shared missing data, which is strongly shifted to lower values in the reduced dataset . phylogenomic analyses of this dataset encompassing  <dig>  sites  confirmed the monophyly of lophophorata  and the monophyly of ectoprocta + phoronida  and, thus, show that these groupings are not artifacts resulting from the amount of missing data. however, rather than based solely on the amount of missing data artificial signal for a grouping of taxa might also stem from a strong degree of overlap in missing data shared between taxa, if the missing data are not randomly distributed across the taxa, but are systematically biased  <cit> . hierarchical clustering analyses based on the degree of overlap in missing data shared between taxa  corroborate that neither lophophorata nor ectoprocta + phoronida are artifacts caused by shared missing data. the taxa belonging to these groups do not cluster in these analyses, but are scattered among other lophotrochozoan taxa.

these results challenge the brachiozoa, polyzoa  as well as kryptrochozoa hypotheses. interestingly, a sister group relation between ectoprocts and phoronids had been previously proposed based on morphological data  <cit> . the phylobayes analysis with the reduced dataset  and the maximum likelihood analyses support a sister group relationship between lophophorata and nemertea . in contrast, the phylobayes analysis with the complete dataset  indicates that entoprocta + cycliophora might be the sister group of lophophorata  and that nemertea and platyhelminthes are sister groups  as has previously been suggested based on morphological data .

causes of incongruent topologies
the results of our phylogenetic analyses are incongruent with those of previous phylogenomic analyses, which revealed monophyletic polyzoa  <cit> , brachiozoa  <cit>  and kryptrochozoa  <cit> . these incongruences cannot be ascribed to random errors, since the monophyly of polyzoa, brachiozoa and kryptrochozoa was strongly supported in most of the previous phylogenomic analyses, whereas the mutually exclusive monophyly of lophophorata and ectoprocta + phoronida is strongly supported in the phylobayes analyses with the cat model . the hierarchical clustering analyses based on degrees of overlap in missing data shared between taxa  also showed that similar to lophophorata and ectoprocta + phoronida polyzoa, brachiozoa and kryptrochozoa cannot be attributed to shared missing data as the taxa belonging to these groups are scattered throughout the tree and do not cluster. therefore, we checked whether these incongruences might be caused by contaminations, incorrect orthology assignments or by compositional bias.

we investigated the possibility that contaminations or a few paralogs in the sequence data affect the topology with respect to our focal groups. in this instance we would expect that apomorphies of lophophorata, as determined by a parsimony mapping of the data on the maximum likelihood tree, cluster in only small parts of the alignment. however, figure 5a shows convincingly that the apomorphies are distributed evenly along the whole alignment. thus, the support for lophophorata is not the result of a few contaminations or incorrect orthology assignments. the same holds for the positions supporting the ectoprocta + phoronida clade  as well as for those that support polyzoa , brachiozoa  and kryptrochozoa  in trees in which these groups are constrained to be monophyletic.

as a first step to assess whether a compositional bias might have affected a phylogenomic analysis as asserted by nesnidal et al.  <cit> , we visualized similarities in the amino acid composition of the focal taxa in non-metric multidimensional scalings. a non-metric multidimensional scaling based on the ribosomal protein dataset of nesnidal et al.  <cit>   shows that the space occupied by the ectoproct sequences overlaps with that occupied by the entoproct sequences, but is clearly separated from that occupied by phoronids, brachiopod and nemertean sequences. in contrast, the space occupied by the ectoproct sequences in the non-metric multidimensional scaling based on the new dataset  does not overlap with that occupied by entoprocts. these analyses indicate that the polyzoa clade in the former analyses might have been an artifact resulting from compositional bias.

we investigated this issue further by analyzing the amino acid composition of the character subsets that support the conflicting nodes. the amino acid composition of the reconstructed ancestral sequence of lophophorata based on the new dataset is not significantly deviating from the overall amino acid composition in the dataset including the  <dig>  characters that display apomorphies for lophophorata . the same is true for the ancestral sequence of lophophorata + nemertea. thus, this analysis provides no indication that the monophyly of lophophorata is caused by a compositional bias. however, the composition of the reconstructed ancestral amino acid sequence of ectoprocta + phoronida is significantly deviating from the overall amino acid composition in the dataset including the  <dig>  characters that display apomorphies for ectoprocta + phoronida .

*compositional homogeneity significantly rejected.

to investigate the so far hidden support in our new data for the polyzoa, brachiozoa and kryptrochozoa hypotheses respectively, we constructed maximum likelihood trees enforcing the monophyly of these groups. we then repeated the parsimony mapping and investigated the composition of the apomorphies in supporting these groupings. polyzoa are supported by  <dig>  autapomorphies. the amino acid composition of the reconstructed states of the hypothetical polyzoan ancestor for these positions deviates significantly from the overall composition of all taxa at these positions . in contrast, the composition of the reconstructed states of the hypothetical ancestor of polyzoa and brachiozoa, the sister group of polyzoa in the constrained maximum likelihood tree, for this character subset is not significantly deviating . this reveals that the amino acid composition of the characters displaying potential autapomorphies for polyzoa has changed at the base of polyzoa. in other words, ectoprocta and entoprocta + cycliophora cluster because of character states that differ from those of other taxa in composition and, as a consequence, polyzoa might be an artifact resulting from compositional bias.

similarly, brachiozoa, a clade comprising brachiopoda and phoronida, can be attributed to compositional biases. if we constrain the monophyly of brachiozoa, they are supported by  <dig>  autapomorphies. as for polyzoa, the amino acid composition of the reconstructed ancestral sequence of brachiozoa is significantly deviating at the positions that display autapomorphies for brachiozoa , whereas the composition of the reconstructed ancestral sequence of brachiozoa and ectoprocta, the sister group of brachiozoa in the constrained maximum likelihood tree, is not significantly different .

the same is true for kryptrochozoa including brachiopoda, phoronida and nemertea. kryptrochozoa are supported by  <dig>  autapomorphies in a tree in which their monophyly is enforced. the amino acid composition of the reconstructed ancestral sequence of kryptrochozoa is significantly deviating at the positions that display autapomorphies for this clade , whereas the composition of the reconstructed ancestral sequence of kryptrochozoa and annelida, the sister group of kryptrochozoa in the constrained maximum likelihood tree, is not significantly different .

the fact that the amino acid composition of a character subset changes at a given node does not necessarily mean that it is an artifactual node. however, in the case of the lophophorate lineages, it is more likely that they actually form a monophyletic clade rather than that the conflicting polyzoa and kryptrochozoa hypotheses are correct, as we have identified a possible source of systematic error in the data for the latter two hypotheses, but not for the lophophorata hypothesis. systematic error resulting from compositional bias might also be the cause of the conflict between the ectoprocta + phoronida versus the brachiozoa hypothesis. however, in this case, both alternatives are potentially affected by compositional bias  so that the test for compositional bias does not give a hint which hypothesis corresponds to the true phylogeny.

implications for the evolution of morphology
the support for the monophyly of lophophorata  indicates that the horseshoe-shaped mesosomal lophophore, the ciliated, tentacular feeding apparatus of ectoprocts, phoronids and brachiopods, is homologous, despite some differences in the structure between these groups  <cit> . our results suggest that the epistome, a muscular lobe that is used to push the infiltrated particles into the mouth opening, is a further innovation of the lophophorate lineage  <cit> .

the position of the lophophorates within lophotrochozoa renders it unlikely that the lophophore of lophophorata is homologous with the similar tentacular feeding apparatus of the deuterostome pterobranchia, with which it has been homologized formerly  <cit> . such a homology would require the assumption of multiple, independent transitions from a sessile, filter feeding life style to a mobile life style and associated multiple losses of the tentacular feeding apparatus. however, a sister group relationship between lophophorata and entoprocta + cycliophora as moderately supported by the phylobayes analysis with the complete dataset  would imply that a tentacular apparatus for filter feeding as an adaptation to a sessile life style is a synapomorphy of these groups, despite the functional differences between the lophophore of lophophorata and the tentacular apparatus of entoprocta  <cit> . the monophyly of the sessile lophotrochozoan groups with a tentacular feeding apparatus would be much more plausible from a morphological point of view than the kryptrochozoa hypothesis  <cit>  grouping the predatory, vagile nemerteans with the sessile filter feeding brachiopods and phoronids, which have no morphological features in common with nemerteans. however, the conflicting results of our analyses  indicate that more data are necessary to resolve the interrelationships of lophophorata, entoprocta + cycliophora and nemertea robustly.

radial cleavage was formerly considered a symplesiomorphy of lophophorates and deuterostomes  <cit> . however, there are no doubts about the homology of the spiral cleavage of entoprocts, nemerteans, platyhelminths, annelids, and molluscs, the closest relatives of lophophorata . taking our phylogeny at face value, parsimony would suggest that radial cleavage evolved secondarily in the lineage leading to the lophophorata. alternatively one might assume that lophophorata is the sister group of the lophotrochozoan phyla that share spiral cleavage. however, the finding that cleavage is spiral in at least some phoronids  <cit>  shows how variable cleavage patterns are and that the radial cleavage of lophophorates is probably secondarily derived from spiral cleavage.

our trees showing a close relationship of ectoprocta and phoronida imply that the eversion of a ventral invagination  at the beginning of the metamorphosis  <cit>  and the loss of setae  <cit>  might be synapomorphies of ectoprocts and phoronids.

phoronida and phylactolaemata  share a bodywall musculature consisting of a regular grid of an outer layer of circular and an inner layer of longitudinal musculature, whereas gymnolaemata , the sister group of phylactolaemata  <cit> , and brachiopoda lack such a distinct regular bodywall musculature  <cit> . schwaha and wanninger  <cit>  discussed whether the similarity of the bodywall musculature of phoronida and phylactolaemata evolved convergently or whether ectoprocta and phoronida are closely related. our results support the latter hypothesis. however, a similar bodywall musculature is also found in several other vermiform lophotrochozoan phyla. thus, it is probably not a synapomorphy for ectoprocta and phoronida, but a symplesiomorphy that was lost in gymnolaemata and brachiopoda as a result of the evolution of solid exoskeletons.

CONCLUSIONS
our results support the monophyly of lophophorata and an ectoproct-phoronid clade and indicate that the support for kryptotrochozoa and polyzoa gathered so far is likely an artifact caused by compositional bias. the monophyly of lophophorata implies that the horseshoe-shaped mesosomal lophophore, the tentacular feeding apparatus of ectoprocts, phoronids and brachiopods is a synapomorphy of the lophophorate lineages. the same may apply to radial cleavage. however, among phoronids also spiral cleavage is known. this suggests that the cleavage pattern is highly plastic and has changed several times within lophophorates. the sister group relationship of ectoprocts and phoronids is in accordance with the interpretation of the eversion of a ventral invagination at the beginning of metamorphosis as a common derived feature of these taxa.

