BACKGROUND
comparative genomics has revealed pronounced differences in gene content across species  <cit> . in an early analysis of eight microbial genomes, 20–56% of the genes in a genome were shown to not have high similarity to any sequence in public databases  <cit> . initially these genes were referred to as orphan genes, or orfans, because they correspond to stretches of open reading frame in bacterial genomes that have no known relationship to other sequences. as more eukaryote genome sequences become available, the term 'lineage-specific gene' is gaining in popularity because one can specify the 'lineage specificity' of a gene to describe its phylogenetic distribution  <cit> .

newly evolved genes may be important for adaptation and generation of diversity  <cit> . for example, the protozoan parasite cryptosporidium parvum possesses a set of nucleotide salvage genes that are unique among all apicomplexans surveyed to date  <cit> . acquisition of the nucleotide salvage pathway from a proteobacterial source as well as other sources apparently facilitated loss of genes involved in de novo pyrimidine biosynthesis, rendering this parasite entirely dependent on the host for both its purines and pyrimidines. characterization of these lineage-specific genes not only leads to a better understanding of the parasite's biology but also provides a promising therapeutic target against an important parasite, since blocking the nucleotide salvage pathway can inhibit parasite growth but not harm its human host  <cit> .

currently, there are several hypotheses regarding the origin of lineage-specific genes. the first model invokes the process of horizontal gene transfer, in which organisms acquire genes from other distantly related species. this mechanism can create lineage-specific genes that are not shared by closely related organisms, as in the example of nucleotide salvage enzymes in c. parvum  <cit> . previous studies have shown that horizontal gene transfer is an important force for genome evolution in bacteria  <cit> , unicellular eukaryotes  <cit> , and multicellular eukaryotes  <cit> .

the second model is based on gene duplication followed by rapid sequence divergence  <cit> . based on the observation that the sequence divergence rate is positively correlated with lineage specificity in a diverse set of organisms  <cit> , alba and castresana  <cit>  proposed that newly duplicated genes may be released from selective constraint and accumulate mutations at a faster rate. while most of the mutations may be deleterious and lead to loss of function in one copy  <cit> , it is also possible that one of the copies can acquire new functions and become a novel gene in the genome. however, whether gene duplication followed by rapid divergence is truly an important mechanism of generating lineage-specific genes is still under debate. elhaik et al.  <cit>  suggested that the correlation between divergence rate and lineage specificity may simply be an artifact, stemming from our inability to identify homologs of fast-evolving genes across distantly related taxa based on sequence similarity searches. however, a recent simulation study by alba and castresana  <cit>  demonstrated that sequence similarity searches performed at the amino acid level can reliably detect fast-evolving genes due to the rate heterogeneity among sites.

in addition to the two main models discussed above, other explanations for the origin of lineage-specific genes such as de novo creation from non-coding sequences  <cit> , exon-shuffling  <cit> , intracellular gene transfer between organellar and nuclear genomes  <cit> , and differential gene loss  <cit>  also have been proposed. however, the relative importance of various forces that generate lineage-specific genes remains largely unknown.

while erroneous annotation has also been proposed as one explanation for the abundance of lineage-specific genes  <cit> , expression data  <cit>  and nucleotide substitution patterns  <cit>  suggest that many lineage-specific genes are indeed functional and not annotation artifacts. unfortunately, understanding the biological function of these genes is difficult due to the lack of homologs in model organisms to use for functional characterization. as a result, a large percentage of the lineage-specific genes that have been identified to date are annotated as hypothetical proteins of unknown function.

in this study, we aim to characterize the lineage-specific genes in a group of unicellular eukaryotes from the phylum apicomplexa, including several important pathogens of humans and animals. the most infamous member of this phylum is the causative agent of malaria, plasmodium, which causes more than one million human deaths per year globally  <cit> . other important lineages include cryptosporidium that causes cryptosporidiosis in humans and animals  <cit> , theileria that causes tropical theileriosis and east coast fever in cattle  <cit> , and toxoplasma that causes toxoplasmosis in immunocompromised patients and congenitally infected fetuses  <cit> . the availability of genome sequences from these apicomplexan species has provided us with new and exciting opportunities to study their genome evolution. improved knowledge of the lineage-specific genes in these important parasites can lead to a better understanding of their adaptation history and possibly identification of novel therapeutic targets.

RESULTS
inference of the species tree
we based our comparative analyses on a phylogenetic framework in order to infer the lineage specificity of individual genes. among the nine species included in the data set , we identified  <dig> single-copy genes that contain at least  <dig> alignable amino acid sites to infer the species tree . based on the concatenated alignment of these  <dig> genes , we infer a species tree with strong bootstrap support . this tree is consistent with our prior understanding of apicomplexan relationships based on morphology and development  <cit> , rdna analyses  <cit> , and multigene phylogenies  <cit> .

phylogenetic distribution of orthologous genes
using the species tree  as the foundation, we characterized the phylogenetic distribution of orthologous gene clusters among the apicomplexan genomes analyzed . the orthologous gene identification was performed using orthomcl  <cit>  based on sequence similarity searches with an additional step of markov clustering  <cit>  to improve sensitivity and specificity . our results indicated that many genes are genus-specific, ranging from approximately 30% of the genes in plasmodium and theileria up to about 45% in cryptosporidium.

the annotated protein sequences for each genome were downloaded from the respective data source with the version date as indicated. two ciliates, paramecium tetraurelia and tetrahymena thermophila, are included as outgroups.

we selected plasmodium falciparum and theileria annulata for further investigations of lineage-specific genes. the asymmetrical topology of the species tree allows categorization of the genes in these two species into six levels of lineage specificity , yielding the highest resolution in determining the lineage specificity of a gene. the least specific genes at level  <dig>  denoted as pf <dig> for those in the p. falciparum genome and ta <dig> for those in the t. annulata genome, are shared by all nine species analyzed, including two free-living ciliates; the most specific genes at level  <dig>  denoted as pf <dig> for those in the p. falciparum genome and ta <dig> for those in the t. annulata genome, are species-specific. together these six sets of genes account for 77% of annotated p. falciparum proteins  and 84% of annotated t. annulata proteins . genes that are shared by a non-monophyletic group  are omitted from the following analyses. additionally, the two species pairs, p. falciparum-p. vivax and t. annulata-t. parva, may have comparable divergence times in the range of approximately 80– <dig> million years  <cit>  such that we can directly compare the properties of their species-specific genes. finally, within the two focal genera, p. falciparum and t. annulata have a higher level of completeness of genome assembly than their sister species and thus are better choices for determining the chromosomal location of the lineage-specific genes.

sequence divergence
the two plasmodium species, p. falciparum and p. vivax, differ greatly in their base composition. in the coding region, p. falciparum has a  content of 24% while p. vivax has a  content of 46%. estimates of dn  and ds  are not reliable due to the extreme at-bias in the p. falciparum genome. the average ds calculated from  <dig>  p. falciparum-p. vivax sequence pairs is  <dig> . for this reason, we quantified sequence divergence at the amino acid level based on the protein distance calculated by tree-puzzle  <cit> . we found that the level of sequence divergence between sister taxa is positively correlated with the lineage specificity of a gene . the same trend is observed in both species-pairs. compared to the two plasmodium species, the theileria species-pair has a lower level of sequence divergence. level  <dig> genes are not included in the sequence divergence result because they are species-specific and have no orthologous sequence in the sister species for comparison.

we identified  <dig>  genes that are single copy in both theileria species and are reasonably conserved for substitution rate analysis at the nucleotide level . consistent with the sequence divergence measured at the amino acid level, nucleotide substitution rates are higher in genes with higher lineage specificity . we do not find strong evidence of any gene under positive selection .

genes that are not single-copy or have a high level of divergence  are excluded because the substitution rate estimates are not reliable. level  <dig> genes are not included because they are species-specific and have no orthologous sequence for comparison. the nonsynonymous substitution rate  indicates the number of nonsynonymous substitutions per nonsynonymous site; the synonymous substitution rate  indicates the number of synonymous substitutions per synonymous site.

 content and relative codon bias
the average  content at the third codon position ) increases with lineage specificity in p. falciparum , suggesting that phylogenetically conserved genes are biased toward at-rich codons in this extremely at-rich genome. in t. annulata, the opposite trend is observed; genes with high lineage specificity have a lower  content at the third codon position .

we used the relative codon bias developed by karlin et al.  <cit>  to compare the differences in codon usage between different gene sets within each species . in both p. falciparum and t. annulata, the level  <dig>  genes exhibit a high level of deviation with regard of their codon preference compared to the other gene sets . in p. falciparum, the average pairwise difference in all comparisons is  <dig>  and the mean pairwise difference involving pf <dig> genes is  <dig>  . in t. annulata, the average pairwise difference in all comparison is  <dig>  and the mean pairwise difference involving ta <dig> genes is  <dig>  .

the relative codon bias between groups of genes was calculated based on the method developed by karlin et al.  <cit> . the gene sets listed in columns are used as the reference and the gene sets listed in rows are the focal set. a. relative codon bias between sets of p. falciparum genes. b. relative codon bias between sets of t. annulata genes.

functional analyses based on annotation
as expected, most of the phylogenetically conserved genes have functional annotation or have at least one identifiable protein domain . as the phylogenetic distribution of a gene becomes more restricted, it is more likely to be annotated as a hypothetical protein. functional analysis based on available gene annotation indicates that most conserved genes  are responsible for basic cellular processes , while most genus- and species-specific genes  are hypothetical proteins of unknown function . despite the poor annotation of genus- and species-specific genes, 87% of level  <dig> genes and 72% of level  <dig> genes in p. falciparum have expression data available based on oligonucleotide microarrays  <cit> . this result suggests that most of the hypothetical proteins are real genes and not annotation artifacts.

gene sets from pf <dig> through pf <dig> refer to the orthologous gene clusters present in the six levels of lineage specificity defined in figure  <dig>  pf6a is the same as pf <dig> except that it excludes three surface antigen gene families . note that there may be more than one p. falciparum gene in a gene cluster when paralogous genes are present in the genome.

the two focal lineages in our analysis, plasmodium and theileria, exhibit one interesting difference in terms of the phylogenetic distribution of surface antigens. we found that surface antigens are species-specific in plasmodium and genus-specific in theileria. all members of the three large surface antigen protein families in p. falciparum genome, including  <dig> rifin,  <dig> pfemp <dig>  and  <dig> stevor, are found in the pf <dig> list and have no ortholog in p. vivax. of the  <dig> t. annulata proteins that contain faint, a protein domain that associates with proteins exported to the host cell  <cit> ,  <dig> are in the ta <dig> list  and only  <dig> are in the ta <dig> list .

in p. falciparum 41% of the genus-specific proteins and 62% of the species-specific proteins contain a putative signal peptide or at least one predicted transmembrane domain , which suggests that these proteins may be exported to the host cell or present on the surface of the parasite or its vacuole. this result is consistent with the hypothesis that lineage-specific genes in apicomplexan parasites are likely to be involved in host-parasite interactions and thus, potentially adaptation.

chromosomal location
analysis of chromosomal location demonstrated that most species-specific genes in p. falciparum are located near chromosome ends . in t. annulata , we observed a similar pattern that the regions adjacent to chromosome ends are devoid of the phylogenetically conserved genes . however, unlike the pattern found in p. falciparum, most of the species-specific genes in t. annulata  are distributed across the entire length of chromosomes and are not enriched in the regions adjacent to chromosome ends .

to quantify the pattern of gene distribution on chromosomes, we calculated the distance of each gene to the nearest chromosome end. for each set of genes , we utilized  the average distance to the nearest chromosome end and  the minimal distance to the nearest chromosome end  for this analysis. in p. falciparum, the average distance scales with chromosome size and the species-specific genes  are closer to chromosome ends . in contrast, minimal distance does not scale with chromosome size . for all chromosomes, the minimal distances of phylogenetically conserved genes from the chromosome ends  are larger than 50– <dig> kb. this result indicates that the regions that are occupied exclusively by genus- and species-specific genes are proportionally larger in smaller chromosomes. consistent with this observation, three of the smallest chromosomes in p. falciparum  have many more species-specific genes than random expectation  *  =  <dig>  p-value = 1e-12).

in t. annulata, genes with different levels of lineage specificity have similar average distances to chromosome ends . this result corroborates the visual pattern in figure 6a that species-specific genes are distributed across the entire length of a chromosome, in contrast to the clustering near chromosome ends observed in p. falciparum . for all four chromosomes in t. annulata, the regions that are adjacent to chromosome ends and devoid of phylogenetically conserved genes  are approximately 20– <dig> kb , a distance smaller than in p. falciparum. unlike the pattern found in p. falciparum in which species-specific genes are closer to chromosome ends than genus-specific genes, genus- and species-specific genes in t. annulata  have similar minimal distances in all four chromosomes .

in both p. falciparum and t. annulata, genes located near chromosome ends have a higher level of sequence divergence relative to its ortholog in the sister species at the amino acid level . this trend is observed in genes with different levels of lineage specificity and is stronger in t. annulata.

discussion
we identified a pattern in which lineage-specific genes have a higher level of sequence divergence among sister species in a group of important protozoan parasites. this result is consistent with previous studies in bacteria  <cit> , fungi  <cit> , and animals  <cit> . now we further confirm that this pattern also holds true in a protistan phylum, suggesting that it may be universal across much of the tree-of-life. results from functional analyses agree with our intuitive expectation that conserved genes are involved in basic cellular functionalities and are well annotated. a large number of the lineage-specific genes  are found to be putative surface antigens that the parasites use to interact with their hosts. this result supports the hypothesis that lineage-specific genes may be important in adaptation  <cit> . in addition, the physical distance of a gene to the nearest chromosome end is correlated with the level of sequence divergence.

we found three contrasting properties of lineage-specific genes between two major apicomplexan lineages. first, families of surface antigens are species-specific in plasmodium but genus-specific in theileria. second, most of the species-specific genes are located in sub-telomeric regions in p. falciparum but no such pattern exists in t. annulata. third, the  content at the third codon position increases with lineage specificity in p. falciparum but decreases in t. annulata. taken together, these results suggest that the mechanisms of generating lineage-specific genes and their subsequent evolutionary fates differ between apicomplexan parasite lineages.

gene content evolution
all apicomplexan species analyzed have small genomes compared to the free-living out-group. this result is consistent with comparative genomic analyses conducted in other pathogenic bacteria and eukaryotes; extreme genome reduction is a common theme in the genome evolution of these organisms  <cit> .

a large proportion of the genes in apicomplexans are genus-specific . one parsimonious explanation for this observation is that each lineage acquired a new set of genes during its evolutionary history. an alternative explanation invokes differential loss among lineages when evolving from a free-living ancestor with a relatively large genome. we found that 23% of the protein coding genes in p. falciparum and 16% in t. annulata have a complex phylogenetic distribution pattern and do not fit into a simple single gain/loss model. these results suggest that some ancestral genes in the apicomplexans may have experienced multiple independent losses during their evolutionary history. further investigation is necessary to distinguish true gene gains from differential retention of ancestral genes.

comparison of genes with different levels of lineage specificity
consistent with previous studies in bacteria  <cit> , fungi  <cit> , and animals  <cit> , we observed a pattern in which sequence divergence is higher in genes with a higher level of lineage specificity. one explanation is that phylogenetically conserved genes are often involved in fundamental cellular processes . these genes are likely to be under purifying selection that constrains the rate of sequence divergence. in support of this hypothesis, we observe that the mean dn/ds ratio among the level  <dig> genes in theileria is only  <dig>  , indicating an extremely low rate of nonsynonymous substitution relative to synonymous substitution.

based on the hypothesis that lineage-specific genes are often involved in adaptation  <cit> , such as invasion of hosts or evasion of the immune responses, lineage-specific genes may be under positive selection and have a faster rate of sequence divergence. our data is suggestive in this regard, as genus-specific genes exhibit higher sequence divergence than genes with lower levels of lineage specificity. unfortunately we cannot directly test the hypothesis that lineage-specific genes are more likely to be under positive selection using the dn/ds ratio data. the level of sequence divergence is too high in both species pairs for such analysis. practically all of the genes from the plasmodium pair and approximately  <dig>  genes from the theileria pair  have a ds estimate that is larger than one. under this high level of sequence divergence, we cannot confidently estimate the substitution rate due to saturation. better detection of positive selection in these genes requires data on genetic variation at within- and between-species levels  <cit> .

codon bias analyses indicate that species-specific genes have a different codon preference compared to other genes in the same genome, whereas the genes with lower levels of lineage specificity are relatively similar to each other . it is possible that species-specific genes are relatively young and have yet to adapt to the codon usage pattern of the genome. support for this hypothesis provided by the observation that the  content at the third codon position is much lower in the phylogenetically conserved genes in p. falciparum , suggesting that these 'older' genes are more biased toward gc-poor codons in this at-rich genome. alternatively, some species-specific genes may be subject to a different pattern of selection and thus possess different codon preference.

for the lineage-specific genes at the genus and species level that have functional annotations, many are known surface antigens. because surface antigens are used by the parasites to interact with their hosts  <cit> , such as adhesion to the cell surface or evasion of the host immune response, this result supports the hypothesis that  lineage-specific genes are involved in host-parasite interactions and have facilitated lineage-specific adaptation. interestingly, surface antigens are species-specific in plasmodium, but are genus-specific in theileria. in addition, 62% of p. falciparum-specific genes contain a putative signal peptide or at least one predicted transmembrane domain. this result is consistent with one previous study that compared p. falciparum with three other plasmodium species that cause rodent malaria  <cit> . of the  <dig> p. falciparum-specific genes identified in this previous study that are not located in sub-telomeric regions, 68% are predicted to be exported to the surface of the parasites or the infected host cells.

comparison between plasmodium and theileria
previous studies suggest that the two focal species pairs have similar divergence times. the two plasmodium species diverged about 80– <dig> million years ago  <cit>  and the two theileria species diverged about  <dig> million years ago  <cit> . our results indicate that sequence divergence is much higher between the two plasmodium species . this may be caused by the difference in nucleotide composition, since p. falciparum has a gc content of 24% while p. vivax has a gc content of 46% in the coding region. bias in nucleotide composition has been shown to change codon usage and amino acid composition  <cit> . alternatively, it is also possible that the divergence time between t. annulata and t. parva was overestimated because it was based on a simplified assumption that the synonymous substitution rate in theileria is similar to that in plasmodium  <cit> .

in both p. falciparum and t. annulata, the sub-telomeric regions contain exclusively genus- or species-specific genes. interestingly, the physical size of these regions is not correlated with chromosome size. this observation indicates that these regions are proportionally larger in smaller chromosomes and helps explains the pattern that the three small chromosomes in p. falciparum have many more species-specific genes than predicted by random expectations . in addition, genes that are located near a chromosome end have a higher level of sequence divergence in both species, regardless of their lineage specificity . the high evolutionary rates in sub-telomeric regions are shared by many eukaryotic lineages; high rates of inter-chromosomal recombination, local duplication, and segmental rearrangement have been reported in organisms including humans  <cit> , yeasts  <cit> , and plants  <cit> .

given the high rates of evolution in sub-telomeric regions, it may be advantageous for pathogens to have their surface antigen genes located in these evolutionary hotspots to facilitate the generation of antigenic diversity. consistent with this hypothesis, many micro-parasites have large gene families that encode surface antigens in sub-telomeric regions . the best-studied example is the causative agent of african trypanosomiasis, trypanosoma brucei. the vsg gene family in t. brucei encodes variant surface glycoproteins  that form a dense coat on the outside of the parasite. in the bloodstream stage, t. brucei sequentially expresses different members of the vsg gene family, one at a time, to generate antigenic variation  <cit> . the positioning of vsg genes in the genome is tightly linked to regulation of expression; the actively expressed vsg is duplicated into one of the bloodstream expression sites located in the sub-telomeric regions . this homologous recombination process which involves loci that are not positional alleles is hypothesized to be important in generating genetic diversity within the gene family  <cit> . although the genes encoding surface antigens in p. falciparum are not known to be duplicated into specific expression sites as observed in t. brucei, the clustering of these genes in sub-telomeric regions can facilitate inter-chromosomal recombination that increases antigenic variation  <cit> .

we found that most of the surface antigen genes in p. falciparum are located in sub-telomeric regions, as previously noted  <cit> . several studies have established the importance of genome location in the generation and maintenance of antigenic variation in p. falciparum  <cit> . the surface antigen pfemp <dig> possessed by p. falciparum is exported to the cell surface of infected erythrocytes. pfemp <dig> can remove infected erythrocytes from blood circulation by cellular adherence to microvascular endothelial cells and avoid spleen-dependent killing  <cit> . the study on genetic structuring suggested that the approximately  <dig> copies of var genes  in the p. falciparum genome can be divided into three functionally diverged groups with two in sub-telomeric regions and one close to the centers of chromosomes  <cit> . furthermore, the recombination rate is found to be high among members in the same functional group but low for members belonging to different groups. this recombinational hierarchy may facilitate the generation of genetic diversity within a group and promote specialization between different groups. experimental evidence suggests that the clustering of var genes in the sub-telomeric regions is important in the epigenetic regulation of gene expression in p. falciparum  <cit> .

given the generality of association between surface antigen genes and sub-telomeric regions in micro-parasites, it is interesting to see that t. annulata appears to be an exception to this rule. this finding may provide an explanation for the difference in host range between the two apicomplexan lineages. because a large percentage of surface antigen genes in plasmodium are located in sub-telomeric regions, the generation of antigenic variation may be faster in plasmodium than in theileria. our results indicate that gene families encoding surface antigens in plasmodium are highly diverged between species within the genus, whereas the two theileria species still share most of their surface antigens and the genes encoding them are distributed across the entire lengths of chromosomes. for this reason, plasmodium may be able to adapt to new host species at a faster rate, resulting in its much wider host range compared to theileria; plasmodium spp. can infect mammals, birds, and reptiles, whereas theileria spp. are limited to ruminants  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
our results agree with previous observations in other organisms that lineage-specific genes have a higher level of sequence divergence compared to phylogenetically conserved genes. in addition, two major apicomplexan lineages may have different mechanisms for generating or retaining species-specific genes. because many lineage-specific genes in these parasites are surface antigens that interact with the host, future investigations on genome evolution in these parasites may facilitate the identification of new therapeutic or vaccine targets. future studies that focus on improving functional annotation of parasite genomes and the collection of genetic variation data at different phylogenetic levels will be important in our understanding of parasite adaptation and natural selection.

