BACKGROUND
mosquitoes are transmitters of several serious human diseases including malaria. anophelines are the only transmitters of malaria. anopheles stephensi is the main vector in urban india, where 70% of world-wide malaria related cases occur. during the development and maturation of parasite in vector the midgut of the female anopheles is a major site of interaction. interruption of parasite development in mosquitoes remains the enticing strategy for the control of mosquito-borne diseases. the malaria parasite development involves critical steps within the mosquito midgut, an environment it shares with gut-residing bacteria. the occurrence of apparent 'symbiotic' association between anopheles mosquitoes and bacterial species has not been much evaluated.

a possible approach to restrict malaria parasite transmission is to manipulate the mosquito functional genome, one possible approach is to employ normal bacterial symbionts of the mosquito gut to block development cycle in the vector. gut microbes have been described to be involved in supporting normal growth and development of drosophila. there have been conflicting reports regarding the role of microbes in the fitness of the vector. hedges et al.  described that drosophila melanogaster flies infected with a common bacterial endosymbiont, wolbachia display reduced mortality induced by a range of rna viruses and bacterial presence provides a fitness advantage to flies. the study highlighted the notion that the native microbes are symbionts that modulate immune responses  <cit> . on the other hand, wolbachia pipientis wmelpop strain presence in dengue vector aedes aegypti, reduced the life span of vector to half the normal adult life span. nevertheless, it is becoming abundantly clear that endosymbiont microbes have a profound influence on the vector persistence and competence in nature  <cit> .

mosquito midgut is an immune-competent organ. plasmodium presence in gut is known to induce immune responses elsewhere in body, probably due to immune-signaling  <cit> . the intensively investigated question is whether mosquito midgut resident endosymbiont contribute towards elicitation of immune response of host to plasmodium invasion? if they do indeed contribute towards facilitation of plasmodium development in mosquito, the second important question is can these endosymbionts be used as paratransgenic to block their development? it is coceivable that a vector endosymbiont may be manipulated to produce antiparasitic molecules. this vector could then reintroduced into the insect gut, thus inhibiting parasite development  <cit> . a close relationship between gut microflora and mosquito development is exemplified during the metamorphosis of larva into adult mosquito. during metamorphic transition from larvae to adult the microflora associated with larvae is 'cleaned' and adult mosquitoes acquire new set of microbes. this process of microbial cleansing and acquisition is termed as gut-sterilization  <cit> .

a few studies have been performed to identify bacterial species in field-collected anopheles mosquitoes, using microbe culturing techniques. these studies highlighted breadth of bacterial flora associated with mosquitoes. bacteria, pseudomonas cepacia, enterobacter agglomerans, and flavobacterium spp. were found in high abundance in laboratory-reared a. stephensi, a. gambiae and a. albimanus mosquitoes  <cit> . further, the gut microflora varied depending upon the ecological niche or geographical location of the mosquitoes. straif et al.  identified pantoea agglomerans  and escherichia coli as the most frequently isolated bacteria, from midgut of a. gambiae and a. funestus mosquitoes caught in kenya and mali  <cit> . jadin et al.  identified pseudomonas sp. in the midgut of mosquitoes from the democratic republic of the congo  <cit> . gonzalez-ceron et al.  isolated various enterobacter and serratia sp. from anopheles albimanus mosquitoes captured in southern mexico  <cit> . recently, field-captured a. gambiae mosquitoes in a kenyan village were reported to consistently associate with a thorsellia anophelis lineage that was also detected in the surface microlayer of rice paddies  <cit> . the microbial flora associated with anopheles darlingi, a major neotropical malaria vector, was found to be closely related to other vector mosquitoes, including aeromonas, pantoea and pseudomonas species. laboratory-reared a. stephensi has been reported to stably associate with bacteria of the genus asaia  <cit> . the successful colonization of serratia marcescens in laboratory-bred a. stephensi has also been established  <cit> .

however, it should be emphasized that microbial studies of the midgut of anopheles are scarce, and have depended mainly on traditional culture-based techniques  <cit> . in a. gambiae, few studies have combined culture and pcr-based approaches to characterize gut associated bacteria  <cit> . therefore, the application of "culture-dependent and culture- independent" based tools, such as 16s rrna gene sequencing and metagenomics, to study these systems are highly desirable. 16s rrna gene sequencing and metagenomics, have been primarily responsible in revealing the status of our lack of knowledge of microbial world such that half of the bacterial phyla recognized so far consist largely of these as yet uncultured bacteria  <cit> . it also provides, an idea of species richness  and relative abundance , which reflect relative pressure that shape diversity within biological communities  <cit> .

there is current interest in the use of microorganisms as biological control agents of vector-borne diseases  <cit> . microorganisms associated with vectors could exert a direct pathogenic effect on the host by interfering with its reproduction or reduce vector competence  <cit> . in laboratory-raised insects, the bacteria in the midgut can be acquired both transstadially and through contaminated sugar solutions and bloodmeals. in wild populations, however, the origin of the midgut bacteria, are still unknown  <cit> . an understanding of the microbial community structure of the mosquito midgut is necessary, which will enable us to identify the organisms that play significant roles in the maintenance of these communities. to understand the bacterial diversity and to identify bacterial candidates for a paratransgenic mosquito, we conducted a screen for midgut bacteria from lab-reared and wild-caught a. stephensi mosquitoes using "culture-dependent and culture-independent" approach.

RESULTS
isolation and biochemical characterization of bacterial isolates
plating of the mosquito midgut contents from lab-reared and field-collected adult a. stephensi  was used for the isolation of the culturable micro flora. the bacterial colonies on tsa and lb agar were selected on the basis of minor variations using conventional microbiological techniques. the initial number of isolates was reduced based on colony characteristics  and the morphology of isolates studied by gram staining. microbial isolates were further selected on the basis of physiological parameters such as their sensitivity to different antibiotics . it ensured the diversity of microbes at a preliminary level. the abilities of these microbial isolates to solublize the various substrates such as amylase, lipase and protease were also quite variable, few bacillus strains were among the high protease producers, whereas enterobacter sp. were showing high lipase activity. overall activity in all strains was moderate, with no activity observed  in few of the isolates. to determine the phylogenetic relatedness of the strains, mosquito midgut contents were subjected to analysis with the 16s rrna gene sequencing using "culture-dependent and culture-independent" approaches. five 16s rrna clone libraries were constructed and approximately  <dig> sequences per library were analyzed.

diversity of cultured bacteria from lab-reared adult a. stephensi
out of a total of  <dig> screened bacterial colonies,  <dig> distinct isolates,  <dig> from adult male and  <dig> from adult female lab-reared a. stephensi were studied further. 16s rrna sequencing placed these two sets of  <dig> and  <dig> isolates with their closest matches into  <dig> major groups. in lab- reared adult male a. stephensi isolates,  <dig> major groups were: cytophaga-flavobacter-bacteroidetes , alphaproteobacteria and gammaproteobacteria, whereas in lab-reared adult female betaproteobacteria was also identified . 16s rrna gene sequence identified the lab-reared adult male bacterial isolates as agrobacterium sp., chryseobacterium meninqosepticum, pseudomonas mendocina and serratia marcescens, whereas in lab-reared a. stephensi adult female comamonas sp. was also present, the details of which are shown in table  <dig>  in lab-reared adult male and female a. stephensi, most abundant and diverse members were of gammaproteobacteria  particularly, pseudomonas mendocina and s. marcescens, as a dominant group. it was followed by cfb group bacteria  constituting around 33% and 38% in male and female a. stephensi, respectively. distinctive representative genera in lab-reared female a. stephensi was comamonas sp. , representing 13% of total isolates. however, male a. stephensi isolates were distinguishable by genera such as agrobacterium sp., an alphaproteobacterium. chryseobacterium, pseudomonas and serratia were genera common to adult male and female a. stephensi.

database
database
database
database
cfb
alpha
beta
gamma
unclassified
distribution of the isolates and otus in taxonomic groups and their abundance in the individual samples are displayed.

a: operational taxonomic units b: values in parenthesis corresponds to total number of microbial strains identified.

total number of phylotypes observed:

lab-reared adult male a. stephensi = 26

lab-reared adult female a. stephensi = 18

analysis of the 16s rrna gene clone library from lab-reared adult a. stephensi
one hundred clones were screened from each lab-reared adult male and female a. stephensi 16s rrna gene library, out of which  <dig> clones from each were analyzed further on the basis of sequencing results. the 16s rrna gene sequencing data of isolates and clones were used to divide them into broad taxonomic groupings. the relative abundance or percent distribution of the taxonomic groups obtained in lab-reared adult a. stephensi is shown in figure  <dig>  analysis of the 16s rrna gene sequence revealed that the libraries were dominated by sequences related to the genus pseudomonas and serratia . the majority of the cultured isolates and the 16s rrna gene library clones belonged to the gammaproteobacteria class. diversity of bacteria within the 16s rrna gene libraries from lab-reared male and female a. stephensi was rather low, with relatively few phylotypes. low bacterial diversity in anopheles species by 16s rrna gene sequencing has been reported, with six, two, and one bacterial species in a. arabiensis, a. gambiae sensu stricto, and a. funestus, respectively  <cit> . we detected few operational taxonomic units  within the gammaproteobacteria that were detected in other studies by 16s rrna gene sequencing and bacterial isolation  <cit> . this difference may be due to the differences in microbial ecology which widens the view of the actual diversity residing in a system.

a total of  <dig> genera were identified,  <dig> from the lab-reared adult male and  <dig> from adult female a. stephensi 16s rrna library and used to assign each of the clones to taxonomic groups . cloning revealed that almost 50% of the sequences obtained in both the libraries were related to known bacteria, which fall within defined groups . it can be seen that there are not much of the differences between isolates and the 16s rrna gene library from lab- reared adult a. stephensi in the relative abundance of the different taxonomic groups. these appeared to reflect that except few isolates, microbial flora present in adult mosquitoes was more or less similar.

bacterial community structure
we grouped 16s rrna gene sequences with its nearest neighbors  as shown by blastn search and clone clusters are comprised of one or more phylotypes. sequences with more than 97% similarity were considered to be of the same otus. the frequencies of the otus obtained are shown in table  <dig>  a total of  <dig> phylotypes were observed,  <dig> from lab-reared male and  <dig> from female a. stephensi 16s rrna library. whereas, by culturable methods  <dig> phylotypes were detected,  <dig> each from lab-reared male and female a. stephensi.

the most abundant phylotypes  in the lab-reared adult a. stephensi 16s rrna libraries were closest matches to gammaproteobacteria  and cfb . almost same pattern is observed among culturable isolates, with gammaproteobacteria and cfb as major phylotypes detected. elizabethkingia meningoseptica clones were observed  only in adult 16s rrna gene libraries, no culturable isolate was identified, whereas c. meninqosepticum, was detected in culturable as well as 16s rrna gene clones among adult mosquitoes.

second major phylotypes in lab-reared male 16s rrna gene library belonged to alphaproteobacteria – agrobacterium tumefaciens  followed by unidentified class of bacteria , none of the alphaproteobacteria and unidentified bacterium clones were detected from female 16s rrna library. the degree of similarity of clone sequences and the 16s rrna gene sequence of its closest relative in the database was in the range of 90–99%. the phylotypes indicated by culture-independent methods exhibited greater divergence and diversity than phylotypes recovered by culturing .

diversity of cultured bacteria from field-collected adult a. stephensi
male anopheles stephensi
analysis with the 16s rrna gene sequence identified  <dig> different bacterial isolates by culture- dependent methods. the phylogenetic tree based on 16s rrna gene placed the  <dig> different bacterial isolates, with their closest matches into  <dig> major bacterial phyla. the 16s rrna gene sequences from a variety of phylogenetic groups are shown in figure  <dig>  in field-collected male a. stephensi  <dig> major groups were, high g+c gram-positive actinobacteria, gram-positive firmicutes and gammaproteobacteria. distinctive representative genera were; micrococcus sp., staphylococcus hominis, s. saprophyticus, acinetobacter sp., a. lwofii, a. radioresistens, a. johnsonii, enterobacter sp., e. cloacae and escherichia hermani details of which are shown in table  <dig>  sequences with more than 97% similarity were considered to be of the same otus. a total of  <dig> distinct phylotypes were identified from male a. stephensi. the frequencies of the otus obtained are shown in table  <dig> 

cfb
distribution of the clones and otus in taxonomic groups and their abundance in the individual samples are displayed. a: operational taxonomic units, b: values in parenthesis corresponds to total number of microbial strains identified, c: no significant similarity found .

total number of phylotypes observed: field-collected adult male a. stephensi =  <dig> 

field-collected adult female a. stephensi =  <dig>  field-collected larvae of a. stephensi =  <dig> 

a large proportion of the isolates, 82% was identified as gammaproteobacteria, where dominant genera were acinetobacter, enterobacter and escherichia. the group of firmicutes constituted 12% of the total clones and was moderately occupied by staphylococcus hominis and s. saprophyticus. high g+c gram positive actinobacteria  was represented by a single clone otu observed among 6% of total male isolates. it was showing less than 85% homology to the closest database match.

male anopheles stephensi 16s rrna gene library
a total of  <dig> clones were analyzed initially from 16s rrna gene library of midgut content of field-collected male a. stephensi. the 16s rrna gene sequencing placed the clones with their closest matches into  <dig> major bacterial groups: cfb, gram-positive firmicutes, betaproteobacteria and gammaproteobacteria. in male a. stephensi 16s rrna gene library, gram-positive bacteria, especially bacteria of the phylum firmicutes dominated the flora. this is not in accordance with culture-based studies made in male a. stephensi. a total of  <dig> distinct phylotypes were identified from male 16s rrna library clones . the most frequently encountered sequences in this work originated from species of the genera: bacillus sp., paenibacillus alginolyticus, p. chondroitinus, and herbaspirillum sp. these phylotypes were specific to the field-collected male midgut flora, as none of the species were identified in rest of the samples. bacillus sp., p. chondroitinus, herbaspirillum sp., and photorhabdus luminescens were identified as single unique phylotypes . the good's coverage calculated for the  <dig> clones was  <dig> % .

the table lists the number of phylotypes, observed and estimated species richness, coverage and diversity indices for the culturables and 16s rrna clone libraries from lab-reared and field- collected adult and larval anopheles stephensi mosquitoes. numbers were calculated with dotur program, otus were defined using a distance level of 3%.

the shannon-weiner diversity index  <cit>  is calculated as follows:

a: s = : total number of species in the sample.

b: h = Σ  , where p represents the proportion of a distinct phylotype relative to the sum of all phylotypes.

c: e =  was calculated as follows: e = h/hmax where hmax = log <dig> 

c_ace = ace coverage, c_chao = chao coverage, c_simpson = simpson coverage

good's coverage =  × 100

where n is the number of molecular species represented by one clone  and n is the total number of sequences  <cit> .

m: adult male anopheles stephensi

f: adult female anopheles stephensi

l: anopheles stephensi larvae

in all, 64% of the clones were found to belong to firmicutes, followed by 28% from unclassified class of bacteria  were also identified. cfb, betaproteobacteria and gammaproteobacteria, each constituted 1% of the total clones . it can be observed here that among culturable isolates gammaproteobacteria are the dominant group, whereas 16s rrna gene clones were dominated by firmicutes. both the approaches  have led to the identification of more number of genera in each sample as compared to single sample analysis.

female anopheles stephensi
a total of  <dig> distinct isolates were identified from field-collected female a. stephensi midgut microflora. on the basis of phylogenetic tree 16s rrna gene sequences were found to belong to major two bacterial phyla, gammaproteobacteria and cfb . the majority of the cultured isolates from field-collected and lab-reared adults belonged to the gammaproteobacteria class. a total of  <dig> bacterial otus were detected among female a. stephensi on the basis of 97% sequence similarity as a cut off value . sequences with more than 97% similarity were considered to be of the same otus. representative genera of gammaproteobacteria were, acinetobacter sp., a. hemolyticus, a. radioresistens, citrobacter freundii, enterobacter sp., e. cloacae, e. sakazaki, escherichia hermani and enterobacteriaceae bacterium. they constituted the largest proportion of 97%, among the total diversity. out of the  <dig> distinct phylotypes observed,  <dig> were found to belong to class gammaproteobacteria only. only single phylotype chryseobacterium indologenes, from cfb was detected with 3% proportion from the total observed otus. none of the member from high g+c gram-positive actinobacteria and gram-positive firmicutes were observed, as in field-collected male a. stephensi. similarly, none of the cfb group phylotypes were detected in female a. stephensi. isolates belonging to genus acinetobacter sp., a. radioresistens, enterobacter sp., e. cloacae and escherichia hermani were commonly observed in both male as well as female field-collected a. stephensi. these results are quite different from the data what we have observed in lab-reared adult a. stephensi .

female anopheles stephensi 16s rrna gene library
a total of  <dig> clones were found positive for the insert and were partially sequenced. of these, three were shown to be chimeras and were therefore not included for further analysis. the phylogenetic analysis of the remaining clones was done using partial 16s rrna gene aligned homologous nucleotide sequences . the percentage distribution of the clones from the 16s rrna gene library representing the microbiota of female a. stephensi midgut was determined  on the basis of sequence similarity to the existing genbank database entries, the clones were clustered together to form four major groups: gram positive firmicutes, betaproteobacteria and gammaproteobacteria and the unidentified and uncultured bacteria group. the last group included all the uncharacterized and as yet uncultured bacteria. thirty six distinct phylotypes were observed from female a. stephensi midgut 16s rrna gene library.

in accordance with culturable isolates, 16s rrna libraries were also dominated by gammaproteobacteria, constituting 86% of the total clones analyzed. representative genera were: acinetobacter sp., a. hemolyticus, uncultured acinetobacter sp., pseudomonas putida, p. synxantha, uncultured pseudomonas sp., serratia marcescens, s. nematodiphila, s. proteamaculans, xenorhabdus nematodiphila, leminorella grimontii, uncultured gamma proteobacteria and enterobacteriaceae bacterium.

unclassified group represented 12% of the total clones  whereas gram-positive firmicute  and betaproteobacteria  contributed 1% each to the total number of clones analyzed. leuconostoc citreum is one of the most prevalent lactic acid bacteria, in a best-known korean traditional dish. it can suppress the growth of pathogenic microorganisms such as b. cereus, listeria monocytogenes, micrococcus luteus, p. aeruginosa and salmonella enterica serovar typhimurium. its complete genome sequence may provide us with scientific insights into the probiotic effects of l. citreum and may lead to new biotechnological applications along with its significance inside mosquito midgut.

it is interesting to observe here that many of the single clone otus such as leuconostoc citreum, achromobacter xylosoxidans, pseudomonas synxantha, s. nematodiphila, s. proteamaculans, xenorhabdus nematodiphila and leminorella grimontii were particularly present in female a. stephensi midgut microbial flora and was not present in either male or larval midgut microbial diversity.

anopheles stephensi larvae
five major phyla, cfb, gram-positive firmicutes, gammaproteobacteria, deinococcus-thermus and unidentified class of bacteria were identified from  <dig> isolates of field-collected a. stephensi larvae. a total of  <dig> phylotypes were observed with 97% similarity values as cut off. the 16s rrna gene sequences from a variety of phylogenetic groups are shown in figure  <dig>  the majority of the cultured isolates  from field-collected a. stephensi larvae were found to belonging gammaproteobacteria class. distinct genera were acinetobacter venetianus, aeromonas sobria, a. popoffii, pseudomonas anquilliseptica, uncultured pseudoxanthomonas, thorsellia anopheles and vibrio chlorae. gram-positive firmicutes represented second abundant phylotypes  containing bacillus sp., b. cereus, b. firmus and exiguobacterium sp. cfb group  and uncultured class of bacteria constituted an equal proportion of 7%. the degree of similarity of isolates and the 16s rrna gene sequence of its closest relative in the database was in the range of 85–99%. uncultured class of bacterial sequences obtained was related to unknown, possibly novel bacteria, which did not fall within defined groups . a single otu was observed from deinococcus xinjiangensis .

it can be observed here that the majority of the cultured isolates from field-collected adults and larvae belonged to the gammaproteobacteria class with acinetobacter as a common and dominant genus. most of the sequence types were specific to larval samples only, such as aeromonas sobria, a. popoffii, pseudomonas anquilliseptica, uncultured pseudoxanthomonas, thorsellia anopheles and vibrio chlorae. bacillus firmus, exiguobacterium sp. and deinococcus xinjiangensis were not detected in either male or female midgut bacterial flora.

16s rrna gene library analysis from anopheles stephensi larvae
more than  <dig> clones were found positive for the insert and were partially sequenced,  <dig> of which were found to contain the amplified 16s rrna gene. of these, four sequences were shown to be chimeras, which were therefore not included for further analysis. the percentage distribution of the clones from the 16s rrna gene library representing the microbiota of the midgut of a. stephensi larvae was determined . the phylogenetic tree based on 16s rrna gene placed the 16s rrna gene library clones from field-collected a. stephensi larvae sample into  <dig> major groups, belonging to  <dig> different genera . these groups were: cyanobacteria, actinobacteria, cfb group bacteria, gram-positive firmicutes, betaproteobacteria, gammaproteobacteria, deinococcus xinjiangensis, and the unidentified and uncultured bacteria group. larval midgut microbial flora was the found to be most diverse as compared to adult mosquito midgut diversity. cloning revealed that almost 50% of the sequences obtained in library were not related to the known bacteria. since the percent similarity with the reported closest database matches are less than 97%, these may be categorized among the new bacteria/species. a total of  <dig> phylotypes were observed from 16s rrna library based on their less than 97% similarity.

the most abundant phylotypes were closest matches to gammaproteobacteria, constituting 65% of the clones. distinct genera were enterobacter aerogenes, ignatzschineria larvae sp., uncultured enterobacter sp., serratia sp., uncultured serratia sp., s. marcescens, s. nematodiphila and thorsellia anopheles. gram-positive firmicutes contributed 14% of distinct phylotypes from groups of staphylococcus cohnii, streptococcus suis, uncultured b. thermoamylovorans and uncultured lactobacillus sp. the inability to detect bacillus sp. in clone libraries despite their presence on plates was observed among larvae samples. 11% of the clones were found to belong to betaproteobacteria, mainly azoarcus sp., leptothrix sp. and uncultured hydroxenophaga sp. deinococcus xinjiangensis was identified as single clone otus among 6% of the clones. cyanobacteria, actinobacteria, cfb group and uncultured class of clones represented 1% of the single clone otus as calothrix sp., brevibacterium paucivorans, uncultured dysqonomona sp. and uncultured bacterium . the degree of similarity of clone sequences and the 16s rrna gene sequence of its closest match in the database were in the range of 85–98%. it was very interesting to observe that the individual libraries harbored many sequence types unique to that library and sample, so the even single data set provides a better estimate of the total diversity in all the samples. among the lab-reared and field-caught mosquito midgut bacteria chryseobacterium, pseudomonas and serratia sp. were found to be overlapping in adult female and larval mosquitoes, whereas no genera were found to be overlapping in adult male a. stephensi.

uncultured groups and "novel" lineages
results of jukes-cantor evolutionary distance matrix suggested that the vast majority of the sequences were different strains of known and unknown species and may represent new species within the genus of different phylum. many 16s rrna gene sequences from field-collected male a. stephensi   and many clusters of different phylotypes in female a. stephensi, such as f <dig>  f <dig>  f <dig>  f <dig>  f <dig>  were very distinct from those of cultured organisms present in the ncbi database. larval a. stephensi sequences  were also found to be deep branching in tree with low bootstrap values, which suggests a high genetic diversity. these did not appear to fall within defined groups and subgroups and may represent "novel" species. many of such novel isolates have been reported earlier by 16s rrna gene-based identification of midgut bacteria from field-caught a. gambiae and a. funestus mosquitoes which have revealed new species related to known insect symbionts  <cit> . further characterizations of these isolates are in progress. few of them could be identified only to the family level  . the family enterobacteriaceae contains various species previously described as insect symbionts in mosquito midgut screens  <cit> . from this study it is proposed that environmental conditions  provide a specific ecological niche for prolonging survival of diverse and "novel" microbial species.

diversity index analysis
diversity index quantifies diversity in a community and describe its numerical structure. the analysis indicated that most of the bacterial diversity has been sufficiently covered . shannon weaver diversity index  for culturable isolates of lab-reared male and female a. stephensi were  <dig>  and  <dig>  and for uncultivable clones was calculated to be  <dig>  and  <dig>  respectively. species evenness  for the culturables from lab-reared male and female a. stephensi were  <dig>  and  <dig>  and for unculturable flora was  <dig>  and  <dig>  respectively.

these index values varied significantly in field-collected male and female a. stephensi. shannon's diversity index  for culturable diversity of field-collected male and female a. stephensi was  <dig>  and  <dig>  and for uncultivable diversity was calculated to be  <dig>  and  <dig>  respectively. species evenness  for the culturable isolates from field-collected male and female a. stephensi were  <dig>  and  <dig>  and for unculturable diversity were  <dig>  and  <dig>  respectively.

shannon's index  and species evenness values were observed to be comparatively higher for field-collected a. stephensi larvae . species evenness  for the culturable isolates from field-collected a. stephensi larvae was  <dig>  and for unculturable diversity was estimated to be  <dig> . in a recent study on bacterial diversity in the midgut of field-collected adult a. gambiae as measured by the shannon- weaver diversity index,  ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig> , which was slightly higher than those observed for bulk water . bacterial diversity indices in all midgut samples were within the range of h values observed for water   <cit> . these values indicate that the diversity and evenness are quite higher in our samples. the evenness and dominance values approximate to the maximum possible values, as most of the sequence types were recovered only once. the sample coverage using good's method for the male, female and larvae  ranged from  <dig> to 71%.

thus, shannon and simpson diversity indices suggested higher diversity in the field- collected adult male, female and larval midgut flora than the lab-reared adult male and female a. stephensi. the shannon index gives more weight to the rare species and simpson to the dominant  <cit> , but in this case they were quite concordant. the ace and chao estimators did not agree with shannon and simpson in all cases. the chao estimator takes into account only singletons and doubletons, ace uses otus having one to ten clones each  <cit> . the ace and especially chao are dependent of the amount of singletons and the discrepancies with the diversity indices are most probably due to different amounts of singletons in the libraries. higher coverage's have been reported with libraries from human sources,  which may be due to the larger number of sequenced clones in these studies  <cit> .

in lab-reared and field-collected adult and larval midgut flora of a. stephensi investigated in this work, the estimated otu number was  <dig> using 97% sequence identity as the criterion in dotur, using the pooled sequence data from all isolates and clones. the ace estimate for the individual libraries varied from  <dig> to  <dig> . the individual libraries harbored many sequence types unique to that library, such that, even pooled data set provides a better estimate of the total diversity. rarefaction curve analyses  revealed that field-collected a. stephensi male, female and larvae midgut microbial flora  consist of a vast diversity. in clone libraries, with increasing numbers of sequences, the number of otus increases, until saturation is reached. in order to cover total diversity a large number of sequences need to be sampled. however, the present analysis indicates that it is more or less sufficient to give an overview of dominating microbial communities for these two, lab-reared and field- collected environments.

discussion
we have identified the richness and diversity of microbes associated with lab-reared and field- collected mosquito, a. stephensi. malaria transmitting vector a. stephensi occupies several ecological niches and is very successful in transmitting the parasite. characterization of gut micobes by "culture-dependent and culture-independent" methods led to the identification of  <dig> culturable isolates and  <dig> distinct clones . the dominant bacteria in field-captured a. stephensi adult male were uncultured paenibacillaceae family bacteria, while in larvae and female mosquitoes the dominant bacteria was serratia marcescens. in lab-reared adult male and female a. stephensi bacteria, serratia marcescens  and cryseobacterium meninqosepticum  were found to be abundant.

almost 50% isolates and 16s rrna gene clones identified from field-collected adult and larvae a. stephensi, displayed 16s rrna gene similarity to unidentified bacterium clones in public databases . 16s rrna gene sequences of majority of these isolates and clones displayed sequence similarities to cultured or the uncultured bacteria of gammaproteobacteria group. recovery of many isolates and 16s rrna clones belonging to the genus acinetobacter, from field-collected adult male, female and larvae of a. stephensi indicate that gammaproteobacteria may form a significant proportion of the a. stephensi midgut microbiota. the presence of exiguobacterium sp. bacterium related to activated sludge treatment probably reflects the ecological niche of larvae and the metabolic diversity of gammaproteobacteria and other bacterial groups  <cit> . a careful comparative analysis of breadth of diversity of microbes reported from other mosquito species reveals preponderance of bacteria, aeromonas, acinetobacter, enterobacter and pseudomonas in adult a. stephensi midgut flora. these bacterial species have also been identified from the midgut of other anopheles sp.,  <cit>  suggesting that at least a fraction of mosquito midgut inhabitants could be common for different mosquito species inhabiting the similar environment and may represent evolutionary conservation of association of gut vector biology.

the transition from larvae to adult is a metabolically dynamic and complex process. it is likely that the gut-associated flora plays some role in facilitating this transition. the gut during larvae to adult transition is believed to undergo sterilization process and adults recruit new microbiota. our results revealed that the gut sterilization is not complete during transition and certain bacteria are retained . these bacterial species do not become dominant during adult maturation and remain in low abundance except cryseobacterium and serratia sp., which were relatively high in lab-reared adult male, female and field-collected larvae and adult female a. stephensi. acinetobacter and enterobacter sp. were retained by both male and female field-collected a. stephensi. it is interesting to observe here that bacillus and staphylococcus sp. were exclusively retained by adult field-collected male a. stephensi, whereas, cryseobacterium, pseudomonas and serratia sp. were retained by adult field-collected female a. stephensi. adult male and female mosquitoes are anisomorphic and have different feeding habits. the gut flora is known to help in various physiological processes including digestion. the difference in gut flora might help in digestion of different types of food in male and female mosquitoes. female mosquitoes are anautogenous, i.e., they require blood meal for ovarian development, which also supplies loads of microbial flora while male mosquitoes never take blood. this may be the reason for the observed more diverse gut flora in adult female than in the male mosquitoes.

it is observed that the bacterial diversity in field-collected mosquitoes, whether male or female, was much more than that of lab-reared mosquitoes. under laboratory conditions, the mosquitoes were reared in hygienic and controlled conditions whereas, reverse is true for the field conditions. hence, the larvae in field are more exposed to the microbial flora of the open water than their counterparts in the laboratory. larvae being filter feeders ingest the water in immediate vicinity irrespective of their preference. similarly, adult mosquitoes feed on uncontrolled natural diet, while laboratory-reared mosquitoes were fed with sterile glucose solution and resins. even the blood offered to female mosquitoes in laboratory is from infection-free rabbit; on the other hand, the blood meal in field is good source of various infections. thus, field-collected mosquitoes have more chances of having diverse gut flora as was observed.

mosquitoes are known to elicit specific immune responses against parasites  <cit> . some of these immune responsive genes are expressed in response to bacteria and this raises the possibility that the presence of specific bacteria in the gut may have an effect on the efficacy at which a pathogen is transmitted by a vector mosquito  <cit> . in previous studies of lab-reared a. stephensi adults, it was demonstrated that great number of s. marcescens were found in the midgut of the insects, but was not found in larvae and pupae  <cit> . in another study, it was observed that plasmodium vivax load in a. albimanus mosquitoes co-infected with e. cloacae and s. marcensces were lower  than control aseptic a. albimanus mosquitoes with plasmodium vivax infection . in our study, we also observed that a relatively high number of s. marcescens  were identified from lab and field- populations of a. stephensi. however, none s. marcescens species were identified from field- collected male a. stephensi. at this point it is premature to draw correlation between the occurrences of s. marcensce and pathogenecity or vector load. however, previous reports suggest that mortality in s. marcensces-infected a. albimanus mosquitoes was  <dig> times higher compared with the controls  <cit> .

the present study assumes importance in the light of earlier studies which suggested that the composition of midgut microbiota has a significant effect on the survival of dengue  viruses in the gut lumen  <cit> . the overall susceptibility of aedes aegypti mosquitoes to dengue viruses increased more than two-folds, with the incorporation of bacterium aeromonas culicicola. however, the increase in susceptibility was not observed when the antibiotic-treated a. aegypti mosquitoes were used, indicating that a. aegypti mosquito midgut bacterial flora plays a role in determining their capacity to carry viral load to the virus  <cit> . it has also been proposed that wolbachia strains might be used to skew a. aegypti mosquito population life span, thereby reducing pathogen transmission without eradicating mosquito populations  <cit> . furthermore, studies involving the effect of midgut bacterial flora have indicated that the incorporation of the pseudomonas and acinetobacter isolates in the mosquito blood meal resulted in an increased vector load of parasite of culex quinquefasciatus towards virus infections  <cit> . it has also been shown in lab-reared drosophila melanogaster that genetic differences promote pathological gut bacterial assemblages, reducing host survival. there results imply that induced antimicrobial compounds function primarily to protect the insect against the bacteria that persist within their body, rather than to clear microbial infections and thus they directly benefit the insect survival  <cit> . malaria-mosquito combination is believed to have been around for thousands of years. it is likely that acquired microflora permitted the maintenance of parasite in mosquito. the microbes could be benefiting mosquito by protecting against pathogenic bacteria or lowering the innate immunity of mosquito against parasite. it has been reported that reduction in the normal bacterial flora in the mosquito midgut increases plasmodium falciparum infection rates in experimentally infected anopheles mosquitoes  <cit> . interactions between midgut bacteria and malaria parasites in wild mosquito populations could explain how the vector potential for malaria parasite transmission is modulated/influenced by environmental factors such as acquisition of different types of bacteria.

the results obtained from our study and from view of previous studies it is indicated that colonization of bacteria in mosquitoes occurs early during their development. it is reasonable to assume that infection of mosquitoes occurs by acquisition of different bacterial species from the environment. the midgut bacterial infection in mosquito field-populations may influence p. vivax transmission and could contribute to understanding variations in malaria incidence observed in different area. to the best of our knowledge, this is the first attempt of comparative cataloguing the midgut microbiota of a parasite transmitting vector a. stephensi from lab-reared and field- collected adult and larvae using "culture-dependent and independent methods". most of the previous studies of midgut flora of anopheles mosquitoes exclusively utilized culture-dependent methods for screening. by including culture-independent method, we obtained a broader picture of the mosquito midgut flora. these microbes represent a potential resource that could be employed in mechanisms to interfere with mosquito vector development and in interrupting parasite development.

CONCLUSIONS
this work demonstrates that the microbial flora of larvae and adult a.stephensi midgut is complex and is dominated by gammaproteobacteria and gram-positive firmicutes species. the dominant phylotypes most probably originated from midgut inhabitants. a sex specific variation was observed, this being reflected in the proportional changes of the microbial phyla, as well as at the species level. identification methods detected a high microbial diversity among a. stephensi adult and larval midgut. the micro flora of the investigated a. stephensi adults and larvae differed statistically and differences between the larval microbial diversity was more pronounced than the differences noted between a. stephensi male and female culturable and unculturables. this work provided basic information about bacterial diversity in midgut of lab-reared and field-caught a. stephensi male female and larval species and its population dynamics and hence, qualitative information about the total bacterial exposure in midgut environment. our future work will include characterization of the different sources of microbes and a quantitative assessment of the different microbial taxa. it is promising that several of the isolates are gram-negative gammaproteobacteria, for which there are well established means of genetic modification. all of the bacterial isolates from this study will be further evaluated for their suitability as paratransgenic candidate.

