BACKGROUND
recent advances in next generation sequencing have generated abundant genetic variants and "omics" data. together, these extremely large, multidimensional datasets present an exciting opportunity to identify genes, and to predict pathways likely to be involved in diseases and traits. however, these complex data sources plus the broad spectrum of phenotypes, challenge the quest to uncover the genetic, molecular, and cellular mechanisms that underlie phenotypes  <cit> . a major challenge in deciphering the genetic basis of multigenic diseases or traits is to distinguish driver mutations that impact the survival or reproduction of a particular phenotype  from passengers that do not confer a selective advantage. standard genome sequence analysis cannot detect all driver mutations due to difficulties in the estimation of the background mutation rate and underlying genetic heterogeneity of adaptive phenotypes  <cit> . statistical machine learning techniques  provide an alternate approach by learning from the annotated mutation data. however, the "black-box" nature of machine learning makes it difficult to interpret the novel functional roles of mutations. parallel to the development of new genotyping and phenotyping techniques, a number of novel computational tools have been developed to integrate and analyze genetic and omics data with the aim of establishing statistical causal relationships between genetic markers, genome-wide molecular signatures, and organismal phenotypes  <cit> . for example, co-expression and bayesian network models derived from dna variances and genome-wide transcriptional profiles have been applied to identify causal disease genes  <cit> , cancer drivers  <cit> , and master regulators of cancer  <cit> . although great efforts have been made to address n<<p problem, where the number of observations n  is much smaller than the number of variables or parameters p , the power of these statistics-based techniques is still limited if sample sizes are small. moreover, the complex phenotype is often associated with interactions among multiple causal genes , any of which alone is not sufficient to drive phenotypic change. it is challenging for statistical methods to identify epistasis given the large number of possible interactions. fundamentally, the "causal" relationships inferred from these methods are mathematical correlations. they may not provide biological insight into the underlying molecular and cellular mechanisms that associate genotypes with phenotypes.

a mechanistic understanding of how individual molecular components work together in a system, and how the system is affected and adapted to individual changes, requires knowledge of molecular structures, their interactions, and their conformational dynamics  <cit> . conversely, a priori knowledge of structures, their interactions and dynamics may facilitate the identification of causal mutations and their interactions from noisy data even where statistical techniques fail. in this paper, we have developed an integrated multiscale modeling framework to decipher the impact of non-synonymous single nucleotide polymorphisms  on the information flow from the activity of a single molecular component, to the function of the complete molecular machinery, and ultimately to the emergent properties of the biological network. conceptually, our approach is rooted in crick's central dogma of molecular biology and blois's scalar theory of biomedical information  <cit> . the fundamental concept of scalar theory is that complex phenotypes arise from the emergent properties of lower scales in the hierarchy which themselves have an intermediate phenotype . based on scalar theory, an organismal phenotype  emerges from dysregulated pathways that can be identified by genome-wide signatures such as gene expression profiles. the change of the genome-wide signature between disease and normal states results from the altered molecular machinery in the cell, which includes abnormal molecular interactions. in turn, the molecular interaction is determined predominately by the shape, dynamics and physiochemical properties of the associated biomolecules - properties changed by genetic modifications. from an algorithmic point of view, the task is to predict the response of the mesophenotype to the emergent properties of the lower scale, and then use that prediction as input to the upper scale. this is different from current paradigms that often bypass one or more intermediate phenotypes. in practice, each level can be studied independently and then integrated for an improved outcome . in this paper, our contributions are three-fold. first, we address the challenges of identifying causal mutations and epistasis in genome-wide association studies  data when the sample size is extremely small. we do so by incorporating a priori knowledge of protein structure, evolution and interaction, and cellular signaling and regulatory pathways. in principle, it allows us to identify driver mutations de novo. second, we show evidence that a large fraction of driver mutations may be involved in perturbation of protein-protein interaction and protein-nucleic acid interactions, and alternation of molecular allosteric regulation; molecular mechanisms that have been paid too little attention in gwas thus far. third, we introduce a new method to identify mutation mediated pathway profiles, which can be used to prioritize driver mutations and epistasis, by integrating sequence variances, protein-protein interaction networks, and gene expression profiles.

to demonstrate the feasibility of our approach, we apply multiscale modeling to reveal the genetic, molecular, and cellular basis of hypoxia, a physiological condition in which the cell is deprived of an adequate oxygen supply. the hypoxia-induced phenotype has been related to multiple pathological conditions including cancer  <cit> . cells, tissues, and organisms have developed different strategies to survive low oxygen levels; however, the underlying molecular mechanisms contributing to hypoxia tolerance remain unclear. to render mammalian cells and tissues resistant to a low o <dig> environment, drosophila melanogaster  has been used as a model system to investigate the mechanisms underlying hypoxia tolerance. through long-term laboratory selection, zhou et al. have generated d. melanogaster populations that tolerate severe, normally lethal, levels of hypoxia  <cit> . microarray analysis identified several adaptive changes in the hypoxia-selected flies  <cit> . comparison between the genome sequences of hypoxia-selected flies and those of controls identified  <dig> amino acid mutations in  <dig> genes  <cit> . these data provide us with an unparalleled opportunity to understand the genetic, molecular, and cellular basis of the hypoxia tolerance phenotype and to develop new computational tools to establish causal genotype-phenotype associations, which can be validated through controlled experiments. it is noted that the gene expression profiles are only measured for one condition in the hypoxia tolerance phenotype, hence conventional co-expression approaches are not applicable to this study. although the hypotheses generated from this study have been experimentally validated by us and are consistent with experimental results from others, the sensitivity and specificity of the method has not been fully evaluated. in the future we will extensively test our method using large case-control datasets from public databases such as the ncbi database of genotypes and phenotypes   <cit>  and the welcome trust case control consortium   <cit> .

RESULTS
knowledge-driven network inference of driver mutations responsible for hypoxia tolerance
complex phenotypic changes typically arise from re-regulated cellular signaling and regulatory pathways . as there are often multiple genes involved in a core pathway, a large number of combinations of genetic alterations can lead to the up- or down-regulation of a pathway. our hypothesis is that driver mutations will collectively contribute to the re-regulation of a core pathway, which manifests itself as a change to the genome-wide signature, measured here by differentially expressed genes between hypoxia and normoxia phenotypes. in this way it is possible to identify the pathway involved in genotype-phenotype associations from the interacting gene networks that connect the mutated genes to the differentially expressed genes. the pathway that appears more frequently than by chance is a potential core pathway. if the hypothesized core pathway is validated by experiments, or consistent with prior knowledge, the association with the core pathway can prioritize the driver mutation. based on this rationale, we developed a knowledge-driven network analysis method . first, both mutated genes and differentially expressed genes are labeled in the protein-protein interaction  network. second, a mutation seeded subnetwork  that connects the mutated gene  and the up- or down-regulated genes  is then identified for each of the mutated genes if the length of the path between the mutated gene and the re-regulated gene is shorter than randomly selected paths. intuitively, the mutated gene will have a bigger impact on the differentially expressed genes if the distance between them is shorter. third, the overrepresented biological pathways in the mssn are identified using bingo, a tool for gene ontology over-representation analysis. the most frequently overrepresented biological pathways for the complete mssn are hypothesized to be core pathways, and validated by experiment. finally, the putative driver mutations are ranked by:  the statistically significant shortest distance between the mutated gene and the differentially expressed genes in the mssn, and  the statically significant enriched core pathways. this pathway analysis of the mssn identifies four core pathways: up-regulated notch and gurken/epidermal growth factor receptor , and down-regulated toll and torso/receptor tyrosine kinase  pathways. using notch signaling inhibition and a p-element screen, we have experimentally validated that the up-regulation of notch signaling is critical to the survival of hypoxia tolerant drosophila strains  <cit> . thus the up-regulation of notch signaling is confirmed as a driver for hypoxia tolerance in d. melanogaster. although more experiments are needed to validate the direct association of other pathways with hypoxia tolerance and their potential cross-talk with notch signaling, the mutation could be a driver if it up-regulates notch signaling. as shown in table  <dig>  nine mssns show statistically significant enrichment  for up-regulation of notch signaling pathways and significantly shorter paths between the mutated gene and differentially expressed genes. an immediate question is, what are the underlying molecular mechanisms associated with these putative driver mutations? if these mutations are non-neutral at the molecular level, it provides additional support for our hypothesis.

 *we experimentally validate that the up-regulation of notch signaling, one of the most frequently overrepresented pathways, confers the hypoxia tolerance in drosophila melanogaster  <cit> . ppi: protein-protein interaction, ar: allosteric regulation.

structural analysis of functional roles of nssnps
structural modeling of nssnps
to better understand the molecular basis of potential driver mutations, we mapped point mutations to protein structure models. among the  <dig> proteins containing nssnps, none of them have known structures available in the rcsb protein data bank   <cit> . homology models were built for these proteins. the distribution of the sequence identities associated with the structural templates used in modeling is shown in figure  <dig>  60% of models are based on a template with a sequence identity greater than 30%, a common threshold for building reliable homology models. these protein models can be grouped into four categories: 1) reliable models can be built and the locations of mutations are close to known functional sites. thus, the functional role of nssnps can be predicted in a relatively straightforward manner. these proteins  are listed in additional file  <dig> table s <dig> and model structures of these proteins are shown in additional file  <dig> figure s <dig>  2) reliable models can be built but the point mutation cannot be mapped to any functional sites. this category includes  <dig> proteins . 3) no structural templates can be found for the domains containing the mutation, but structural models can be built for other functional domains of the same protein.  <dig> proteins are in this category . 4) no structural templates can be found for the whole protein or any part;  <dig> proteins are in this category.

structural roles of putative driver mutations
for putative mutations in nine genes predicted from network analysis , we first analyze if the mutation might alter substrate binding, catalytic activity, or structural stability. interestingly, most of the predicted driver mutations are surface-exposed, but not located in conserved functional sites. we hypothesize that they may be involved in allosteric regulation, protein-protein interactions, or protein-nucleic acid recognition. co-evolution analysis is applied to these proteins to identify the correlation between mutated amino acids and functional sites. the residue couplings were observed in four structures . one example is hdac <dig>  which belongs to the histone deacetylase family. as shown in figure  <dig>  residues that are predicted to be co-evolved with a <dig>  one of the mutations in hdac <dig>  form zinc binding sites. among them, the two his residues around the zinc ion are conserved in all members of the class iia histone deacetylase family. the mutation of residues coordinating the zinc ion was reported to prevent the association of hdac <dig> with the n-cor· hdac <dig> repressor complex  <cit> , which is required for hdac <dig> to possess histone deacetylase activity  <cit> . thus, a <dig> is functionally coupled to the zinc binding site in hdac <dig>  and as a consequence, may remotely regulate its activity. more examples are shown in the additional file  <dig> figures s2-s <dig> 

in addition to allosteric regulation, the putative driver mutation may modify protein-protein interactions. this is the case for rad51d, as shown in figure  <dig>  rad51d plays a major role in homologous recombination repair  of damaged dna arising during replication or induced by dna damaging agents. brc repeat  mimics a motif in rad51d that serves as an interface for oligomerization between individual rad51d monomers. one of the rad51d mutations, s55n, is close to the oligomerization interface between individual rad51d monomers and hence may impact the formation of the rad51d complex, which is associated with the hypoxia phenotype  <cit> .

machine learning based prediction of non-neutral nssnps
the functional importance of nssnp is further supported by snap  <cit> , software used to predict a given nssnp as neutral or non-neutral with an expected accuracy. in a benchmark study, snap outperformed most similar methods  <cit> .  <dig> out of the  <dig> nssnps, located on  <dig> genes, are predicted as non-neutral with an accuracy of higher than 58% , . five predicted non-neutral mutations are hypothesized as putative drivers. two of them  have an accuracy of over 80%. the remaining predictions have lower expected accuracies. this could imply that while the functional impact of each individual mutation is limited, collectively they may mediate the signaling pathway activity through epistasis.

several mutations in cg <dig> , a serine-type peptidase, are predicted as non-neutral by snap. these mutations are mapped to the substrate binding sites or other functional important regions in the structure . however, enriched biological pathways associated with this gene were not detected. more studies are required to understand how these non-neutral mutations impact the biological network.

experimental and literature supports
as discussed above, a complex phenotype rises from re-regulated biological pathways that themselves result from the collective effects of multiple genetic mutations . since the down- or up-regulation of core pathways directly impacts the organismal phenotype, the experimental validation of the core pathway would provide strong evidence to support the predicted driver mutations that are responsible for the re-regulation of the core pathway. indeed, we have experimentally validated that notch signaling is the core pathway of hypoxia tolerance in d. melanogaster. the reduced activation of notch signaling by a specific γ-secretase inhibitor significantly reduces the survival and life-span of hypoxia tolerant d. melanogaster strains  <cit> . the critical role of notch signaling in hypoxia tolerance is further supported by uas-gal <dig> over-expression and rnai knockdown of genes involved in notch signaling  <cit> . other experimental evidence from the literatures, as detailed below, also support our predictions. the top ranked h gene  is a well-known regulator of notch signaling in d. melanogaster  <cit> . dys encodes the protein dystrophin. genetic interaction screens in d. melanogaster have shown that dys is involved in interactions with components of the notch signaling pathway  <cit> . furthermore, the mutation of the dys homolog in the mouse model is related to the up-regulation of the notch-beta pathway  <cit> . for other genes, although little direct experimental evidence supports an association with hypoxia in d. melanogasta their functional roles in hypoxia has been demonstrated in cancer and other human diseases. hdac <dig> regulates hypoxia-inducible factor  <dig> α  and cancer cell response to hypoxia  <cit> . galnac-t <dig> is an n-acetyl-galactoseaminyl transferase that catalyzes the synthesis of glycosphingolipid . a recent study has shown that gsl may directly regulate the activity of notch signaling  <cit> . wnt <dig> is a ligand to a family of frizzled receptors, acting as a regulator of wnt signaling. an increasing body of evidences suggests that wnt and notch signaling cooperatively determine the fate of cell development in humans  <cit> . the association between rad51d and hypoxia has been demonstrated in cancer  <cit> . ulp <dig> is a sumo-specific protease that is essential for the stabilization of hif1α during hypoxia by removing sumo and participates in the regulation of hypoxia-responsive genes  <cit> .

discussion
the important functional role of allosteric regulation, protein-protein interactions, and protein-nucleic acid interactions in sequence variants
in this study, none of the driver mutations associated with hypoxia are conserved functional site residues, nor are they responsible for structural stability. the driver mutations are hypothesized to be involved in either protein-protein interactions , protein-nucleic acid interaction , or allosteric regulation . a recent survey of the structural basis of in-frame mutations in protein-protein interactions has suggested that changes in specific interactions play a critical role in pathogenesis  <cit> . from a network point of view, the modification of protein-protein interactions, rather than the proteins themselves, may have significant impact on network properties  <cit> . recent progress in the encode and modencode projects highlights the critical functional roles of non-coding dnas in the regulation of biological processes  <cit> . as a large number of non-coding dnas perform their functions through specific protein-nucleic acid interactions, the mutations that impact protein-nucleic acid binding could be directly associated with phenotype changes. the dysregulation of allosteric interactions is considered to be another major determinant of disease  <cit> . during evolution, organisms need to survive and reproduce in a changed environment. as such, certain genes need to gain functions and activate critical pathways. allosteric regulation is an efficient way for driver mutations to act since the change of activity is not constrained to a single molecule, but can be propagated to a whole network  <cit> . new computational methods that are able to identify "hot spots" in protein-protein interactions, protein-nucleic acid recognition, and allosteric regulations, in which the mutation may cause the dysregulation of biological pathways, may have significant impact on the interpretation of genome-wide association studies.

the relevance of d. melanogasta driver mutations to human hypoxia adaption
recently several studies in hypoxia adaptation in humans have been performed on tibetans  <cit> , andeans  <cit> , and ethiopians  <cit> . however, all human studies to date have adopted limited, sampling-based approaches, such as genotyping or exome sequencing. the relatively sparse sampling of the genome makes it harder to identify large-scale shifts in the allele frequency spectrum associated with natural selection. consequently, these studies restricted subsequent analysis to variants in candidate genes that are mainly involved in the canonical hypoxia response  and related pathways. the identification of the functional roles of sequence variances in human orthologs of drosophila genes may provide critical insight in the prioritization of candidate genes in human, which may fail using conventional statistical techniques. indeed, the majority of driver mutations identified in this study are human orthologs and associated with the hypoxia cellular phenotype, as shown in table  <dig> 

CONCLUSIONS
based upon multiscale modeling, we propose that the up-regulation of notch and gurken/egfr and the down-regulation of toll and torso/rtk pathways are responsible for hypoxia tolerance. using integrated structural and network analysis, we hypothesize that nssnps in h, rad51d, ulp <dig>  sol, wnt <dig>  cg <dig>  galnac-t <dig>  dys, and hdac <dig>  may all lead to the functional modification of these genes via allosteric regulation and protein-protein/dna/rna interactions and hence are driver mutations defining the hypoxia tolerance phenotype. our predictions are supported by experimental evidence  <cit> . moreover, multiscale modeling may identify potential epistasis using a very small sample size. this reduces the burden imposed during statistical multiple testing of large epistasis models. it is anticipated that the further extension of this multiscale modeling approach to genome-wide protein-protein interactions, protein-nucleic acid interactions, and microrna data will provide a powerful tool for uncovering the functional roles of both coding and non-coding sequence variations in gwas; a role which neither the knowledge of molecular structures nor of biological networks alone can achieve. however, challenges remain in extending multiscale modeling approaches. new algorithms are required to predict emergent properties, at both molecular and network levels, as well as to seamlessly model information flow across scales.

