BACKGROUND
tuberculosis is the second leading infectious cause of mortality worldwide. mycobacterium tuberculosis remains one of mankind's deadliest pathogen, responsible for approximately two billion deaths worldwide every-year, which is one-third of the world's population  <cit> . although effective drugs against tuberculosis exist, therapy requires prolonged treatment with several drugs, leading to problems in compliance and emergence of multidrug resistance  <cit> . there is an urgent need for more effective drugs against tuberculosis. hence, development of new drugs and characterization of new targets is urgently required.

mycobacteria synthesize the branched-chain amino acids, l-valine, l-leucine and pantothenic acid from α-ketoisovalerate . the essentiality of this pathway in m. tuberculosis, and its absence in humans makes the enzymes of this pathway attractive target/s for development of drug/s for treatment of tuberculosis  <cit> . the first step in the l-leucine biosynthesis is the formation of α-isopropylmalate from acetyl-coa and α-kiv that is catalyzed by α-isopropylmalate synthase . α-ipms is an allosteric enzyme that is present in various organisms like bacteria, fungi and plants.

crystal structure of only one α-ipms, mtαipms a dimeric enzyme, has been reported to date  <cit> . each monomer of the enzyme is folded into two major n- and c-terminal domains which are separated by two small sub-domains, sub domain i and sub domain ii that are joined by a flexible hinge  <cit> . the n-terminal domain contains the active site and the c-terminal domain the l-leucine binding site of the enzyme. the functional characterization of α-ipms from several organisms have been reported  <cit> . they share some common features like requirement of monovalent cations for activity, feedback inhibition by l-leucine and narrow substrate specificity for analogues of α-kiv. the kinetic parameters of the substrates for mtαipms are significantly influenced by cations both monovalent and divalent. the k+ is physiological activator of the enzyme  <cit> . divalent cations show broad specificity for the functional activity of the enzyme. mg2+ and mn2+ induce activation whereas; zn2+ and cd2+ induce inhibition of the functional activity of the enzyme  <cit> . the kinetics of activation or inhibition of the mtαipms by the cations has been extensively studied and possible mechanisms have been proposed. however, no experimental validations of the proposed mechanism/s have yet been documented.

in order to understand the mechanism of modulation of functional activity of mtαipms by cations we have carried out detailed functional and structural studies. for studying the specificity of interaction of cations with different domains of the enzyme, the catalytic tim barrel domain was isolated and purified. the effects of cations on the structural and functional properties of the isolated tim barrel domain were carried out. comparative analysis of the effect of cations on the isolated catalytic domain and the full-length enzyme provides intriguing insight into the possible mechanism of cation induced changes in the mtαipms.

RESULTS
over-expression and purification of mtαipms
the expression of the recombinant mtαipms was good and the expressed protein was present predominantly  in the soluble fraction . the purified protein was homogenous as indicated by a single protein band on sds-page <dig>  and a single peak in esi-ms of molecular mass about  <dig>  kda .

differential effect of metal cations on the functional activity of mtαipms
metal cations, both monovalent and divalent, showed broad specificity on the functional activity of mtαipms . monovalent cation k+, was essential for the functional activity of the enzyme as in its absence no activity was observed. presence of mg2+ ions along with k+ resulted in enhancement  of functional activity. zn2+ and cd2+ ions induced significant inhibition of above 90% of the functional activity of mtαipms. these observations are similar to the earlier report  <cit> .

cations induce differential effects on the secondary structure of mtαipms
the effect of cations on the structure of mtαipms was studied by monitoring changes in the far-uv cd of enzyme at  <dig> nm in presence of increasing concentration of mgcl <dig>  kcl, zncl <dig> and cdcl <dig>  no significant alteration in the secondary structure of the enzyme was observed in presence of mgcl <dig> and kcl concentration even up to  <dig> mm . zncl <dig> and cdcl <dig> induced significant loss of secondary structure of mtαipms. an exponential loss of cd ellipticity at  <dig> nm was observed with increasing concentration of zncl <dig> or cdcl <dig>  however, a maximum loss of about  <dig> and  <dig> percent of cd signal was observed with about  <dig> mm cdcl <dig> and zncl <dig>  respectively . this suggests that interaction of cd2+ and zn2+ ions with mtαipms leads to only partial loss of secondary structure, i.e partial denaturation of the enzyme.

we wanted to understand the underlying mechanism for differential action of cations on both the structure and function of the mtαipms. the electrostatic surface potential of the enzyme as obtained from grasp shows no large concentration of positive or negative charged regions on the enzyme surface . hence, non-specific binding of cations on protein surface will be low. furthermore, a differential effect of activation or inhibition and partial unfolding or no effect on the structure of enzyme by similarly charged cations like mg2+, cd2+ and zn2+ was observed. these observations suggest a possibility of interaction of cations with similar charges at different sites in the enzyme. this possibility is further strengthened by the observation that cd2+ and zn2+ induce only partial unfolding but almost complete loss of functional activity of the enzyme. so we concentrated our efforts on mapping site of interaction of various cations on mtαipms. to obtain an isolated folded catalytic domain of the enzyme, limited proteolysis technique was applied which has been demonstrated by us to be a technique of choice for obtaining isolated domain/s in folded functionally active form from the full-length protein  <cit> .

identification of a structural domain of mtαipms
the band i showed no affinity for the nickel-nitrilotriacetic acid-agarose matrix and anti-his antibody on western  suggesting that it corresponds to portion of mtαipms in which n-terminus has been removed as the histidine tag is attached to the n-terminus of the full-length protein. for determining the site of cleavage of protease in the protein, n-terminal sequencing of the obtained fragment was carried out. it had a sequence rpfae. based on n-terminal sequence and the observed molecular mass, band i corresponds to the protein fragment arg <dig> to phe <dig> of the mtαipms. this fragment consists of the tim barrel portion, sub domain i and a small part of sub domain ii of the full-length enzyme . it has been designated as the tim barrel domain in this study.

the tim barrel domain of mtαipms is stabilized as a functionally active dimer
to confirm that the isolated tim barrel domain is stabilized in folded conformation, structural studies were carried out. figure 7a and 7b, shows far uv-cd and tryptophan fluorescence spectra respectively, of the tim barrel domain. a far-uv profile typical of a αβ-protein  <cit>  was observed. the tryptophan fluorescence emission spectra of the domain showed emission wavelength maxima at about  <dig> nm suggesting that the tryptophan moieties in the tim barrel domain are buried in the hydrophobic core of the protein  <cit> . these observations support the suggestion that the isolated tim barrel domain is stabilized in folded conformation under physiological conditions.

the most convincing result proving that the isolated tim barrel domain is stabilized in folded conformation similar to that in which it is present in the full-length protein came from thermal denaturation studies. figure 7c shows the comparative thermal denaturation profile of native mtαipms and isolated tim barrel domain as studied by monitoring the loss of cd signal at  <dig> nm at increasing temperature. for mtαipms at ph  <dig> , a single sigmoidal transition centered at about 49°c and corresponding to loss of only about 35% of the cd signal was observed. for the tim barrel domain, a biphasic transition with a main transition having tm about 52°c corresponding to loss of about 50% structure of the protein along with a minor transition with tm about 92°c and loss of about 70% cd signal was observed. the similar thermal denaturation profile for the main transition of tim barrel domain and the heat sensitive domain of the mtαipms indicates that they correspond to same portion of the full-length protein i.e. the catalytic n-terminal domain. this is confirmed by complete loss of functional activity of both the full-length enzyme and isolated tim barrel domain at 65°c  suggesting that it is indeed the catalytic domain that is unfolded under these conditions. these observations conclusively demonstrate that isolated catalytic tim barrel domain is stabilized in a conformation similar to that in, which it is present in native conformation in the full-length protein.

the quaternary structure of the isolated tim barrel domain was obtained by sds-page analysis of glutaraldehyde crosslinked sample, figure 7e. a molecular mass of about  <dig> kd was observed for the cross-linked sample, which is about twice the mass of about  <dig>  kda observed for this fragment. hence, isolated tim barrel domain is stabilized as a dimer under physiological conditions.

according to crystal structure, tim barrel domain of mtαipms is the catalytic domain and it contains all the residues required for the catalytic activity of enzyme  <cit>  so we carried out a functional activity assay on it. the tim barrel domain did show functional activity however; it was only about 12% of that observed for the mtαipms . furthermore, unlike mtαipms whose functional activity was significantly inhibition by l-leucine, the functional activity of tim barrel domain was not affected by l-leucine . x-ray studies have demonstrated that l-leucine binds to the regulatory domain of the enzyme  <cit>  <cit>  which is absent in the isolated tim barrel domain, explaining why l-leucine did not inhibit the activity of the catalytic domain. these results demonstrate that the tim barrel domain obtained on limited proteolysis of the mtαipms with α-chymotrypsin is indeed the catalytic domain of the enzyme and it can carry out the catalytic function on its own.

differential effect of metal cations on the functional activity and structural properties of isolated tim barrel domain of mtαipms
divalent cations induce structural cooperativity in the mtαipms
to analyze whether the two structural domains, n-terminal or tim barrel domain and the c-terminal or regulatory domain, of mtαipms interact strongly with each other or they are independent folding/unfolding units of the protein, thermal denaturation studies were carried out by monitoring the loss of secondary structure of enzyme at increasing temperatures. figure  <dig> shows the changes in cd ellipticity at  <dig> nm for mtαipms as a function of temperature. a broad sigmoidal transition with an apparent tm of about 49°c was observed. an interesting observation was that a loss of only about 35% cd ellipticity at  <dig> nm was associated with the thermal denaturation of mtαipms, demonstrating that the major part of the protein molecule is resistant to thermal unfolding. this indicates that mtαipms is composed of two unfolding units that behave independently and have different thermal stabilities: one being sensitive to thermal denaturation and the other resistant to it. a similar sensitivity of structural domains to thermal denaturation has been observed for other proteins  <cit> . hence, full-length mtαipms is structurally a non-cooperative molecule having two distinct structural units that fold/unfold independently of each other.

the effect of cations on the thermal denaturation of mtαipms was studied by incubating the protein with salts like kcl, mgcl <dig>  cdcl2or zncl <dig>  as all these salts contain the same anion , the different effects observed in the comparative study using these salts will be mainly due to different cations. figure  <dig> summarizes the thermal denaturation profiles of kcl-, mgcl2-, cdcl2-, zncl2- or ph  <dig> -incubated mtαipms. kcl-treated mtαipms showed a thermal denaturation profile similar to that observed for the enzyme in absence of salt demonstrating that in presence of kcl the enzyme still behaves non-cooperatively. however, for mgcl2-, cdcl2- or zncl2-treated mtαipms, a single transition with almost complete loss of secondary structure was observed. this demonstrates that divalent cations induce strong interactions between the structural domains of enzyme resulting in induction of cooperativity in the otherwise non-cooperative mtαipms molecule. an interesting observation was that the tm associated with the cdcl2-treated mtαipms  is significantly lower than that of 65°c observed for mgcl2-treated mtαipms. these differences in tm in the presence of different salts are due to the differential effect of salts on the enzyme structure. the cdcl <dig> induces partial denaturation of the enzyme whereas, the mgcl <dig> does not affect the structure of enzyme significantly. the information that divalent cations induce co-operativity in the otherwise non-cooperative mtαipms molecule is of importance as it suggests that mg2+ ions that are included in the enzyme assay induce interaction between the catalytic n-terminal and the regulatory c-terminal domain as a result of which the regulatory domain can modulate the activity of the catalytic domain.

discussion
mtαipms in the functional form, is an intimately associated extended dimer  <cit> . the dimer interface of the enzyme covers only the n- and c-terminal domains which are in contact with each other in the native conformation of the enzyme  <cit> . the two tim barrels in the dimer of enzyme pack against one another and are tied together by n-and c-terminal extensions. the n-terminal residues 18– <dig>  from one monomer wind over the surface of the other monomer. the c-terminal domain of the enzyme also dimerizes. the tim barrel without the n and the c-terminal extension contribute only  <dig> % of the total buried surface as compared to 80% of the total buried surface area attributed by the dimerization of the barrel including the n- and c-terminal extensions  <cit> . it has been demonstrated in this paper that the isolated tim barrel domain  that is devoid of the n-terminal extension and the c-terminal domain, is stabilized as a functionally active dimer. this suggests that the n-terminal extension and the regulatory c-terminal domain are not essential for the stabilization of the dimeric configuration of mtαipms under physiological conditions, which has also been indicated earlier  <cit> .

the functional activity of the mtαipms is subject to major controls by small molecules. metal cations, k+ and mg2+ are the activators of mtαipms and their presence is important for the activity of the enzyme  <cit> . the activating molecules influence the oligomeric structure or conformation of the enzyme belonging to the family of claisen-condensing enzymes, including several αipms  <cit> . however, our studies and a recent report  <cit>  demonstrates that for mtαipms, both the activators k+ and mg2+, have no significant effect on the oligomeric or the secondary structure of the enzyme. in contrast, zn2+ and cd2+ induced partial and almost complete denaturation of the mtαipms and the catalytic tim barrel domain, respectively. however, complete loss of enzymatic activity was observed for both the full-length enzyme and isolated catalytic domain under these conditions. these observations suggest that zn2+ and cd2+ bind directly to the catalytic domain of the enzyme leading to its unfolding/denaturation resulting in loss of activity. binding of zn2+ ions leading to unfolding of the protein has recently been reported for spermadhesion psp-i  <cit> . the activator k+ ions induces activation of both the full-length enzyme as well as the isolated catalytic tim barrel domain suggesting that it interacts directly with the catalytic domain and induce activation of the enzyme. these results for the first time demonstrate that different cations bind at different sites in the mtαipms resulting in differential modulation of functional and/or structural property of the enzyme.

one important observation was that the isolated tim barrel domain showed only 12% activity of that observed for the mtαipms although the structural and stability studies showed that the isolated domain has similar conformation as that in which it is present in the native mtαipms. this suggests the possibility that probably the c-terminal domain of enzyme is necessary for optimum activity of the enzyme. in other words the non-catalytic c-terminal domain modulates the activity of the catalytic tim barrel domain and its absence results in decrease in activity of the catalytic domain. this possibility is supported by the fact that l-leucine, which binds in the c-terminal domain, inhibits the activity of the mtαipms.

an important property of mtαipms found to be influenced by the cations is the structural cooperativity of the enzyme molecule. divalent cations were found to induce cooperativity in the otherwise structurally non-cooperative mtαipms molecule. the induction of cooperativity in the mtαipms molecule by the mg2+, which is an activator of the enzyme and is added to the reaction mixture during activity measurements, may help in modulation of functional activity of the tim barrel domain by the regulatory domain.

CONCLUSIONS
comparative studies on the effect of cations on the structural and functional properties of mtαipms and its isolated catalytic tim barrel domain demonstrates that different cations interact at different sites in the enzyme molecule inducing different effects on the enzyme structure. zn2+ and cd2+ ions interact with the catalytic domain of the enzyme and induce unfolding/denaturation of the domain and loss of its functional activity. the physiological activator k+ ion also interacts with the catalytic domain and activates the enzyme however; it does not induce any significant structural change in the enzyme. the divalent cations were found to induce structural cooperativity in the otherwise non-cooperative mtαipms molecule. the study provides an intriguing insight into the structural details of the enzyme mtαipms and its regulation by the cations. this information will be of significant importance in designing of the inhibitors of the enzyme.

