BACKGROUND
while the forests of south america are renowned for their diversity of frogs, including endemic clades that are both old and species rich  <cit> , south american salamanders are represented only by the family plethodontidae  <cit>  and are considered species poor in this region. in fact, with the exception of two species of oedipina, all salamanders in south america belong to the genus bolitoglossa  with only  <dig> currently recognized species that are distributed across the entire continent  <cit> . species richness is greatest in colombia and rapidly decreases to the south and east. less than one-ninth of all recognized neotropical salamander species are found in south america, despite its geographical area dwarfing that of central america where the remaining diversity is concentrated  <cit> .

one hypothesis for the lower species richness of south american salamanders is that they arrived only relatively recently via the isthmus of panama , which is widely accepted to have closed  <dig> to  <dig> million years ago . if true, then south american plethodontids would have had less time to diversify compared to those of central america . however, recent geological research suggests that the panamanian land bridge may be much older , although this remains controversial .

when, and how many times, salamanders migrated into south america has been a matter of debate: for example, brame & wake  <cit>  suggested multiple migrations from the pliocene to the pleistocene, while dunn  <cit>  suggested a late miocene to early pliocene origin that would predate a  <dig> my old land bridge. estimates based on allozyme distances suggested the divergence between central and south american species to be at least  <dig> mya  <cit> , while analyses from mitochondrial  dna sequences suggested bolitoglossa were present in south america before the pliocene land bridge closure  <cit> . hanken & wake  <cit>  offered two alternative hypotheses to explain such a deep level of divergence: 1) that several deeply divergent lineages occurred in southern central america by the early pliocene and each independently migrated to south america after the late pliocene connection was established, or 2) that bolitoglossa colonized south america prior to the late pliocene land bridge and subsequently diversified in situ. parra-olea, garcía-parís & wake analysed the phylogenetic relationships across bolitoglossa and concluded that the south american lineages must be old  and predate the isthmus of panama  <cit> . this was reaffirmed with more advanced chronogram analysis, which calculated a divergence of at least  <dig> million years  <cit> . however, to date, there have been no detailed studies or discussion of south american plethodontids based on dna sequence data and these hypotheses have never been rigorously tested.

very little is known about south american salamanders because of the “fractal”  <cit> , highly spatially partitioned nature of plethodontid diversity across vast underexplored areas of the upper amazonian forests. in particular the systematics of amazonian salamanders has proven difficult because they are generally small, have similar derived morphological features such as extensively webbed digits, reduced dentition, and subtle colour pattern differentiation  <cit> . further, they have been seldom collected and thus we are missing even basic data on geographical distributions. in  <dig>  brame & wake noted that because “… biologists have always been intrigued with organisms living under novel or unusual conditions, or in unexpected regions … it is surprising that south american salamanders virtually have been ignored for so long” . almost fifty years after this statement, there has been little progress towards quantifying the biodiversity and describing the evolutionary relationships of south american salamanders.

the aim of our present study is two-fold. first, we use divergence time estimates and ancestral area reconstruction to estimate the deepest age of an endemic south american clade and thereby infer the minimum time of colonization of south america by plethodontid salamanders. our estimates of divergence times suggest that the salamanders arrived and diversified within south america in the early miocene. furthermore, south american bolitoglossa are all members of a single clade that is nested within a larger clade, the subgenus eladinea, which also occurs in costa rica and panama. therefore, their colonization of south america significantly predates the widely accepted date of about  <dig> mya for the panamanian land bridge connection. because these salamanders have low vagility and most likely reached south america by land, our results are more compatible with a much earlier land bridge connection . second, we infer evolutionary relationships and the extent of genetic divergence among south american bolitoglossa from the ecuadorean andes and upper amazon basin  using mitochondrial and nuclear dna sequence data. our analyses reveal previously unsuspected deep genetic divergences even within local regions, documenting the presence of extensive cryptic species richness.

RESULTS
bolitoglossa colonization of south america
ancestral area reconstruction based on  <dig> bolitoglossine taxa strongly supported a central american origin of bolitoglossa . our estimate for the deepest time of divergence for bolitoglossa from throughout central and south america is ca.  <dig> mya , and our estimate for the subgenus eladinea is ca.  <dig> mya  .

while we were unable to sample the south american taxa exhaustively, we found that the diverse clade of bolitoglossa from the andes and amazon had a high likelihood of a south american origin. the origin of the entire south american clade of sampled bolitoglossa was estimated to be ca.  <dig> mya . even if we consider a much younger divergence time calibrations for the plethodontidae , we still estimate divergence among sampled south american taxa to be at least  <dig>  mya . furthermore, the deep divergence among regionally structured clades within upper amazonian bolitoglossa — b. peruviana  and b. equatoriana  — also confirmed the minimally miocene age of this radiation within south america . based on these observations, we reason that the andean and amazonian species did not diversify north of the panamanian land bridge and subsequently disperse into south america after its closure . rather, the lineages result from diversification in south america after colonization ca.  <dig> mya. this is in agreement with the scenario proposed by parra-olea et al.  <cit> , whereby the south american bolitoglossa greatly predate a  <dig> mya land bridge between central and south america.

until very recently it had generally been accepted that the south american continent was isolated from the northern land mass until the isthmus permanently closed ca.  <dig>  <cit>  to  <dig>  <cit>  mya. however, recent geological analyses, which are still controversial, suggest the isthmus may have closed at least for some period of time much earlier. this involved a major narrowing of the seaway and great shifting of islands in the early miocene   <cit>  and a complete closure is now estimated to have happened by  <dig> mya  <cit> . clearly this would have facilitated dispersal between central and south america. while the pliocene ‘great american interchange’ between continents approximately  <dig> mya considerably affected mammalian fauna  <cit>  and some avian fauna  <cit> , a growing list of biological data based on molecular phylogenetics also supports an earlier, miocene, land connection: e.g. frogs  <cit> , plants  <cit> , procyonid mammals  <cit> , and snakes  <cit> . our finding confirms this also to be true for plethodontid salamanders. our estimates of divergence among south american and even just andean bolitoglossa are far older than the most generally accepted dates for completion of the panamanian land bridge ca.  <dig> mya and instead suggest a very early miocene colonization of south america, which is concordant with the postulated land connection between panama and south america on the order of  <dig> to  <dig> mya, timing that has been advanced to explain new geological discoveries  <cit> .

since that time there have been at least two other dispersals across the isthmus by salamanders. the two species in our analyses that occur in colombia and panama  have clear south american origins but the specimens are from central america and likely represent a more recent secondary colonization of central america . other than bolitoglossa, oedipina salamanders are also found in south america and these are less well known. the current taxonomy, dating from  <dig>  <cit> , recognizes two species, both of which occur in panama. of these, o. complex  is known from two south american specimens, one from isla gorgona, colombia, and the other from northwestern ecuador. the ecuadorean specimen has recently been re-examined  and represents an unnamed species. the second species, o. parvipes , is currently thought to occur in panama, but it, too, requires a modern taxonomic revision and it is unlikely that the panamanian and colombian samples represent the same species. nevertheless, whether the taxonomy is correct or not, oedipina is represented by few species and in south america is found only in western colombia and northern ecuador. pending study of currently unavailable samples using molecular methods, oedipina may well represent a post-isthmus dispersal from its central american origin  <cit> .

phylogenetic and phylogeographic patterns within south american bolitoglossa
our phylogenetic analyses based on mtdna document high diversity of bolitoglossa lineages in the upper amazon and andes of ecuador, even within a small geographic area . additionally, there is striking geographical structure in b. equatoriana and b. peruviana often coincident with east andean and upper amazonian geographical features. for example, sister clades generally differ in elevation  within and between river basins.

bolitoglossa equatoriana  vs. b. equatoriana 
bolitoglossa equatoriana  forms a well-supported monophyletic group  with two divergent subclades that are separated by elevation and found in the napo and aguarico river basins . one of these we refer to as “upper equatoriana” because it includes specimens from an upland locality on the napo river  and a single specimen from the more lowland tiputini locality  . its sister subclade includes samples from localities near to, and more geographically typical of, the type locality  <cit>   and so we consider this group to represent b. equatoriana .

taxon, voucher specimen museum catalogue number, geographical locality , locality number from figure  <dig>  and genbank accession numbers. institutional abbreviations are as listed in  <cit>  with the following additions: bu = boston university , dfch-usfq = diego francisco cisneros-heredia at universidad san francisco de quito , fhgo = fundación herpetológica gustavo orcés , qcaz = museo de zoología pontificia universidad católica , jcs = field collection juan carlos sánchez.

average genetic divergence between these two subclades of b. equatoriana  is  <dig> % for cytb  and  <dig> % for rag <dig> . bayesian estimates of divergence times average ca.  <dig>  mya .

mean p-distances between subclades are written on the lower diagonal ± standard error on the upper matrix; mean intraclade p-distances ± standard error lie on the diagonal .

mean p-distances between subclades are written on the lower diagonal ± standard error on the upper matrix; mean intraclade p-distances ± standard error lie on the diagonal .

bolitoglossa peruviana diversity
within b. peruviana  four major subclades are broadly distributed by elevation and river basin . we informally identify these subclades as follows: altamazonica, upper napo, upper aguarico, and lower napo/lower aguarico. the altamazonica subclade spans the greatest latitude: from the lower napo to the lower pastaza river basins . this subclade, which includes the most lowland representative in our study , is not the sister taxon of the other amazonian basin lowland species from brazil, tentatively assigned to b. paraensis. instead, the specimens assigned to b. paraensis  are more closely related to the southeastern ecuadorean specimens from higher elevations . the upper napo subclade occurs in multiple localities in the vicinity of the headwaters of the napo river . although the southeastward distribution of this subclade remains to be determined, it is replaced to the north at the headwaters of the aguarico river  with the divergent sister subclade upper aguarico. specimens in the subclade lower napo/lower aguarico were found to span the lower napo and lower aguarico river basins . additional sampling is required to determine the eastward distribution of this subclade.

the four major subclades of b. peruviana  are highly divergent: from  <dig>  to  <dig> % at cytb  and from  <dig>  to  <dig> % at rag <dig> . divergence time estimates among populations that have been assigned to b. peruviana average ca.  <dig>  mya .

given the highly localized nature of genetic differentiation in what has been considered to be b. peruviana, we think that none of the ecuadorean samples should be assigned to that taxon. instead, b. peruviana should be considered to be a peruvian endemic that so far is known only from the unique holotype . further sampling, especially in this area of southern ecuador and northern peru, is required to further resolve phylogenetic relationships.

our mtdna phylogeny contains more extensive sampling of upper amazonian salamanders than the parra-olea et al.  <cit>  mtdna phylogeny, which contained samples across the large, geographically widespread genus bolitoglossa. parra-olea et al.  <cit>  considered their specimen from cuyabeno  to be b. peruviana . we find this specimen instead to be a member of the b. equatoriana  clade and was likely previously misidentified. we do not have a rag <dig> sequence for this specimen.

ecuadorean highland bolitoglossa spp
taking a broader geographical perspective on our mtdna phylogenetic hypothesis, the high andean specimen from northwestern ecuador  is recovered as sister to the rest of our east andean and amazonian specimens . its relationship with the lowland amazonian species b. paraensis  is undefined. specimens from the high altitude eastern slopes of the southern andes of ecuador  are all, with varying resolution and including the extreme lowland brazilian b. paraensis, sister to the upper amazonian species b. peruviana and b. equatoriana.

nuclear phylogeny
phylogenetic analysis of rag <dig> alone  reveals weak phylogeographic structure , perhaps due to incomplete lineage sorting and the longer coalescence times of slowly evolving nuclear genes. as in the mtdna phylogeny, the high andean specimen from northwestern ecuador   is sister to the rest of our east andean and amazonian specimens. the remaining internal relationships are less defined. the combined analysis  is intermediate in resolution between the single gene analyses.

patterns of diversity in the upper amazon
similar high diversity has been found previously in amazonian frogs, with morphological, bioacoustic, and molecular data across ecologically and evolutionarily diverse clades, including the pattern of elevation and latitude in discerning upper amazonian clades. specifically, the geographical distribution of mtdna clades in bolitoglossa is approximately coincident with those identified for the terrestrial leaf litter frog pristimantis “ockendeni”  <cit>   and engystomops frogs  <cit> . the major phylogeographic divergence within northwestern amazonian terrestrial frogs of the species engystomops  petersi is also altitudinal in the napo basin  <cit> , although elevation was not an important overall biogeographic signal at broader scales in that species  <cit> . given the paucity of data on the phylogenetic diversity and fine-scale phylogeographic structure of upper amazonian vertebrates in this region, the extent to which elevation has promoted speciation and maintains species identity  requires further and detailed analyses combining genetic, phenotypic, and geographical information.

bolitoglossa species richness and relevance for conservation
the high divergence and pronounced geographic structuring among subclades of these salamanders support our view that additional species of bolitoglossa should be recognized in the upper amazon region of ecuador; more species exist than were previously recognized based on existing morphological descriptions and field surveys  <cit> . we propose that at least six upper amazonian species  be recognized, rather than the previously designated two . additionally, perhaps two more species should be named from higher elevations to the south . it is doubtful that any ecuadorean salamander are conspecific with topotypic b. peruviana because the geographic distance from the most lowland ecuadorean sample to the b. peruviana type locality is greater than the ranges of the three or four phylogenetic species  within ecuador. the situation with b. equatoriana is also difficult, although the geographic proximity of the b. equatoriana type locality to specimens of the “lower equatoriana” clade suggests that this group is b. equatoriana sensu stricto. from northern ecuador, in the westward drainage of the andes mountains, we have a single exemplar of a currently unnamed highly divergent species . our study reveals that many taxonomic problems remain to be resolved for these morphologically similar species and work on this topic is currently underway . further alpha-taxonomic work and extensive sampling from the upper amazon and andes is much needed, though hampered by difficulty in collecting these rare amphibians from remote regions.

high genetic differentiation within “species” of neotropical salamanders is not unusual in the few molecular studies on these to date . garcia-paris et al.  <cit>  found genetic structuring at fine geographical scales for salamanders in continuous habitat in montane costa rica. in a study of allozyme variation, hanken & wake  <cit>  reported that south american bolitoglossa displayed intra-site heterogeneity, high differentiation within species-groups, and diversity levels comparable to among species of different genera in north america. studies of neotropical frog taxa have also found mtdna differentiation to be particularly high among populations, sometimes also suggestive of distinct species  <cit> , though not always  <cit> . the low vagility, high philopatry, small home ranges, and non-migratory life history of direct-developing salamanders and terrestrial frogs may promote high levels of local differentiation as a result of restricted gene flow  <cit> , ultimately producing high speciation rates.

our survey of salamanders from upper amazon drainage of ecuador indicates that upper amazonian salamander species’ distributions are much smaller than previously assumed. accordingly, a revision of current conservation assessments may be required. the iucn red list considers all salamander species east of the andes as data deficient with regard to their risk assessment criteria . the amazonian species are all thought to have very wide geographical distributions  and therefore large population sizes are assumed; such widespread species have accordingly been considered of “least concern”  <cit> . our findings suggest that wide geographical distributions are unlikely and species must be reassessed to take into account the possibility of smaller geographic distributions and concomitantly smaller population sizes, which might place these species at greater risk due to localized environmental degradation. results to date imply that the salamander species richness in the andes and upper amazon has been substantially underestimated.

CONCLUSIONS
minimal estimates for the timing of diversification of the south american salamanders of the genus bolitoglossa, based on our studies of eastern ecuadorean species, indicate that plethodontids colonized south america ca.  <dig> mya. these findings are consistent with an early miocene, rather than pliocene, initial closure of the isthmus of panama. within south america, bolitoglossa have considerable genetic diversity at nuclear and mitochondrial loci. there is a high cryptic diversity of distinct lineages, even within a relatively small geographic area of the andes and upper amazon of ecuador. our molecular phylogenetic findings suggest that salamander species richness in south america may be seriously underestimated, in large part because of extensive morphological similarity and lack of sampling. this implies that many more species of bolitoglossa should be recognized in the upper amazon and andes.

