BACKGROUND
the malagasy tenrecs belong to the afrotheria, one of the four basal clades of placental mammals which have recently been recognized  <cit> . this ancient group of african origin is divided into two clades: the strongly supported paenungulata, composed of the orders sirenia , proboscidea  and hyracoidea , and the afroinsectiphillia  <cit> , comprising the orders afrosoricida , macroscelidea  and tubulidentata   <cit> . the tenrec family  comprises four subfamilies, the potamogalinae from continental africa, and the tenrecinae, geogalinae and oryzorictinae from madagascar. the malagasy tenrecs are divided into eight genera and  <dig> species  <cit> . based on morphology, tenrecs were previously grouped in the insectivorous order lipotyphla, which has turned out to be biphyletic and now is split into the orders eulipotyphla  and afrosoricida  <cit> .

the malagasy tenrecs have diversified into a spectacular radiation in terms of morphology, behavior, physiology and ecology. they show a high degree of adaptation to their niches  and considerable convergence with other insectivores, notably shrews and hedgehogs. this made it difficult to understand the origin and phylogenetic relationships of this group on a morphological basis. the tenrecinae  include four genera , characterized by a spiny pelage and a large body size compared to the other tenrecs. their monophyly is well established, even at the morphological level  <cit> . the branching of the four remaining genera , which share a shrew-like appearance and a small size, remains more open. most earlier, molecular studies did not include more than five tenrec species  <cit> , while poux et al.  <cit>  missed the large-eared tenrec . therefore, not all relations between and within the three subfamilies of malagasy tenrecs have yet been firmly established. only two recent studies, by olson and goodman  <cit>  and asher and hofreiter  <cit> , included all tenrec genera, but were unable to confidently resolve the position of geogale, which suggests the necessity to expand the number of species and sequences for this family.

the island of madagascar is a well-known biodiversity hotspot, displaying diverse and highly endemic amphibian, reptilian and mammalian faunas. the level of endemism reaches 95% for the non-flying vertebrates, and this level is mainly due to a few speciose endemic radiations  <cit> . four clades of terrestrial endemic mammals are present, the lemuriform primates, the euplerine carnivores, the nesomyine rodents and the malagasy tenrecs. each of these clades represents one unique event of colonization from continental africa, followed by several diversification events that gave rise to the actual malagasy diversity  <cit> . the colonization of a new environment can be followed by an adaptive radiation, defined as a rapid succession of speciation events leading to a high ecological and phenotypic diversity within a lineage  <cit> . the study of adaptive radiations on islands or in lakes is essential for understanding processes of speciation and diversification  <cit> . therefore, knowing the patterns and timing of the successive diversification events within endemic island clades, which, like tenrecs, display a broad ecological and morphological diversity, might help to better understand this phenomenon.

apart from echinops telfairi, for which the genome sequencing is in progress, there are only a limited number of sequences available in public databases to reconstruct a solid molecular phylogeny of the malagasy tenrecs. in the present study we therefore selected exons from four independent nuclear genes that are widely used in mammalian phylogeny  in order to resolve tenrec phylogeny. this study is especially focused on understanding the phylogenetic position of the large-eared and the web-footed tenrecs, geogale and limnogale, respectively. in addition, we used a relaxed molecular clock timeframe to compare tenrec evolutionary patterns with defined adaptive radiation characteristics. moreover, the influence of both taxon sampling and data partitioning on the accuracy of the estimated ages were assessed.

RESULTS
afrotherian phylogeny
the overall phylogenetic relationships as deduced from the concatenated dataset are consistent with the now broadly accepted branching pattern of the mammalian tree  <cit>  . the superordinal clades euarchontoglires, laurasiatheria and afrotheria are highly supported, and within these clades most bootstrap percentages and posterior probabilities are also high. afrotheria is now generally accepted as a natural group since molecular studies unanimously support its monophyly, using various methods  <cit> . in contrast, until now only few morphological synapomorphies, notably placental morphology  <cit> , an increase in number of thoracolumbar vertebrae  <cit> , and testicondy  <cit> , appear to support this grouping. afrotheria are divided into paenungulata on one hand and the three remaining afrotherian orders  on the other hand. the most probable hypothesis concerning these remaining orders is their grouping within a clade called afroinsectiphillia  <cit>  within which the internal relationships remain unclear.

within the paenungulate clade the tethytheria  are strongly supported by morphological and complete mitochondrial genome data  <cit> . nuclear genes are ambiguous about this relationship and left the phylogenetic affinities between the three paenungulate orders essentially unresolved  <cit> . our concatenated tree shows for the first time, based on nuclear genes, strong support for one of the three possible hypotheses: the grouping of hyracoidea with sirenia . bootstrap trees supporting alternative hypotheses exclusively group elephant with hyrax ; tethytheria is never recovered. all four genes independently support this result; the high support for the sea cow + hyrax grouping is therefore expectedly due to the synergy of these non-conflicting informations. to test whether our extensive taxon sampling within tenrecidae may have improved the phylogenetic accuracy  <cit> , all tenrecs but one  were removed from a new analysis. the results did not differ much; support for the sirenia/hyracoidea clade dropped negligibly in the concatenated analyses . interestingly, in a retroposon insertion analysis, nishihara et al.  <cit>  found one insertion supporting exclusively the grouping of hyrax with dugong. these authors dismissed the apparent synapomorphous hyrax-sea cow insertion as homoplastic, in favor of the morphological evidence for tethytheria.

similarly, the relations between the afroinsectiphillian orders have not yet been clarified, and conclusions vary in different studies. mitochondrial data give highly inconsistent results  <cit> , while mixed data tend to group golden moles and tenrecs with elephant shrews, together being the sister group of aardvark, with rather strong support  <cit> . our data also support these results, as the afrosoricida/macroscelidea clade  is displayed with high confidence , and tubulidentata is found to be the sister group of this clade . with a smaller dataset  the support for the afrosoricida/macroscelidea clade slightly increased . hence, enlarged taxon sampling cannot explain our strong phylogenetic results within the afrotherian clade. all four genes separately displayed afroinsectiphillia either as paraphyletic or weakly supported therefore the present results are not due to gene sampling biases. the retroposon analyses of nishihara et al.  <cit>  proposed the grouping of golden moles, tenrecs and aardvark, to the exclusion of elephant shrews, on the basis of two shared retrotransposons.

phylogenetic position of geogale aurita
the large-eared tenrec  has been included until now in only two molecular studies, by olson and goodman  <cit>  and by asher and hofreiter  <cit> . these two studies found two different results concerning its phylogenetic position. the first study, comprising three mitochondrial genes  and one nuclear marker , displayed, in a parsimony framework, the large-eared tenrec as the most basal of all malagasy tenrecs. this result was not influenced by the inclusion of morphological characters in the analyses. asher and hofreiter  <cit> , using exon  <dig> of the ghr gene and morphological data, found geogale nested within the oryzorictinae, as sister group of the microgale/limnogale clade.

in the present study we also sequenced ghr exon  <dig> and vwf exon  <dig>  and in addition the intronless gene for adra2b and the first exon of ar. for all genes separately the results were congruent in placing geogale as sister group of the oryzorictinae , although not always strongly supported: adra2b: pp =  <dig> , bp = 96; ar: pp =  <dig> , bp = 86; ghr: pp =  <dig> , bp = 59; vwf: pp =  <dig> , bp =  <dig>  concatenation of the four genes led to a stronger support for this node: pp =  <dig>  and bp =  <dig> . the position of g. aurita as sister group of the oryzorictinae  seems thus strongly supported. however, the kh- and sh-tests  did not completely confirm the strength of our results, showing that placing geogale as the most basal malagasy taxon  was indeed significantly worse than our best tree, but placing it within the oryzorictinae  did not significantly change the likelihood of the topology.

rell and full option test give the same results. the kishino-hasegawa test applied to the following hypotheses leads to the same conclusions. performing the tests including only the afrotherian species in the analyses does not change the results either.

the differences with the results of olson and goodman  <cit>  probably stem from the fact that we did not use the same phylogenetic methods and datasets, even though one of our markers was in common . however, their vwf  sequences are not yet available in public sources like genbank to be compared with ours. the different position of geogale in the tree of asher and hofreiter  <cit>  is more difficult to explain. remarkably, their geogale ghr sequence  displays  <dig> differences with ours . no mutations leading to unusual amino acid changes that might indicate sequencing errors could be detected. to try and explain the different geogale ghr sequences we calculated ka and ks for each sequence pair of malagasy tenrecs. the results showed that the sequence divergence between the two geogale specimens was greater than between some of the other tenrec genera, like echinops/setifer and limnogale/microgale . moreover, the new geogale sequence from this study was slightly more divergent in most comparisons than the one from the database . this genetic diversity within geogale could reflect that this genus might contain in fact more than one species. it may also be mentioned that the museum specimen used by asher and hofreiter  <cit>  was collected at the southwest coast of the island , whereas our specimen  was sampled in the central west in the menabe area. considering photos of living geogale available to us from the south-west  and the central-west , the central western specimens appear to have a less golden-colored fur and in general a more gracile habitus, but it is unclear whether this may reflect a difference between coloration of adults versus subadults. clearly, a detailed taxonomic study is needed to confirm whether these differences are constant and the populations may represent two distinct species. furthermore, a single record of geogale exists also from the east coast near fenoarivo. this specimen has been described as subspecies geogale aurita orientalis by grandidier and petit  <cit> , but the status of this taxon has remained obscure. it may be a candidate nomen to be elevated to species rank if geogale aurita is demonstrated to consist of more than one species.

ks  are given in the lower left part of the table and ka  in the upper right part. the divergence between the two geogale ghr sequences  is greater than or equal to that between some other tenrec species . geogale a is the sequence from the database , geogale b is our sequence. hemicent. stands for hemicentetes, and m. brevi. for microgale brevicaudata.

further phylogenetic analyses of the ghr dataset, including both geogale sequences or removing all segregating sites between the two sequences, led to the same result as obtained by asher and hofreiter  <cit> , i.e. geogale nested within the oryzorictinae. the phylogenetic position of geogale as sister group of oryzorictinae was only obtained when our sequence alone was used. however, both geogale sequences always grouped together, confirming the identity of our sequence. these results, in combination with the fact that the oryzorictinae/geogalinae clade radiated very fast, might make it difficult to reach a final consensus on the evolution of geogale.

from a morphological point of view the phylogenetic relation between geogale and the oryzorictinae has never been clear. although most studies gave unresolved results , two were concordant with ours  <cit> , while none has ever argued that geogale was either the sister group of all malagasy tenrecs or the sister group of the limnogale/microgale clade. salton and szalay  <cit>  reached the conclusion that the tarsal morphology of geogale warrants its status as a separate subfamily, and suggested its closer affiliation with oryzorictinae than with tenrecinae.

three genera of fossil tenrecids – erythrozootes, protenrec and parageogale – from the kenyan and namibian miocene  have been discovered until now  <cit> . as parageogale is thought to be the sister group of the extant geogale aurita  <cit> , these data would suggest a more complex dispersal history than the "one time dispersal event" deduced from the monophyly of malagasy tenrecs. asher and hofreiter  <cit>  were the first to include these three fossil tenrecids in a phylogenetic framework. their result confirmed the position of the kenyan fossils as geogale's closest relatives. however, alternative hypothesis  could not be ruled out indicating the uncertainty of the parageogale/geogale affinity. recent studies have argued that the sweepstakes dispersal model  from africa to madagascar suffers from many inconveniences, among which the fact that prevailing winds and currents between africa and madagascar would be much more likely to favor transports from the island to the african continent, rather than the reverse route  <cit> . therefore, if a second dispersal event ever occurred it was most probably from madagascar to africa. olson and goodman  <cit>  suggested a basal position of geogale among malagasy tenrecs and argued that, if true, this would only imply a minimum of two dispersal events, whereas any other scenario would require at least three. however, a back dispersal of parageogale from madagascar to africa would only assume a second dispersal event, independent of the phylogenetic position of geogale.

phylogenetic position of limnogale mergulus
due to its semi-aquatic life style, shared with the african potamogalinae, the determination of the phylogenetic relationship of limnogale, the web-footed tenrec, has led to controversies. its specialized morphological features brought some authors to the conclusion that limnogale was either sister group of the potamogalinae  <cit>  or sister group of all other malagasy tenrecs  <cit> , the semi-aquatic behavior then being seen as an ancestral state and a key element to facilitate over-water dispersal. in contrast, other morphological studies challenged this view by affirming that limnogale had closer relationships to the shrew tenrecs , and that the semi-aquatic behavior was an example of convergence acquired twice during tenrec evolution . this strong affinity between limnogale and microgale has recently also been supported by a study of hind limb muscles  <cit> . these authors argue that limnogale may have been derived from a microgale-like terrestrial ancestor. molecular studies have now confirmed this last hypothesis  <cit> . supporting the hypothesis of olson and goodman  <cit> , our study shows that the semi-aquatic limnogale is actually nested within the shrew tenrec genus and not a sister clade of it , now with more elaborate analyses and strong support from four nuclear genes.

the phylogenetic supports displayed in the present study are quite low, even with the concatenated dataset , probably due to the fact that the microgale/limnogale clade may have radiated very fast . only one gene, ghr, presents a high pp of  <dig>  for the cluster of microgale cf. parvula/limnogale mergulus . the sequencing of more shrew tenrec species  might help to resolve this issue, and subsequently to understand the morphological evolution of the aquatic specialization of the web-footed tenrec.

tenrec diversification timing
only three studies have previously assessed the timing of tenrec diversification, mainly to understand their colonization pattern  <cit> ; none comprised a taxon sampling broad enough to delineate the successive tenrec speciation events. the study by douady et al.  <cit>  was based on a linearized tree method and suggests an early diversification of tenrecs as compared to the other studies , which are based on bayesian methods and partially overlapping gene sampling . consequently, the results of the latter three studies are, as can be expected, rather similar. the present study, with the broadest taxon and gene sampling, estimates the tenrecs/golden mole split at  <dig> ±  <dig> mya, followed by the divergence between african and malagasy tenrecs at  <dig> ±  <dig> mya. the malagasy tenrec radiation began  <dig> ±  <dig> mya, and several diversification events spread over time gave rise to the totality of malagasy tenrec genera around between  <dig> ±  <dig> mya and  <dig> ±  <dig> mya . these datings are slightly older than previously calculated. the only gene difference between this study and poux et al.  <cit>  is the inclusion of the ghr gene. removing it from the calculations led to dates even a little older and with wider confidence intervals .

node numberd as in figure  <dig>  sd: standard deviations; ci: credibility intervals; – nodes not present in the study.

aage estimated from vwf, 12s and 16s

bage estimated from vwf, adra2b, brca1

cage estimated from vwf, adra2b, ar

because the ghr influence on the dating was very small, the difference in taxon sampling between the two studies might be responsible for the different outcomes  <cit> . in the present study carnivores and primates were less extensively sampled, whereas afrosoricida were better represented than in poux et al.  <cit> . we therefore compared for these three clades the age inferences in poux et al.  <cit>  and in the present study, with or without ghr . the conclusion is that the age of a given node tends to become older when the taxon sampling around this node  increases. this phenomenon has already been described by yoder and yang  <cit>  when assessing the timing of evolution of mouse lemurs. they suspected that these incongruences were due to the model used  <cit> , which breaks down the path from a tip of the tree to the root  into identically distributed segments. such a prior would tend to push divergence time within the clade under study towards unrealistically old ages. comparing the priors of divergence times between both large and small datasets, they reached the conclusion that the too old priors of the larger dataset had influenced the posterior estimates, which became older as well. this also is the pattern we can see comparing the priors of poux et al.  <cit>  with the ones of the present study . in both studies the time estimate differences were not dramatic, but they could have a problematic effect for studies requiring more precise estimates.

bayesian relaxed molecular clock method was used. ages in bold indicate the study in which the corresponding order was more extensively sampled. the result shows that increasing the sampling size pushes the ages towards older estimates. in this analysis rodents could not be taken into account because of sampling incongruences between the two studies.

a paleontological time constraints used as calibrations.

b the results of modeltest were used to define the partitioning; the three studies are therefore directly comparable.

the influence of data partitioning was tested as well. the ages of the nodes in the phylogenetic tree increased with the number of partitions , and the smallest standard deviations  were reached for the less extreme numbers of partitions . however, for the present study, differences in taxon sampling or partitioning did not affect our conclusions, as the various analyses displayed fairly similar results, showing reciprocal overlaps. this is to our knowledge the first time that the influence of data partitioning on dating results has been empirically pointed out. more investigations are needed to generalize and clearly understand the underlying causes of this result. one might however suppose that the differences between the various partitions could increase with the number of genes included in an analysis. consequently, these results show that it is important, in order to calculate datings as accurately as possible, to select the right manner of partitioning the data: too few or too many partitions might lead to biased results.

to exclude the possibility that individual calibration constraints may bias our dating analyses, we repeated them after removing each calibration point in turn following  <cit> . hereby we could check whether the excluded calibration constraint was accurately estimated by the remaining ones. all datings remained highly congruent when any of the six calibration points was removed. the average percentage difference between the main analysis and the ones with only  <dig> constrained nodes ranges between  <dig>  and  <dig>  percent. only the paenungulate calibration seems to have a somewhat larger impact on the dating as its removal from the analysis increases the estimated node age by  <dig>  percent. this influence is however too slight to have an impact on our conclusions . moreover, the calibrations were reciprocally compatible: the remaining five calibrations always recovered a posterior estimate  for the excluded node within the time window independently obtained from the corresponding fossil evidence .

since geogale has been hypothesized by olson and goodman  <cit>  to be the first malagasy tenrec genus to have diverged, its absence from poux et al.  <cit>  was a problem for drawing final conclusions about tenrec colonization timing. it now appears that geogale is nested within the malagasy tenrec clade, and therefore plays no role when estimating the period of colonization. consequently, the window of colonization of madagascar by tenrecs could not be narrowed. as previously concluded in poux et al.  <cit> , the tenrec colonization time completely overlaps with the hypothetical time of existence of a land bridge crossing the mozambican channel  , which however is highly controversial  <cit> .

adaptive radiation often occurs when a species is introduced into a new environment, such as an island. one might therefore expect that the majority of the diversification events within the malagasy tenrecs would have occurred soon after colonization. however, no such pattern of a diversification burst can be seen at the root of the malagasy tenrecs, and speciation events seem to be spread through time . this could result from two possible scenarios: either malagasy tenrecs may actually have experienced a fast adaptive radiation, but most of the resulting taxa are now extinct, or all genera appeared indeed at different periods as a result of a slower speciation rate than expected in case of adaptive radiations. morphologically, one might speak about adaptive radiation of malagasy tenrecs, but these morphological adaptations do not seem to have developed within a short time span just after the colonization of madagascar. the most striking example is the semi-aquatic specialization of the genus limnogale, which dates at most from  <dig> mya, i.e., 20– <dig> my after the colonization of the island. the genus microgale is by far the most speciose amongst tenrecs, being represented by  <dig> species  <cit> , while the remaining genera may not comprise more than one species. the acceleration of the molecular evolutionary rates on the internal branches leading to and within this genus , associated with both a poor phylogenetic resolution between the few microgale species  and its recency among the tenrec genera , suggests that there has been a fast radiation around  <dig> mya that gave rise to the current diversity of microgale. it is interesting to note that the other two endemic mammalian malagasy genera for which radiation times have been assessed apparently diverged around the same time as microgale: eulemur at  <dig>  mya and microcebus at  <dig> – <dig> mya  <cit> . however, not enough data are yet available to confirm this parallel radiation phenomenon.

 <dig> sciurus vulgaris  combined with s. niger  and marmota monax 

 <dig> lepus crawshayi  combined with l. capensis 

 <dig> eulemur fulvus fulvus  combined with e. coronatus 

 <dig> tupaia tana  combined with t. glis 

 <dig> diceros bicornis  combined with ceratotherium simum ;

 <dig> equus caballus  combined with e. asinus 

 <dig> lama pacos  combined with l. glama 

8cynopterus sphinx  combined with pteropus vampyrus 

 <dig> erinaceus europaeus  combined with crocidura russula 

 <dig> myrmecophaga tridactyla  combined with cyclopes didactylus 

 <dig> trichechus manatus  combined with dugong dugon 

 <dig> amblysomus hottentotus  combined with chrysospalax trevelyani 

 <dig> didelphis marsupialis  combined with d. virginiana  and monodelphis domestica 

 <dig> macropus rufus  combined with m. giganteus 

upperscore numbers  refer to taxa for which sequences from different species were combined in the concatenated analysis. * new sequences from the present study. the full alignment is available from treebase .

even though the colonization of madagascar by tenrecs might have taken place during the eocene, the radiation of the extant species started after madagascar reached its current geographical subtropical location during the early oligocene  <cit> , with warmer climatological conditions probably similar to the actual ones  <cit> . the colonization of madagascar by carnivores and rodents took place at the end or just after the oligocene, around 20– <dig>  mya for rodents, and 19– <dig> mya for carnivores . these dates are quite close to the periods of appearance of extant tenrec genera: the radiation of tenrecinae and the split between tenrec and hemicentetes occurred  <dig> ±  <dig> mya and  <dig> ±  <dig> mya, respectively; geogale split from the oryzorictinae  <dig> ±  <dig> mya; and oryzorictes separated from microgale  <dig> ±  <dig> mya. so five out of the seven tenrec genera  diverged soon after the colonization of madagascar by carnivores and rodents. these new colonizations may have altered the ecological conditions, and thereby induced speciation within tenrecs, either by predation pressure  or by interspecific niche competition .

CONCLUSIONS
the complete phylogeny of the malagasy tenrec genera has now been resolved with strong support. these results should lead to a revision of the taxonomy with regard to the genus geogale  and the limnogale/microgale clade . this solid phylogenetic and dating framework shows that the major morphological specializations of the tenrecs are not the result of fast adaptive radiations just after colonization, but would as well have been affected by ecological changes caused by climatic and/or subsequent colonization events; however, more work is still needed to understand the role of possible biotic interactions on the speciation processes of malagasy tenrecs.

