BACKGROUND
aerobic eukaryotes possess classical mitochondria, but anaerobic eukaryotes can host very diverse organelles that belong to a broad spectrum of double-membrane bounded, mitochondria-related compartments. these organelles range from full-fledged, but anaerobic mitochondria to tiny "mitosomes" with a minimal protein content. examples of these anaerobic functioning organelles are the "mitochondria-like" organelles of blastocystis  <cit> , the "mitochondrial remnant" of cryptosporidium  <cit> , the "hydrogenosomes" of trichomonas  <cit>  and the "mitosomes" of giardia, entamoeba, and trachipleistophora  <cit> . anaerobic mitochondria, mitochondria-like organelles and hydrogenosomes produce atp, albeit with either different electron transport chains than in aerobic mitochondria, or without an electron transport chain altogether. mitosomes do not produce atp - they seem to host only enzymes engaged in fe-s cluster biogenesis  <cit> . the presence of these proteins appears to be the only property that is shared between all members of the mitochondrial family, perhaps with the exception of the mitosomes of entamoeba histolytica and mastigamoeba balamuthi where the corresponding proteins are likely to be localized in the cytoplasm  <cit> . hydrogenosomes produce molecular hydrogen with the aid of one or several hydrogenases. they are double-membrane bounded organelles sized approximately  <dig>  -  <dig> μm. they are found in a broad spectrum of unicellular, anaerobic  protists such as parabasalid flagellates , excavate, preaxostylid flagellates , heterolobosean amoeboflagellates , anaerobic ciliates , and anaerobic chytridiomycete fungi . the broad phylogenetic distribution of their hosts suggests that the hydrogenosomes of these organisms evolved several times independently. accordingly, hydrogenosomes are not the same, they differ structurally and metabolically  <cit> . however, it is likely that all these various hydrogenosomes produce atp by substrate-level phosphorylation. besides atp and hydrogen, most of them produce co <dig> and acetate as end products of their carbohydrate metabolism. nyctotherus ovalis produces succinate in addition, and the ciliate trimyema compressum as well as the anaerobic chytrids neocallimastix sp. and piromyces sp. produce formate as one of their metabolic end products  <cit> . the major substrate of the carbohydrate catabolism of hydrogenosomes is pyruvate that is metabolized by either pyruvate:ferredoxin oxidoreductase  as in trichomonas or pyruvate:formate lyase  as in neocallimastix and piromyces  <cit> . notably, nyctotherus ovalis uses pyruvate dehydrogenase  as aerobic mitochondria do  <cit> . for their major redox-reactions, hydrogenosomes use ferredoxins or components of a mitochondrial or bacterial complex i.  <cit> .

evidence from morphology and 18s rrna phylogeny suggests that the microaerophilic amoeboflagellate psalteriomonas lanterna belongs to the heterolobosea, a taxon that consists predominantly of aerobic, mitochondriate organisms  <cit> . only three related anaerobic organisms, the amoebae vahlkampfia anaerobica, monopylocystis visvesvarai and sawyeria marylandensis have been described. while the lack of molecular data does not allow a closer determination of the phylogenetic position of vahlkampfia anaerobica, 18s rrna data clearly reveal that the latter two amoebae are close relatives of psalteriomonas lanterna  <cit> . the flagellate stage of psalteriomonas lanterna hosts a large globular hydrogenosomal complex that is associated with numerous endosymbiotic methanogens  <cit> . remarkably, it also hosts  <dig>  -  <dig>  μm sized cytoplasmic organelles that were interpreted as "modified mitochondria"  <cit> . if this interpretation is true, it would make psalteriomonas unique in having both mitochondria and hydrogenosomes which are normally mutually exclusive. the large, globular organelles were identified as hydrogenosomes using a cytochemical reaction  to detect hydrogenase activity and the organelle's reaction with a heterologous antibody against hydrogenase  <cit> . the "modified mitochondria" reacted only weakly with the antibody and were not analyzed in more detail. physiological studies were not performed since p. lanterna cannot be cultured axenically. molecular information is restricted to the dna sequence of a ferredoxin and the 18s rrna gene; the latter allowed the determination of the phylogenetic position of p. lanterna as belonging to the percolozoa  with a sistergroup relationship to the vahlkamphidae  <cit> .

here we present a combined electron microscopic and molecular study that aims to unravel the structure and function of the hydrogenosomes and the presumed "modified mitochondria" of psalteriomonas lanterna. we describe the ultrastructure of the "modified mitochondria" and hydrogenosomes in detail and provide evidence that both organelles are actually two morphs of the same organelle and not two different organelles. moreover, we provide molecular information from preliminary est studies on the phylogenetic position with respect to the aerobic relatives and the potential function of the hydrogenosomes. these studies suggest that the hydrogenosomes of p. lanterna are physiologically similar to the hydrogenosomes of trichomonas vaginalis and trimastix pyriformis  <cit> . phylogenetic analysis of the ests confirms the relationship of p. lanterna with its aerobic relative, the heterolobosean amoeboflagellate naegleria gruberi. this organism is a free-living soil and freshwater amoeboflagellate and closely related to the pathogenic naegleria fowleri that can cause severe amoebic meningitis.

RESULTS
electron microscopy
light microscopy of psalteriomonas lanterna flagellates reveals a large globule in the centre of the cell . this globule had been identified as a hydrogenosome by its reaction with an antiserum against hydrogenase and activity staining for hydrogenase with the aid of the bstp reaction  <cit> . also in the amoeba stage this globule is present but less prominently shaped . dapi - and ethidium bromide staining of the globule for nucleic acids were negative .

when the hydrogenosomes of psalteriomonas lanterna were described for the first time at the electron microscopy level, they were seen to form globules consisting of closely packed "microbodies" intermingled with symbiotic methanogenic archaea  <cit> . in some cases the hydrogenosomes  were penetrated by methanogens  <cit> . notably, the analysis of symbiont-free cells revealed that the hydrogenosomes also assembled into globules in the absence of methanogenic archaea. after more than  <dig> years of cultivation, all psalteriomonas lanterna cells became free of methanogens as judged by the absence of methane production and the specific f <dig> autofluorescence  <cit>  . electron microscopical analysis confirms the absence of methanogens and reveals that the central globule is a large complex built up from stacks of more than  <dig> individual hydrogenosomes, which are predominantly sausage- and dumb-bell-shaped . individual hydrogenosomes are surrounded by a double membrane that encloses a homogeneous, dark staining matrix . in a few cells, up to four smaller hydrogenosomal complexes were found; the stacks consist of 5- <dig> individual hydrogenosomes . these stacks are regarded as juvenile complexes.

broers  <cit>  described "modified mitochondria" in the periphery of the psalteriomonas lanterna cells, odd organelles that were surrounded by a cistern of rough endoplasmatic reticulum . in our study, these "modified mitochondria" look very similar to the individual hydrogenosomes of the hydrogenosomal complex of the globule . the matrix is homogeneous, but less densely stained as in the stacked hydrogenosomes; there is no evidence for the presence of  cristae. all these organelles are surrounded by 1- <dig> cisterns of rough er - like the mitochondria of aerobic heterolobosea, e.g. tetramitus rostratus, paratetramitus jugosus, vahlkampfia aberdonica, vahlkampfia avara and vahlkampfia ustiana  <cit> . similarly to the hydrogenosomes in the stack, they are bounded by a double membrane. most organelles are dumb-bell-shaped , some are sausage-shaped , and a few are cup-shaped and similar in appearance to the mitochondria of certain aerobic heterolobosea, e.g. vahlkampfia ustiana  <cit> . certain dumb-bell- and cup-shaped organelles are rather slim in the middle, suggesting that these organelles might be fission stages similar to the fission stages of trichomonas vaginalis hydrogenosomes  <cit> . a biometric analysis of the electron microscopic pictures of the stacked hydrogenosomes and the cytoplasmatic organelles revealed no differences in the length-distribution . the diameter of the hydrogenosomes and the modified mitochondria show a modal distribution around  <dig>  μm . given the identical distribution of lengths and diameters and the very similar morphology, we conclude that the cytoplasmatic organelles are hydrogenosomes, potentially in young, dividing stages. absence of staining of the cytoplasmatic organelles in the bstp reaction at the light microscopic level can be explained either by a lack of hydrogenase activity in the "young" organelles or by an insufficient sensitivity of the bstp reaction. on the other hand, pictures published by broers  <cit>  suggest a faint reaction with the hydrogenase antibody. moreover, both types of organelles stain with rhodamine- <dig> as normal mitochondria and hydrogenosomes  <cit> . therefore, it is likely that both the stacked hydrogenosomes and the cytoplasmatic organelles  are morphs  of the same organelle. it is highly unlikely that hydrogenosomes and mitochondria occur in the same cell, because hydrogenosomes have been identified as a special kind of hydrogen-producing mitochondria  <cit> . on the other hand, different morphs of mitochondria have been described in the ciliate euplotes minuta  <cit> . the most spectacular example of the presence of different mitochondria in the same organism is the "nebenkern" formation during spermatogenesis in drosophila where mitochondria aggregate and fuse to form a globule of the same size as the nucleus  <cit> .

ests
about  <dig> randomly chosen clones were sequenced and analyzed using the blast x tool  <cit> . the clones were single reads of varying length. the genes discussed here  were extended by rt-pcr.

although the cdna library was created using poly-d primers, several sequences of bacterial origin were identified that matched with species present in the non-axenic culture. however, bona-fide psalteriomonas sequences were easily identified by their high a+t content . in addition, a codon usage analysis was performed using the cusp program from the emboss package  <cit>  and a principal component analysis. these analyses confirmed the homogeneity of the putative psalteriomonas sequences.

the protein sequences were selected for phylogenetic analysis either because of their usefulness for establishing the phylogenetic position of psalteriomonas lanterna: elongation factor  <dig> alpha, hsp <dig>  or for their potential role in the hydrogenosomal metabolism: putative adp/atp carrier,  hydrogenase, pyruvate:ferredoxin oxidoreductase , propionyl-coa carboxylase , complex i -  <dig> kda subunit and glutamate dehydrogenase .

elongation factor  <dig> alpha 
during the translation of a mrna chain in the ribosome, two gtpases play an important role in the elongation cycle: the elongation factor  <dig>  and the elongation factor  <dig> alpha. the ef- <dig> alpha  is responsible for carrying and promoting the binding of aminoacyl-trnas to the a-site of the ribosomal small subunit  <cit> .

since elongation factor  <dig> alpha is present in the three domains of life, i.e., bacteria, archaea and eukaryota, it should be a good phylogenetic marker that might be useful for inferring the phylogenetic position of psalteriomonas within the eukaryotic tree of life. however, the species distribution within the tree calculated here is not in complete agreement with the eukaryotic tree of life since several species exhibit conspicuous artefactual relationships, particularly the polyphyly of the ciliates and amoebozoa . notwithstanding, psalteriomonas lanterna clusters with trichomonas vaginalis as seen in several of our phylogenies.

heat shock protein  <dig> 
hsp <dig>  is an atp-dependent, highly conserved protein, involved in protein folding, maturation, renaturation and assembly of complexes, as well as in intracellular cross-membrane shuttling of precursor-protein molecules  <cit> . in nearly all eukaryotes it is located in the mitochondria, hydrogenosomes or mitosomes.

its structure resembles a cylindrical barrel, which binds and encloses the folding of proteins in its core  <cit> . it is an essential and highly conserved protein present in virtually all organisms, shows no evidence of horizontal gene transfer, and is frequently used as a mitochondrial marker  <cit> .

the hsp <dig> phylogeny shows the expected eukaryotic branching, and a solid bootstrap supported outgroup of prokaryotic sequences . psalteriomonas lanterna and naegleria gruberi branch together corroborating a close relationship between the mitochondrion of naegleria gruberi and the hydrogenosomes of psalteriomonas lanterna. this clustering with n. gruberi is consistent with the previously published 18s rrna phylogeny which groups both organisms  <cit> . furthermore, the clustering of the heterolobosea with the euglenozoa seen in this tree is consistent with previously published eukaryotic phylogenies  <cit> .

mitochondrial solute carrier )
the adp/atp translocator is a member of the mitochondrial carrier family , which catalyses the transmembrane exchange of atp produced in the mitochondria  for cytosolic adp. all members of this protein family exhibit a tripartite structure which consists of three consecutive sequence repeats of about  <dig> residues each representing the  <dig> transmembrane domains  <cit> . this protein family is exclusively present in eukaryotes.

all bona-fide mitochondria, but also the hydrogenosomes of nyctotherus ovalis and neocallimastix/piromyces, possess members of the mitochondrial-type adp/atp translocator subfamily. the hydrogenosomes of trichomonas vaginalis and the mitosomes of entamoeba histolytica and antonospora locustae do not possess a mitochondrial-type adp/atp translocator. instead they evolved alternative adp/atp carriers, which, of course, belong to the mitochondrial carrier family  <cit> . in addition, the three members of the mitochondrial carrier family of trimastix pyriformis do not belong to the cluster of genuine mitochondrial-type aacs; their function has not yet been established  <cit> . while the aac of naegleria gruberi clusters within the bona-fide mitochondrial carriers, the mitochondrial carrier protein of psalteriomonas lanterna assumes an intermediate position between the genuine mitochondrial aacs and the alternative transporters of trichomonas, entamoeba and antonospora . the phylogenetic position of the mitochondrial carrier protein of psalteriomonas lanterna argues that this mitochondrial carrier might also be an alternative adp/atp carrier. nevertheless, the alternative possibility, that the mitochondrial carrier protein of psalteriomonas lanterna is derived from bona-fide aacs cannot be excluded.

 hydrogenase
hydrogenases are metalloenzymes that catalyze the reversible reaction that produces dihydrogen using two electrons and two protons. these enzymes are classified in three distinct classes according to the metallic composition of their prosthetic groups: the -hydrogenases, only present in methanogenic archaea; the -hydrogenases, widespread within prokaryotic organisms; and finally, the oxygen sensitive -hydrogenases  <cit> .

-hydrogenases are rather common in anaerobic bacteria and archaea, but in eukaryotes its presence is limited to a few species of anaerobic protists, anaerobic chytrid fungi and some green algae. in general, the hydrogenase is located in membrane-bounded organelles, i.e. plastids or hydrogenosomes. in giardia and entamoeba the enzyme is located in the cytoplasm  <cit> . -hydrogenases are generally monomeric and exhibit a multi-domain structure, with a very well conserved active site of ca.  <dig> residues - the h-cluster - and a variably sized n-terminal domain containing up to four fe-s clusters  <cit> . this phylogeny was computed using the h-cluster portion of the protein, due to the modular structure of the hydrogenases, and it positions psalteriomonas lanterna as a sister group of the algal and fungal hydrogenases .

pyruvate:ferredoxin oxidoreductase 
pyruvate is of central importance for the energy metabolism of cells. its oxidative decarboxylation leads to the formation of acetyl-coa and co <dig>  aerobic species possess a pyruvate dehydrogenase  multi-enzyme complex, which catalyzes this reaction and specifically reduces nad+. anaerobic species in general use another set of specialized enzymes, which reduce low-potential electron carrier proteins, e.g. ferredoxin or flavodoxin, instead of pyridine nucleotides like nad  <cit> . one of these enzymes is the pyruvate:ferredoxin oxidoreductase , which is present in many eubacteria and archaea, but also in a restricted number of anaerobic eukaryotes, like trichomonas vaginalis  <cit> , trimastix pyriformis  <cit> , giardia lamblia and entamoeba histolytica  <cit> . pfo seems not to be present in the aerobic amoeboflagellate naegleria gruberi. it is regarded as a hallmark protein for hydrogenosomes or organisms with mitosomes  <cit> , although pfo or the related pno have also been detected in a few organisms with mitochondria, e.g. euglena and chlamydomonas. the pfo of psalteriomonas lanterna branches with the enzymes of trichomonas vaginalis and blastocystis, but here is still some discussion regarding the intrinsic function of pfo  <cit>  . in blastocystis, which belongs to the straminopila and which possesses a hydrogenosome-like organelle, two est clusters encoding a pfo and a pno  were identified. biochemical studies have so far provided only evidence for pno activity  <cit> .

propionyl-coa carboxylase 
propionyl-coa carboxylase is a biotin dependent enzyme that catalyses the atp dependent carboxylation of propionyl-coa to d-methylmalonyl-coa. it is involved in the metabolism of odd-chained fatty-acids, cholesterol and the essential amino acids threonine, methionine, valine and isoleucine  <cit> .

the pcc structure consists of two heterologous subunits, alpha and beta, encoded by pcca and pccb genes, respectively. the dodecamer enzyme complex is arranged in an alpha6beta <dig> conformation  <cit> .

pcc is involved in metazoan ubiquitous pathways; it has a patchy distribution among other eukaryotes, suggesting multiple gene loss events  <cit>  and it was included in our analysis, because of its location in the mitochondrial matrix and its pivotal metabolic role. the phylogenetic analysis shows a 100% bootstrap value for the clustering between psalteriomonas lanterna and naegleria gruberi , which is consistent with the results obtained with hsp <dig> and points to a close relationship between naegleria's mitochondrion and psalteriomonas's hydrogenosome.

nadh: ubiquinone oxidoreductase  <dig> kda subunit 
nadh: ubiquinone oxidoreductase, commonly known as mitochondrial complex i, is the largest of the five oxphos complexes present in the mitochondrial membrane of aerobic organisms, comprising  <dig> proteins in human  <cit> . this protein complex can be divided into  <dig> functional modules: the dehydrogenase module which is responsible for the oxidation of nadh, the hydrogenase module that shuttles the released electrons, and finally, the transporter module, which pumps protons across the mitochondrial membrane  <cit> . the  <dig> kda subunit, encoded by the ndufv1/nuof nuclear gene, is an essential part of the dehydrogenase module because it carries the nadh binding site. also it binds two co-factors: flavin mononucleotide  which is an electron carrier molecule that acts as a hydrogen acceptor and one 4fe-4s cluster, which captures the electrons released from the nadh oxidation  <cit> . despite its role in mitochondrial complex i, this protein has been found in the absence of most of the remaining proteins of this complex in at least two organisms: trichomonas vaginalis  <cit>  and schizosaccharomyces pombe  <cit> , where it is believed to bind and oxidize nadh, potentially functioning as a diaphorase for the hydrogenase. once again, the link between psalteriomonas and trichomonas is present in this phylogeny, showing also that the  <dig> kda of psalteriomonas belongs to the cluster of mitochondrial and alpha-proteobacterial enzymes .

glutamate dehydrogenase 
glutamate dehydrogenase  is a mitochondrial enzyme widely distributed in the three domains of life. it catalyzes the reversible oxidative deamination of glutamate to 2-oxoglutarate and ammonia, using either nad or nadp as a co-factor. this enzyme is classified in three basic types, according to its co-factor specificity: the nad specific, the nadp specific and the dual enzyme which accepts either of these. these enzymes are homopolymeres, commonly composed by two to six subunits  <cit> . while multicellular eukaryotes present only the dual enzyme, fungi have both co-factor specific enzymes and protists possess any combination of dual and specific gdhs  <cit> . the phylogenetic analysis clusters psalteriomonas within the ciona, spironucleus and giardia branch . the position of n. gruberi relative to that of psalteriomonas is at odds with their relation observed in the pccb and the hsp <dig> phylogeny. glutamate dehydrogenases show evidence of frequent lateral gene transfer  <cit> , providing an explanation for this inconsistency.

CONCLUSIONS
the hydrogenosomes of psalteriomonas lanterna are morphologically similar to the mitochondria of its relatives, the aerobic heterolobosea, if one ignores the absence of cristae in psalteriomonas lanterna. this becomes evident from their shape, the double membrane, which bounds both types of hydrogenosomes of psalteriomonas lanterna, and the cisterns of rough er that surround the cytoplasmic forms of the hydrogenosomes. this is characteristic for the mitochondria of the aerobic heterolobosea, which, in contrast to the hydrogenosomes of psalteriomonas lanterna, possess full-fledged cristae. however, there are no reports that the mitochondria of the aerobic heterolobosea can form stacks like the hydrogenosomes of p. lanterna.

the molecular data, which are summarized in table  <dig>  also support the similarity between the hydrogenosomes of p. lanterna and the mitochondria of the aerobic heterolobosea since the mitochondrial proteins hsp <dig> and propionyl-coa carboxylase b of psalteriomonas lanterna are closely related to their homologues of naegleria gruberi. the close phylogenetic relationship between psalteriomonas lanterna and naegleria gruberi had also been shown by the analysis of the 18s rrna  <cit> .

hsa: homo sapiens, sce: saccharomyces cerevisiae, tth: tetrahymena thermophila, pte: paramecium tetraurelia, pfa: plasmodium falciparum, ngr: naegleria gruberi, lma: leishmania major, cpa: cryptosporidium parvum, ecu: encephalitozoon cuniculi, gla: giardia lamblia, ehi: entamoeba histolytica, tva: trichomonas vaginalis, nov: nyctotherus ovalis$; pla: psalteriomonas lanterna$, nfr: neocallimastix frontalis$.

y: present, n: absent, y*: alternative protein, -: not known;$: no complete genome available

the presence of a pfo, a hydrogenase, a putative alternative adp/atp translocator and the  <dig> kd subunit of mitochondrial complex i are characteristic hallmarks of a hydrogenosomal metabolism resembling that of trichomonas vaginalis and trimastix pyriformis  <cit> . however, this is the first report of a pfo in a hydrogenosome that is clearly derived from an aerobic mitochondrion. this allows the development of a rudimentary metabolic scheme . the decarboxylation of pyruvate by pfo yields electrons, which, analogous to the situation in trichomonas  <cit> , requires a ferredoxin like protein similar to the one described earlier  <cit> . however, blast analysis of the published ferredoxin sequence fails to reveal homologies with well-characterized ferredoxins. moreover, the at content of the gene is dramatically lower than that of other genes analysed in this study. finally, an analysis of the codon usage with the aid of a principal component analysis clearly excludes the published ferredoxin sequence from the cluster of psalteriomonas genes . therefore, it is very unlikely that the published sequence is a psalteriomonas ferredoxin, and, consequently, a genuine ferredoxin of p. lanterna still awaits detection.

consequently, the transfer of the electrons from the pfo to the hydrogenase in our scheme  remains unclear. it is possible that the  <dig> kda protein might be involved since it can function as a diaphorase  <cit> .

in conclusion, both the morphology of the hydrogenosomes and the molecular data strongly support the interpretation that the hydrogenosomes of psalteriomonas lanterna and the mitochondria of the aerobic heterolobosea share a common ancestor. the hydrogenosomes of trichomonas are metabolically similar, but morphologically distinct, and they represent a peculiar type of hydrogenosome that lacks related mitochondrial relatives. also the hydrogenosomes of ciliates and chytridiomycete fungi are different. and since the hydrogenosomes of the ciliate nyctotherus ovalis share a common ancestry with ciliate mitochondria, while the hydrogenosomes of the anaerobic chytrids neocallimastix and piromyces share an ancestry with fungal mitochondria, our study provides a new example of the evolution of a hydrogenosome from an aerobic relative  <cit> , and the first example of a trichomonas-like hydrogenosome from an aerobic mitochondrion.

