BACKGROUND
the background that follows encompasses three subjects relevant to the nanopore detector examination of dna-protein binding interactions:  transcription factors , their binding sites  in dna, and possible drug mechanisms;  nanopore blockade detection and transduction detection for examination of dna interactions and conformational changes; and  channel current cheminformatics and the utility of nanopore transduction for drug discovery.

transcription factor drugs
tfs are proteins that regulate gene expression by binding to the promoter elements upstream of genes to either facilitate or inhibit transcription  <cit> . they are composed of two essential functional regions: a dna-binding domain and an activator domain. the dna-binding domain consists of amino acids that recognize specific dna bases near the start of transcription. tfs are typically classified according to the structure of their dna-binding domain, which are of one of the following types: zinc fingers, helix-turn-helix, leucine zipper, helix-loop-helix, and high mobility groups. the activator domains of tfs interact with the components of the transcriptional apparatus and with other regulatory proteins, thereby affecting the efficiency of dna binding. a cluster of tfs, for example, is used in the preinitiation complex  that recruits and activates rna polymerase. conversely, repressor tfs inhibit transcription by blocking the attachment of activator proteins.

therapeutic drugs based on stfs represent a compelling new approach to the regulation of cancer, aids, and genetic diseases. the creation of stfs that can appropriately target their transcription factor binding sites on native genomic dna provides a means to directly influence cellular mrna production . since the cognate tf for many binding sites remains unidentified, an automated method for screening among candidates would be a highly valuable contribution to the manufacture of medicinal tfs. developed, as it is, to study single molecule interactions/blockades on a nanometer-scale, the nanopore detector is an ideal choice for such a task. nanopore-based research of transcription factor binding could afford the means to quantitatively understand much of the transcriptome. this same information, coupled with supplementary interaction information upon introduction of stfs, provides a very powerful, directed approach to drug discovery.

nanopore blockade detector
there are important distinctions in how a nanopore detector can function: direct vs. indirect measurement of static, stationary, dynamic , or nonstationary channel blockades. a nanopore-based detector can directly measure molecular characteristics in terms of the blockade properties of individual molecules – this is possible due to the kinetic information that is embedded in the blockade measurements, where the adsorption-desorption history of the molecule to the surrounding channel, and the configurational changes in the molecule itself directly, imprint on the ionic flow through the channel  <cit> . this approach offers prospects for dna sequencing and single nucleotide polymorphism  analysis  <cit> . so far this is a very brief and limited synopsis of the nanopore detector background relevant to this paper. for other references on nanopore detectors see the nanopore detector review presented in  <cit> : early work involving alpha-hemolysin nanopore detectors can be found in  <cit> ; rapidly growing research endeavors on nanopore detectors based on solid-state, and other synthetic, platforms can be found in  <cit> .

nanopore transduction detector
the nanopore-based detector works indirectly if it uses a reporter molecule that binds to certain molecules, with subsequent distinctive blockade by the bound-molecule complex. one example of this, with the established dna experimental protocols, is the exploration described here of transcription factor binding sites via the different dsdna blockade signals that occur with and without dna binding by a hypothesized transcription factor. the modulatory auxiliary molecule represents a new "wrench in the works," a wrench that happens to rattle around in a useful fashion to create a new, much more sensitive, overall mechanism – one where it is possible to transduce single molecule events  into changes in the ionic current stationary statistics. more than an on/off event detection, the transduction is analog, with a range of values, such as binding strength available from binding event dwell time distributions .  and support vector machines . for blockade signal acquisition and simple, time-domain, feature-extraction, a finite state automaton  approach is used  <cit>  that is based on tuning a variety of threshold parameters . a generic hmm can be used to characterize current blockades by identifying a sequence of sub-blockades as a sequence of state emissions  <cit> . the parameters of the generic-hmm can then be estimated using a method called expectation/maximization, or 'em"  <cit> , to effect de-noising. the hmm method with em, denoted hmm/em, is used in what follows . the feature vector has either  <dig> components or  <dig> if spike frequency feature included.  classification of feature vectors obtained by the hmm for each individual blockade event is then done using svms, an approach which automatically provides a confidence measure on each classification.

the nanopore detector is operated such that a stream of  <dig> ms samplings are obtained. each  <dig> ms signal acquired by the time-domain fsa consists of a sequence of  <dig> sub-blockade levels . signal preprocessing is then used for adaptive low-pass filtering. for the data sets examined, the preprocessing is expected to permit compression on the sample sequence from  <dig> to  <dig> samples . the signal preprocessing makes use of an off-line wavelet stationarity analysis.

biological significance and drug discovery utility
a new form of binding analysis/characterization is possible at the level of an individual molecular complex. this has direct relevance to biology and medicine since it can potentially provide a very direct form of binding analysis. such a method is needed because information about molecular species, particularly their binding properties in the presence of cofactors and adjuvants, is what is often sought in drug discovery, a very complex and expensive design/discovery process. nanopore transduction detection, thus, holds promise for helping to identify medicinal co-factors or adjuvants that lead to stronger immune response by aiding the design/selection for specific binding properties. in the results that follow tbp-tata binding is examined , and integrase-hivdna binding is examined.

RESULTS
nanopore transduction platform and transduction "carrier" signal
upon addition of the alpha-hemolysin monomers to the cis-well, according to the standard nanopore protocol, the toxin oligomerizes to form a water-filled transmembrane channel in the phospholipid bilayer . next, the ty10t1-gc aptamer was applied through refluxing to this environment and began to engage the alpha-hemolysin channel. upon capture of a single ty10t1-gc aptamer at the channel there is an immediate and overall current reduction. thereafter, the steady flow of ions through the channel was alternately blockaded at levels corresponding to approximately 40% and 60% of baseline, hypothesized to correspond with the binding/unbinding of the aptamer's blunt-ended terminus to the surrounding vestibule walls. these fluctuations in ionic current were measured and recorded as a blockade pattern. the two-level dominant blockade signal is shown in fig.  <dig> for t-y10t1-gc.

aptamer-tbp model and aptamer-integrase model
in an attempt to demonstrate the nanopore detector's capacity for describing the transcription factor/transcription factor binding site interaction, we examined the tbp/tata box complex following the nanopore protocol. tbp, a subunit of transcription factor tfiid, was selected for its broad commercial availability and nominal price. tfiid is the first protein to bind to dna during the formation of the pre-initiation transcription complex of rna polymerase ii . the tata box, located in the promoter region of most eukaryotic genes, assists in directing rna pol ii to the transcription initiation site downstream on dna. for our transduction molecular system, the tata box is located on a 4dt-loop terminating arm of our y-aptamer, which was prepared in the lab by annealing to two dna hairpin molecules. the base stem of our bifunctional y-aptamer is designed to target and bind the area around the limiting aperture of the alpha-hemolysin channel, while the arm containing the tata box binds the tbp.

we find that some of the blockade signals are only seen after introduction of tbp, which is hypothesized to be the sought after indication of tbp/tata box complex formation. the automated signal analysis profiles for t-y10t1-gc w/wo tbp are shown in figs  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  the experiment is also repeated , with the receptor arm elongated several base pairs for more distal receptor placement from the channel environment, in order to ensure accommodation for the tata binding protein , with similar indication of binding in our experiments.

dna terminus studies: terminus dynamics
dna termini are of critical importance for certain retroviral integrases and other biological processes – being able to study them, even comparatively, offers new avenues for understanding and drug selection . information on the dna molecules' variation in structure and flexibility is important to understanding the dynamically enhanced  dna complex formations that are found with strong affinities to other, specific, dna and protein molecules. an important example of this is the hiv attack on cells. the second molecule studied focuses on the dna terminus properties of retroviral dna molecules. these molecules are found to exhibit greater flexibility, often marked by an increase in the number of blockade states, such as in the upper-level fine structure for the molecule terminating with gacg-3' that is examined here .

dna terminus studies: hiv integrase binding
one of the most critical stages in hiv's attack is the binding between viral and human dna, which is influenced by the dynamic-coupling induced high flexibility of a ca dinucleotide positioned precisely two base-pairs from the blunt terminus of the duplex viral dna. the ca dinucleotide presence is a universal characteristic of retroviral genomes. in previous work  <cit> , we observe unusual nanopore blockade activity for molecules with such a ca step, indicative of unusual binding or conformational activity. in  <cit>  a dna hairpin with a similarly behaving ga dinucleotide step is examined in the same position. further results along these lines are shown here, with use of the latest kinetic analysis tools. as mentioned in the introduction, the third dna molecule studied consists of the hiv consensus terminus at the end of the y-aptamer arm with the tata receptor – where it is exposed for binding to integrase. since this molecule presents another blunt-ended dsdna for capture, it is no surprise that such events occur. the signal analysis must separate between two classes of signal associated with these two dominant forms of capture – associated with capture of the two blunt-ended dna regions . with appropriate capture of the molecule at the base of the y, this permits direct examination of protein binding to the terminal dna region.

the third molecule studied consists of a y-aptamer with the same base sequence as in the ty10t1-gc aptamer above. the new y-aptamer, however, has a blunt-ended arm  that consists of the hiv dna terminus consensus sequence examined in the second dna molecule experiment. the new y-aptamer is used to observe interaction events between that terminus and hiv dna integrase. preliminary binding observations are shown in figure  <dig>  more detailed figures are shown in additional file  <dig>  where the three most common signal classes are shown for the hiv y-aptamer , with right side images zoomed in to a time-scale more than  <dig> times shorter. similarly, a more detailed figure is shown in additional file  <dig>  where the a signal class is shown that is not seen when hiv y-aptamer is introduced without addition of integrase. in that figure, a possible binding event might be shown at the change in signal pattern from fixed level that ends in the yellow box, .

discussion
transcription factor blocking using single-stranded oligonucleotides
the advance of drug therapies designed to target the dna binding site of individual tfs is currently impeded by insufficient sequence specificity for the appropriate binding site. while progress is being made to produce derivatives with greater specificity, another technique for altering transcription via single-stranded oligonucleotides has been implemented in such fields of medicine as cancer treatment. this approach employs a single-stranded oligonucleotide to bind a specific sequence in double-stranded dna and form a triple helix which is not recognizable to a protein, such as a tf, that would usually bind to that site in double helical dna. the creation of triple helixes was used, for example, to repress the transcription of the tumor necrosis factor gene, which in turn inhibited the growth of tnf-dependent tumor cells. despite certain successes achieved with single-stranded oligonucleotides, synthetic tfs still provide a more directed, powerful means to influence the mechanism of transcription. nanopore technology can be play an essential role in the further development of therapeutic agents by identifying and improving structural information on the binding of these drugs to dna. principally, the nanopore detector gives us the ability to observe the binding event in real time with a single molecule view. furthermore, multi-component processes not discernible by standard cell-based analysis may also be resolvable using the nanopore detector.

other modifications of the y-shaped aptamer
a complementary set of experiments intended to build a foundation for a study of dna-dna interactions, was performed with variations of the same y-shaped aptamer. in one experiment, the 4t loop at the end of the tata arm was opened at the 5'-end and extended to 6t. this particular aptamer, referred to as t6-y10t1-gc, may enter the channel at either the blunt gc terminus or the 6t overhanging terminus, thereby yielding two distinct signals representing both possible insertions. addition of a 6a-base nucleotide sequence to the nanopore environment generated a third blockade pattern, which represented the binding event between the "sticky" 6t overhang and its complement. the blockade patterns were characterized using the nanopore detector and initial results are shown in  <cit> .

further exploration of mechanism of tbp-tata transduction signal
when tbp binds to the tata box, it creates a nearly ninety degree bend in the dna. this strong conformational change allows for strand separation. this is possible since the binding region of dna is rich with the weaker two-hydrogen bond interactions of adenine and thymine. once the strand separation occurs, rna pol ii gains entry and begins transcription of the gene. the conformational deformity precipitated by the binding of tbp to dna may be largely responsible for the alteration of the blockade signal originating after the introduction of tbp. further results are sought in this area to explore the ability to observe conformational changes.

further exploration of retroviral dna terminus dynamics
the behavior of the dna hairpins containing the ca dinucleotide step , have been studied using a nanopore detector  <cit> . the nanopore detector feature extraction makes use of hmm-based feature extraction and svm-based classification/clustering of "like" molecular kinetics. we have previously found that the dna hairpin with ca dinucleotide, positioned two basepairs from the blunt terminus, has "outlier" channel current statistics qualitatively differentiable from the other dna hairpin variants. we have also verified the same for molecules with a ga dinucleotide step . we are now attempting to explore hairpins with base changes at the same dinucleotide step . with recent hmm methods to resolve blockade fine-structure using eva projection, and with an hmm w/duration implementation, we expect to fully resolve the different hairpin signal classes and will then seek to cluster them. we hypothesize that molecules with greater flexibility and added binding configurations will cluster with like molecules.

hmm/svm clustering for knowledge discovery
hmm-based feature extraction and svm based clustering methods have been developed to identify clusters of duplex termini according to their blockade patterns  <cit> . we hypothesize that this clustering will allow us to infer useful details about the binding/conformational properties of molecules by blockade-class association. as a prelude to extensive studies of dna annealing, y-aptamers have been examined in a parallel study, where a ssdna overhang  are placed at the end of one of the y-aptamer arms , see  <cit>  for further details.

luciferase transcription reporter vs. nanopore detector based screening
luciferase protein can be used as an agent for measuring the ability of various therapies to stimulate or repress transcription. this is the main alternative to our proposed nanopore-based screening method. in this approach, the luciferase-encoding gene is simply linked to the gene promoter of interest, and then the entire construct is introduced into cells, where the effect of potential drug therapies  on the activity of the promoter may be discerned by comparing the expression of the luciferase protein read by luminometer in treated and untreated cells  <cit> . both of the mechanisms in question have the advantage of high throughput and are capable of evaluating a broad range of compounds. however, as demonstrated in our study of the tbp/tata complex, the nanopore device allows the binding event to be observed directly, whereas the luciferase protein would only represent its products. moreover, the expression of luciferase does not indicate at all the manner in which a particular identified compound modulates promoter activity. given its single molecule view, the nanopore-mechanism is capable of a superior resolution of molecular interaction.

CONCLUSIONS
the utility and sensitivity of the nanopore detector when operating in "transduction mode" is described. it was hypothesized that binding targets on the transduction molecule, that are well away from the channel-captured region, could be monitored insofar as their binding status, or history, is concerned. this appears to be true for observations of binding status on the dna molecules studied here. extended observations, to establish the ability to monitor binding histories, is a work-in-progress.

