BACKGROUND
initially reported in early 1990's as post weaning multi-systemic wasting syndrome   <cit> , porcine circovirus associated disease  soon became a cause of a major animal-health crisis worldwide. the emergence of pcvad was remarkable in that it was causally linked with porcine circovirus  <cit> , which, prior to emergence of pcvad, was believed to be a contaminant of cell cultures  <cit>  with no effect on swine health  <cit> . this virus was subsequently classified as porcine circovirus type  <dig>  <cit> . genetic dissimilarity between the type  <dig> and the subsequently detected porcine circovirus type  <dig>  is thought to be linked to the difference in virulence between the two types and the consequent emergence of clinical disease. however, detection of pcv <dig> in historical samples prior to emergence of pcvad  <cit>  is still unexplained. the ubiquitous nature of the virus in swine populations, coupled with common infection  but variable severity of clinical presentation, as well as the roles of concurrent infectious agents, make the diagnosis of clinical disease in individual animals challenging. the most commonly used set of criteria to define pcvad is that of sorden  <cit> , who proposed that all of the following need to be present for confirmation of pcvad:  wasting, weight loss, and respiratory disease,  lymphoid depletion and/or lymphohistiocytic to granulomatous inflammation, typically in lungs or lymphoid tissues, and  pcv <dig> antigen or nucleic acid associated with microscopic lesions. however, a positive pcvad diagnosis in individual animals does not necessarily equate to a herd-level problem. it was proposed that a herd was assumed to be facing a substantial pcvad problem if the level of mortality due to pcvad is sufficiently higher than historically found in this herd or in area-level averages  <cit> .

starting in  <dig>  the canadian swine industry experienced significant losses due to pcvad. in ontario, the frequency of reported lesions associated with pcvad, based on diagnostic submissions to animal health laboratory of the university of guelph, increased considerably in  <dig> and  <dig> relative to the period between  <dig> and  <dig>  and a shift in pcv <dig> genotype was observed  <cit> . in some herds, mortality in grower-finisher pigs reached as high as 50%. similar findings were observed in quebec herds, and ~80% of isolates collected from across canada during  <dig> and  <dig> were classified into a previously unreported group, pcv2b  <cit> . since then, several vaccine products have been introduced into the market and have generally been effective. despite research findings concerning the pathogenesis and transmission of pcv <dig> between animals, data concerning regional spread of pcvad remain limited. clustering in space, time, and space and time were identified in europe, specifically in denmark  <cit>  and great britain  <cit> . in both studies, the observed pattern of spread between herds was most consistent with introduction of a new infectious agent or a new strain of an agent. direct transmission through animal movement is believed to be a major contributor  <cit> , and previous research has indicated a possible role of seagulls  <cit>  and people  <cit>  as vectors of infection. the pattern of spread consistent with the emergence of a new contagious agent was, however, not always detected. for example, no apparent links between affected herds existed during the early phase of pcvad  emergence in sweden  <cit> . under north american conditions, no results obtained from a large-scale epidemiological study are presently available. the aim of this study was to provide exploratory results for ontario swine herds, with two specific objectives. first, this study aimed to explore the spatial characteristics of self-reported pcvad distribution and spread in ontario, and second, it aimed to investigate whether a pattern of local spread of pcvad existed under ontario conditions, and if it did, to describe its characteristics. for the latter objective, we relied primarily on measures of spatio-temporal clustering  obtained through space-time k-functions. briefly, a plot of space-time k-function indicating a relative increase in cases in the vicinity of a case herd would indicate existence of disease spread to neighboring farms and would suggests the characteristics of this spread. additionally, we investigated measures of purely spatial clustering to investigate aggregation of cases in the proximity of a typical case while ignoring time.

RESULTS
description of the study population
the study included  <dig> swine herds, each with a unique premises location, with  <dig> of these herds declared to be pcvad-positive. figure  <dig> depicts inclusion of herds from the original database into study population. all herds were geographically distributed throughout the study area in the southern part of ontario . table  <dig> contains descriptive statistics of unique euclidean pairwise distances among all study herds and the euclidean distance between the nearest neighboring herds. more neighbors were < <dig> km apart when distance to the nearest neighbor was evaluated than when unique pair-wise distances were evaluated, because repeated values might have been used for distances between the neighboring herds.

neighboring
herd demographics are addressed in more detail in an accompanying article  <cit> . briefly,  <dig> herds were positive for porcine reproductive and respiratory  virus by polymerase chain reaction  testing, and  <dig> were assessed as prrs-negative by the herd veterinarian. this assessment might have varied between practitioners in terms of diagnostic and sampling approaches, but it implied that the herd was free from prrs virus shedding and exposure. descriptive statistics of herds included in analysis are provided in table  <dig> 

 <dig>  calculated only from farms with corresponding superscript

spatial and temporal analysis
the risk of pcvad positivity appeared to vary over the study area before adjusting for the prrs virus  status of included farms  =  <dig> ), and was significant after this adjustment  =  <dig> ). the latter was the final gam model for predicting geographical risk of pcvad. in april of  <dig>  when the study ended, the risk of pcvad - based on this final model - was higher in the eastern areas of ontario, with a tendency for lower risk in the western parts of the province. the only statistically significant risk factor resulting from univariable analysis was the prrsv status of the herd. the odds of pcvad occurring in a herd were  <dig>   times greater in prrsv-positive farms than in prrsv-negative herds after adjusting for farm location. interestingly, the coefficient for prrsv-positive status increased by 29% on the original  scale after adjusting for trend by including the smooth bivariate function of x  and y  coordinates . in addition, herd type was identified as potentially associated with occurrence of pcvad  during univariable analysis, with nursery operations having lower odds than farrow-to-finish operations . in the final gam model, no obvious outliers were detected after examination of deviance residuals; however, herds in zone  <dig>  had the highest cook's d values, i.e., tended to have some disproportionate influence on the model building process. the higher expected risk in the eastern region, based on the final gam model, was in concordance with the results of the cox's proportional hazard models. results of the cox's model that used four easting zones as categorical covariates suggested that herds in zone  <dig> of the study area  had a lower hazard than herds in zone  <dig>  and zone  <dig> , but had a hazard equal to that of herds in zone  <dig>  . there was no evidence of non-proportional hazards, as evaluated by scaled schoenfeld residuals and absence of significance for the time-varying coefficient in the cox's model. figure  <dig> depicts the reported number of pcvad cases per month according to the three case definitions. the highest number of cases was reported in june of  <dig>  and 50% of cases were reported by september of  <dig> 

no gof test could be produced for the model with categorical data
§the table corresponds to survival curves in figure 5

spatial clustering  was not identified in this study when evaluated over the entire study area, as both the d function  and the empirical variogram of deviance residuals obtained from the binomial gam  failed to suggest any significant spatial clustering. in contrast, the most likely spatial cluster was identified using spatial scan statistics with a centroid in zone  <dig> . the spatial cluster identified by gam partly overlapped the spatial cluster detected by the spatial scan statistic, suggesting involvement of herds in the same general area in this cluster. we did not further investigate characteristics of herds included in this high-risk area.

spatio-temporal analysis
examination of the spatio-temporal k-function revealed a space-time interaction in the data, originating primarily from small-scale clustering in space and/or time . the contour plot of the d <dig> suggested a proportional increase in risk attributable to space-time interaction; herds that were closer than ~  <dig>  km to an incident pcvad-positive herd seemed to be under increased risk  of a pcvad-outbreak over the next  <dig> mo . as the distance  to the incident herd decreased, the excess risk of developing pcvad increased to reach a maximum at approximately  <dig> km of spatial and  <dig> mo of temporal distance. interestingly, this risk seemed to be lower for herds located < <dig> km apart . since only a few distances between cases were < <dig> km, we decided to evaluate our spatio-temporal k-function starting at  <dig> km. investigations at larger spatial and temporal scales yielded similar conclusions . in addition, one significant space-time cluster was detected, with a radius of  <dig>  km and a duration of  <dig> mo starting in february  <dig> and involving four herds . although no secondary spatio-temporal clusters  reached statistical significance, their exploration yielded some insight into the development of the epidemic. in all but one case, the duration of likely space-time clusters was ≤  <dig> mo, the radius was < <dig> km, and the number of farms included was ≤  <dig>  this descriptive information further supported the clustering of incident pcvad cases on a small spatial and temporal scale depicted by d <dig>  furthermore, figure  <dig> contains a scatterplot of all likely spatio-temporal clusters with kilometers of easting on the y axis, start date on the x axis, and dot size proportional to the number of herds in the cluster. the scatterplot is further divided into four zones according to categories of easting  previously used as discrete levels in survival analysis. it is evident that all likely clusters were detected in zones < <dig> km east, with the highest density of the swine population in ontario. moreover, there was a lack of clear correlation between easting of the most likely outbreaks and their starting dates, in contrast to the correlation between these parameters at the herd level. thus, it seems that these apparent spatio-temporal clusters were generated by a process with no clear linear evolution over a geographical area in the x direction.

discussion
collectively, the results of this analysis suggest three major findings:  existence of spatial variation in risk,  existence of apparent local spread, and  possible existence of other mechanisms of spread.

spatial variation in pcvad risk between the eastern and western part of the study area existed  and there was a general east-to-west trend in pcvad spread . similar findings of directionality were observed in other studies that investigated outbreaks at the national or regional level. woodbine et al  <cit> , investigating outbreaks in great britain, reported that pcvad outbreaks were first observed in the south of england, progressing toward the west and north. in denmark, vigre et al  <cit>  reported the existence of two large spatial clusters of positive herds during an initial 2-y period of disease occurrence, and although geographical variability in the occurrence of disease existed, directionality was not apparent from the results, nor was it discussed. in the early phases of the outbreak, geographical variation was, as expected, found in other study regions  <cit> . the observed directionality was contrary to the dominant winds in ontario, but it was in close concordance with one of the "principal routes" of the atlantic bird flyway http://www.birdnature.com/upperatlantic.html through the study area. in previous studies of pcvad emergence, it was suggested that southern black-backed seagulls were possible mechanical vectors of indirect spread of a causative agent  <cit> . data collected in this study did not allow investigation of birds as mechanical or biological vectors. moreover, the directional spread pattern might also be linked with other direct or indirect mechanisms. finally, it cannot be completely excluded that farmers in eastern ontario have different social contacts or sources of information than producers in the western part of the province, and would consequently have a different sensitivity or threshold to declare herds pcvad-positive. although only a few herds were sampled from this region, these herds did not appear to be outliers in either regression model. in addition, existence of differences in terms of social contacts cannot explain the apparent difference in spatial risk between herds located in zone  <dig> and zone  <dig>  where the identical spatial trend was observed. although the pcvad risk surface, generated by gam, suggested the existence of this directionality, we caution the reader that the actual numerical risk estimates are not directly interpretable as estimates of prevalence or of incidence risk in an area, particularly in the unadjusted gam, because of the initial sampling and subsequent inclusion criteria .

the lack of evidence of purely spatial clustering , was not in agreement with detection of a significant purely spatial cluster, for two possible reasons. first, in theory, clusters of disease-positive cases could occur even in the absence of interaction  between farms. a typical example would be environmental factors impacting herds independently. thus, clusters could be detected even if spatial autocorrelation does not exist. second, the methods used to identify the existence of spatial clusters might have higher sensitivity than those used to identify spatial clustering, at least as we used these methods in the study. we used the latter set of methods over the entire study area, in contrast to the use of similar methods  in specific regions to investigate other swine diseases  <cit> . the rationale for our approach was that we had no predefined local area of interest prior to analysis, and we used methods intended to accommodate the heterogeneous distribution of the study population.

apparent local spread  existed, as suggested by the existence of clustering and clusters on a small spatial and temporal scale. during the  <dig> foot-and-mouth  epidemic in the uk the term "local spread" was used in a field when a new fmd case was identified within a  <dig> km of a previous fmd case, and contact with a more distant source of fmd could not be determined  <cit> . this description of local spread was more in line with the field investigation of outbreaks on a case-by-case basis, whereas our approach to investigating local spread was comparable to the analytical approach taken by picado et al  <cit> . similar findings for pcvad clustering were reported in denmark  <cit>  and subsequently in great britain  <cit> , although the scale of spatio-temporal clustering in the latter study seemed to be larger than in this study. high pig-farm density in the neighborhood was identified as a risk factor in other studies as well  <cit> . a pattern of local spread could be the consequence of a combination of different mechanisms, including direct, indirect, and airborne transmission of an agent identified as a necessary cause  or a component cause . these mechanisms could not be easily discriminated using the data at hand. while the possibilities of direct and indirect transmission are discussed in previous reports, data concerning airborne spread are scant. recently, verreault et al  <cit>  reported detection of pcv <dig> genome copies in the air of confined finisher barns in concentrations of up to  <dig> copies/m <dig>  the significance of this finding is yet to be elucidated. although none of the secondary likely spatio-temporal clusters were statistically significant, they exhibited some common characteristics. they were observed in zones  <dig> and  <dig>  where the majority of pig herds in the study population were located, involved a small number of herds, and were short in duration and limited in geographical extent. the latter two observations were in agreement with the results of the spatio-temporal k-function. however, given the number of herds in this study, statistical evidence to support existence of apparent local spread was relatively weak. this could be a consequence of non-differential misclassification due to the non-specific case definition; alternatively, local spread may have been only one component of disease transmission, or perhaps that apparent local spread was confounded by clustering of farms under the same ownerships in the same geographical area. thus, the results of this study suggest that farms in the vicinity of those experiencing pcvad outbreaks were at increased risk of experiencing outbreaks for months. recommendations based on these findings were modified once other factors were taken into account. the results and methodological approaches taken are reported in an accompanying article  <cit> .

at least two inconsistencies in the results suggest the existence of patterns of spread other than apparent local spread. firstly, while the existence of a spatial trend in the study region was confirmed in various analyses, the most likely spatio-temporal clusters occurred almost haphazardly in x direction and time . this suggests that disease did not spread as a sequence of geographically connected outbreaks in the east-west direction. secondly, the expected time to outbreak in herds located in zone  <dig> was equivalent to that in zone  <dig>  while herds located in zone  <dig> had the largest residuals and were influential points in the gams. it is possible that herds in this area were more isolated from the major centers of swine production than herds in the other three areas. this "isolation" could be with respect to direct or indirect potential sources of infection. the infectious agent could have also spread via other transmission pathways, primarily through movements within swine production companies and their suppliers. bigras-poulin et al  <cit>  showed that patterns of swine movement in denmark had the topology of a scale-free network. theoretically, much lower transmission probabilities on scale-free networks are sufficient to spread or maintain "infection" on these networks than under the assumption of a homogeneous mixing  <cit> . recently, firth et al  <cit> , using pcv <dig> sequence data, reported several significant diffusion pathways for this agent between different continents and between different countries. the pathways identified were similar to the trade patterns of swine. despite the limitations inherent to such data  and study design , the conclusions suggest that live-animal movements contributed to disease spread. woodbine et al  <cit>  identified purchase of breeding stock as a risk factor for herd outbreaks in the early phase of the pcvad epidemics in great britain. in this respect, it is possible that ontario herds in zone  <dig>  interacted more with herds in the neighboring province  than with other ontario herds. in contrast, herds in zone  <dig>  were likely sufficiently distant in both geographical and road distances from centers of intensive production in the highly swine-dense areas of ontario and quebec to decrease the frequency of direct contacts  and indirect contacts  with herds from these centers. this is consistent with the findings of madec et al  <cit> , who argued that contact between pigs is the main route of transmission for pcvad. in agreement with direct contact as a major contributor to pcvad spread, ownerships as proxy measurements for network memberships were investigated in the accompanying article  <cit> . however, regardless of whether spread through networks occurred or not, it should be stressed that detailed investigation of production-disease epidemics in intensive production systems that prevail today in industrialized countries is challenging if appropriate movement and contact information is not readily available. despite these limitations, results gained through this exploratory analysis support the spread of the infectious agent in accordance with other studies  <cit> .

generalized additive models were useful with respect to investigating different aspects of pcvad. some advantages of the trend surface produced by the gam were that it could be easily adjusted for risk factors, and residuals and influential values could be examined. in addition, deviance residuals could be produced from the model using binomial  data to construct an empirical variogram. this approach has the advantage of evaluating second-order effects  after accounting for the first-order effects . however, this aggregation of herd-level  data to areal  data  introduced two limitations. first, herd-level covariates could not be used in a model unless they were aggregated to the same level as the outcome. second, as in any logistic regression model, a reasonable number of observations in each covariate pattern is needed to achieve desirable properties of residuals  <cit> . for the aggregation used in this study, this could be attained only if the density of sampled points in a grid was high or the area of the grid used to collapse the data was large. finally, the gam further offered the opportunity to investigate the location and significance of local clusters. this approach was based on previously published methodology  <cit> . in this study, both approaches identified spatial clusters in the same region, although the location and the extent of the two high risk areas only partially agreed. we opted to use the gam approach to identify spatial trend and risk factors in a purely spatial model, as opposed to the logistic regression based on fully bayesian linear mixed model with spatially structured residuals . although performance of the two approaches was not compared, one of the advantages of the gam approach over a generalized linear model  is that the gam allows for fitting a very flexible trend surface for spatial point data.

this study has several important limitations. first, the study population represented a biased sample of the ontario swine population at that time. one explicit inclusion criterion was that the referent veterinarian was to be a member of the ontario association of swine veterinarians , and information was shared through oasv's e-mail list. this group of veterinarians consults for most commercial swine herds in ontario. premises holding small numbers of pigs may be under-represented in the study population because these farmers may be less likely to ask for the services of a veterinarian. we believe that this increased the accuracy of diagnosis, because clinical signs suggestive of systemic pcvad are easier to observe in large populations. moreover, we believe that this study was not biased with respect to geographic location, because two diagnostic laboratories that perform prrsv testing are located within a 30-km euclidean distance, and some samples from the alternate diagnostic laboratory were eventually included in the study when prrsv sequencing at no cost was offered as an incentive to participate in the study. therefore, we believe most eligible herds were included in the study. we cannot provide complete statistics on this, since inclusion of a herd was the responsibility of not only the research team , but also of the veterinarian . it was anticipated that a comparatively high percentage of prrsv-negative herds would be identified in eastern ontario, as the density of swine herds in this region is much lower than in western or southern ontario. we included the prrsv status of a herd at the time of sampling in an attempt to adjust analytically for such stratification, when the risk surface was produced. results of adjusted analysis suggested that the spatial trend was simpler and more suggestive of directionality than the expectations from the unadjusted analysis. a mapping approach using gam was very useful in this respect.

bias might also influence detection of clustering and clusters. we believe that the impact of this bias is small for the following reasons:  pcvad-positive and negative herds were selected from the same target population using the same selection mechanism, and  premises with multiple herds included over time were aggregated to only one, the most relevant herd. since prrsv-positive status is associated with higher odds of being a pcvad-positive herd, potential spread of prrsv or a specific prrsv genotype might have positively contributed to measures of clustering for pcvad.

the second important limitation of the study is a non-specific case definition that depended on the memories of the producers. the extent and influence of potential misclassification bias is difficult to ascertain. however, results of the several initial analyses that were based on more stringent criteria to define a case  confirmed the same conclusions with respect to temporal  and spatial trends . consequently, we decided to use the maximum amount of data available. in addition, herd-level diagnosis of pcvad is difficult, as even identifying pcvad in individual pigs does not necessarily equate to a clinical problem in the herd. herd-level diagnosis of pcvad is ultimately based on mortality rate in the growing pig, which, in the absence of regular electronic monitoring, has to rely on the operator's assessment. the reader should also be aware that under the "circovirus inoculation program"  <cit> , swine producers could qualify for compensation for diagnostic testing and vaccination for pcv <dig> performed between march  <dig>   <dig>  and december  <dig>   <dig>  this likely increased diagnostic testing and confidence in declaring pcvad status of a herd. finally, within a region, spatially referenced data about the spread of a disease such as pcvad is difficult to obtain under current conditions.

third, one could also argue that a large number of herds were excluded from our analysis. however, the purpose of this step was to eventually have only one, the most relevant, data point per premises - representing the first occurrence of a disease at that site.

fourth, introduction and uptake of effective vaccines might have had an undue influence on our results. at least one commercial vaccine was introduced in canada and the usa starting in late march and april of  <dig>  <cit>  under conditional license. due to limited supply, it was initially distributed to herds with documented outbreaks. at the time of vaccine introduction, the peak of the outbreak in this study population had already occurred in june of  <dig> . thus, the most likely impact of this intervention on the results of the study was to diminish any effects identified. this also illustrates a need to evaluate possible time-varying patterns of disease spread. despite its limitations, we believe our investigation will provide additional information about this important disease, particularly under north american farming conditions.

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, a pattern of spread consistent with the emergence of an infectious agent was supported by a spatial trend . over the study period, the risk of reporting a pcvad-positive herd seemed to be higher in the eastern part of the province. this directionality was partly confirmed for spread using survival analysis. a pattern of local spread also appeared to exist, as evidenced by spatio-temporal clustering of pcvad and existence of spatio-temporal clusters. this second-order effect was based primarily on clustering on the small spatial and temporal scale. the spatial trend and clustering could be due to direct or indirect mechanisms of spread and were not explored further in this analysis. other patterns of spread were suggested by the pcvad failure risk in zone  <dig>  that was indistinguishable from the pcvad failure risk in zone  <dig> , and a lack of clear geographical directionality of the most likely apparent spatio-temporal clusters. generalized additive models as used in this study can be a useful complement to exploratory spatial analysis.

