BACKGROUND
phenotype descriptions are valuable information right at the interface of medicine and biology. their main value lies in helping to dissect the relationships between diseases and genes. therefore, large genetic screens, especially in organisms like drosophila melanogaster or caenorhabditis elegans, have been carried out to systematically research the phenotypes associated to genes  <cit> . since high-throughput screening methods, such as rna interference , have become available also for mammals  <cit> , phenotype screening has become an acknowledged and widely used component of functional genomics.

one particular problem with analyzing phenotypes is the lack of a common vocabulary to describe them. instead, researchers use either home-grown vocabularies or plain english text. due to the resulting heterogeneity in descriptions, automatically analyzing phenotypes is a daunting and yet relatively unexplored task. adding to this problem, the term 'phenotype' in itself is used for a broad variety of concepts, including the descriptions of clinical diseases, the characterization of naturally occurring mutants or experimentally generated mutants, and rnai screens or gene knock-out experiments, and sometimes even large-scale microarray gene expression data, which makes an integrated analysis of phenotypes from different experiments and laboratories particularly hard  <cit> . another issue is that until very recently, no comprehensive set of phenotypes with associated genes were available. this issue has been partly addressed by the creation of phenotype databases, such as phenomicdb  <cit>  or phenogo  <cit>  .

probably due to these difficulties, there exist relatively few studies dealing with the analysis of phenotypes beyond a single gene-phenotype relation. some of the groundwork for studying phenotypes in a more comprehensive manner has been laid by piano et al.  <cit> , who used manually curated phenotypes from a single rnai screen. they described a phenotype as the sum of  <dig> phenotypic features and coined the term 'phenoclusters'  to describe groups of such vectorized phenotypes that 'correlate well with sequence-based functional predictions and thus may be useful in predicting functions of uncharacterized genes'  <cit> . similarly, a study by van driel et al.  <cit>  compared human phenotype descriptions and found that grouping of phenotypes reflects biological modules of interacting functionally related genes. recently, gaulton et al.  <cit>  developed a computational system to suggest new genes contributing towards a 'complex trait' . they use ontologies and entity recognition to extract genes and proteins from phenotype descriptions and rank them accordingly to corresponding biological data from online resources. butte et al.  <cit>  clustered keywords from the unified medical language system  annotated to gene expression data and interpret the resulting connection between these terms and the associated genes . in a study by raychaudhuri et al.  <cit> , text-mining methods were applied to medline abstracts dealing with gene function – but not specifically phenotypes – and to assign functional annotation from the gene ontology   <cit> . using phenotype data for more than annotation prediction, eggert et al.  <cit>  compared phenotypes from rnai as well as chemical genetic screens to find genes responsible for the same cellular phenotype. thus, they could identify new members of known pathways as well as small molecules with an effect on the same pathway.

all these approaches have in common that they worked either with only very little phenotype data  or with a large but very unspecific set of 'phenotypes' . in this paper, we go beyond these limitations and present the results of a systematic and large-scale comparison of phenotypes from multiple sources and touching upon many species. we used phenomicdb  <cit>  as one of the largest available collections of phenotype descriptions across species. phenomicdb aims at the integration of phenotype data in any of the above mentioned senses. therefore, and due to the lack of standardized vocabulary as explained above, it stores phenotype descriptions mostly as plain text extracted from the various sources. we analyzed these data using text-clustering to group together similar phenotypes, therein creating a novel approach to cluster genes. to validate the biological usefulness of the created 'phenoclusters' , we examined the relatedness of the genes in a cluster using several independent measures, i.e., protein-protein-interaction  of associated proteins, functional annotations from the gene ontology , and the co-occurrence of pairs of genes known to be responsible for identical phenotypes . we found that 'phenoclusters' have interesting properties: they significantly correlate with the degree of connectedness on the ppi level, phenocopies co-occur significantly more often in the same cluster than in different clusters and they are highly enriched in terms of coherence of their functional annotation. especially the last observation led us to the hypothesis that genes within a 'phenocluster' have a high chance of sharing gene function, and that we can use 'phenoclusters' for function prediction by predicting the function of badly characterized or un-annotated genes in a cluster from the function of other genes in the same cluster. using cross-validation, we found that this method yields a recall of up to  <dig> % at a precision of  <dig> %, which, in our mind, strongly supports our hypothesis. we conclude that 'phenoclusters' are a novel and promising way of finding relationships between genes with high biological coherence.

RESULTS
we obtained textual description of phenotypes and a reference to their associated gene from the phenomicdb database. for text mining purposes, the descriptions had to be properly adapted and prepared . we use the working term 'phenodoc' in the following to refer to this adjusted form of phenotype description and use 'phenocluster' to refer to a cluster of 'phenodocs'. we clustered the resulting  <dig>  'phenodocs' associated to  <dig>  genes from  <dig> different species into  <dig>  clusters based on the cosine distance between 'phenodocs' using the k-means algorithm on a vectorized representation of the documents. we studied the resulting groups from a number of perspectives to assess whether or not the grouping itself is biologically reasonable. finally, we predicted gene function within each cluster and evaluated this method using cross validation. all methods are described in detail in the 'methods' section.

of the  <dig>  clusters,  <dig> % are single species. figure  <dig> shows the distribution of clusters into different sizes. figure  <dig> details the distribution of genes by species  and the distribution of species in clusters .

proteins of genes within a 'phenocluster' intensively interact with each other
to test whether 'phenoclusters' consist of genes with a high chance of being part of a common biological process, we studied whether the proteins of genes within one cluster interact with each other more often than of genes in random control groups. this approach derives from the observation that physically interacting proteins have a higher chance to be part of the same biological process or pathway than non-interacting proteins  <cit> . to this end, we downloaded protein-protein interactions from the biogrid database represented by entrez gene ids . we then analyzed the degree of interactions among the members of a given 'phenocluster', and compared those figures to random gene groups of similar size.

in  <dig> clusters  comprising  <dig>  genes, all genes interact with at least 75% of the rest of the genes from the same group within at most two intermediates . thus, those clusters consist of genes which almost build cliques in the protein-protein-interaction network. such quasi-cliques previously have been associated to functional modules  <cit> . in another  <dig> clusters, comprising a total of  <dig>  genes, all genes interact with at least 33% of the rest of the genes in each group. we compared these numbers to  <dig> repetitions of randomly sampled control groups. in this dataset, there is on average only one group reaching the threshold of 75% and two groups reaching the threshold of 33%.

these figures show that clustering of 'phenodocs' results in gene groups whose members much more often interact with each other than expected by chance and thus represent coherent biological knowledge. however, the interaction score of the rest of these clusters is not significantly higher than in the control groups. we shall later exploit this difference to sort clusters based on this score to see whether the prediction of function is improved in highly interacting clusters.

we believe that the large number of those non-interacting clusters is mostly an artefact of the current incompleteness of ppi data sets in biogrid, with the notable exception of saccharomyces cerevisiae. therefore, even highly interacting 'phenoclusters' will not necessarily mimic the ppi network due to the diverse nature of phenotypes or a lack of data . figure  <dig> exemplifies e.g. the lack of phenotype data showing genes from a 'phenocluster' with many connected proteins , where we have added a-posteriori and coloured in red those genes having interacting proteins but no phenotype described yet. in contrast, in figure  <dig> the clustered blue nodes are again supplemented by nodes from the ppi data. here, we find nodes added a-posteriori with phenotype data  that have been clustered elsewhere and one single unconnected node. both these examples show that phenotype data is only in some way congruent with ppi data . nevertheless, our 'phenoclusters' give insight into the structure of biological networks and can be used to identify new members in a sub-network not detected by other methods, e.g. the only unconnected node in figure  <dig> could be such a case.

genes in 'phenoclusters' have coherent go-annotations
the gene ontology  has been widely recognized as the most comprehensive functional classification system and has become a de facto international standard for functional annotation and prediction  <cit> . it should be noted here that in phenomicdb, gene ontology terms are associated to the gene descriptions and are not part of our 'phenodocs' . therefore, as a second way of evaluating the biological meaning of 'phenoclusters', we computed the similarity of the go-terms assigned to the genes of a group . in the analysis of our  <dig>  'phenoclusters', we found  <dig> clusters containing  <dig>  genes with a go-similarity score ≤  <dig> . for each distinct group size we built  <dig> control groups from randomly picked genes. only two control groups reached this threshold by chance. we furthermore computed the correlation of the average go-similarity with the average phenotype similarity of clusters. the pearson correlation coefficient r was  <dig> , indicating a shared variance in both similarity scores, approximately 16% higher than expected by chance.

this shows that phenotype similarity is indicative for a high probability to share go-annotations between the associated genes. in table  <dig> we present an exemplary cluster with a go-similarity score of  <dig> . of all terms associated with this group, there are  <dig> terms annotated to  <dig> out of  <dig> genes. due to the homogeneous nature of the annotations, one can hypothesize that the remaining  <dig> genes should receive the same common annotation as the other  <dig> genes. we shall build on this idea later when we predict go-terms in 'phenoclusters'.

of all terms associated with this group, there are  <dig> terms annotated to  <dig> out of  <dig> genes. due to the homogeneous nature of the annotations, one can hypothesize that the remaining  <dig> genes should receive the same common annotation as the other  <dig> genes.

phenocopies co-occur in 'phenoclusters'
a phenocopy is an environmental effect of a single trait  that mimics the effect of a trait produced by a gene, which is in this case intact, i.e. wild-type. however, there are also phenocopies independently induced by different genes. in an extensive manual search of medline literature on phenocopies induced by genes, we have identified  <dig> of such phenocopies, induced by  <dig> genes in total . if our 'phenoclusters' properly reflect phenotype similarity on a biological basis, the genes causing phenocopies should co-occur within the same clusters. of the  <dig> phenocopies induced by  <dig> genes we have retrieved from literature,  <dig> phenocopies  were in our data set. in our  <dig>  'phenoclusters', the genes of  <dig>  phenocopies co-occurred in a cluster. in  <dig>  random clusters of the same sizes none of those genes co-occurred in any cluster.

predicting gene function within 'phenoclusters'
based on the previous results, we hypothesized that gene function can be predicted based on the association of genes to 'phenoclusters'. if gene groups based on 'phenoclusters' have a coherent go-annotation, we should be able to predict similar functions in genes from the same cluster .

in evaluating the correctness of a go-annotation prediction, one has to consider the structure of the gene ontology. recall that go-terms form an ontology, and that terms are connected by is-a and part-of relationships. the simplest case would be to consider a prediction as correct only when it appears exactly as it is in the test data. however, this measure is overly harsh, since terms being a little more general or more specific are also very useful from a biological point-of-view. in the following, we therefore give results for different definitions of 'correctness' of a prediction of a term. in the most stringent case, we consider a term to be correct only if it appears itself in both, test and training set. thus, predicting a child of a term actually counts negative twice – as a false positive and a false negative. because this measure is much stricter than that of other studies , we also studied how our figures change when we apply a less stringent criterion for 'equality' of go-terms.

in the following section, we present values for precision and recall of go term predictions for different subgroups of genes from our 'phenodocs'. our 'predictions' show the percentage of overlaps between the true annotations of a set of genes  and 'predicted' terms which are derived from a training set .

precision ceiling
to explore the upper limit of 'predictability' of go-terms based on phenotype clustering using our method , we first ran the following experiment. we performed function prediction for all gene groups based on the clustering of the 'phenodocs'. for each group, we computed precision and recall of the predictions. we then selected the 10% highest-scoring clusters sorted by the harmonic mean of recall and precision . thus, clusters were selected a-posteriori based on their performance in prediction. of course, this measure cannot be extrapolated to the result of a prediction on unknown groups; however, it gives a good estimate on the maximum performance achievable using our data set and our approach. function prediction from only these groups yielded an average  <dig> % precision and  <dig> % recall. considering this as upper limit, we strived for criteria for selecting appropriate gene groups a-priori.

results for different filter criteria
we defined a number of filters for selecting clusters, based on criteria such as the number of genes they contain, the number of available annotations, and their scores for in-group annotation coherence and in-group connectedness. we defined five different filters which are described in table  <dig>  we calculated precision and recall of function prediction in all clusters selected by different combinations of those filters, see table  <dig> . using the least stringent filter , but the strict criterion for judging the identity of go terms, the number of clusters was reduced to  <dig> by filtering all clusters containing less than  <dig> genes and reduced once more to  <dig> by filtering all clusters without any descriptive go-terms . we predicted  <dig> distinct go-terms from the biological process subtree at a precision of  <dig> % and a recall of  <dig> %, averaged over all selected clusters.

in order to push the values for precision and recall towards the precision ceiling, we strived for filter criteria for selecting appropriate gene groups a-priori. to achieve this goal, we defined the following filter criteria for our  <dig>  'phenoclusters':

filter 1: removes groups with less than  <dig> genes, no go-terms associated to at least 50% of genes

filter 2: removes groups with a go-similarity score <  <dig> 

filter 3: removes groups with a ppi-connectedness < 33%.

filter 4: removes all non-single species clusters.

filter 5: removes all single-species clusters

precision and recall values of function prediction in all clusters and with varying k selected by different combinations of the filters defined in table  <dig> 

relaxing the criteria for go-term identity, now allowing for a single deviation towards the root  resulted in an average  <dig> % precision and  <dig> % recall . allowing one more step towards the root, we predicted  <dig> unique terms with  <dig> % precision and  <dig> % recall.

if we used for function prediction only those clusters that pass filter  <dig> and that show an average go-similarity ≤  <dig>  , the averaged precision dropped slightly to  <dig> % and recall increased to  <dig> % . this drop in precision and increase in recall is due to the increasing number of predictions made per gene and group and is explained in more detail in the following sections. applying again a less stringent criterion for identity of go-terms as explained above, we derived an average  <dig> % precision and  <dig> % recall in the first step towards the root . when we selected only those clusters containing genes from only one species , the values for precision and recall stayed roughly the same. this was expected as 90% of all clusters met to this condition . the values for precision dropped slightly and for recall quite dramatically when we used only cross-species clusters .

to our surprise, average precision and recall dropped  when we used only those clusters that show a ppi-connectivity of at least 33% . in a recent study  <cit>  it was reported that 35% of interactions occur between proteins with no common functional annotation. we believe that lack of common functional annotations in relatively small groups of immediate neighbours in ppi-networks explain our surprising drop in precision and recall when using only these groups. nevertheless, both enrichment in pairwise interactions and common go-terms show the high biological coherence of 'phenoclusters'. we conclude that despite some shortcomings in the data, 'phenoclusters' appear to be another suitable source functional annotation prediction.

selecting gene groups from ppi-cliques
to see whether our prediction method using 'phenoclusters' exceeds the use of another non-random gene selection method; we grouped our  <dig>  initial genes based on direct pair-wise interaction. we found  <dig>  groups in which each gene interacts with each other . applying filter  <dig> on this data set, we derived  <dig> groups resulting in  <dig>  predictions with a precision of  <dig> % and  <dig> % recall. thus, the precision of this approach  was about 10–20% less precise than our method of clustering genes based on 'phenodoc' similarity.

clustering phenotypes with different values of k
k-means is a clustering method that requires the a-priori determination of the number of clusters k. typically, to assess cluster quality internal and external measures are evaluated  <cit> . external measures, however, as e.g. a comparison with a gold standard, cannot be applied here due to the lack of a gold standard for clustered 'phenodocs'. as internal measure for cluster quality, we sought to gain insight how the data structure changes by choosing different values for k, ranging from  <dig> to  <dig>  . the results show a number of interesting facts. firstly, the average number of genes per cluster clearly decreased with increasing k. however, the percentage of clusters that comply with filter  <dig> in table  <dig> stayed roughly the same. although those clusters on average contained fewer genes, the number of predicted annotations and affected genes increased considerably with increasing k. this indicates that the top clusters – selected by filter  <dig> – become more homogeneous with increasing k, as more clusters have more terms which are annotated to more than 50% of their members. partly, this is also a statistical effect of the decreasing cluster sizes which naturally lead to more homogeneous groups. at the same time, the precision drops slightly with increasing k while recall increases considerably. this means, that more predictions come along with more errors, but the ratio of errors to the overall amount of predictions decreases. another effect is that in smaller clusters, there is usually only a single gene left in the test set. the increasing recall shows that more terms from the test set are descriptive in the training set, but the decreasing precision means that the number of terms associated with a single gene cannot compensate for the number of suggestions derived from the training set.

as internal measure for cluster quality we sought to gain insight how the data structure changes by choosing different values for k, ranging from  <dig> to  <dig> . here, filter  <dig> has been applied for go-predictions. for details, see text.

while the correlation between go-similarity and phenotype similarity drops significantly for increasing k, the percentage of single-species clusters increases. this is an indication that the homogeneity within clusters mentioned above shifts from a functional to a methodical, i.e. a descriptive homogeneity owned by the fact that similar vocabulary – from the same species – yields less variance than similar function.

thus, k is an important parameter to balance the trade-offs between precision, recall and number of predictions. one can either choose a small k-value, resulting in few high quality predictions, or a larger k-value, resulting in a much larger number of less accurate predictions. clearly, the choice of the k-value depends on the concrete application. as our goal was the best precision with acceptable recall, we found k =  <dig>  most suited, although a large k  resulting in many small clusters yields the best technical solution with an f-measure of  <dig>  .

discussion
using phenotypic data
for a long time, phenotypes have been regarded solely as indicators for changes in genotypes or diseases. the ability to interfere with the genetic component in a systematic manner, e.g. by gene knock-out or rna interference  <cit> , has raised the importance of phenotypes as a tool to understand biological processes on the molecular level. even though whole-genome rnai screens have created large amounts of phenotype data, many of them publicly available, very few attempts have been reported to systematically analyze these data beyond single gene effects. it is noteworthy that even  <dig> years after the availability of rnai screens for mammals and many calls for standardization of data types  <cit>  and analysis methods in phenomics, still, such data is poorly organized and difficult to access. only recently, the eumorphia project has released standard operating procedures for phenotype screening in the mouse and has created phenostat, a tool for visualization and systematic statistical analysis of standardized phenotype data  <cit> .

our approach contributes a new method to cluster genes based on their functional relationships on a high level. we have shown that such clusters can be used to identify and predict gene function and interaction, and that they have a high biological coherence.

examples for gene groups
the evaluation of our prediction method has the fundamental drawback that only existing annotations are considered as correct. however, it is well known that go-annotations are highly incomplete for virtually all species. thus, we have a considerable chance for false predictions that actually may be the most interesting ones from a biological point of view. false positive predictions potentially represent new functional insights, e.g. when a gene not yet annotated with a particular function is found in a cluster with a strong consensus annotation for that function. in the following, we discuss the biological nature of exemplary 'phenoclusters' to show their biological significance beyond pure precision values.

example 1: odorant receptors from drosophila melanogaster
one of our clusters consisting of  <dig> genes shows a high consensus annotation for the three go-terms g-protein coupled receptor protein signaling pathway , sensory perception of smell  and cell-cell signaling . this group contains  <dig> genes from the drosophila melanogaster odorant receptor  group and one other gene. this other gene is called myospheroid . it is in several ways a very interesting group:

firstly, all  <dig> genes are antennal dor genes, a physiological region of drosophila melanogaster in which a total of  <dig> dor genes are located  <cit> . the other  <dig> antennal dor genes not found in this group  are not in our initial list of  <dig>  genes, likely due to a lack of substantial phenotype description.  <dig> of the  <dig> genes are annotated with all three go-terms from the consensus annotation in that cluster, the other  <dig> genes are only annotated with go-term sensory perception of smell . the other interesting aspect is the occurrence of mys, neither a gene from the dor group, nor annotated with any of the three go-terms, but instead with  <dig> other terms, among them signal transduction, axon guidance, calcium-dependent cell-cell adhesion, calcium-dependent cell-matrix adhesion, cell adhesion, cell migration and cell-matrix adhesion. even though it has been previously suggested that mys is a candidate gene for drosophila olfactory associative learning  <cit> , only recently, in a publication not yet included in phenomicdb, a link between the drosophila olfactory system and mys has been reported. bhandari et al. have shown that expression of mys-rnai transgenes in the antennae, antennal lobes, and mushroom bodies disrupted olfactory behaviour, confirming that mys is important for the development and function of the drosophila olfactory system  <cit> .

it is not clear why some of the antennal receptors are not annotated with the two go-terms g-protein coupled receptor protein signaling pathway and cell-cell signaling. after all, all are clearly odorant receptor proteins consisting of seven transmembrane domains, and transduce odour recognition into neuronal activation through g-protein-coupled second messenger signalling pathways  <cit> . in our analysis of go-annotations, these genes represent false false positive results, i.e., the annotation that has been predicted is in fact true but missing, thus reducing the precision of our prediction.

another important lesson that can be learned from this example is the dependence of phenotypic similarity on complete and well-structured phenotypic data. even though one study reports on both antennal receptors or22a and or22b , our gene group only includes or22a, simply due to missing phenotypic information about the other gene.

example 2:  <dig> drosophila melanogaster genes
in another group, yielding very high average pair-wise phenotype- and go-similarities, most genes are associated with the two go-terms cellularization  and pole cell formation . this group consists of  <dig> drosophila melanogaster genes, including  <dig> genes from the matsyn  family, as well as the indirect flight muscle gene ru <dig> ru2) and a gene called presto. presto and the genes from the matsyn group are both associated with deficiencies on the second drosophila melanogaster chromosome and are part of closely related maternal effect loci that cause defects before cellularization of the blastoderm embryo  <cit> . during these stages of nuclear division, the embryo is called a syncytial blastoderm, meaning that all the cleavage nuclei are contained within a common cytoplasm, including cleavages that form the two cell types of early development   <cit> .

seven genes are annotated with both go-terms, while ifmru <dig> is not annotated with any of those terms. instead, it is annotated with the term muscle development . still, all phenotypes in the cluster show a high similarity and this may indicate that the genes are commonly regulated or that they are part of one developmental process. the development of the indirect flight muscle has been closely associated with the myosin heavy chain gene   <cit> . since ifmru <dig> and mhc are found on very close-by loci, they have been studied together in an ethyl methanesulfonate mutagenesis screen  <cit> , where mutated mhc and ifmru <dig> have been found to act together, enhancing muscle disorganization compared to their respective heterozygous phenotypes.

another gene, the 95f unconventional myosin gene  is shown to be required for proper organization of the drosophila melanogaster syncytial blastoderm  <cit> . compared to mhc, this gene shows a high degree of conservation in the atp-binding and actin-binding regions, and sh <dig>  one of the two reactive thiols  found in many muscle mhc heads is also present in 95f mhc. the amino-terminal two thirds of the protein comprise a head domain that is 29–33% identical  to other myosin heads, and contains atp-binding, actin-binding and calmodulin/myosin light chain-binding motifs  <cit> .

when looking only at go-annotations, this gene is a true false positive result, i.e., its available annotation is in line with the biology but not part of the consensus annotation for the rest of the genes from this cluster, thus the prediction is wrong. even though there is not yet proof for an immediate interaction between mhc and 95f mhc, these genes are very similar to one another. a relationship between mhc and ifmru <dig> has already been suggested and we have found further indications that those genes are responsible for similar phenotypes . we have therefore reasons to believe that there are some undisclosed functional links between 95f mhc, mhc, ifmru <dig> and at least some matsyn gene family members. we provide these very interesting findings to be tested biologically.

cross-species clustering
as stated, more than 90% of clusters contain only genes from a single species. however, as can be seen in figure  <dig>  the distribution of species in clusters differs greatly from the distribution of species in the gene set. for example, although almost a third  of the genes from our set are mouse genes, they can be found in just 16% of the clusters, while less than a quarter  of fly genes make up  <dig> % of the clusters. this is a clear indication towards the heterogeneity within the different data sets. on the other hand, the very strong tendency of genes to fall into species-specific clusters shows that the terminology that is used to describe a phenotype strongly depends on the species, and thus on the community of researchers studying it. a prominent example of community-specific annotation is the mammalian phenotype ontology  <cit>  used to annotate many phenotypes for mouse genes but, of course, not for fly genes. this separation of terms is only partly justified, as many phenotype-effects are equal across-species. however, until now, no common terminology for describing phenotypes in different species has been established. we believe that such a unified ontology would open the door to more powerful ways of analyzing phenotypes, in the same manner as the establishment of the gene ontology has opened the door for many new approaches to analyze biological knowledge.

CONCLUSIONS
we have shown that a great deal of the heterogeneous nature of phenotype data can be overcome by using text-mining. within one framework, we systematically analyzed textual descriptions of clinical diseases, naturally occurring mutants, rnai screens, gene knock-out experiments, and many others. using clustering, a reasonable fraction of the associated genes can be grouped into biologically meaningful categories. grouping genes based on certain properties is a powerful tool that has often been applied for function prediction before, using criteria such as participation in the same pathway  <cit> , participation in ppi cliques  <cit> , or mentioning in the same medline abstracts  <cit>  – but not on phenotypes. we believe  that this is an important new approach, as phenotypes, e.g. in contrast to interaction data, yield more information on the high diversity of biological meaning that is innate to any gene. it is, in fact, the intrinsic nature of phenotypes to visibly reflect genetic activity. thus, phenotype data has the potential to be more useful for functional studies than most other types of data.

a much larger fraction of our clusters are more homogeneous with respect to pair-wise interactions, go-annotations and re-occurrence of phenocopies than expected by chance. the remaining part of the 'phenodocs' do also cluster, but probably not driven by biology but by spurious effects of the data set itself and the clustering methods we used; an effect typical of high-throughput methods . we showed that 'phenoclusters' can be used to infer gene functions for poorly annotated genes with high precision and reasonable recall. in a recent survey, pandey et al.  <cit>  have collected success rates for different approaches, like sequence clustering, to protein function prediction using go. these approaches show precision values between 50% and 74%, i.e. from slightly below to slightly above our values . in the light of this survey, large-scale phenotype clustering as carried out here should be considered as a novel tool to predict function with highly competitive results.

