BACKGROUND
mutualistic associations between invertebrate hosts and bacteria are widespread in nature  <cit>  and have important implications for host ecology and evolution  <cit> . while the taxonomic and functional diversity of bacterial symbionts has been – and continues to be – studied extensively, particularly in insects, the fastidious nature of most symbiotic bacteria and their refractoriness to axenic cultivation  <cit>  has in most cases hampered detailed investigations of the symbionts’ physiology and the molecular underpinnings of symbiosis establishment through targeted genetic manipulation .

most insect-bacteria symbioses have a nutritional basis, with proteobacteria, firmicutes, and bacteroidetes as especially common and widespread symbionts providing limiting nutrients to their hosts  <cit> . however, more and more defensive alliances for the host’s protection against parasitoids, predators, and/or pathogens are being discovered  <cit> , <cit> , and filamentous actinobacteria are especially prevalent as protective symbionts, due to their ability to produce a range of bioactive secondary metabolites  <cit> , <cit> . antibiotic-producing actinobacteria have been implicated in pathogen defense of fungus gardens or galleries in leaf-cutter ants  <cit> – <cit>  and bark beetles  <cit> , respectively, as well as in the protection of the developing offspring in solitary beewolf wasps  <cit> . additionally, actinobacteria have been isolated from mud-dauber wasps  <cit> , termites  <cit> , the nests of allomerus ants  <cit> , and several other insect taxa, but their possible involvement in the protection of the hosts remains to be investigated.

of all protective actionbacterial symbionts, ‘candidatus streptomyces philanthi’ constitutes so far the only known specific streptomyces symbiont tightly associated with an insect. these bacteria populate female-specific antennal gland reservoirs of solitary digger wasps of the genera philanthus, philanthinus and trachypus   <cit> , <cit> , where the host provides its symbionts with nutrients  <cit> , <cit> . similar to the symbiotic actinobacteria of leaf-cutting ants  <cit> , ‘ca. streptomyces philanthi’ plays a defensive role in symbiosis: after secretion of the bacteria from the females’ antennae into the subterranean brood chambers, the larvae apply the symbionts onto the cocoon surface, where within a short  period the bacteria produce a ‘cocktail’ of two different groups of antibiotics, streptochlorin and several piericidin derivatives, thereby protecting the larva from fungal infection during the vulnerable phase of the host’s hibernation  <cit> , <cit> – <cit> .

recent phylogenetic analyses revealed that the symbiosis between beewolf digger wasps and protective streptomyces bacteria already evolved in the late cretaceous   <cit> . over the long evolutionary timescales, the association was stabilized by a combination of partner fidelity through vertical transmission and partner choice by host control over symbiont transmission  <cit> . the high degree of specificity in this intimate relationship resulted in a consistent association with a single clade of streptomyces across philanthini wasps.

long-term intimate symbiosis often leads to host-dependency of the symbionts due to genome erosion  <cit> , <cit> ; concordantly, most microbial symbionts cannot be isolated in axenic culture by traditional techniques  <cit> . unlike the above-mentioned actinobacteria of leaf-cutting ants, this is also true for ‘ca. streptomyces philanthi’, which seems to have lost certain metabolic capabilities during the long time of association with its host  <cit> . its refractoriness to cultivation so far prevented insight into their physiology as well as into host-symbiont interactions in the antennal gland reservoirs, specifically nutritional benefits provided by the host.

here we report on the isolation and axenic cultivation of symbiotic streptomyces from  <dig> beewolf host species comprising all three philanthini genera collected over a broad geographic range . in vitro cultivation allowed us to address three important questions in the context of the symbiotic association with philanthini:  how does the physiology of beewolf symbionts differ from free-living relatives?  do the symbionts of different host species share the same physiological characteristics including nutritional requirements, indicating host-symbiont co-adaptation in the early stages of the symbiosis?  are host individuals colonized by a single symbiont strain in the antennae? the results are discussed in light of the evolutionary history of this defensive symbiotic association.

RESULTS
isolation of ‘streptomyces philanthi biovar triangulum’
due to the availability of a laboratory colony of philanthus triangulum and an ongoing genome sequencing project of its symbionts, the isolation of ‘ca. streptomyces philanthi biovar triangulum’ was of our specific interest. in preliminary experiments, this bacterium did not grow on ‘standard’  nutrient media  . therefore, we used grace’s insect medium , which might imitate, to some extent, antennal gland exudates or insect hemolymph – the most likely source of nutrition in the natural habitat of the bacteria in the beewolf’s antennal gland reservoirs. because the composition of beewolf hemolymph and gland secretions were unknown, other supplements  and mammalian cell lines media) were added to increase the availability of compounds in the nutrient media. in antennal samples prepared for inoculation, ‘ca. streptomyces philanthi’ looked like individual or relatively short-chained unbranched cells; long mycelium, typical for free-living members this bacterial genus, was very rare . fish analysis demonstrated that the majority of these bacterial cells were physiologically active .

in complex liquid media, the bacteria formed typical streptomycetal mycelium with terminal physiologically active cells  and grew as polymorphic  colonies. despite this polymorphism, the sequence analysis confirmed the purity of the cultures – analyzed amplicons of 16s rrna, gyra and gyrb gene fragments were identical to the respective sequences of ‘ca. streptomyces philanthi biovar triangulum’. according to the classification rules for cultured and uncultured prokaryotes  <cit> , the isolated but not yet characterized bacterium was designated – and is hereafter referred to – as ‘streptomyces philanthi biovar triangulum’ strain tri23af <dig>  on solid media, the strain tri23af <dig> formed beige opaque colonies of slightly shiny surface varying from smooth to rimmed and rugose ; typical streptomycetal colonies with fuzzy surface formed by aerial sporulating hyphae were not observed even after long incubation  . likewise, scanning electron microscopy of mature colonies grown on solid grace’s medium did not reveal spores . apparently, these symbionts have either lost the ability to form spores, or sporulate only under in vivo conditions and would need specific stimuli to do so in vitro.

strain tri23af <dig> showed the best growth in the medium sf900-ii . however, other insect media  or grace’s-based medium m <dig> were also suitable for cultivation ; additionally, it grew in the media m <dig> and m <dig> , but with lower growth rates than in grace’s medium . surprisingly, the strain tri23af <dig> did not grow in the original schneider’s drosophila medium alone, even though the composition and ph of this medium was very similar to other insect cell line media ; moreover, further experiments demonstrated that schneider’s drosophila medium supplemented with missing amino acids  was not suitable for symbiont cultivation either . however, fbs added to the schneider’s medium could enable the growth of strain tri23af <dig> . interestingly, media designed for mammalian cell lines  alone or with fbs were also not suitable for the biovar ‘triangulum’ , even though these media are nutritionally rich and supported the growth of other bacteria including free-living streptomyces . unfortunately, due to the complexity of the required nutrient media, we could not define which host-provided compounds were essential for growth of the biovar ‘triangulum’.

isolation and phylogenetic analysis of ‘s. philanthi’ biovars from other host species
for the isolation of additional ‘s. philanthi’ biovars, grace’s insect medium with 10% fbs and cycloheximide  was applied. overall,  <dig> biovars of the clade ‘streptomyces philanthi’ were obtained from  <dig> host species. in some cases, antennal specimens did not yield culturable bacterial symbionts, or opportunistic bacteria grew instead  . as had been observed previously  <cit> , phylogenetic analyses based on 16s rrna, gyra, and gyrb sequences from symbiotic and free-living actinobacteria demonstrated that the symbiont clade is monophyletic . generally, the isolates clustered together with symbiont sequences obtained directly from the antennae of field-collected specimens of the corresponding host species. however, the strain alb539- <dig> of biovar ‘albopilosus’ affiliated to the biovars ‘parkeri’ and ‘ventilabris’ instead of the representative sequence of its own biovar . analyses based on  <dig> aflp markers were completely congruent with the sequence-based trees, supporting the robustness of the phylogenetic analyses and the displacement of strain alb539- <dig> . a comparison of the symbiont phylogeny with a previously published phylogeny of the hosts based on one mitochondrial and five nuclear genes supported earlier findings of frequent horizontal transfer of symbionts among host species over evolutionary timescales   <cit> .

characterization of ‘s. philanthi’ biovars
in all antennal samples used for isolation, the symbiotic streptomyces showed a characteristic “antennal” phenotype: bacteria looked like individual or relatively short-chained cells, unbranched or with very short side branches, while no well-developed long mycelium was observed . in culture, the vast majority of biovars developed typical mycelium. however, two biovars were clearly distinguishable from all other symbiotic streptomyces due to their “antennal” phenotype also in culture: in liquid medium, the actively growing biovar ‘elongatus’ formed micro-colonies, but in late stage of logarithmic growth or in stationary phase they tended to fall apart into short, often poorly branched fragments. a similar pattern was also observed for the biovar ‘loefflingi’, which could express one or the other phenotype over several transfers and change it by the next passage, although conditions triggering such phenotypic changes remained unknown .

although all beewolf-associated symbionts were originally assigned to biovars of the same species ‘ca. s. philanthi’  <cit> , the morphology of even closely related biovars growing on the same medium varied strongly . on grace’s medium, bacteria from the clade ‘s. philanthi’ formed pigmented  opaque colonies of round or irregular form, flat or gibbous with wave, broken or smooth border, and the surface varied from matte to slightly shiny, from smooth to rimmed and rugose. only biovar ‘multimaculatus’, when grown on the grace’s insect medium, formed white colonies with well-developed aerial mycelium typical for streptomyces .

since all isolates were obtained on rich medium  imitating insect hemolymph, the next step was to assess the nutrient requirements of the isolated biovars by testing whether they could grow on media containing either an organic  or inorganic source of nitrogen . surprisingly, the majority of isolated biovars could grow  on the media containing peptones as the nitrogen source; only bacteria from the biovars ‘loefflingi’, ‘triangulum diadema’ and ‘triangulum’  required medium imitating insect hemolymph . however, inorganic nitrogen was less suitable for supporting the growth of ‘s. philanthi’ strains: only  <dig> out of  <dig> biovars isolated from north american philanthus species as well as the symbiont of philanthinus quattuordecimpunctatus were able to utilize ammonium as nitrogen source, but none of the isolates from european or african philanthus or the south american trachypus host species . thus, the nitrogen assimilation pattern correlated strongly with geography and phylogeny of the hosts . the ability to assimilate inorganic nitrogen was also observed for all free-living species of the genus streptomyces  used for comparison in this work . these bacteria were also growing on r2a and grace’s media . interestingly, on r2a and on the medium containing ammonium, colonies with fuzzy surface formed by aerial mycelium, typical for free-living members of the genus streptomyces and related actinobacteria, were observed for the symbionts isolated from some north american philanthus species .

in order to gain more insight into physiological differences among symbiont biovars, resistance assays were performed with eight different antibiotics representing five major groups. the results revealed that antibiotic resistance of the isolated biovars also correlated with the host phylogeny. the biovars hosted by north american philanthus as well as by philanthinus were commonly antibiotic-resistant, especially to streptomycin, ampicillin and chloramphenicol . by contrast, bacteria isolated from african and eurasian philanthus or south american trachypus hosts were typically sensitive to the antibiotics applied: among these seven biovars, only three showed antibiotic resistance to streptomycin and just one to chloramphenicol. generally, the isolated ‘s. philanthi’ biovars showed the highest sensitivity to rifampicin and tetracycline .
s. philanthi
’ isolates

 indicates antibiotic resistance,  indicates antibiotic sensitivity.

 streptomycin;  kanamycin;  gentamycin;  ampicillin;  penicillin g;  tetracycline;  chloramphenicol;  rifampicin.

overall, the assessed physiological characteristics strongly varied across the monophyletic clade of streptomyces symbionts, with the strains isolated from eurasian/african philanthus species showing the lowest metabolic versatility, followed by the south american trachypus, while philanthinus and the north american philanthus species harboured symbionts that were more flexible in terms of nitrogen assimilation and antibiotic resistance.

diversity of symbiont strains within individual beewolf antennae
since populations of symbiotic streptomyces suffer significant bottlenecks during vertical transmission  <cit> , genetic diversity within individual antennae could be expected to be low. however, recent phylogenetic analyses provided evidence for relatively frequent horizontal symbiont exchange among host species, raising the question whether individual antennae may in fact simultaneously harbour different bacterial lineages. therefore, we set out to assess the diversity of symbionts growing within the same antenna.

for this analysis we used the antennae of two p. multimaculatus and one p. psyche specimen for the isolation of individual symbiont micro-colonies. these biovars were selected because in liquid medium they formed small , compact, well-separated colonies.  <dig> individual colonies of each strain were harvested from the original enrichments and subjected to sequence analysis of the gyrb gene fragment, which provides higher phylogenetic resolution than the 16s rrna gene. perhaps due to different cell wall thickness, colony pcr and further sequence analysis succeeded with different efficiencies:  <dig> and  <dig> high quality sequences were obtained from the two ‘multimaculatus’ specimens , but only six sequences from the ‘psyche’ biovar. sequence analysis of gyrb revealed no heterogeneity among the analyzed isolates within each host individual, suggesting low levels of  diversity or even clonality of the symbionts in individual beewolf antennae.

opportunistic bacteria
beewolf antennae are constantly exposed to the environment, and non-specific bacteria are potentially able to colonize the gland reservoirs, especially in cases where the host fails to acquire its specific symbionts  <cit> . these bacteria, not belonging to the clade ‘s. philanthi’, were considered opportunistic, because no evidence for their contribution to the host’s protection against pathogens has been provided so far. culturable forms of opportunistic bacteria were analyzed  from females’ antennal samples of different host species, and  from european beewolf males’ antennae used as a reference for environmental contamination, because they do not contain antennal gland reservoirs.

based on their abundance, opportunistic bacteria isolated from both males’ and females’ antennae could be separated into two groups: all gammaproteobacteria, firmicutes, and actinobacteria from males and some from females were isolated in low cfu counts . these bacteria were considered casual environmental contamination, probably of the antennal outer surface. the second group included highly abundant bacteria , which were only isolated from females of different species and geographic origin; this group encompassed exclusively filamentous actinobacteria  . it seems likely that in those samples, the original symbiont from the clade ‘s. philanthi’ was replaced with other actinobacteria in the antennal gland reservoirs, as has also been observed occasionally with molecular methods  <cit> . all these latter isolates were able to use ammonium as nitrogen source .

discussion
in the present study, we report on the isolation of  <dig> wasp-associated ‘s. philanthi’ biovars in pure culture. comparative physiological analyses provide insight into divergent metabolic capabilities in the monophyletic clade of symbiotic streptomyces. due to the difficulties in axenic cultivation of bacterial symbionts tightly associated with insect hosts, analyses of most symbiotic bacteria are confined to the in silico reconstruction of metabolic pathways from genomic or transcriptomic data. however, experiments on pure bacterial cultures can deliver direct evidence for the physiological consequences of co-evolution with the host and also provide the opportunity to test hypotheses on the symbionts’ physiology by genetic manipulation of the bacteria. nevertheless, cultivation-based analyses also have important limitations: since the conditions used for in vitro cultivation likely differ from those in vivo, the obtained results may not be representative of the natural situation.

typically, bacteria of the genus streptomyces possess large genomes  and therefore, they are capable of utilization and de novo biosynthesis of a large diversity of compounds. concordantly, these bacteria can usually grow on simple mineral media with any one of a range of different carbon and nitrogen sources. however, ‘s. philanthi’ biovars isolated from the host genus trachypus, and from african/eurasian and some north american philanthus species  were unable to assimilate inorganic nitrogen  and needed peptides or even more complex media imitating insect hemolymph . additionally, they were sensitive to a broad range of antibiotics. these characteristics suggest that their co-evolution with wasps resulted in decreased metabolic versatility, probably caused by genome erosion; this phenomenon is well known for symbiotic bacteria tightly associated with their hosts  <cit> , <cit> .

considering the monophyly of the ‘s. philanthi’ clade and the observation that they populate phylogenetically and ecologically similar host taxa, we expected that different ‘s. philanthi’ biovars share similar physiological characteristics. in contrast to that anticipation, however, isolated ‘s. philanthi’ strains showed broad diversity in morphology and physiology. while the observed physiological patterns also showed some congruency with the symbiont phylogenetic relationships, the host phylogeny appeared to be a much better predictor of symbiont physiology, specifically considering the group requiring hemolymph-imitating nutrient medium , as well as the physiologically similar trachypus symbionts , which both turned out as monophyletic in the host but not symbiont phylogeny . thus, the environment provided by the host in the antennal gland reservoirs seems to be an important factor shaping the evolutionary fate of the symbionts.

the differences in metabolic versatility across symbiont strains may reflect different stages of genome erosion. in intracellular insect symbionts, degenerative genome evolution of bacterial symbionts commonly proceeds comparatively quickly within the first phase of intimate associations, followed by genomic stasis  <cit> , <cit> . in beewolves, however, our results and previous co-phylogenetic analyses with fossil calibration suggest that the symbionts’ loss of metabolic capabilities has started long after the origin of the symbiosis in the late cretacious  <cit>  and proceeded independently in particular clades, as exemplified by the loss of metabolic capabilities and antibiotic resistance in the symbionts of defined host lineages . preliminary data from ongoing genome sequencing projects of four ‘s. philanthi’ biovars support the hypothesis of independent genome evolution in different symbiont lineages .

at present, we can only speculate about the mechanistic basis of the host influence on symbiont physiology. a plausible scenario, however, is that the amount, complexity, and reliability of nutrients provided to the symbionts can affect the symbionts’ evolutionary fate by relaxing or increasing selective pressures on maintaining metabolic versatility. under this scenario, a nutrient-rich and stable environment provided by the host sustains genome erosion in the symbiotic bacteria, leading to metabolic dependency and high host specificity . despite the higher costs, providing a rich environment could be beneficial to the host by stimulating bacterial growth and increasing the number of bacterial cells applied onto the cocoon, which in turn leads to high antibiotic production and an effective symbiont-mediated host protection  <cit> . simultaneously, a rich environment could allow for selection of the best symbionts by ‘screening’ through increased competition, with the most competitive and best-defended strain winning out  <cit> , <cit> . by contrast, a nutrient-poor environment  would be less costly to the host and prevent genome erosion in the bacterial symbionts. the high metabolic versatility would enable the bacteria to persist as free-living forms and provide the opportunity for host switching by horizontal transfer . interestingly, different symbiont strains across individuals of the same host species have so far only been detected for north american philanthus species , suggesting that horizontal transfer of symbionts is indeed more common among these physiologically versatile strains than across species in the metabolically more restricted south american and eurasian/african clades. such horizontal transfer could occur in populations of sympatric host species through interspecific predation or by the acquisition of symbionts from the soil in reused or closely associated brood chambers .
s. philanthi
’.

acquisition of symbionts occurs shortly before or during emergence of the adult female beewolf from the cocoon, and only few bacterial cells are taken up into the antennal gland reservoirs  <cit> . the strong bottleneck effect likely contributes to the low genetic diversity we observed within the antennae of individual beewolves, as well as across host individuals of the same species . while the genetic homogeneity of the symbionts reduces competition and conflict in the symbiosis, it also compromises the symbionts’ ability to adapt to changing environmental conditions  <cit> . furthermore, the uptake of low numbers of symbiont cells from the cocoon surface may entail the risk of taking up non-symbiotic bacteria into the antennae.

accordingly, opportunistic bacteria were occasionally isolated from beewolf antennae, indicating that replacement of the beewolf symbionts with opportunistic bacteria can indeed occur . interestingly, however, our results suggest that only filamentous actinobacteria  can reach high densities and persist in the antennal gland reservoirs, whereas other bacteria probably contaminate the antennal surface in low abundance, but do not invade the reservoirs. thus, the host apparently provides a selective environment that acts as a first ‘screening’ mechanism to prevent the growth of many opportunistic, and possibly pathogenic, bacteria  <cit> . as a second step to ensure partner specificity, the host selectively blocks application of opportunistic actinobacteria from the gland reservoirs into the brood cells, thereby effectively disrupting the vertical transmission route  <cit> . despite the opportunity for acquisition of opportunistic bacteria, the combination of these two different layers of symbiont selection seem to efficiently ensure specificity in the association over long evolutionary timescales, as reflected in the monophyly of the beewolf symbiont clade.

CONCLUSIONS
the successful in vitro cultivation and characterization of multiple defensive symbiont strains of beewolves provided valuable insight into the symbionts’ physiology and revealed an unexpected morphological and physiological diversity that may reflect a ‘snapshot’ of ongoing evolution towards a tight association with the wasps. we hypothesize that the selective host environment plays an important role in shaping degenerative metabolic evolution in its native symbionts and also acts as a ‘screening’ barrier to prevent colonization by potentially pathogenic microorganisms.

