BACKGROUND
small rnas play a wide range of regulatory roles from degradation to translational silencing of messenger rna. the most studied class of small regulatory rna is micrornas . mirnas are about  <dig> nucleotides long and have been identified in animals, plants and viruses. precursor mirnas have stem loop structures that are cleaved by drosha and dicer forming mature functional mirna molecule. by forming rna-induced silencing complexes, mirna can either cleave messenger rna molecules or inhibit translation. through such mechanisms, they are involved in various cellular processes including hematopoietic differentiation and cell cycle regulation  <cit> .

the amount of genetic information regulated post-transcriptionally by mirnas is potentially huge. computational and indirect evidences indicate that mirnas might regulate up to a third of all genes making direct and indirect consequences of mirna directed regulation significant  <cit> . the resulting regulatory network is very often an extensive and complex one.

deep sequencing provides a rapid and sensitive way of obtaining mirna profiles expressed by human embryonic derived mesenchymal stem cells . these cells have the ability to differentiate into multiple mesenchymal phenotypes, such as bone, cartilage, tendon and adipose tissue  <cit> . this property with a broad distribution of sources makes msc an attractive therapeutic target.

despite this level of interest, a clear understanding of the factors involved in regulation of msc remains rudimentary. global gene expression analysis has revealed that msc differentiation into specific mature cells types is a temporally controlled and regulated process  <cit> . mirnas provide an attractive mechanism for temporal regulation of mrna translation and stability. regulation of mirna expression pattern can then be perceived as a novel regulatory network affecting cellular function. organization of the hierarchical order of stem cell types based on the linkage of their functional characteristics to such regulatory elements might present a novel means to understand and eventually manipulate cell fate. this mirna mediated regulation of stem cell differentiation however will act in concert with other methods of regulation of gene expression like transcription factors, epigenetic mechanisms etc. therefore it is important to interpret the results of this study in the context of understanding mirna regulation in concert with other regulatory mechanisms that control cellular differentiation.

recent literature has also revealed that genetic exchange of mrna and mirna between cells can be accomplished through microvesicles or exosome mediated transfer  <cit> . microvesicles can be shed from surfaces of activated cells or derived from the endosomal membrane compartment after fusion of secretory granules with the plasma membrane where they exist as intraluminal membrane-bound vesicles. embryonic stem cells are a source of such microvesicles. it is possible that embryonic stem cell derived microvesicles contain biologically active molecules that affect growth and cell fate decision of targeted cells. similar vesicles released from human and murine mast cell lines were shown to contain mirnas  <cit> . employing microvesicles for transfer of genetic material would be an efficient means for these intercellular communications  <cit> . it is conceivable that msc derived from embryonic stem cells also communicate with neighbouring cells using microvesicles. in this study, we performed deep sequencing of small rnas to understand the expression of mirnas in both microvesicles and intracellular environment of hes-msc.

this convergence of deep sequencing technology and the potential regulatory roles of mirna in stem cells provide many opportunities as well as challenges in terms of data mining methodology in uncovering biological significance. bioinformatics tools are necessary to bridge the gap between raw sequencing data and biological significance of these regulatory rnas. a fundamental difficulty lies in identifying mirna targets as well as deciphering the exact mechanism of translational repression of mrnas by these snippets. considerable work has been put into computational prediction of mirna targets. many challenges still remain in integrating large sequencing datasets to obtain gene-level distinctions.

in our study, we present a novel workflow using existing tools available for understanding these sequencing data sets. our workflow extracts salient features from sequencing data for visualization and focuses on potential relationships between mirnas with gene targets. applying our workflow for quantitative estimation of small rnas in hes-msc intra and extra cellular examples, we can develop a better understanding of exosome mediated mirna involvement in the regulation of other cells in the hes-msc microenvironment.

RESULTS
distribution of mirnas from deep sequencing showed distinct phases
massive sequencing data can be overwhelming to examine. with each stage of processing, choices are made to direct analysis towards biological significance and understanding. initial processing stages emphasize on visualisation of datasets in different forms such as annotations and alignment in the genome. this allows for quick assesment of salient features. following this are more advanced analyses exploiting existing tools for examining distrbutions and networks topology used to conjure biological hypothesis for verification. the entire workflow can then be thought as a funneling process towards identifying biologically interesting interactions of mirnas with genes in hes-msc . these interactions can then be experimentally verified.

one of the main challenges in interpreting deep sequencing data is the large number of transcripts with small read counts in the range of  <dig> to  <dig>  therefore there is a need to determine a threshold value for sieving out significant mirnas. we address this issue by first examining the overall distribution of transcripts in our samples which are biological replicates. plots were made to interpret the global expression distribution for these mirnas as depicted in figure  <dig>  such plots can be interpreted to give the probability of finding a particular mirna given an associated count/abundance.

in general, the distribution shows three distinct phases. a large number of unique transcripts have low count number and are distributed unevenly across the low count number range. this is followed closely by a subsequent phase where the numbers of unique transcripts are distributed evenly across a large range of count number magnitude. the last phase follows the previous with transcripts reverting to an uneven distribution of high count number. these phases can be categorised into different groups based on transcript counts. figures  <dig> and  <dig> show this classification which reflects the degree of agreement and overlap in each case.

considering the initial uneven distribution of transcripts with low count number, it is a possibility that this large group of transcripts constitute a form of noise since this group of transcripts is expressed sporadically with low counts. the concept of noise here is distinct from noise arising from stochastic variations in the expression level of a given gene in individual cells. it is possible that these transcripts arose from imperfect fidelity of pol ii transcriptional machinery due to stochastic components governing fundamental interactions between molecules within the cell. alternatively, it could also be an artefact inherent to sequencing.

transcripts of the subsequent phase with even distribution can then be inferred to be another group of mirnas that constitute a steady state expression of mirna genes in msc followed by the last phase consisting of mirnas with large count numbers that contributes significantly to the unique phenotype exhibited by such cells. from a genome wide perspective, this representation and interpretation of data presents a possibility to distinguish the relative proportions of biologically significant mirnas from potential noise. to corroborate such a view with a quantitative aspect, a statistical test based strategy was developed.

statistical method employed implies transcript count of  <dig> as the minimum threshold
to achieve this quantitative threshold value for further analysis, we began by mapping reads to the human genome. seqmap was used to map known human mirna transcript sequence data with  <dig> mis-matches in alignments to the human genome. the resulting genomic graphs  combined with read counts when observed in the ucsc genome browser reveals peaks along genomic locations. histograms of the peaks magnitude distribution  reveal that, after an initial transient uneven distribution phase, peaks are similar amongst our biological replicates. to achieve a threshold value, an adaptive thresholding method using ks statistics is deployed . this value came to a read count of  <dig>  transcripts with a read count of more than  <dig> are thus deemed to be significantly different from noise. this threshold value of  <dig> read counts coincide with the point of inflexion in the distributions of figure  <dig> that marks the separation of the initial transient uneven phase with the later stable phase.

high read counts of let- <dig> family mirnas transcripts are present in both intra and extra cellular samples of hes-msc
using the  <dig> read counts as the threshold, ranking according to read counts was performed on this subset of human mirnas. table  <dig> shows the highest ranking mirna transcripts in the intracellular space, whereas table  <dig> lists the highest ranking mirna transcripts in the extracellular space. the complete list of mirnas in the intracellular and extracellular space of msc ranked according to their abundance is given in supplementary file  <dig>  let- <dig> family of mirnas is represented predominantly in the top rankings mirnas in both intra and extra cellular samples of hes-msc. let- <dig> family of mirnas was first identified in c. elegans and has since been emerging as having important tumour-supressor role. moreover, it also marks a temporally controlled switch from stem cells to differentiated cell fate. this led to our growing interest of let- <dig> mirna's functional roles in hes-msc. apart from the let- <dig> family, other mirnas like mir199b, mir <dig> & mir <dig> were also significantly overrepresented in both the intracellular and the extracellular hes-msc samples. it is also interesting to note that there is significant overlap between the lists of mirna represented in the intracellular and extracellular space. we were unable to find any mirnas that were overrepresented only in the extracellular space and not in the intracellular hes-msc space.

extracellular
complexity reduction using gene interaction networks revealed similarity in topology that suggested downstream targets for let- <dig> family of mirnas
mirnas are known to down regulate gene expression. this can be done by direct mrna cleavage, mrna decay by deadenylation or translational repression. the greatest challenge besetting incorporation of mirna regulation into known gene expression mechanism is the great difficulty in predicting mrna targets of mirnas. although the binding event behind the translational repression and mrna degradation is driven primarily by complementarity between mirna and target sites, computationally predicted target interactions generally generate a large list of targets. one such prediction algorithm, targetscan requires perfect complementarity to the seed region of mirna and extends these regions to account for complementarity outside the region. conservation criteria based on the presence of seed region in an island of conservation is then incorporated by using groups of orthologous 3' utr as input data. all of the above aims to efficiently reduce the false positive rates. however, the large amount of predictive targets for the let- <dig> mirna family constitutes a complexity that can be difficult to interpret and explore. since the accuracy of prediction of target sequences is low, it is difficult to identify bona fide gene targets regulated by mirnas using targetscan alone. also such an approach will not yield genes indirectly regulated by mirnas. therefore we decided to focus on networks generated by targetscan predictions rather than individual genes.

our way of visualizing the roles of mirna is via the concept of an integrated network emerging from the culmination of the interactions of the gene targets associated with the family of let- <dig> mirnas. such networks are tenuous but would serve sufficiently as a first order approximation. networks generated using our previous genomic mapping alignment data were compared with the networks generated using targetscan predictions. examination of both networks  simultaneously revealed common nodes within these gene interaction networks. hepatic nuclear factor  <dig> alpha  was found to be a common node in both networks making it a highly probable downstream target of indirect transcriptional regulation by let- <dig> family of mirna. the expression of let- <dig> family of mirnas was verified by quantitative real time pcr. let- <dig> b, let-7g, let-7f and let-7i mirnas have threshold cycle  values of  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig>  respectively compared to beta-actin at a ct value of  <dig> . we further compared the expression of let  <dig> family of mirna in hep g <dig> cells. hep g <dig> which is a liver cell line expresses high levels of hnf4a. let- <dig> mirna was expressed at  <dig>  fold higher levels in hes-msc compared to hepg <dig> cells, whereas hnf4a was undetectable in hes-msc and very strongly expressed in hepg <dig> cells . thus, a high level of expression of let- <dig> family of mirna coincide with a low level of expression of hnf4a  and vice versa .

to test the hypothesis that the network of genes surrounding hnf4a was controlled by let- <dig> family mirna, we compared the expression of genes identified in the let- <dig> family alignment network in hepg <dig> cells and hes-msc. figure  <dig> shows the relative gene expression of these genes in hepg <dig> compared to hes-msc. most genes in this network show a higher expression in hepg <dig> cells  relative to hes-msc  providing further support to our hypothesis that let- <dig> family of mirnas are regulating these genes.

discussion
we have developed a workflow for analyzing deep sequencing data focusing on mirna. this workflow has revealed several trends in mirna expression profile for hes-mscs. the majority of sequenced transcripts were identified by mapping to known small rna libraries and a considerable proportion of these were mirnas. several studies have showed that certain mirnas are associated with specific stem cell types and those that are regulated during stem cell differentiation. characterizing mirna expression profile for the purpose of extracting biological function from sequencing data can be a challenge.

raw sequencing data of our samples showed distinct distribution patterns across a large range of magnitude for transcripts counts. the necessity of a minimum threshold of transcript count for biological significance was addressed by adaptive thresholding exploiting ks statistics amongst biological replicates giving a lower bound value for transcript counts. currently ks statistics are used primarily for comparing distributions and have been used in areas such as image processing for examining pixel distribution. in our study, we employed ks statistics to estimate the lower bound where distributions of transcripts peaks begin to differ. using a transcript count of  <dig> as a lower bound, we were able to define a threshold for mirna expression based on transcript abundance. further comparisons  of top ranked genes between our sequenced data with microarray data showed that there is a considerable degree of overlap between the two especially in the intracellular samples. mirnas from the extra-cellular samples form a subset of those expressed in the intracellular samples. among the most abundantly expressed transcripts across both intra and extra-cellular environment  the let- <dig> family of mirnas was the only overexpressed family of known mirnas.

amongst other over expressed mirnas, mir199b has transcription factors like sox <dig> and has been shown to be involved in liver cancer and muscular dystrophy  <cit> . mir <dig> has recently been shown to cooperate with mir  <dig> to regulate plasticity and cell fate determination of smooth muscle cells via regulation of expression of transcription factors like kruppel like factor  <dig> , myocardin and elk- <dig>  <cit> .

let- <dig> mutant phenotype studied in c. elegans has been associated with a lack of terminal differentiation and ongoing cell proliferation, both of which are characteristics of stem cells and cancer. let- <dig> targets include cell cycle regulators such as cdc25a and cdk <dig>  <cit> ; promoters of growth including ras and c-myc  <cit>  and a number of early embryonic genes including hmga <dig>  mlin- <dig> and imp- <dig>  <cit> . further, let- <dig> also targets dicer  <cit>  which is the protein responsible for mirna maturation. therefore it is possible that the let- <dig> family of mirna acts as a master regulator of mirna function. since the let- <dig> family of mirnas were abundantly expressed in msc and given their central role in controlling cellular differentiation and mirna regulation, we decided to focus on this family of mirnas for further investigations.

mirna mediated translational repression might play an important role in stem cell self-renewal. in our study, a high level of let- <dig> family of mirna transcripts was predominant in both intra and extra cellular samples for our hes-msc. this was true for other abundantly expressed mirnas in the extra cellular space as well. we were unable to find mirnas that were expressed only in the extra cellular space or were expressed more abundantly in the extra cellular space compared to the intra cellular space. this suggests that the process of secretion of mirnas is most likely a passive one unlike that of proteins, where signal peptide containing proteins are transported out of the cell as soon as they are synthesized.

moreover, the elevated presence of mirnas in the extra cellular environment suggests a possible intercellular signaling mechanism. recent literature has also supported that genetic exchange of mrna and mirna between cells can be accomplished through microvesicles transfer  <cit> . mirnas like mir  <dig>  <cit> , mir  <dig> and mir  <dig>  <cit>  have been shown to play a role in cardiac remodelling in infracted hearts. since mirna can affect cardiac remodelling and these mirnas are transported in micro vesicles by transplanted msc , it is possible that transplanted msc regulate remodelling of the surrounding myocardium through secreted mirnas in addition to secreted cytokines and soluble factors.

hnf4a is a transcription factor that has also been shown to be essential for morphological and functional differentiation of hepatocyte and for liver morphogenesis  <cit> . hnf4a is also one of the physiological factors in the liver to activate apob gene expression at the af- <dig> site  <cit> . elevated levels of apob have been correlated with an increased risk of atherosclerosis and coronary heart disease  <cit> . hnf4a is also involved in the regulation of serum lipid levels and is linked to elevated serum cholesterol and triglyceride levels in finnish combined familial hyperlipidemia patients  <cit> . however to date there is no evidence of mirna regulation of hnf4a. none of the target prediction algorithms predict the regulation of hnf4a by let- <dig> family of mirnas. there are no predicted mirna binding sites in the untranslated or intronic regions of the hnf4a gene. however combining the networks generated by sequence alignment of expressed mirnas and targetscan, we predict that hnf4a is indirectly regulated by the let- <dig> family of mirnas. we were able to confirm this indirectly by measuring the levels of let- <dig> family of mirnas and hnf4a in undifferentiated msc and hepg <dig> cells. in undifferentiated msc when let- <dig> mirnas are highly expressed, expression of hnf4a is very low. conversely in hepg <dig> cells where a high level of hnf4a is expressed, we find very low expression of let- <dig> family mirnas. since hnf family of transcription factors have been reported to be upregulated in hepatocytes derived from adipose tissue msc  <cit> , it is possible that let- <dig> regulates hnf4a levels during this process. since genes in the hnf4a alignment network also show a similar expression profile to hnf4a in hepg <dig> and hes-msc cells, it is possible that the let- <dig> family mirna regulation of hnf4a is mediated through genes in this network. it is also interesting to note that there is no predicted mirna target site in the utr of hnf4a. thus mirna based regulation of hnf4a may be indirectly achieved through regulation of genes in the network that interact with hnf4a. it will be interesting to study the effect of lin <dig> overexpression on differentiation of hepatocytes from hes-msc since lin  <dig> is a transcription factor that inhibits function of let- <dig> family mirnas.

let-7f mirna is known to exert pro-angiogenic effects  <cit> . human msc conditioned medium has been shown to reduce infarct size in patients with acute myocardial infraction  <cit> . since msc conditioned medium contains exosomes with let- <dig> family mirnas and these let- <dig> family mirnas may regulate hnf4a , it is highly likely that msc conditioned medium mediated reduction of infarct size is achieved by indirect regulation of hnf4a mediated by the let- <dig> family of mirnas.

thus, our study suggests the possibility of let- <dig> family of mirnas indirectly regulating this particular transcription factor to achieve physiological changes. this is in line with recent paradigm where mirnas regulate self-renewal and differentiation pathways of embryonic stem cells by forming an integral biological network with transcription factors  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, our study using a combination of different available tools to examine deep sequencing data by examining alignment, computer predictions, mathematical and network analysis has led us to a hypothesis that hnf4a is indirectly regulated by the let- <dig> family of mirnas.

