BACKGROUND
recent evidence indicates that ecological and environmental variation can result in genetic differentiation within many taxa, including highly mobile species. examples include sea turtles , fish species such as herring  and hake , and mammal species including the orca , cougar , lynx , coyote , and wolves . for example, muñoz-fuentes et al.  <cit>  showed strong genetic divergence over distances less than 500 km between wolves of coastal and interior regions of british columbia , canada. ecological and environmental dimensions such as climate and prey availability between areas, not distance, best explained population structure. these patterns arise because individuals may be more likely to survive and reproduce within their natal habitats , which, in turn, can influence population genetic structure. a prediction from this body of work is that genetic divergence might be detected even over short geographical distances, and for highly mobile animals, should there be a sharp gradient in environmental conditions.

such sharp ecological transitions occur between mainland and adjacent island environments within coastal bc. although distances between mainland and neighbouring islands are small , the environments have striking geological and ecological differences. the mainland is topographically rugged, contains less shoreline for a given area and is relatively species-rich. in contrast, the neighbouring islands are less mountainous, have more complex shorelines, and host fewer species; notably absent are grizzly bears, , which compete with wolves for marine resources . owing to these different environments, analyses of faeces and stable isotope data have identified distinctly different realized niches. wolves from island populations rely on marine resources for up to 85% of their diet, whereas mainland conspecifics rarely include more than 30% . additionally, the coastal mainland supports moose  and mountain goats  that are absent or rare on coastal islands. consequently, these major prey items are commonly detected in wolf diet in mainland areas and only very rarely on islands . moreover, likely reflecting these distinct habitat and dietary niches, parasite prevalence also differs between areas; there is higher faecal prevalence of giardia sp. infections on islands and a lower prevalence of diphyllobothrium sp. relative to mainland sites .

our objective was to examine genetic data from wolves of coastal bc over a limited geographic area  to test the hypothesis that ecological heterogeneity can drive population genetic structure of a highly mobile animal within a small area. we note that this prediction was also informed by holders of traditional ecological knowledge  in the heiltsuk first nation area, who distinguish between mainland “timber wolf” and island “coastal wolf” forms. given these scholarly- and tek-informed hypotheses and the sharp environmental gradients on the bc coast, we expected mainland-island genetic differentiation that mirrors ecological differences among neighbouring social groups.

methods
study area
the central coast of bc is a remote network of islands and naturally fragmented mainland landmasses with limited  industrial anthropogenic disturbance. the area is characterized by a wet and temperate climate, and annual precipitation typically exceeds 350 cm . a core area  centered on bella bella  served as the location for this study . this landscape is surrounded by ocean, which separates a mainland landmass  and five main islands ranging in size from 150–250 km <dig>  distances from island to mainland range from 250 m to 1450 m. observational and genetic data  suggest that wolf packs, defined by the multi-year association of genetically and morphologically distinct individuals, have either island or mainland home ranges. however, one group  primarily uses island habitat but also a portion of the adjacent mainland. other units are either mainland groups . moreover, wolves are commonly observed swimming among landmasses, and home ranges of social groups often include multiple islands or mainland landmasses .

sampling
one thousand and seventy-four  wolf faecal samples were collected between winter  <dig> and winter  <dig>  we collected the following number of samples per season: spring: n =  <dig> summer: n =  <dig> fall: n =  <dig> winter: n =  <dig>  sampling areas included wildlife trails, logging roads, and electrical power rights-of-way. we preserved each sample in a 50-ml falcon tube with 95% ethanol. we selected samples for genetic analysis based on characteristics of the samples and collection sites that best predicted amplification success . we extracted dna from faecal samples with qiagen qiaamp® dna stool mini kits and the ‘protocol for isolation of dna from larger amounts of stool’ . we performed dna extractions in a room physically separated from amplified pcr products and used exclusively for this study to reduce the risk of contamination. final purified extracts were refrigerated at +4°c until use.

microsatellite amplification
we amplified a panel of  <dig> microsatellite markers . these were fh <dig>  fh <dig>  fh <dig>  fh <dig>  fh <dig>  fh <dig>  fh <dig> , fh <dig>  fh <dig> , pez <dig>  pez <dig>  pez <dig>  pez <dig> , and the y-chromosome marker ms41b . we genotyped n =  <dig> faecal samples. polymerase chain reaction  conditions optimized for the markers, based on the qiagen multiplexing kit, were: initial denaturation at 95°c for 15 minutes, then 35 cycles of denaturation at 94°c for 30 sec, annealing at 58°c for 90 sec, extension at 72°c for 60 sec, with final extension at 60°c for 30 min. organisation of markers into multiplexes is shown in additional file  <dig>  amplified pcr product was loaded into a  <dig> % denaturing polyacrylamide gel, and run on a licor4300s dna analyzer. genotyping was done with a licor’s saga gt version  <dig>  microsatellite analysis software.

we accepted for further analyses samples that amplified at least 9/ <dig> loci, and used the excel microsatellite toolkit  to test for the presence of matching profiles. we consolidated matches  into one profile and retained the profile with the highest amplification rate. matches were tested across all samples, but only observed within wolf groups and  <dig> profiles were removed.

n =  <dig> individual profiles were identified. only  <dig> wolves  were identified as males, and we observed six alleles for marker ms41b . we used micro-checker  <dig> . <dig>  to assess possibilities of null alleles, large allele dropout, and scoring errors due to stutter peaks. we repeated genotyping of  <dig> samples collected during the fall season  to evaluate data quality and estimate genotyping error. here we estimated per-locus error rates based on the percentage of loci that did not show the same result twice . loci for which we obtained the same results twice were accepted as duplicated loci. from these results we obtained duplicate genotypes comprising five or more loci for  <dig> individuals . based on amplification and error rates  we removed ms41b, pez <dig>  fh <dig>  and fh <dig> from further analyses.

statistical analyses
we calculated allelic diversity and observed and expected heterozygosity  per locus in genepop  <dig>   and genetix  <dig> . <dig> , and fis according to weir and cockerham  <cit> , for mainland and island wolves. we tested for departures from hardy-weinberg equilibrium per locus in genepop  <dig>  with the markov chain method . the results were adjusted to account for multiple comparisons with the false discovery rate . subsequently, we performed centered and scaled principal component analyses  with the adegenet-package  in r  <dig> . <dig> . the pca approach does not assume genetic equilibrium conditions and is well-suited for identifying spatial patterns such as genetic clines  that can be difficult to detect . we repeated the pca with the  <dig> individuals for which we had duplicated genotypes , and all wolves identified as males to confirm the presence of the observed cline. on average, male wolves may disperse longer distances than females and are more likely to join new packs. as our data set comprised relatively few confirmed males, we tested these results separately to check if the island-mainland gradient remained consistent. a high proportion of females in our sample might otherwise have contributed to the observed gradient if females disperse less frequently and/or shorter distances than males. we then performed a spatial pca , which also takes spatial sampling information into account. as multiple samples were at times collected from the same location, we added 100 m of jitter  to the utm coordinates. we performed a spatial autocorrelation in genalex  to examine the possible existence of isolation-by-distance in our data set. we used distance classes of 5 km to obtain fine-scale results for our study area. finally, we performed a partial mantel-test in r with the vegan package  to examine the relationship between genetic distance and island-mainland habitat type while controlling for geographic distance. this allowed us to test whether there was an effect of habitat type on fine-scale genetic structure after accounting for the effect of geographic distance. geographic distance and habitat may be co-linear and their effects could be difficult to separate. consequently, we also examined the relationship between geographic distance and habitat type. for these tests we incorporated co-dominant genotypic and euclidean geographic distance matrices exported from genalex and a third matrix with island-mainland habitat designations. we used pearson’s correlation coefficient with n =  <dig> permutations.

RESULTS
the average number of alleles per locus was  <dig>  for mainland wolves and  <dig>  for island wolves . for mainland wolves, expected heterozygosity was  <dig>  and five loci showed departures from hardy-weinberg equilibrium with observed levels of heterozygosity lower than expected. fis results were positive for all loci with a mean value of  <dig> . for island wolves, expected heterozygosity was  <dig>  and seven loci showed departures from hardy-weinberg equilibrium . fis results for island wolves were positive for all except two loci, with a mean value of  <dig> . we identified possible null alleles and stutter peaks for the overall sample, but dropout of large alleles was not detected .

o 
e 
p
is 
o 
e 
p
is 
genetic variation across  <dig> microsatellite loci for individuals from mainland  and island  areas.

he values are calculated with correction for uneven samples sizes .

*bold font indicates significant p-values.

pca results indicated the presence of a genetic cline between island and mainland wolves . although overlap was extensive, the results suggested an east–west gradient in profiles across < 30 km. examination of genetic profiles based on the known wolf groups in the area  suggested limited overlap between lr  and yc  wolves . the cc and dc island groups occupy an intermediate position, along with the ur group from the mainland. colour plots  show the individual genetic profiles throughout the study area, and display a similar east–west gradient from the mainland to the islands. the pca results for individuals identified as males  were consistent with island-mainland differentiation . for the spca, one global structure  was apparent . when mapped across the geographic space, the global structure revealed an east–west gradient where yc and lr were the most differentiated groups . the partial mantel test gave a correlation coefficient of  <dig>   between genetic distance and habitat matrices. the test between geographic distance and habitat matrices produced a correlation coefficient of  <dig>  . spatial autocorrelation results were positive for the first 17 km, negative from approximately 17–45 km, and subsequently positive .

discussion
genetic variation
allelic diversity and expected heterozygosity for island wolves  and mainland wolves  were relatively high and comparable to values reported for island populations of wolves on the pacific coast in southeast alaska  and coastal island populations in arctic canada . allelic diversity and expected heterozygosity were somewhat lower for wolves on the mainland portion of our study area, although this might, at least in part, reflect chance effects of our relatively small sample sizes. comparison with fis values from southeast alaska islands  and coastal islands in arctic canada  suggest a higher degree of mating among relatives in mainland  and island  wolves from coastal bc. however, carmichael et al.  <cit>  also observed high fis values on victoria island  and on islands in the high arctic . based on the findings from alaska wolves, continental wolves appear to have higher genetic diversity. we would also expect a similar situation for our study area, as mainland wolves have a wider surrounding area from which to receive immigrants. however, there are known wolf groups on neighbouring islands not included in this study and we cannot exclude the possibility that immigration from these areas may have augmented the diversity in our sample of island wolves.

non-invasive sampling and genotyping
allelic dropout in non-invasive sampling  could, at least in part, explain the lower values for observed heterozygosity, the high number of loci not in hardy-weinberg equilibrium, and the positive fis values. our results could also have been influenced by the presence of null alleles. when most of the loci indicate null alleles, however, the micro-checker program warns there may not be random mating in the population . the pca and spca findings of island-mainland differentiation suggest absence of panmixia in our study area. we therefore believe that island-mainland structure contributed to the frequent reports of null alleles. the study area is difficult to access, and many samples may have been several weeks old and thus affected by exposure to the humid climate . our results are based on analyses of faecal material, where duplicated genotypes were obtained for 15%  individuals. error rates were high, but we do not expect any consistent bias between areas. results from the duplicated genotypes accord with the larger dataset, although further sampling and multiple-tube analyses  would be necessary for accurate identification of individual wolves and to confirm dispersal events in our study area.

evolutionary ecology and genetic differentiation between mainland and island wolves
the partial mantel test showed no significant relationship between genetic distance and island-mainland habitat type when accounting for geographic distance. however, there was a significant correlation between geographic distance and island-mainland habitat type, suggesting that the two matrices are collinear and their effects cannot be differentiated. the spatial autocorrelation indicated negative autocorrelation from approximately 17–45 km. these results appear to contrast with those of muñoz-fuentes et al.  <cit>  who reported that geographic distance was unlikely to explain the spatial structure of wolf mtdna haplotypes in a broader study of coastal and central bc. wolves are highly capable dispersers able to travel > 70 km/day , and it seems unlikely that geographic distance alone can explain the island-mainland structure suggested by the spca. in such a situation, we would expect the spatial autocorrelation results to show consistent  negative kinship-values with geographic distance. in contrast, the 45– <dig> distance class that represents wolves in the northern- and southernmost parts of our study, which are farthest apart in geographic distance, showed positive values . multiple interacting factors, including distance, water, terrain ruggedness etc., may affect genetic structure in our study area. although it is essential to evaluate the possible influence of physiography on the differences observed between island and mainland wolves, the observed correlation between geographic distance and habitat type combined with the physical complexity of the landscape make it problematic and potentially misleading to use linear distances for estimating wolf movement.

water barriers between the mainland and islands might restrict dispersal and gene flow. for example, captive wolves released on coronation island in alaska did not swim 900 m to nearby habitat with abundant food . in our study, we reject this hypothesis because we commonly observe wolves swimming among landmasses and distances among islands  are often larger than the distances between islands and the mainland . immigrants from outside the study area could also influence the observed east–west gradient in genetic profiles. the differentiation seen in yc profiles, for example, may be explained by gene flow from unsampled wolves on the outer islands father west. similarly, profiles from the ur group, which showed considerable overlap with island wolves, might result from immigration by one or more island wolves with high reproductive success. furthermore, the presence of intermediate profiles in the north and south of our study area implies an island-mainland gradient. a strict island-mainland dichotomy may thus be simplistic and should be evaluated on a broader geographic scale. without genetic data from a larger spatial extent, however, we cannot evaluate these hypotheses.

family group structure might also have influenced our results, especially for long-lived animals for which the genetic influence of one successful breeder can be detected for many generations. difficulties with amplification of ms41b likely reduced our ability to identify male wolves. a possible higher prevalence of females in the sample might nevertheless exacerbate genetic structuring in species where males are more likely to disperse. however, male wolf profiles we assessed showed a similar island-mainland gradient. observational and tracking data suggest that wolf group size in the study area was ≤  <dig> individuals , and it appears unlikely that the observed gradient in genetic profiles could be explained by social structure  alone. the identification of  <dig> individuals in the study area appears reasonable for a sampling period that included  <dig> litters, winter pup mortality that may exceed 50%, and the likelihood that 20% of individuals would be solitary or extra-territorial dispersers .

despite the above-mentioned uncertainties, we offer the working hypothesis that the sharp ecological gradient between island and mainland locations, as revealed by the landscape characteristics and the dietary and parasitic data from wolves in our study area, can influence population genetic structure. although our study must be interpreted with caution, and should be repeated with genetic profiles of higher quality, the results appear consistent with an increasing body of literature reporting genetic differentiation in wolves and other highly mobile species  influenced by ecological and environmental factors. dispersal rates and gene flow might differ substantially between island and mainland sub-populations, and the extent to which populations are demographically independent could help define management units  along the pacific coast.

associated morphological or other characteristics observed over time might have allowed tek knowledge holders to recognize these dissimilar wolf forms. such intra-specific nomenclature is common among indigenous knowledge holders . indeed, in adjacent southeast alaska, the frequency of the black colour phase among wolves killed by trappers is ~50% on the mainland and only ~20% on the islands . additional morphological differences among wolves of coastal bc might have led to mainland-island classification by local people.

the evolutionary influence of marine resources, which are pronounced on islands in our study area, can be dramatic for terrestrial wildlife. for example, polar bears  are thought to have evolved from grizzly bears in peripheral areas where marine resources were abundant . moreover, wolves of coastal bc  were thought to have diverged from interior populations in part because of marine resource availability in coastal zones . individuals born in this distinct environment are likely better able to survive and reproduce within, compared to beyond, these conditions.

CONCLUSIONS
our results indicate the presence of a genetic cline between island and mainland wolves. although overlap was extensive, the results suggest an east–west gradient in profiles across < 30 km. we hypothesize that adaptive responses to heterogeneity in food resources can influence genetic differentiation. accordingly, this line of inquiry presents an exciting avenue for future research where marine resources or other components of ecological heterogeneity are present.

competing interests
the authors declare that they have no competing interests.

authors’ contributions
eln carried out laboratory work, and contributed to fieldwork, statistical analyses, manuscript writing and revisions. avs performed statistical analyses and manuscript writing. msq supervised the study and helped revise the manuscript. ctd participated in study design, fieldwork, and manuscript writing. pcp contributed to study design, field work and manuscript revisions. hmb created the maps and helped revise the manuscript. all authors read and approved the final manuscript.

supplementary material
additional file 1
map of the study area on the central coast of british columbia, canada. shown are estimated home ranges of five wolf  social groups.

click here for file

 additional file 2
multiplex combinations of  <dig> microsatellite markers for genetic analyses of wolves from the central coast of british columbia, canada.

click here for file

 additional file 3
calculation of amplification and error rates and assessment of null alleles, large allele dropout, and stutter peaks for wolf samples  from the central coast of british columbia, canada.

click here for file

 additional file 4
colour plot of wolf profiles from the central coast of british columbia, canada. a) individual profiles  based on ≥  <dig> microsatellite loci. the first axis represents  <dig> % of the variation, the second axis  <dig> %. b) a subsample of individual profiles  based on ≥  <dig> duplicated loci. genetic diversity is represented by distance and colour; individuals further apart and/or labelled with more dissimilar colours have more divergent genotypes. the first axis represents  <dig> % of the variation, the second axis  <dig> %.

click here for file

 additional file 5
principal component analysis  of male wolves from the central coast of british columbia, canada, showing island  and mainland  individuals. the first axis represents  <dig> % of the variation, the second axis  <dig> %. pca is based on the  <dig> loci retained for final analyses .

click here for file

 additional file 6
eigenvalues from a spatial principal component analysis  on  <dig> microsatellite loci from  <dig> wolves from the central coast of british columbia, canada. positive values  represent global structures and negative values  show local patterns. tests for local and global structure revealed the presence of one global structure, which was subsequently interpreted.

click here for file

 additional file 7
spatial autocorrelation analysis of wolf samples  from the central coast of british columbia, canada, using 5 km distance classes. the y axis shows the kinship coefficient , and u and l are the upper and lower limits for the 95% confidence interval of no spatial structure occurring in the data set after permutation . error bars show the 95% confidence interval around r as determined by bootstrap resampling .

click here for file

 acknowledgements
we thank the heiltsuk first nation for their permission to study an important cultural animal in their traditional territory. we also thank j. carpenter, j. gordon-walker, b. mann, m. musiani, m. niedziałkowska, g. pflueger, y. plante, and c. service for field, laboratory and/or intellectual contributions. we are especially grateful to chester starr  of the heiltsuk nation for the knowledge he shared with us, which inspired this work. raincoast conservation foundation, national geographic society, wilburforce foundation, and the tula foundation supported this work. eln was supported by a natural science and engineering research council graduate scholarship. ctd was supported by natural science and engineering research council discovery grant no.  <dig>  j. olano-marin and b. martinez-cruz offered constructive comments on an earlier version of the text. we thank the editor and two anonymous reviewers for their assistance in improving our manuscript.
