BACKGROUND
amyloid-like fibrils may be formed from amylome, the universe of protiens. today the association between protein fibrils and amyloid diseases, including alzheimer’s and prion diseases has been established  <cit> . to find a solution for effective treatments of amyloid disorders, the fundamental problem of understanding the factors that stimulate conformational changes and aggregation in proteins need to be solved  <cit> .

the inference that there is a predisposition for primary sequence-specific formation of amyloidal fibrils is made from the wet lab proven experimental remarks that not all proteins are amyloidogenic and that only precise continuous stretches of amyloid fibril forming peptides are more amyloidogenic than other regions. furthermore, the observation that amyloids can be formed from short peptide fragments, seem to indicate that these segments, which are exposed to the environment, can cause the changeover of native proteins into amyloid state  <cit> .

it is apparent that certain sequences have more amyloidogenity than others regardless of studies that seem to suggest that assembly into amyloid-like fibrils is an intrinsic property of peptides, irrespective of their sequence. additionally, some short segment of peptides have same amyloid characteristics as full length proteins, and some fragments have been considered to be the regions causing aggregation, due to the fact that they can transform the amyloidogenic tendencies of polypeptides by favouring or obstructing the formation of fibrils. these data recommend that primary sequence can impact the formation of amyloid fibrils, and has stimulated the recent advancement of computational models to predict the amyloidogenic propensities of proteins  <cit> .

the challenge of predicting amyloidogenic regions has resulted in a variety of multi-parametric methods that attempt to predict such motif sequences  <cit> . each methodology has its own hypothesis and implements, ranging from simple to complex  <cit> . overall, the success of different computational approaches in predicting aggregation-prone regions allow proposing that aggregation propensity in polypeptide chains is ultimately dictated by the sequence  <cit> . as research continues for the understanding of amyloid formation, the development of computational prediction techniques is an imperative supplement to experimental molecular approaches  <cit> . several computational tools for predicting amyloid segments have emerged since  <dig>  such as  <cit>  based on physicochemical grounds or structural denominators. however, methods by means of supervised machine learning models are only few such as pafig  <cit> .

in this article, we propose a supervised machine learning architecture that purely follows a sequence-based design strategy to determine the amyloidogenic short stretches in peptides. the systematically selected bpc properties of amino acids taken from amino acid index database in dbget  and protscale in swiss expasy are utilized along with auto-correlation function and atomic composition within a peptide fragment to represent protein sequence features, and finally ann is implemented to classify the fibril forming and non-fibril forming peptide segments. prior to prediction, a feature optimization scheme based on evolutionary svm is employed to search for the significant bpc features thereby reducing the dimensionality of the input space. the evolutionary strategy hybridizes a variant of genetic algorithm  named memetic algorithm  with svm. the present study was initiated in an attempt to improve the overall performance in predicting the amyloid motifs in proteins by incorporating auto-correlation functions generated from selected amino acid indices and atomic composition of amino acids combined with corresponding bpc features obtained by a novel implementation of feature optimization.

RESULTS
given the laborious nature of experimental validation of peptide segments most prone to form fibrils, it is imperative that computational approaches be developed that could produce reliable, affordable and testable in silico predictions  <cit> . by incorporating correlation of carefully selected amino acid indices through embedded svm, among the residues within a window, we attempted to strengthen the sequence interaction effect in forming the feature vector thereby reducing the misclassifications. in fact, experimentally predicted amyloidogenic regions reported in different works do vary  <cit> . one possibility could be due to the fact that the sequences are examined under diverse conditions. hence reliable identification of amyloid fibril stretches is challenging and difficult.

the cross validation and independent tests carried out on all five prediction models  showed that inclusion of feature like auto-correlation function significantly improved the sensitivity and specificity. results of comparative studies on prediction models based on sensitivity  and specificity  are shown in table  <dig>  as seen, maximum performance is obtained by pm <dig> that integrates newly introduced correlation feature and the least by pm <dig> trained with constituent atoms alone. the performance of pm <dig> is further analysed using receiver operating characteristic  curves in figure  <dig>  pm <dig> tested with bpc features and autocorrelation function values gives an area under curve  of . <dig>  the effect of other models with integrated and independent features have been investigated and found that the aucs got significantly decreased as can be interpreted from figure  <dig>  from these evaluations, we could establish that bpc features along with autocorrelation function are sufficient in determining the peptide status – amyloigogenic or non-amyloidogenic computationanlly.

comparison with existing approaches
the performance of the best pm is compared with two recently published prediction tools, foldamyloid  <cit>  and amylpred  <cit>  which predict amyloidogenic regions from primary sequence, in terms of sn, sp, balanced accuracy   <cit>  and mathew’s correlation coeffecient . prediction by foldamyloid is based on expected probability of hydrogen bond formation and expected packing density of residues and we chose the value of sliding window size and reliable frame size to be  <dig> to carry out the analysis. the tool amylpred makes a consensus prediction of fibril forming regions in proteins by utilizing five diverse and individually published methods and the analysis was performed using the default parameters for each employed algorithm.

in order to compare various methods, their performances are evaluated on the same dataset. as the online predictors included in our analysis were not assigned any prediction cutoff or threshold, roc curves cannot be constructed completely for these tools. therefore, their performances in terms of sn and sp are denoted by specific points on the roc plot. figure  <dig> shows the scatter plot for true positive rate  versus false positive rate  to compare the balance between sn and sp of the proposed method with other online tools. the plot area is split into four quadrants denoted i-iv as referred  <cit> . in fact, the four quadrants denote algorithm that achieves  higher sn but lower sp  higher sn and higher sp  lower sn but higher sp  lower sn and lower sp. the diagonal line  –  indicates a method that results in equal true positive rates and false positive rates. hence, methods in quadrant ii, far-off from the diagonal line are better performers.

those methods that have its place in quadrant iii have a tendency to predict all the examples as negative resulting in high specificity but very low sensitivity. foldamyloid and amylpred appearing in quadrant iii imply that although they have good specificity, , the sensitivity , is very poor. out of these tools, amylpred achieves the least bacc. mcc scores obtained by foldamyloid and amylpred are . <dig> and . <dig> respectively.

quadrant ii in the plot is the best with both sn and sp being >  <dig> . as evident from the plot, the best proposed prediction model is found in this quadrant. our method shows the highest sensitivity with the optimum specificity than previously reported prediction tools. remarkably, the prediction results of our method are moderate and it achieves sn and sp of  <dig> % and  <dig> % for cross validation test and  <dig> % and  <dig> % for independent test. the presented computational architecture  achieves the best bacc on an average of 80% and mcc score of . <dig>  although  <cit>  and  <cit>  show high specificity, the overall balanced accuracy is poor due to very low sensitivity. nevertheless, the sensitivity of these tools decreased substantially for amylhexset data or they suffered from highly biased prediction . low sensitivity obtained by foldamyloid may be due to the fact that trans-membrane and signal regions are not considered in their study. frousios et al.,  <cit>  reported that scores of . <dig> and . <dig> representing sensitivity and specificity respectively are obtained by amylpred for a dataset consisting of  <dig> data samples used in their work. garbuzynskiy et al.  <cit>  correctly predicted 80% and 72% of amyloidogenic peptides and non-amyloidogenic peptides respectively for a dataset of  <dig> peptides using foldamyloid webserver.

the statistical measures, sn and sp, the equilibrium maintained between them in terms of balanced prediction accuracy and mcc across the test dataset indicate that our algorithm produces the most significant improvement. the influence of each separate feature may be lesser; however the progress on the performance of the algorithm is further apparent when these features were taken into account collectively. instead of randomly choosing some physicochemical properties related to aggregation for training the model, we tried to get an optimized set of properties related to fibrillar aggregates using a supervised machine learning algorithm named evolutionary svm through a novel implementation of the memetic algorithm. as reviewed  <cit>  and discussed  <cit> , structural information of peptides plays substantial role in determining amyloid fibrils. in fact, the selected bpc features include few amino acid indices related to protein structure study described in profeat  <cit>  which indicates that the presented models are trained with a feature subset that contains structural details of amino acid sequence as well. though the results of our prediction model matched favourably with other methods, it needs to be enhanced further. improvement in prediction results may be possible by identifying novel relevant features, features that maintain the sequence interaction effect and by incorporating more training data.

CONCLUSIONS
the study of folding and unfolding events in proteins and subsequent aggregation into amyloid fibrillar deposits is becoming central to develop rational therapeutic strategies against devastations such as alzheimer and parkinson disease. a promising approach to spot such deposits is through computational prediction models. even though, these models cannot replace the wet lab work, they might serve in identifying the regions of interest for further molecular investigations.

in our present study, due to the sheer amount of properties contained within the amino acids, we tried to provide a new and complementary set of physicochemical and biochemical properties through evolutionary svm feature selection approach, besides their correlation and atomic composition within a residue in forming the feature vector to train the ann model. to our knowledge, this is the first attempt to utilize auto-correlation function and atomic composition in computationally predicting the amyloidogenic or non-amyloidogenic peptide status. in addition, a variant and novel implementation of hybrid ga termed ma is implemented. among the five prediction models built, pm <dig> - the one trained with  <dig> features gives the best results in terms of sn, sp and auc of roc curve which clearly provide indication that newly introduced feature, autocorrelation function which helps in maintaining the sequence order effect, besides the bpc properties selected through ma have high impact in determining the amyloid aggregates. as also evident from the mcc score and the scatter plot, the proposed in silico computing method achieves an agreeable result and preserves balance between the rates of true positives and false positives that is deficit in the existing online tools.

