BACKGROUND
the taxonomy of fungi is largely based on ephemeral and irregularly occurring propagation structures, notably sexual fruiting-bodies. the main part of the fungal life cycle is, however, a somatic – typically mycelial – phase that offers few discriminatory morphological characters and that may be difficult to assign even to family or ordinal level. this means that alternatives to morphological characters are essential to get a complete picture of the fungal diversity and ecology at any given locality and time. indeed, dna-based methods have been in long use for identification purposes in mycology  <cit> .

the locus most commonly used for identification of fungi is the its region of the nuclear ribosomal dna  <cit> . this region has three subloci of different rates of evolution, its1: highly variable,  <dig> s: very conserved, and its2: variable to semi-conserved  <cit> . it is flanked on both sides by comparatively conserved regions  which simplifies the design of primers targeted at the its region. another important aspect of the ribosomal dna is that it is a multi-copy segment such that it amplifies readily even when the initial amount of template dna is moderate, as is often the case with environmental samples.

a branch of mycology where sequence-based methods are in common use is ectomycorrhizal community research. ectomycorrhizae are ecologically important root-associated symbiotic relationships between plants and fungi where the fungus obtains carbohydrates for its energy supply and the plant, among other benefits, receives nitrogen and phosphorous for its metabolism  <cit> . since ectomycorrhizae normally can be observed as a hyphal cap by visual inspection of the plant roots, it is possible to sort out ectomycorrhizal root tips from soil samples and extract dna for sequencing  <cit> . the sequence obtained is then typically used in a similarity search against reference databases such as genbank  <cit>  or unite  <cit>  in the hope of finding a close match for inference of taxonomic affiliation. given that less than 1% of all fungal species have been sequenced for the its region  <cit> , the similarity search often fails to produce a match close enough for reliable species identification. as a part of the scientific publication process, such unidentified sequences are normally submitted to genbank without a full species name. if put in the right context, these unidentified sequences may represent valuable samples of fungal diversity and ecology. interestingly, however, unidentified sequences and their potential to contribute metadata and resolution are typically left out from phylogenetic studies  <cit> .

one of the larger ectomycorrhizal genera is inocybe  fr.  which comprises some  <dig> species  <cit>  distributed world-wide. there are several morphology-based monographs of the genus  <cit> , although most of these have a european focus . in addition, many new species have been described recently  <cit> . a search on inocybe in the taxonomic database index fungorum  <cit>  returns  <dig> names , but the actual number of recognized taxa is far lower owing to widespread synonymy. the fact that much of the taxonomy within the genus remains unclear  <cit>  has been accentuated further by recent dna-based analyses, which have shown that many of the commonly recognized taxa in the genus are incompletely understood  <cit> . in spite of the fact that inocybe is a species rich, widely distributed, and commonly encountered genus, there were only  <dig> fully identified inocybe its sequences deposited in genbank at the onset of this study. the size and distribution of the genus coupled with the lack of fully identified inocybe reference sequences jointly suggest that a substantial number of the unidentified its sequences in genbank could belong to the genus.

this study seeks to mine genbank for hitherto unexplored ecological and geographical data pertaining to inocybe. to accomplish this, fully identified its sequences from an ongoing study of inocybe are used together with fully identified inocybe its sequences in genbank to pinpoint unidentified genbank sequences associated with the genus. the unidentified genbank sequences are divided into groups – putative species – and identified as far as possible by sequence similarity analysis and phylogenetic inference. information stored in genbank about the unidentified sequences, as well as data from the papers in which they were published, are then compiled and analysed. for purposes of comparison, the number of unidentified its sequences associated with a selection of other ectomycorrhizal genera is estimated using fully identified genbank sequences.

RESULTS
comparison of ectomycorrhizal genera
when comparing a selection of widespread ectomycorrhizal fungal genera it was found that tomentella pat., cortinarius fr., and russula pers. are the most commonly encountered as viewed through the number of studies that had unidentified sequences from the respective genera as their closest blast match . of these, cortinarius and russula are also two of the most abundantly available genera in terms of fully identified sequences in genbank while tomentella was found to be among the more poorly represented. additionally, one of the most commonly occurring genera as unidentified sequences, sebacina tul., is among the least well represented with respect to fully identified sequences. notably high numbers of fully identified sequences are available for tuber wigg.: fr. and tricholoma  quél., both of which contain species with economically important edible sporocarps . pisolithus alb. & schwein., the most widely used ectomycorrhizal inoculum  <cit> , was found in only  <dig> studies. inocybe, together with lactarius pers., are the fifth most common among the included genera in terms of the number of studies including unidentified sequences for which they form the closest match, but only the 16th most well represented with respect to the number of fully identified sequences .

 <dig> before addition of fully identified inocybe sequences to emerencia in this study.

 <dig> after addition of fully identified inocybe sequences to emerencia in this study.

number  of distinct studies with unidentified sequences associated with the respective ectomycorrhizal  genera , the number of unidentified  sequences the genera constitute the closest blast match for, and the number of fully identified  sequences belonging to them. based on genbank data as of 2006-10- <dig> 

alignment groups
a joint  <dig> s and lsu alignment of the fully identified inocybe sequences was compiled to form the basis of a division of the sequences into smaller groups. a total of  <dig> sequences were omitted from this alignment due to insufficient sequence length. sixteen clades from the parsimony consensus tree inferred were selected as groups for the construction of its alignments. eleven sequences fell outside these clades and were included in the its alignment that featured their closest blast match. five sequences that did not end up with other sequences bearing the same species annotation were additionally assigned to the alignments where sequences with the same species name were present; these five sequences were therefore found in more than one alignment. this resulted in  <dig> alignments with 4– <dig> fully identified sequences. of the  <dig> unidentified genbank sequences with an inocybe as the closest blast match, four were excluded from further analysis due to ambiguous establishment of homology in the alignment stage and the likely connection to other genera after further investigation of the blast output. the remaining  <dig> sequences were added to the alignment featuring their closest blast match. after the unidentified sequences and outgroup taxa had been added, the  <dig> alignments comprised 8– <dig> sequences .

its similarity
sixteen species of inocybe  were found to have outlier sequences that differed considerably in sequence similarity from, and were not monophyletic with, the majority of the sequences annotated as their conspecifics. these deviant sequences  were excluded from the analysis of intra- and interspecific similarity. some species, such as i. flavella, i. geophylla, i. soluta, and i. squamata, were not monophyletic in the phylogenetic analysis  and were therefore excluded from the intra- and interspecific similarity analysis. due to the low resolution within the clade including i. geophylla, i. posterula, and i. whitei , these taxa were treated together as i. geophylla s. l. several species show considerable variation in the its <dig> region  even within monophyletic groups. these include i. asterospora, i. calamistrata, i. cervicolor, i. cookei, i. glabripes, i. godeyi, i. hirtella, i. maculata, i. mixtilis, i. phaeocomis, i. rimosa, and i. whitei. for i. calamistrata, i. cookei, i. godeyi, and i. maculata, the minimum interspecific sequence similarity was smaller than the maximum intraspecific sequence similarity. the its <dig> region was found to be more variable than its <dig> in 49% of the inocybe species while the its <dig> region was more variable in 31%. for 6% of the species it was not consistent which region that had the highest sequence similarity between different sequence pairs within the species. in 14% of the species both regions were fully conserved .

the inter- and intraspecific comparison  of sequence similarity in its <dig> indicates that a cut-off value of about 97% would give the most reasonable error rates for species delimitation in inocybe: 71% of the species had an intraspecific sequence similarity larger than 97%, and 98% of the species had an interspecific similarity lower than 97%. this fits well with previously used cut-off values in mycology  <cit> . there were two cases where unidentified sequences from the same study formed clades with full jackknife support but without internal resolution in the phylogenetic analysis and where the sequence similarities were between 96% and 97%. since it seems likely that these belong to the same species and the effect on the error estimates would be small, a 96% cut-off value was used instead of 97%. this had no effect on the identity of the remaining unidentified sequences.

the its <dig> region indicated the same sequence groups as its <dig> except for one of the unidentified sequences  that showed affinities to different sequence groups for the two different regions.

species identification
of the  <dig> unidentified genbank sequences with an association to inocybe,  <dig>  were identified to species level in this study,  <dig>  were identified as having a close affinity to a fully identified inocybe species , and  <dig> sequences  remains unidentified . the  <dig> fully identified inocybe sequences originally in genbank constitute  <dig>  of the closest blast matches after the addition of the new inocybe sequences. the unidentified sequences of inocybe were determined to belong to  <dig> different species. the study with the largest number of inocybe species, as circumscribed from unidentified sequences here, featured  <dig> species and was conducted in a meadow ecosystem on calcareous soil in western estonia  <cit> .

ninety-four  of the  <dig> unidentified genbank sequences assigned to inocybe in this study were from a published study that assigned an identity to the sequence. of these  <dig> sequences, eight  were determined to species level in the study they were presented,  <dig>  were identified as inocybe,  <dig>  as cortinariaceae, and  <dig>  at an even higher taxonomic level . there were also three sequences  that had been classified to taxonomic ranks that do not include inocybe.

there was a marked skewness in the distribution of unidentified its sequences among the inocybe clades given in  <cit>  , with the vast majority  of the sequences belonging to the inocybe clade, only one to the mallocybe clade , and none to the inosperma clade  <dig> . two sequences were found to have potential affinities to the inosperma clade and one to the pseudosperma clade but could not be confidently included in these and were therefore excluded from the analysis.

geography and ecology
the majority of studies in which inocybe has been reported was conducted in europe and north america . four studies could not be confidently geographically assigned to a continent and were therefore excluded from all analyses regarding geography and climate, and an additional five studies could not be confidently assigned to a climatic region and were therefore excluded from all climatological analysis. a disproportionately large number of the unidentified sequences that were successfully identified in this study came from europe: 49% of the european sequences were identified to species level whereas for n. america the corresponding number was 25%. for asia and australia the values were 14% and 0% respectively, but both areas were represented by fewer than ten sequences. when comparing the köppen-geiger climate regions  <cit>  that were represented by more than one study containing inocybe sequences, 50% of the unidentified sequences in fully humid snow climate  were identified to species level here; for fully humid warm temperate climate , 30% were identified; and for warm temperate climate with dry summers , 32% were identified .

df = snow climate, fully humid; ds = snow climate with dry summer; cf = warm temperate climate, fully humid; cs = warm temperate with dry summer; aw = equatorial savannah with dry winter; ? = climatic region uncertain. n. am. = north america; aus. = australia; eur. = europe. spec. = species; seq. = sequences. # = number of unidentified inocybe species/sequences; % = percentage being identified in this study.

only  <dig>  of the species delimited from unidentified genbank sequences were found in two or more studies. the species found most often was i. glabripes which occurred in five studies, although two of those were conducted in the same forest. five species  were found in both europe and north america  and one species was found both in europe and japan . in addition, eight  of the species that were identified to species level in this study were collected outside europe .

a total of  <dig> species were found in hardwood forests,  <dig> in coniferous forests, and  <dig> in mixed forests. two of these species were found in both hardwood and coniferous forests, two in both hardwood and mixed forests, and five in both coniferous and mixed forests. the host was given either in genbank or in the paper from which the sequence originated for  <dig>  of the sequences representing  <dig> species. eight of those species were found on more than one host genus. among the more noteworthy hosts are arbutus unedo and orthilia secunda , which form arbutoid mycorrhizae, and species of cephalanthera and epipactis , which exhibit orchid mycorrhizae  <cit> . oddly, one inocybe sequence comes from a study of the total mycoflora of the grass phragmites australis   <cit> . the rest of the hosts were known ectomycorrhizae formers . three species were reported from ecological conditions differing from those in the literature: i. lanuginosa, i. leptophylla, and i. phaeocomis .

discussion
inocybe is one of the larger genera of ectomycorrhizal fungi and its species are consequently found in many studies of ectomycorrhizal communities. the comparison between the genera in this study is based on the closest blast matches for the unidentified sequences, an approach that although associated with complications  <cit>  serves as a crude quantification of the frequencies at which the genera occur. the number of fully identified its sequences annotated as inocybe in genbank was similar to those of the likewise ectomycorrhizal genera hygrophorus and albatrellus gray that form the closest blast matches of unidentified sequences from much fewer studies. as many as 58% of the sequences found to be associated with inocybe were not denoted as such in the study in which they were originally published, which indicates that the lack of reference sequences of inocybe has severely impeded identification to genus level.

the observation that seven  of the  <dig> species recovered in more than one study were found on different continents suggests that at least many of the north temperate inocybe species are widely distributed. this finding notwithstanding, it is clear that the restricted geographical area from which the fully identified sequences were collected has had an impact on the number of unidentified sequences being identified to species level. in this study, fully identified sequences belonging to  <dig> different inocybe species were included, a set that represents about 20% of the estimated number of described species in the genus. if this was a representative taxonomic sample for the world it should be a reasonable basis for species identification, but when comparing different geographical regions it was only in fully humid temperate and snowy  parts of europe that a significant proportion of the unidentified sequences was successfully identified in this study. with respect to sequences from australia and thailand, none of the unidentified sequences were identified to species level in this study, indicating a geographic skewness in the taxonomic sampling.

since there is a general bias in the geographic distribution of ectomycorrhizal studies towards europe and north america  <cit> , it is hard to draw precise conclusions on the distribution of inocybe. it is nevertheless clear from the results that the genus is widely distributed and can be found in many climatic regions, from fully humid snow  climate to equatorial savannah. it furthermore appears that inocybe can form mycorrhizal associations with various diverse hosts and not only of the ectomycorrhizal type but also arbutoid and orchid mycorrhizae  <cit> . in addition, many species were found to form mycorrhizae with more than one host genus, which expands on what has previously been reported for inocybe  <cit> . the study in which an inocybe sequence was recovered from a tissue sample of the grass phragmites australis  <cit> , a species that forms arbuscular mycorrhizae  <cit> , was designed to investigate general fungal associates with the plant and not specifically mycorrhizal associations. there are previous reports that i. serotina can be associated with ammophila arenaria  <cit> , another arbuscular mycorrhizal member of poacea  <cit> . since arbuscular mycorrhizae is restricted to the phylum glomeromycota among the fungi  <cit> , it seems unlikely that the association between inocybe  and these grasses is mycorrhizal. this might suggest that the inocybe species in question may have colonized the host for other reasons  such that not all species of inocybe are obligately mycorrhizal.

most of the unidentified its sequences with an affiliation to inocybe were found to be associated with the inocybe clade . this is not surprising since this is the largest clade within the genus in terms of the number of species  <cit> . the observation that only one sequence was associated with the mallocybe clade  and none with the inosperma clade  <dig>  might be due to a bias in what kind of ecosystems that have been sampled combined with random sampling effects, but it could also be interpreted as an indication of a different nutritional mode for the species of these clades.

species identification using dna sequences from only one locus has been cautioned against for several reasons  <cit> . in this study we grouped sequences based on a dual demand of sufficient sequence similarity and monophyly in a phylogenetic context. such groups might be more correctly referred to as molecular operational taxonomic units  and it remains to be shown how well they correspond to actual species and whether discrepancies between these units will have an impact on our results. if a species is represented by only one or a few sequences , species determination and delimitation may have to rely on similarity threshold values, a process that while known not always to be reliable  <cit>  has been shown to be useful in some groups of fungi  <cit> . in this study, threshold values were inferred from the sequence similarity among the fully identified sequences, but the variation in inter- and intraspecific similarity among the species was found to be large and at times overlapping, resulting in similarity thresholds that are a compromise between over- and underestimating the number of species. some of this variation in sequence similarity might be explained by insufficient taxonomic resolution such that one species name is applied to what is actually several species, consequently with an overestimation of the intraspecific variability as a result.

in i. rimosa and i. maculata, the low sequence similarity is accompanied by a large variability in morphology and uncertain taxonomy. inocybe rimosa is known to be a taxonomically difficult species with different opinions on species delimitation  <cit> . this study also reveals that there is large ecological variation, including associations with several hosts, among the collections of i. rimosa, which emphasizes the need for more data to settle the taxonomy within this complex. for i. maculata, kuyper  <cit>  reports a great variation in colour, and there are also some species with purportedly close affinities to i. maculata that have not been considered in this study . the three species i. phaecomis, i. hirtella, and i. cookei are each divided into varietal taxa reflecting a marked morphological diversity that has only partly been accounted for in the present study. for other species, the variation in sequences is harder to correlate to morphological diversity.

the multiple copies of the nuclear ribosomal dna undergo concerted evolution that serves to homogenize the array of copies. sequence similarity measures based on the its region are complicated by the fact that there may still be several distinct and mutually heterogeneous copies of the region in one genotype  <cit> , adding to the sequence variation observed within a taxon. another possible source of variation in sequence similarity is sequencing errors  <cit> , but since primary data  rarely are easily available in the public databases, it is hard to judge the quality of a sequence and thus the extent of this problem. in this study we found one sequence that associated with different sequence groups depending on which of the its subregions that were considered. this could be explained if the sequence represents an in situ hybridization between two its types or if the sequence is chimeric  <cit> .

another pitfall in single-locus sequence-based species identification is that species do not always appear to form monophyletic groups in phylogenetic analyses  <cit>  . there might be several explanations for this, such as poorly resolved phylogenetic estimates, inadequate taxonomy, and incomplete lineage sorting  <cit> . there were several cases in the present study where sequences with identical species annotation were found not to form monophyletic groups, and some sequences fell well inside the clades of other species. most of these cases are probably due to misidentification, and in a few instances it is plausible that the same name is used for different species in different parts of the world  <cit> . this points to the importance of voucher specimens so that such disagreements can be emended  <cit> . there are some instances, however, where other explanations are conceivable. inocybe boltonii and i. aff. boltonii render i. soluta paraphyletic and divided into two clades. the nodes between the clades within this complex are well supported and additional information from morphological studies or other loci is needed to resolve the reason for this non-monophyly. specimens annotated as i. flavella and i. squamata  form a clade where each species is divided into more than one separate clade. although the phylogenetic relationships are not fully resolved for these taxa, it is clear that at least i. squamata is non-monophyletic. this could be explained by incomplete lineage sorting, hybridisation/introgression, or inadequate taxonomic resolution  <cit> . another complex of species, referred to as i. geophylla s. l. here, was circumscribed to include several taxa. two of these taxa do not form monophyletic groups, but the resolution within this complex of species is poor. the low sequence similarities among the different clades implore further taxonomic studies.

CONCLUSIONS
as more and more sequences are made available from environmental samples, this new and previously unexplored data can be used by systematists as an information resource on the ecology and distribution of different taxa. these sequences also represent a valuable sample of intraspecific diversity and might furthermore present clues on where to look for previously undescribed species, but in the end it is the standard and level of detail of the metadata for each sequence that will determine the ease and extent to which this information can be utilized. as this study shows, it is vital to provide rich and consistent sequence metadata even if the sequences are not identified to species level, and much would be gained if all sequence entries in genbank were thus annotated.

