BACKGROUND
chronic kidney disease  is characterized by a progressive deterioration of renal function. ckd is a common condition that, according to the recent report of nhanes iii, affects  <dig> % of the us population  <cit> . recently, an international consensus categorized ckd into five stages according to the glomerular filtration rate  <cit> . the reduction of renal function, particularly in the more advanced stages, has been associated to significant changes in energy metabolism, nitrogen balance, protein-energy malnutrition and insulin resistance and with a significant increase in the generation of reactive oxygen species  <cit> .

although many of these biochemical alterations can be improved by renal replacement treatments, including hemodialysis  and peritoneal dialysis, these procedures do not reconstitute the normal body homeostasis  <cit> . in fact, it has been extensively reported that patients in renal replacement therapy develop a complex disease comprising partially treated uremia and ill effects of dialysis, such as fluctuation in the extracellular fluid volume, residual inorganic ion disturbances and exposure to bioincompatible materials  <cit> .

additionally, it is well known that during these treatments the interaction of peripheral blood mononuclear cells  with bioincompatible dialysis devices causes their activation with consequent increased synthesis and release of pro-inflammatory cytokines  <cit> , imbalance between pro- and anti-oxidant activities resulting in high oxidative stress  <cit>  and immune system deregulation  <cit> . all together these conditions may lead to severe clinical complications including cardiovascular disease, atherosclerosis, anemia and malnutrition with a consequent low quality of life, high risk of hospitalization and short survival of this patients' population  <cit> .

in the last decade, numerous studies have investigated the molecular triggers and biological key elements associated to the development of these clinical changes, but the complete picture of this process is still incomplete  <cit> .

new strategies based on the combination of traditional molecular approaches  and innovative high-throughput technologies have been proposed to address this issue. in particular, microarrays, largely employed in the screening of complex biological events, analyzing simultaneously thousand of genes, represent one of the most powerful and highly sensitive tool to investigate the potential molecular interactions and multi-factorial variables involved in biological processes  <cit> .

to date, only few studies have employed this methodology to select the molecular fingerprints associated with the onset and progression of renal damage and to build models defining the mechanisms underlying severe clinical complication associated to ckd and dialysis therapy  <cit> . however, these studies have been performed on a relatively small number of patients and on limited gene datasets.

therefore, the aim of the present study was to uncover, through a combined strategy based on an innovative high-throughput technology  and classical molecular methodologies, the mechanisms underlying alterations in cell metabolism featuring patients with ckd.

RESULTS
microarray analysis
to identify specific genomic fingerprints differentiating healthy subjects from those with chronic kidney disease, we analyzed the gene-expression profiling of pbmc isolated from  <dig> healthy subjects,  <dig> ckd patients on stage ii–iii  and  <dig> patients undergoing hd treatment . according to independent statistical algorithms and the estimated fdr, we identified  <dig> gene probe sets  up-regulated in ckd ii–iii and hd and able to discriminate the three study groups . however, we found only a slight and not significant difference in the genomic profile between ckd ii–iii and normal subjects  . the latter result may be related to the low degree of renal failure of the ckd population included in the microarray analysis. the 2d hierarchical clustering using the  <dig> selected gene probe sets showed the degree of separation among the  <dig> study groups .

functional analysis of the transcriptomic profile identified by microarray
using ingenuity pathway analysis  software, we found that the top selected genes were involved in several biological pathways including oxidative phosphorylation system, ubiquinone biosynthesis and glucocorticoids receptor signaling. however, oxidative phosphorylation system, including  <dig> of  <dig> genes , reached the highest level of significance . the relative connectivity diagram in figure 2b shows the high degree of direct and indirect biological association  among the selected genes. in addition, kegg analysis reveals that the  <dig> genes encode for essential subunits of complex i, iii, iv and v of oxidative phosphorylation pathway .

validation of microarray using  <dig> representative genes of the oxidative phosphorylation system
cox6c, cox7c, atp5i, and uqcrh mrna levels, measured on the same microarray population and  <dig> additional ckd patients on stage iv–v, were significantly higher in hd and ckd iv–v compared to ckd ii–iii and healthy subjects. for all the genes analyzed there was no statistical difference in the expression levels between ckd iv–v and hd patients . only for atp5i and uqcrh mrna levels there was a statistically significant difference between ckd ii–iii and healthy subjects . these results were in line with those obtained by the microarray analysis and indicated a possible similarity in oxidative phosphorylation system activity between ckd iv–v and hd patients.

coxi and coxiv protein expression
based on the results obtained in first part of the study, suggesting a significant involvement of the mitochondrial respiratory system in patients with a high degree of renal failure  and hd, we measured the protein level of the mitochondrial-encoded subunit i  and the nuclear-encoded subunit iv  of complex iv in the testing-group. as shown in figure  <dig>  coxi and coxiv levels were higher in ckd iv–v and hd compared to the control group. however, only for coxi, the comparison between ckd iv–v and healthy subjects reached the statistical significance. in addition, for both proteins, there were no significant differences in expression levels between ckd iv–v and hd patients.

complex iv  activity
to obtain additional knowledge about the mitochondrial respiratory system function in patients with ckd, we measured the complex iv activity in  <dig> hd,  <dig> ckd patients and  <dig> healthy subjects. mean enzymatic activity was reduced by 65% in ckd iv–v and by 46% in hd patients compared to the control group, while no statistical difference was found in the comparison between ckd iv–v and hd patients .

intracellular reactive oxygen species  levels
since a significant part of ros generation is dependent on the mitochondrial respiratory chain activity, we measured their levels in pbmc of all the testing-group population. both, ckd iv–v and hd patients have significantly higher ros levels compared to healthy subjects. no differences were observed between ckd iv–v and hd .

dna oxidative damage
we measured serum 8-hydroxydeoxyguanosine  levels in all testing-group population as an oxidative stress biomarker. both, ckd iv–v and hd patients had significantly higher 8-ohdg levels compared to the control group. in addition hd patients showed higher 8-ohdg levels compared to ckd iv–v .

discussion
in the last twenty years, several reports have focused on the molecular changes occurring during the onset and progression of ckd, but this rich literature appears fragmented and not exhaustive  <cit> . analyzing these reports the attitude to focus on small number of biological elements and the lack of a comprehensive strategy to study the biochemical network associated with ckd is evident. in addition, despite the efforts of researchers and clinicians, ckd and renal replacement therapy are still associated to important clinical complications. in particular, during hd, the interaction of pbmc with dialytic membranes causes their activation with a consequent increased synthesis and release of pro-inflammatory cytokines  <cit>  and imbalance between pro- and anti-oxidant activities, resulting in high oxidative stress with elevated synthesis of ros  <cit> .

in the present study, we used a whole genome analysis by microarray technology, combined with classical biomolecular approaches, to detect unrecognized biological elements deregulated in subjects with ckd and to identify new potential targets for pharmacological interventions. microarray analysis revealed a specific genomic fingerprint able to identify hd and ckd patients from healthy subjects. functional analysis by ipa and kegg demonstrated that 25% of the selected genes encodes for protein involved in mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation system.

mitochondria are essential eukaryotic cells organelles involved in several metabolic pathways, calcium and iron homeostasis, ros production and programmed cell death  <cit> . they present an outer and inner membrane, the latter of which would be impermeable to all molecules in the absence of specific carriers and contains the enzymatic oxidative phosphorylation complex. the respiratory flux is due to the donation of electrons from nad- or fad-dependent substrates, via respiratory chain, to molecular oxygen which is finally reduced to water. simultaneously, the energy conserving complexes i, iii and iv build up a trans-membrane electrochemical gradient by coupling the electron transfer activity to proton translocation from the matrix to the outer side of the inner mitochondrial membrane. complex v utilizes backward the electrochemical gradient for atp synthesis.

a significant number of the genes discriminating ckd and hd patients from healthy subjects were involved in the synthesis of important nuclear-encoded structural subunits of the oxidative phosphorylation complexes. in particular, ndufa <dig>  ndufs <dig>  ndufa <dig> and ndufb <dig> encode for subunits of the complex i  that is involved in the transfer of electrons from nadh to ubiquinone  <cit> . interestingly, another gene encoding for a subunit of this complex  was identified by microarray analysis being up-regulated in skeletal muscle biopsy specimens of hd patients compared to control subjects without renal failure  <cit> . cox6c, cox7c encode for two subunits of the cytochrome c oxidase , the terminal enzyme of the mitochondrial respiratory chain catalyzing the electron transfer from reduced cytochrome c to oxygen  <cit> . atp5o, atp5i and atp5j encode for components of the atp synthase .

to investigate whether the increased gene expression observed in our genomic study was, indeed, associated with an increased oxidative phosphorylation system activity, we analyzed the protein expression of mitochondrial-coding coxi  and nuclear-coding coxiv subunits of complex iv. although these two essential subunits of complex iv have not been identified by our genomic approach, we decided to measure their levels based on the evidence that cox exerts a tight control on the respiration of a variety of human cells including myeloma  <cit>  and jurkat blood cells  <cit> . the observation that the expression of both proteins was higher in hd and ckd patients compared to healthy subjects further confirmed the data obtained by the microarray analysis.

additionally, when we measured the activity of complex iv, despite the expected high interindividual variability  <cit> , we observed a dramatic reduction in both ckd and hd patients compared to healthy subjects. this is in line with experimental evidences suggesting that chronic oxidative stress and oxidant injury may enhance the expression of several nuclear mitochondrial biogenesis genes  <cit> . indeed, our results highlight the role of oxidative stress in this process since both ckd and hd patients were characterized by an elevated intracellular ros production and a high level of 8-ohdg, a marker of oxidative stress to dna  <cit> . ros may deeply influence a variety of key cell functions damaging proteins, lipids and nucleic acids  <cit>  and inhibiting directly the enzymatic activities of several elements of the cellular respiratory chains  <cit> . thus, our hypothesis is that an increased production of ros due to the effect of pro-inflammatory mediators may cause a profound inhibition of the oxidative phosphorylation system leading to a compensatory "hypertrophy" of its components. in addition, a hypertrophic and impaired oxidative phosphorylation system may prime a vicious circle, causing a continuous release of ros.

an interesting point in our study is that ckd and hd patients are virtually undistinguishable when it comes to the expression of oxidative phosphorylation system components. on this basis, we may consider this finding as a genomic hallmark of ckd itself that is not modulated by hd treatment. however, it should be taken into consideration that our hd patient's population has been treated with highly biocompatible synthetic membranes, previously shown to cause a very limited lymphomononuclear cell activation  <cit> , although, raj ds et al. have reported that mitochondrial dysfunction is induced even with the use of biocompatible membrane  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, our results suggest, for the first time, a clear deregulation of the mitochondrial respiratory machinery in the ckd patients closely associated with an enhanced oxidative stress. this may explain previous fragmented reports indicating a subnormal energy metabolism in this complex population. finally, our research strategy may delineate a new methodological approach for biologists and clinicians who may collaborate and achieve what has been recently termed as "translational medicine".

