BACKGROUND
personal healthcare has the goal to deliver specific targeted therapeutics to patient groups stratified based on predictive genetic or transcriptional markers. the availability of several hundred complete human genomes in the public domain has added a high degree of confidence to genetic markers predicting susceptibility to certain disorders. robust and validated pcr-based assays interrogating disease specific single-nucleotide-polymorphisms  panels are routinely used in exploratory and clinical research using formalin fixed-paraffin embedded  or biopsy derived dna samples. the de novo discovery of dynamic mrna biomarkers that inform about drug response or specific gene expression patterns is regularly done by genome-wide transcript profiling using dna microarrays or quantitative rna sequencing. however, both technologies require relatively high amounts of high quality rna complicating genome-wide transcript profiling of clinical samples.

for translational research novel primary cell based tissue models are emerging. induced pluripotent stem cell  technology allows in vitro generation of tissue specific human cells such as cardiomyocytes. in addition, spherocyte based three-dimensional culture systems allow small-scale engineering of human tissues containing cell types present in the native tissue. in contrast to patient derived tissues these in vitro models can be exposed to drugs at various dose-levels and multiple time-points in a well-controlled laboratory environment. the main purpose of such primary cell based in vitro systems is analysis of drug-responses using a variety of dynamic parameters such as transcript levels. differentially expressed transcripts found in 3d-cultures, human primary cells or clinical samples are useful resources for generation of customized assays interrogating expression of disease relevant genes only. the microfluidics based quantitative pcr  platform  allows multiparallel expression analysis of  <dig> custom transcripts in  <dig> samples at high sensitivity with low rna input  <cit> . the luminex system is a multiplexed color-coded microsphere-based suspension platform for digital quantification of up to  <dig> custom transcripts in a single tube  <cit> . the nanostring technology uses complementary probes coupled with large color-coded dna molecules to label transcripts followed by confocal microscope-based digital quantification at single molecule sensitivity  <cit> . alternatively, oligonucleotide probe coated cantilever arrays have been used to quantify transcripts in cell lysates based on nano-mechanical bending  <cit> . the production of custom microarrays was discontinued by most suppliers due to high costs and declining market size. for routine applications, qpcr profiling  is the method of choice because it is performed in conventional 96-well plates using standard thermocyclers  <cit> . in addition, custom gene qpcr panels covering various major biological processes such as apoptosis, cell cycle control or immune stimulation are commercially available from a number of vendors. all technologies briefly outlined above suffer either from low sample throughput or else from a rather limited number of transcripts for multiparallel analysis.

recently a combination of pcr amplification and semiconductor sequencing termed ampliseq became commercially available for customized detection of sequence based single-nucleotide polymorphisms  or point mutations  <cit> . compared to standard pcr assays this technology provides the sequence flanking the mutation of interest at high coverage permitting quantitative determination of allele frequencies. for cancer research for instance, a commercial panel of  <dig> primer pairs covering hot-spot mutations in  <dig> cancer-related genes is available for low-throughput semiconductor sequencers  <cit> . this gene panel was used in a pilot study for ampliseq validation using clinical  lung cancer samples . the amplicon size of  <dig> to  <dig> base pairs is compatible with partially degraded material which is very challenging to sequence by classical dna sequencing methods such as sanger-sequencing. all clinical ffpe samples were successfully amplified and sequenced with 10ng dna input. the allele frequencies determined by sanger-sequencing were confirmed by ampliseq technology  <cit> . therefore it is likely that focused parallel sequencing will gain attention in clinical studies and for patient stratification.

here we present the first ampliseq-based rna quantification  in multiple samples using a custom panel of  <dig> individual amplicons quantified by high-throughput ion-torrent-proton semiconductor sequencing  <cit> . for validation, we have chosen rna samples derived from four time points of a published cardiomyocyte differentiation experiment as a well-characterized biological system  <cit> . expression values measured by ampliseq-rna data correlate well with equivalent microarray data or conventional quantitative rna sequencing. adaptation of ampliseq-rna technology to high-performance semiconductor technology closes an important gap in custom rna analysis because it allows for the first time multi-parallel expression analysis of hundreds of genes in up to one hundred samples covering a dynamic range of five orders of magnitude.

RESULTS
workflow of ampliseq-based digital transcript imaging 
compared with dna genotyping, the ampliseq-rna quantification workflow  requires polya-primed conversion of mrna to cdna followed by target specific pcr amplification using a multiplex primer pool. each primer pair amplifies a unique 80- <dig> base pair cdna fragment using a limited number of pcr cycles important for maintenance of transcript stoichiometry. after amplification a dna-barcode is attached to each sample followed by pooling and emulsion-pcr of all samples. following bead library construction the amplicon library is sequenced on an ion-torrent proton instrument. decoding of samples and quantitative mapping to the input amplicon sequences concludes the experimental workflow. for experimental validation of ampliseq-rna we have compiled a custom panel of  <dig> transcripts representing about  <dig> biological signaling cascades. this gene set was collected from commercial pathway panels, public domain resources such as pathway commons  or relevant literature . we anticipated that this pathway-based transcript panel would report major variances in gene expression programs across very diverse cell-types. therefore we considered the differentiation of inducible pluri-potent stem cells  into cardiomyocytes as an appropriate test case  <cit> .figure  <dig> 
experimental workflow for ampliseq-rna based transcript quantification. an aliquot of the custom primer pool, the cdna sample and a pcr master-cocktail are combined in individual tubes or multititer plate wells. following pre-amplification the amplicons are tagged with a sample specific molecular barcode followed by pooling and emulsion pcr  amplification on nanosphere-beads. after semiconductor sequencing  reads are mapped to the target sequence library. read frequencies proportional to transcript abundance are provided in a standard spread-sheet for further analysis .



in addition, we adapted the ampliseq-rna technology to the high-throughput ion-torrent proton semiconductor sequencer which generates about 100-times more reads than the personal genome sequencer  originally used. this expansion of capacity allows adaptation to the experimental needs by either adjusting the dynamic range or the number of samples. in the current study, the pooled samples coming from biological triplicates of four time-points  were sequenced in parallel on a single chip. we obtained in average 16’362’ <dig>  11’145’ <dig>  15’951’ <dig> and 12’467’ <dig> mapped reads for day  <dig>  day  <dig>  day  <dig> and day  <dig> respectively. the most abundant amplicons of our panel are represented by up to 800’ <dig> reads exceeding the needs of most profiling experiments. we have set the lower detection limit to an average of five reads per amplicon in order to reduce artefacts known as the “monte carlo effect” caused by stochastic single molecule amplification at low input rna levels  <cit> .

technical and biological validation of ampliseq-rna
to keep this technology-focused study in a manageable scope we selected triplicate rna samples from day  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> of our published ipsc differentiation experiment for ampliseq-rna validation. to confirm integrity of the reference samples we have repeated the published microarray profiling analysis  <cit> . prior to the biological evaluation we assessed technical variation of the ampliseq-rna technology adapted to proton-sequencing. we selected a single rna sample  and prepared four independent sequencing libraries using  <dig> nanogram input rna per technical replicate. following sequencing and transcript quantification we calculated a common coefficient of variation of  <dig>   for ampliseq-rna. the observed inter-sample variation is in the range of established rna profiling technologies such as qpcr  microarray  or quantitative rna sequencing .

comparison of ampliseq-rna gene expression with microarrays and quantitative rna-sequencing
next we compared the read-frequencies measured by ampliseq-rna with equivalent data from illumina microrarrays  <cit>  or from quantitative rna sequencing  <cit>  at day  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> . we selected an average amplicon length of about  <dig> nucleotides matching the median read length of the ion-torrent proton sequencing technology. as a result, the number of reads per amplicon is directly proportional to transcript abundance circumventing the need for data normalization. in contrast, results obtained by conventional quantitative rna sequencing require length normalization and are expressed as rpkm  values. in addition, uneven read coverage along a given transcript can complicate precise quantification. fluorescence-based microarray technology suffers from low sensitivity as result of background noise. nevertheless, we included this technology for benchmarking with published data. above the noise level of  <dig> on log <dig> scale we found an almost linear relation of ampliseq-rna and microarray data at a confidence level of 95% across all time points. genes below this noise level are not detected resulting in a sigmoid curve . the correlation coefficient of  <dig>  for ampliseq –rna and microarrays is similar to the correlation of r =  <dig>  found in a comparison between microarrays and conventional, quantitative rna-sequencing  <cit> . to confirm expression of all transcripts detected by ampliseq-rna we profiled the same samples by conventional strand-specific rna sequencing as an independent technology with comparable sensitivity. we obtained a nearly linear relation between the two datasets with an average correlation coefficient of r ≈  <dig>  for all time points .for experimental applications in areas such as translational medicine or biomedical research the ability to measure dynamic transcriptional responses to stimuli is often more relevant than the determination of absolute expression values. we addressed this point by comparing detection of differential gene expression by ampliseq-rna and microarrays. we selected differentially expressed genes  from all time-points with an absolute log fold-change larger than one and a p-value smaller than  <dig>  . less abundant degs  fulfilling the filter criteria above are only reported by ampliseq-rna thereby extending the scope of the analysis.figure  <dig> 
comparison of rna- profiling to microarrays and quantitative rna sequencing.  correlation of gene expression profiles generated by ampliseq-rna  and dna microarrays  using identical rna samples. each circle corresponds to one gene of our custom gene panel measured on both platforms. curves in red indicate the local regression  fit between the two profiles, and shades in red give 95% confidence interval of the fitting. the grey vertical line indicates the detection limit of microarrays and horizontal line the arbitrary detection limit of less than one read per sample.  gene expression profiles of the same samples probed by ampliseq-rna  and by conventional quantitative rna sequencing . curves and shades in red, like in , give the loess fit and 95% confidence interval of the fitting. horizontal and vertical dash lines indicate the detection limit and transcripts below one count per gene are considered as being absent. time points of each panel are indicated in the top bar and the correlation coefficient is displayed in the top left corner of each diagram.
comparison of linear gene expression changes of differential called by ampliseq-rna  and by microarray . each dot corresponds to a gene with an absolute log fold-change larger than one and a p-value smaller than  <dig>  using data from all time points. yellow dots with a red outline correspond to genes  for which significant differential gene expression changes are only captured by ampliseq-rna. color codes corresponding to microarray  log <dig> expression levels are shown in the legend insert. note that degs with moderate to high expression are captured by both technologies with comparable change factors.



biological significance of ampliseq-rna data
despite single molecule sensitivity of deep sequencing, a specific set of about  <dig> genes is undetected at each time point . five genes with preferential expression in neuronal tissues are absent in all time-points. this finding shows indirectly that absent calls are related to lack of gene expression rather than to technical issues. transcripts of the foxa signaling network for instance are not detected in ipscs. the forkhead-box-domain transcriptional regulator family has about forty functionally distinct member genes and plays pivotal roles in mammalian development  <cit> . apart from being a physiological master regulator, foxa <dig> is a potent stimulator of cell proliferation in tumors  <cit> . likewise, transcripts activated by the mitogen-activated protein  kinase signaling network are not detectable in ipscs cells. map-kinase signaling has pleiotropic functions controlling inflammation, cell cycle, cell death, development, cell differentiation, senescence or tumorigenesis in specific cell types  <cit> . suppression of foxa and map-kinase signaling is probably crucial for maintenance of stem cell pluripotency and homeostasis. once cardiomyocyte differentiation is completed genes belonging to the ras- and jnk- signaling cascades are suppressed. the ras pathway is an important regulator of cell differentiation and a point of convergence for multiple signaling cascades  <cit> . janus kinase signaling is expected to induce further cell proliferation and apoptosis  <cit> . suppression of the signal transduction by the pathways briefly described is consistent with biological function suggesting faithful performance of ampliseq-rna transcript imaging.table  <dig> 
specificity of ampliseq-rna: number of undetected amplicons at each time point


the numbers refer to undetected genes in the entire panel of  <dig> transcripts.  <dig> transcripts are absent considering all time points.



in order to detect transcriptional re-programming during differentiation, we chose three master regulator networks involved in eukaryotic development. the nos-signaling pathway has protective properties such as detoxification and is regulated by nitric oxide the only gas activator of eukaryotic development  <cit>  . the family of nitric oxide synthases catalyzes production of protective nitric oxide from l-arginine following signal transduction to downstream pathways. the wnt and stem signaling cascades are functionally closely related and regulate several aspects of development including organogenesis, midbrain development as well as stem cell proliferation  <cit> . wnt signals control cell fate determination, cell movement and tissue polarity. loss-of-function mutations and epigenetic silencing in wnt signaling genes occurs in a variety of human cancers. notch and the fibroblast and transforming growth factor receptors are key regulators of the morphogenetic stem cell signaling network. this pathway is implicated in the maintenance of tissue homeostasis by regulating self-renewal of normal stem cells as well as proliferation and differentiation of progenitor cells. to demonstrate developmental modulation of these pathways we monitored specific sets of about  <dig> transcripts for each of them. for nos, wnt and stem cell signaling essentially all member genes were found to be differentially expressed during differentiation . regardless of the pathway, all genes with high expression in stem cells are repressed in the terminal cardiomyocyte stage and vice versa. four wnt genes present in our panel are only expressed in the transition phase at day  <dig> and  <dig> reflecting the role of wnt-proteins in tissue differentiation and cytoskeleton plasticity. we conclude that differential gene expression measured by ampliseq-rna data matches results obtained from genome-wide transcript profiling.figure  <dig> 
expression patterns of selected genes involved signaling pathways for cell plasticity, growth and differentiation:  nitric oxide signaling  pathway ;  wnt pathway ;  stem cell signaling . relative transcript abundance normalized per gene across four time points are visualized with ‘cascade plots’. the order of genes from top to bottom was generated according to expression at each time point. the diagrams were scaled to the same size. transcript abundance is color coded from low  to high .



discussion and 
CONCLUSIONS
the current trend to study subsets of genes rather than genome-wide gene expression requires appropriate technologies. apart from significant cost-reduction, data interpretation is less complicated and more conclusive due to focus on relevant data points. the current version of the microfluidics based fluidigm technology  <cit>  measures expression of  <dig> custom genes in  <dig> samples by qpcr. despite high sensitivity, throughput and dynamic range are suboptimal. in addition, a significant hardware investment is involved. standard quantitative rna sequencing comes with single molecule sensitivity and a dynamic range of at least five orders of magnitude depending on instrument platform and multiplexing. high-throughput sample processing is currently restricted by the largely manual workflow of most platforms, expenses and lavish data processing. we argue that ampliseq-rna can potentially close these gaps. we demonstrate parallel amplification of  <dig> transcripts in a single tube with comparable efficiency which we consider sufficient for most biological and medical research applications. we performed parallel sequencing of  <dig> barcoded samples to explore the full dynamic range of the proton-technology delivering about  <dig> million reads per sample under optimal conditions. for most applications, a profile based on  <dig> million reads per sample is sufficient for discovery of significant biological processes. such a high-level analysis allows multiparallel analysis of up to  <dig> samples in a single run. the short three-hour run time of proton sequencers permits completion of two experiments per day within normal working hours. the low amount of input rna ranging from  <dig> picogram to  <dig> nanogram allows analysis of biopsy derived tissue samples and the small amplicon size of  <dig> base pairs is compatible with partially degraded ffpe-tissue  <cit> . the steadily increasing acceptance of human primary- or ipsc derived three-dimensional in vitro tissue models as surrogate for clinical responses is another area where only small amounts of rna are available from spheroid body cultures. apart from multiplexing options with respect to sample number and analysis content, we consider sequence based quantification as an important feature of ampliseq-rna. pooling of up to 1’ <dig> primer pairs will likely result in off-target amplification which cannot be detected by fluorescence based detection methods. in fact, we found experimentally that about 3% of all reads do not map to the amplicon sequence pool probably due to unspecific off-target amplification. in contrast to conventional rna sequencing that employs genomic read mapping, ampliseq-rna considers only reads matching the correct target sequence for quantification resulting in elimination of off-target born amplicons. defining the number of mismatches in the sequences used for mapping allows detection of genetic variations such as single-nucleotide polymorphisms  and point mutations in the transcript provided the amplicon covers such polymorphic stretches. along the same lines, targeting of conserved sequence stretches flanking polymorphic regions in closely related homologs of gene families allows quantification of each transcript variant. finally, we expect that amplicon based mrna quantification can be performed on any deep sequencing instrument with sufficient data output. however, semiconductor sequencing is by far the fastest method with three hours run time and automated read quantification on the ion-torrent system server.

