BACKGROUND
the mammalian neurohypophysial hormones, vasopressin and oxytocin belong to a superfamily of structurally and functionally related nonapeptides. vasopressin is primarily involved in the regulation of osmotic balance and contraction of smooth muscle cells in arteries while oxytocin is mainly involved in parturition and lactation  <cit> . members of this superfamily are widespread in the animal kingdom with hormones similar to vasopressin and oxytocin isolated from invertebrates such as arthropods, annelids, and mollusks  <cit> . among vertebrates, all jawed vertebrates  characterized to date contain at least one vasopressin-like hormone and one oxytocin-like hormone. by contrast, the primitive jawless vertebrates  contain a single hormone, the vasotocin, which is more similar to vasopressin than to oxytocin  <cit> . vasotocin is also the vasopressin homolog in non-mammalian jawed vertebrates. however, the oxytocin homologs are much more diverse: it is isotocin in teleost fishes  and other ray-finned fishes , mesotocin in non-eutherian tetrapods, and mesotocin and mesotocin in lungfishes  <cit> . in cartilaginous fishes, besides oxytocin in the pacific ratfish  <cit> , six homologs of oxytocin, termed aspargtocin, valitocin, asvatocin, phasvatocin, phasitocin, and glumitocin have been identified  <cit>  .

adapted from gimpl and fahrenholz  <cit> , and hyodo et al.  <cit> .

molecular cloning of genes encoding neurohypophysial hormones has shown that the nonapeptides are synthesized as part of a larger precursor molecule that is composed of a signal peptide, the nonapeptide, and a neurophysin. the precursors of vasopressin-family hormones and the teleost fish isotocin hormone contain an additional molecule at the carboxyl terminal called copeptin . the presence of a single gene encoding the vasotocin precursor in jawless vertebrates, and at least one gene each encoding a vasopressin-family precursor and an oxytocin-family precursor in jawed vertebrates, has led to the suggestion that the ancestral vasotocin gene has duplicated to give rise to vasopressin and oxytocin families of genes in jawed vertebrates. in human and rodents, the vasopressin and oxytocin genes are closely linked in a tail-to-tail orientation , with intergenic regions ranging from  <dig> kb  to  <dig> kb   <cit>  . despite their close linkage, the two genes are regulated independently and are expressed in distinct populations of neurons in the supraoptic nuclei and paraventricular nuclei of the hypothalamus. transgenic studies in mice and rats have indicated that the regulatory elements that mediate neuron-specific expression of vasopressin and oxytocin genes reside in the intergenic region of the two genes  <cit> . interestingly, sequencing of the neurohypophysial hormone gene locus in the pufferfish  showed that, in contrast to the tail-to-tail orientation of oxytocin and vasopressin genes in humans and rodent, pufferfish isotocin and vasotocin genes are located on the same strand of dna, with vasotocin gene located downstream of isotocin gene, separated by five genes  <cit>  . these differences in the organization of human and pufferfish genes raise the question of whether the vasotocin and oxytocin homologs in the common ancestor of mammals and ray-finned fishes were linked like the human genes or the pufferfish genes. sequencing of neurohypophysial hormone gene loci in vertebrates phylogenetically positioned close to the divergence of the mammalian and ray-finned fish lineages would shed light on the organization of neurohypophysial hormone genes in the last common ancestor of these vertebrates.

the lobe-finned fishes, lungfish and coelacanth, are the only two surviving lineages that arose between tetrapods and ray-finned fishes. the phylogenetic relationships of tetrapods to lungfish and coelacanth are unclear, although phylogenetic analyses of mitochondrial sequence and nuclear protein coding sequences, and a molecular marker  seem to favor lungfish as the closest relative to tetrapods  <cit> , and coelacanth as the most basal lobe-finned fish. it would, therefore, be interesting to determine the neurohypophysial hormones encoded by the coelacanth and the organization of neurohypophysial hormone genes in the coelacanth genome. coelacanths were long believed to be extinct until a live specimen of the african coelacanth  was caught off the coast of south africa in  <dig>  <cit> . a second species of coelacanth, latimeria menadoensis, was caught more recently in indonesia indicating that there are at least two living species of coelacanths  <cit> . like cartilaginous fishes and lungfish, coelacanths store urea and trimethylamine oxide to stay hyperosmotic to seawater  <cit> . in this study, we have characterized the neurohypophysial hormone gene locus in the indonesian coelacanth by isolating and sequencing a bac clone. in addition, we have analyzed the neurohypophysial hormone gene loci in xenopus tropicalis, chicken and gray short-tailed opossum  and investigated the evolutionary history of the vertebrate neurohypophysial hormone gene locus. our results show that, in contrast to vasotocin and mesotocin in the australian lungfish, coelacanth contains vasotocin and mesotocin similar to non-eutherian tetrapods, and that the arrangement of vasotocin and mesotocin genes in coelacanth is different from their homologs in both human and pufferfish.

RESULTS
coelacanth neurohypophysial hormone gene locus
by using a probe for the second exon of the coelacanth vasotocin gene, we isolated five overlapping bac clones. one of the bacs, #66g <dig>  was sequenced completely . the insert of this bac is  <dig> kb long and contains both neurohypophysial hormone genes that are flanked by ubox <dig> gene in the upstream and gnrh <dig> gene in the downstream . the coelacanth neurohypophysial hormone genes encode vasotocin and mesotocin precursors like the non-mammalian tetrapods. it does not encode mesotocin present in the australian lungfish. the coelacanth vasotocin and mesotocin genes each comprise three coding exons similar to the mammalian vasopressin and oxytocin genes and the pufferfish vasotocin and isotocin genes. however, the introns of coelacanth genes are considerably larger  than their homologs in human  and fugu  mainly due to an abundance of repetitive sequences. interestingly, the arrangement of coelacanth vasotocin and mesotocin genes is different from the arrangement of their homologs in both human and pufferfish. they are present on the same strand of dna in a tail-to-head orientation with mesotocin gene located  <dig>  kb downstream of vasotocin gene .

diverse sine elements in the coelacanth neurohypophysial hormone gene locus
approximately 17% of the 166-kb coelacanth neurohypophysial hormone gene locus sequence is represented by repetitive sequences, with lines and sines accounting for  <dig> % and  <dig> %, respectively . altogether, this locus contains  <dig> line elements and  <dig> sine elements. previous studies have identified an ancient family of sine elements in coelacanth, termed lf-sine, which is specific to lobe-finned fishes  <cit> . the coelacanth genome is estimated to contain  <dig> copies of these sines, and some of these elements have been conserved in mammalian genomes as 'ultraconserved elements' . another family of sine, called lmesine <dig>  has also been identified in coelacanth  <cit> . using the consensus sequence of the lmesines, nishihara et al  <cit> , identified a novel family of sines which is widespread in the human and chicken genomes but absent in the coelacanth sequences that were available in the public domain. this family has been designated amniote-specific sine <dig> or amnsine <dig>  <cit> . the sine elements in the coelacanth neurohypophysial hormone gene locus include not only lf-sines and lmesine1s, but also two instances of amnsine1s . the presence of amnsine <dig> in the coelacanth indicates that these elements are not specific to amniotes and are more ancient than previously thought.

coelacanth vasotocin and mesotocin precursors
the coelacanth vasotocin gene encodes a 162-amino acid protein comprising a signal peptide, vasotocin, a neurophysin and a copeptin moiety . vasotocin is linked to the neurophysin by a tripeptide sequence gly-lys-arg which serves as a signal for proteolytic processing and carboxyl-terminal amidation of vasotocin . the two arginine residues at the end of the neurophysin  are likely to serve as a processing signal between the neurophysin and the copeptin. all the cysteine residues that are considered important for the conformation of neurophysin are conserved in the coelacanth vasotocin neurophysin . the copeptin includes a leucine-rich core segment like the copeptin of vasopressin-family precursors in other vertebrates, and an n-linked glycosylation site that is conserved in tetrapods, australian lungfish and dogfish but absent in teleost fishes .

the coelacanth mesotocin gene encodes a shorter protein of  <dig> amino acids comprising a signal peptide and mesotocin which is linked to a neurophysin by the tripeptide signal sequence, gly-lys-arg . like its homolog in the dogfish, australian lungfish, toad and mammals, the coelacanth mesotocin precursor lacks a copeptin . thus, the teleost fish isotocin precursor is the only oxytocin-family precursor that contains a copeptin . however, it should be noted that the teleost fish isotocin precursor does not contain an arginine residue between the neurophysin and the copeptin , and consequently the copeptin moiety is not cleaved from the neurophysin molecule  <cit> .

second exons of coelacanth vasotocin and mesotocin genes are under purifying selection
the second exons of the coelacanth vasotocin and mesotocin genes, which encode the central region of the neurophysin, exhibit an unusually high degree of identity at the amino acid  as well as nucleotide level . in fact, a stretch of  <dig> bp is perfectly conserved in the two genes . previously, a similarly high level of nucleotide identity  has been reported between the second exons of the bovine vasopressin and oxytocin genes  <cit> . in these genes, the high level of sequence identity extends into  <dig> bp of the preceding intron. this observation led to the suggestion that the two genes have experienced a recent gene conversion event  <cit> . we calculated the sequence identity between the second exons of vasopressin and oxytocin family genes from various vertebrates and found that they all exhibit a high identity . however, besides the bovine genes, the high level of sequence identity extends into the preceding intron only in human genes   <cit> . in coelacanth, the high level of sequence identity does not extend into the flanking introns , which suggests that, if coelacanth genes have indeed experienced gene conversion, it is restricted to the coding sequence. gene conversion between coding regions of paralogous genes generally results in a high gc content at the third position  of codons  <cit> . to determine whether the coelacanth exons have experienced gene conversion, we calculated the gc <dig> content of all the three exons of the coelacanth vasotocin and mesotocin genes and compared them with gc <dig> content in bovine and human vasopressin and oxytocin genes. in the bovine and human genes, the gc <dig> content of the second exon is exceptionally high . however, the gc <dig> content of their flanking exons is also high  , which indicates that either all three exons have experienced gene conversion or that these genes are located in a gc rich region of the genome. in the coelacanth vasotocin and mesotocin genes, the gc <dig> content of the second exons is rather low  and comparable to that of the first and third exons   which do not show a high level of sequence identity. thus, the second exons of the coelacanth vasotocin and mesotocin genes do not seem to have experienced gene conversion. alternatively, the high level of sequence identity could be the result of purifying selection acting on the nucleotide sequences of the second exons. since the third positions of codons are also under constraint, it is possible that besides coding for amino acids, these exons may harbor sequences related to the stability of transcripts, microrna targets  <cit>  or regulatory elements such as exonic splicing enhancers  <cit>  that require conservation at the nucleotide level.

the gc <dig> contents of all three exons of the coelacanth vasotocin and mesotocin genes are compared with the gc <dig> content in bovine and human vasopressin and oxytocin genes to determine if the coelacanth genes have undergone gene conversion.

evolutionary history of vertebrate neurohypophysial hormone gene locus
to trace the evolutionary history of the neurohypophysial hormone gene locus, we analyzed vasotocin and mesotocin gene loci in the genome assembly of xenopus tropicalis. the xenopus genes for vasotocin and mesotocin are present on scaffold_ <dig>  which is ~ <dig>  mb long. their exon-intron organization is identical to that of their homologs in coelacanth, pufferfish and mammals , and as expected, the precursors encoded by them are most similar to their orthologs in the toad and coelacanth . the xenopus vasotocin and mesotocin genes are linked tail-to-head and flanked by ubox <dig> gene in the 5' region and gnrh <dig> gene in the 3' region similar to their orthologs in coelacanth. thus, the order and orientation of genes in this locus are highly conserved in xenopus and coelacanth . the xenopus neurohypophysial hormone gene locus is compact  compared to the coelacanth locus  mainly due to a paucity of repetitive sequences in the xenopus locus. the conserved tail-to-head orientation of vasotocin and mesotocin genes in coelacanth and xenopus indicate that the inverted orientation of oxytocin gene in human and rodents is the result of inversion of this gene in the tetrapod lineage after the divergence of amphibians. to determine more precisely when the inversion occurred, we analyzed neurohypophysial hormone gene locus in the genome assemblies of chicken and opossum. the vasotocin and mesotocin genes in the chicken genome are arranged similar to their orthologs in coelacanth and xenopus. the opossum genome encodes vasopressin precursor similar to human and rodents but mesotocin precursor like non-eutherian tetrapods. furthermore, it contains two copies of vasopressin and mesotocin genes due to a tandem segmental duplication, and one duplicated copy of the vasopressin gene codes for vasopressin precursor . nevertheless, the two copies of the vasopressin and mesotocin genes are linked tail-to-head similar to their homologs in xenopus and coelacanth. thus, the inverted orientation of oxytocin gene in human and rodent is the result of a recent inversion event in placental mammals after they diverged from the marsupial lineage.

we also analyzed the neurohypophysial hormone gene locus in the genome of tetraodon nigroviridis, a freshwater pufferfish. the isotocin and vasotocin genes in this fish are arranged similar to their orthologs in fugu and separated by four genes . furthermore, the tetraodon gnrh <dig> and ptpra genes whose orthologs are closely linked to mesotocin or oxytocin genes in tetrapods are located on a different chromosome in tetraodon and most likely in fugu . thus, the neurohypophysial hormone gene loci in pufferfishes appear to have experienced multiple rearrangements. as such, the arrangement of isotocin and vasotocin genes in pufferfishes is unlikely to represent the arrangement of their homologs in the last common ancestor of ray-finned fishes and lobe-finned fishes. the two neurohypophysial hormone genes in the common ancestor were more likely to have been linked closely in a tail-to-head orientation similar to their homologs in coelacanth, xenopus, chicken and opossum. sequencing of neurohypophysial hormone gene loci in cartilaginous fishes should confirm this hypothesis.

evolution of vasopressin and oxytocin families of hormones
the evolution of vasopressin and oxytocin family hormones is a classical example of the origin of a novel gene by the duplication of a gene. while vasopressin family peptides are basic peptides, the oxytocin family peptides are neutral peptides. these distinct chemical properties are conferred by the eighth residue of the nonapeptide which is arg or lys in vasopressin family, and leu, ile, gln or val in oxytocin family . following the duplication of the ancestral vasotocin gene, one copy has been conserved to encode the basic peptide, while the other copy has diverged to give rise to the novel neutral peptides of the oxytocin family . the identification of vasotocin gene in coelacanth and vasopressin gene in opossum indicates that vasotocin is highly conserved during evolution of vertebrates from cyclostomes to birds, and is replaced by vasopressin in mammals . the evolutionary stability of vasotocin in non-mammalian vertebrates probably reflects its fundamental role in maintaining osmotic balance in these vertebrates. in contrast to the highly conserved vasotocin in non-mammalian vertebrates, oxytocin family hormone exhibits wide diversity in these vertebrates. the most basal jawed vertebrates, the cartilaginous fishes, contain seven different types of oxytocin-like hormones, which suggests a relaxed pressure on this family of hormone owing presumably to the redundancy of the second hormone following the duplication of the ancestral vasotocin gene . while the ray-finned fishes contain isotocin, mesotocin is conserved in coelacanth, lungfish, and non-eutherian tetrapods. the australian lungfish appears to be unique in possessing mesotocin. it is interesting that although ray-finned fishes are the largest and most diverse group of vertebrates, they posses only isotocin in contrast to cartilaginous fishes which contain seven different forms of oxytocin-like hormone. the presence of only isotocin in ray-finned fishes reflects a selective pressure on this hormone in this largest group of vertebrates.

CONCLUSIONS
we have sequenced neurohypophysial hormone genes from coelacanth and shown that coelacanth contains vasotocin and mesotocin like the non-eutherian tetrapods. we also show that the coelacanth vasotocin and mesotocin genes, and their homologs in xenopus, chicken and opossum are linked in tandem in a tail-to-head orientation unlike the tail-to-tail orientation of their homologs in placental mammals, and tail-to-head orientation of isotocin and vasotocin genes in pufferfishes. these results indicate that the neurohypophysial hormone gene locus has undergone independent rearrangements in placental mammals and teleost fishes. the analysis of the neurohypophysial hormone gene locus has shown that the coelacanth genome is likely to be more stable than that of ray-finned fishes and mammals. this underscores the importance of coelacanth as a valuable outgroup for tracing evolutionary changes in the tetrapod and ray-finned fish lineages.

