BACKGROUND
the lack of time to sleep is a hallmark of modern living, and it is commonly assumed that in the long run this makes us unwell. this assumption is supported by experimental data showing that acute sleep deprivation decreases or decelerates the production of antigen- specific antibodies if sleep is interrupted in the night following the vaccination  <cit> , indicating that poor sleep patterns potentially counteract the process of effective adaptive immune responses. sleep is assumed to regulate immune function primarily by fostering adaptive immune responses  <cit> . in the present study, we investigated a 7-week antibody titer in males and females in response to a novel influenza a h1n <dig> virus  vaccination and measured the effects of sleep in those who had a single night of sleep deprivation versus no sleep deprivation.

RESULTS
hemagglutination inhibition antibody titer against the h1n <dig> virus
overall, the antibody production did not differ between treatments and/or sexes. . however, five days after vaccination, the antibody response associated with sleep deprivation was approximately 60% lower in males than that measured in those of the sleep group . in contrast, the immune response in women was generally not influenced by sleep deprivation .

sleep
the eeg recordings revealed a normal sleep pattern . data gathered using sleep diaries  during the first  <dig> days after h1n <dig> vaccination ensured the continuation of regular sleep start times  in both conditions.

discussion
acute sleep deprivation impaired the early immune response to h1n <dig> virus in males, despite prolonged periods of sleep recovery after antigen exposure. in contrast, in females, the production of antibodies specific for the swine flu virus was not influenced by sleep loss. these results underline the relevance of sleep for supporting immune functions  <cit> .

our results suggest that acute sleep deprivation is associated with a delayed induction of adaptive immune response to h1n <dig> virus in males that is consistent with previous data. that is, interrupted sleep at the time of first virus exposure is followed by a slower increase in specific antibody titers relative to that following undisturbed sleep  <cit> . factors important for an effective adaptive immune response show very concordant changes under sleep deprivation  <cit> . for instance, the production of growth hormone normally peaks during early sleep periods  <cit> , and this effect is suppressed by sleep deprivation  <cit> . this hormone stimulates immune function directly in that many immune cells possess receptors for growth hormone  <cit> . further, the secretion of cytokines involved in the adaptive immune response is downregulated by sleep loss . such hormonal changes associated with interrupted sleep might have contributed to the decelerated immune response to h1n <dig> that was observed in males but not females in our study. interestingly, in a recently published study, a lipopolysaccharide-induced immune response following acute sleep loss has been shown to induce distinct sex differences inasmuch as sleep-deprived females showed increased production of proinflammatory cytokines compared to response in sleep-deprived males  <cit> . however, there are also other candidate mechanisms that may account for the impaired antibody titer response in sleep-deprived males seen on day  <dig>  for instance, compared with sleep, sleep loss is associated with a striking decrease in the number of myeloid dendritic cell precursors  <cit> . these cells play a major role for the initiation of adaptive immune responses  <cit> . further it might be that the impaired effect of sleep loss on the early antibody titer response to the h1n <dig> vaccination was due to a delayed migration of antibody titer producing b cells into the blood.

at the first glance, the clinical relevance of our findings is somewhat questionable because the only difference in specific antibody titers is  <dig> days after vaccination in males only and titers even out thereafter, which in the end results in same possible protection in sleep deprived and regular sleep subjects. in contrast, other studies with a similar study design showed profound effects of sleep deprivation on specific antibody titers at later time points, e.g. a 2-fold higher hepatitis a titer at day  <dig> post immunization in regular sleep subjects as compared to sleep deprived men  <cit> . nevertheless, in a sort of external validation of our results, previous observations revealed that partial sleep deprivation in the time of vaccination against a seasonal influenza virus induced differences in specific antibody titers during early periods  but not during late periods  of the adaptive immune response  <cit> . one explanation for the discrepancy in results among these studies could be that the effect size of sleep deprivation on adaptive immune responses is antigen- specific.

limitations
due to the similarity of the antigen with other influenza strains there might be the possibility that the history of influenza vaccination plays a profound role in the response to h1n <dig> vaccine. in this respect, the major shortcoming of the present study is that no hai titers were determined before vaccination to exclude possible cross-reactivity of antibodies possibly already present. although it was vital that participants reported, in a thorough interview, to have been free of major influenza-like symptoms in the past  <dig> months, we thus cannot exclude that there were any baseline differences in hai titers before vaccination. however, given the age of the subjects  it is unlikely that they had previously been exposed to a similar h1n <dig> until the recent pandemic. sleep deprivation did not influence the antibody titer response to h1n <dig> in females. moreover, there were no differences between the sleep and sleep deprivation conditions in terms of circulating concentrations of h1n <dig> antibodies at time points later than day  <dig>  these negative findings should be interpreted with caution inasmuch as they could be caused by the low detection power associated with the relatively low sample size of our study. thus, these results indisputably require further validation in more studies. finally, although we obtained eeg measures in five subjects of the sleep group, and thus quantitatively assured that subjects did sleep, we cannot rule out that those whose sleep were not recorded may have deviated from their habitual sleep patterns. however, based on the sleep diaries, all participants, including those who did not undergo eeg recordings, did not report subjective disturbances in their sleep habits.

CONCLUSIONS
our results suggest that sleep deprivation in the night after vaccination may influence very early phases of an adaptive immune response, as indicated by the lower antibody titer response in sleep-deprived males measured  <dig> days after vaccination against the h1n <dig> virus. however, since antibody titers at later time points did not differ between the sleep and sleep deprivation conditions, our results do not support the view that acute sleep deprivation has lasting effects on the human antibody titer response to influenza vaccination.

