BACKGROUND
elastic mechanisms in animals are highly diverse and involve either single rapid movements as in jumping froghoppers and many vertebrates  <cit>  or rhythmic movements as in flying insects  <cit> . the molecular springs involved in elastic movements are as diverse but have in common unstructured domains that lose conformational entropy upon stretching, generating the restoring force, which finally drives the elastic movement. although elastic mechanisms are well studied in arthropods, there are few data for lower metazoans and the evolutionary origin of elastic proteins.

nematocytes or stinging cells of jellyfish and other cnidarians produce a unique toxic organelle consisting of a spherical capsule to which a long tubule is attached  <cit> . the tubule is tightly coiled inside the capsule matrix and expelled in a harpoon-like fashion during a nanosecond discharge process  <cit> . by the synthesis of poly-γ-glutamate at final maturation, nematocysts in hydrozoans are charged with an osmotic pressure of about  <dig> bars  <cit> . prior to discharge, the capsule volume is increased by 30% due to osmotic swelling  <cit>  and the explosive exocytosis releases the kinetic energy stored in the elastically stretched capsule wall with an extreme acceleration of  <dig> ,000 g  <cit> . after discharge, the size of the capsule is reduced to about 50%   <cit> .figure  <dig> 
capsule recoil after nematocyst discharge and sequence elements in cnidoin primary structure.  capsule size change during discharge of a stenotele.  domain organisation of cnidoin and minicollagen- <dig>  and alignment of respective crd domains. conserved cysteines are highlighted.  alignment of the elastic domain of cnidoin with a homologous sequence in spidroin- <dig>  highlighted is the gxgqq motif present in both sequences.



the nematocyst wall is built of a dense matrix consisting mainly of minicollagens, which represent a unique feature of cnidarians  <cit> . minicollagens constitute a large protein family in hydra and share a common domain organisation comprising a short central collagen triple helix flanked by variable polyproline stretches and cysteine-rich domains  supposed to be involved in network formation  <cit> . while minicollagens can account for the high tensile strength required for the capsule wall to withstand a pressure of  <dig> bars  <cit> , elastomeric proteins, which can store the energy for the extraordinarily fast kinetics of discharge, are unknown.

recently, we have presented the proteome of hydra nematocysts, which showed an extracellular matrix-like composition of the nematocyst supra-structure  <cit> . a novel component of the insoluble nematocyst shell was designated cnidoin, a protein with a central glycine-glutamine-rich sequence flanked by minicollagen crds . the highly repetitive central domain is homologous to the glycine-rich sequence of the spider silk protein spidroin- <dig>  <cit> . a conserved motif in both proteins is gxgqq, where x is cysteine in cnidoin and proline in spidroin- <dig> . cnidoin protein has been shown to be co-localised with minicollagens in the nematocyst wall, suggesting a mechanical function in nematocysts  <cit> .

it is well accepted that disordered peptides such as spidroins, the pevk segment in titin, or resilin in the muscle of fly wings can serve as elastic elements in protein structures and materials  <cit> . elongation of such an unstructured peptide is entropically unfavoured and involves rupturing of non-specific interactions of hydrophobic or electrostatic nature along the chain. consequently, this process requires significant mechanical force, resulting in high elasticity. the elastic features of disordered peptides as defined by their amino acid sequence have been documented by both experimental atomic force microscopy  studies and molecular dynamics  simulations, with remarkable agreement  <cit> .

here, we provide evidence for an elastomeric function of cnidoin in nematocyst morphogenesis and discharge. as with minicollagens, cnidoin is expressed exclusively in developing nematocytes in the body column of hydra. we demonstrate a concomitant incorporation of cnidoin and minicollagens into both the wall and tubule structures of all nematocyst types. recombinantly expressed and purified cnidoin protein has a high tendency for aggregation and forms amorphous sheets and fibres as described for spider silk proteins. md simulations of the repetitive elastic sequence of cnidoin suggest an elastic behaviour comparable to other elastomeric proteins, such as the silk disordered domain or resilin. the predicted molecular elasticity is in line with force spectroscopy measurements on single cnidoin molecules. our data provide an explanation for the unusual biomechanical properties of the cnidarian nematocyst at the molecular level and give insights into the evolution of elastomeric proteins.

RESULTS
primary structure and domain organisation of cnidoin
a full-length clone for cnidoin was isolated from hydra magnipapillata cdna based on the predicted gene sequence annotated in our recent proteome analysis  <cit> . the primary structure comprises a signal peptide  and an unusually large putative propeptide  terminating at a basic lys-arg dipeptide sequence, which is conserved in diverse nematocyst proteins . the predicted mature protein contains  <dig> amino acids and has a calculated molecular weight of  <dig>  kda. the central part of the protein comprises an extended sequence rich in glycine and glutamine residues whose repetitive motif qmqgcgqqxp  shows high similarity to the elastic glycine-rich sequence of the major spider silk component from nephila clavipes, spidroin- <dig>  <cit>  . the amino acid composition of the elastic motif in cnidoin is unusual in containing a high percentage of methionine and cysteine . at both termini cnidoin contains short crds homologous to those in canonical minicollagens as minicollagen- <dig>   <cit> , suggesting a possible linkage to the minicollagen network via intermolecular cysteine links . the cnidoin primary sequence does not contain n-glycosylation sites, but several potential sites for o-glycosylation. treatment of nematocyst preparations with n- and o-glycosidases, however, did not result in a molecular weight shift ruling out posttranslational modifications by sugars .

cnidoin is expressed in developing nematocyst nests and co-localises with minicollagens
whole mount in situ hybridisation  experiments were carried out to determine the expression pattern of the cnidoin gene. as shown in figure 2a the expression of cnidoin is restricted to developing nests of nematocytes in the body column of hydra. tentacles, head and peduncle regions were free of signals. this pattern is highly reminiscent of other nematocyst-specific structural genes, such as minicollagens or nowa  <cit> . as shown in figure 2b, mostly late stages of developing capsules with a pronounced nematocyst vesicle showed a cnidoin signal. in nests of early developmental stages the signal was not detectable probably due to lower expression rates . when double ish experiments using cnidoin and ncol- <dig> probes were performed, the signals were mostly co-localised in developing nematocyte nests .figure  <dig> 
gene expression pattern and immunohistochemical localisation of cnidoin.  gene expression pattern as shown by in situ hybridisation. the signal is detected in nests of developing nematocytes in the body column.  close-up of nematocyte nests shown in a.  double in situ hybridisation of minicollagen- <dig>  and cnidoin .  antibody staining reveals nests of developing nematocytes in the body column of hydra.  enlarged view of the immunostaining shown in d.  costaining of minicollagen- <dig> and cnidoin in pfa-fixed animals. both signals localise to the capsule wall.  co-staining of minicollagen- <dig> and cnidoin in lavdovsky-fixated animals. this fixation reveals the presence of both proteins in the tubule of developing nematocysts.  enlarged view of a nest with cnidoin and minicollagen- <dig> immunostaining.  magnification of a nest with a tubule-specific signal for cnidoin and minicollagen- <dig>  pfa, paraformaldehyde.



to localise cnidoin protein during capsule development, whole mount immunostainings were performed using a polyclonal cnidoin antibody raised against the c-terminal crd. nematocytes in hydra develop in nests of  <dig> to  <dig> cells that originate from interstitial stem cells . their morphogenesis involves the continuous secretion of proteins into a growing post-golgi vesicle. capsule maturation is marked by nematocyte separation into single cells that migrate to the tentacles to be incorporated into battery cells. immunostainings using paraformaldehyde  fixation showed cnidoin in developing nematocyst nests of all stages and capsule types in the body column of hydra . the staining pattern is again highly reminiscent of minicollagens that lose antigenicity during capsule maturation  <cit> . co-staining using minicollagen- <dig> antibody revealed a co-localisation of the two proteins to a large extent in the developing capsule walls . in contrast to pfa fixation, lavdovsky fixated animals showed in addition tubule staining patterns in developing nests, which co-localised with the tubule-specific minicollagen- <dig> . this observation might be due to an altered molecular arrangement of cnidoin in the different capsule parts. the loss of cnidoin staining in the tentacles indicates a tight incorporation of the protein into the collagenous wall and tubule structures as already suggested by the possession of crds.

recombinant cnidoin is highly hydrophobic and spontaneously forms fibrous aggregates
in western blot analysis cnidoin was detected as a single band of about 42 kda in hydra lysates, isolated nematocyst capsules as well as in nematocyst ghosts . this is slightly lower than the calculated molecular mass of  <dig>  kda including the putative propeptide, indicating that propeptide cleavage does occur during secretion into the nematocyst vesicle. when expressed recombinantly in hek <dig> cells, full-length cnidoin exhibited a molecular mass of about 53 kda, which matches the calculated mass of cnidoin including a c-terminal his-tag  . we conclude that in hek <dig> cells propeptide cleavage does not occur resulting in the observed molecular mass difference to the native protein, which accounts for the propeptide fragment. the western blot signal was exclusively detectable under reducing conditions suggesting an incorporation of cnidoin into the disulphide-linked capsule wall polymer similar to ncol- <dig> and nowa  <cit> .figure  <dig> 
western blot detection and self-aggregation of cnidoin.  western blot analysis of cnidoin in isolated nematocysts, the insoluble fraction of nematocysts , whole hydra lysate, and after recombinant expression in bacteria and hek <dig> cells.  transmission electron micrograph of recombinant cnidoin forming bundles of fibres. scale bar is 100 nm.  western blot analysis of recombinant cnidoin induced to form disulphide-linked polymers by glutathione treatment.



when full-length cnidoin was expressed in bacteria the protein formed highly insoluble aggregates that were already detectable as large pellets after cell lysis. purification of cnidoin via histidine tag was, therefore, performed under denaturing conditions using 8 m urea, which led to transient solubilisation of the protein aggregates. cnidoin was essentially insoluble in physiological aqueous buffers. the recombinantly expressed protein exhibited a lower apparent molecular mass of about 38 kda and a prominent double band, probably indicative of altered migration behaviour by intramolecular disulphide bonding. purified cnidoin spontaneously formed macroscopic fibrillar structures in 8 m urea when cooled samples were gradually brought to room temperature  <cit> . this coacervation process is reminiscent of elastin-derived peptides where spontaneous self-assembly of monomers is induced by temperature increase depending on protein and salt concentration  <cit> . the driving force for coacervation, which precedes microfibrillar deposition and cross-linking in elastin, are hydrophobic domain interactions in an aqueous environment. analysis of cnidoin fibres by transmission electron microscopy revealed bundles of linear fibres in the nanometre range reflecting the common filamentous nature of elastomeric proteins . due to the presence of terminal minicollagen crd domains we hypothesised that cnidoin polymerisation was dependent on disulphide coupling. this was demonstrated by glutathione treatment of recombinant cnidoin samples, which showed gradual formation of high molecular weight oligomers in non-reducing sds-page . a similar behaviour is observed for recombinant ncol- <dig> samples  <cit> , suggesting a possible copolymer formation of both proteins. our hypothesis was further strengthened by incubating recombinant ncol- <dig> with increasing amounts of cnidoin in the presence of glutathione, which resulted in a dose-dependent increase of disulphide-linked polymer formation .

cnidoin shares elastomeric functions with other disordered proteins
the sequence composition of cnidoin  with a high glycine and proline content of 24% and 10%, respectively, shows typical features of disordered proteins. intrinsically unstructured proteins have been classified previously as sequences with low overall hydrophobicity and high net charge as compared to structured proteins  <cit> . these two properties are believed to prevent the formation of a solvent-inaccessible protein hydrophobic core typically formed by proteins with a well-defined structure. however, with a high mean hydrophobicity of  <dig>  and a low mean net charge of  <dig> , cnidoin falls into the region known to be covered by natively folded proteins. nevertheless, the high glycine and proline content impedes the formation of a native structure, as predicted by disembl   <cit> . while the high hydrophobicity in this case does not result in protein core formation, it gives rise to the observed high propensity for self-aggregation . again, spidroin- <dig> follows similar tendencies with a  mean hydrophobicity of  <dig> , a mean net charge of  <dig>  and a proline content of 8% to 15%.

we investigated the degree of ordering additionally by using mid-infrared spectroscopy following the considerations of byler and susi  <cit> , who showed that disordered proteins such as casein exhibit a low number of spectral components in the so-called amide i band of the mid-infrared spectrum. furthermore, both the existence and the above-average width of a peak around  <dig>  cm− <dig>  were considered as an indication of a low degree of ordering. the number of spectral components of casein together with the corresponding numbers for other standard proteins investigated is shown in additional file 3: figure s3b  <cit> . the optimum number of components in cnidoin tended to be low in relation to standard proteins known to be highly ordered  <cit>  and comparable to that of casein. moreover, cnidoin does exhibit a broad peak around  <dig>  cm− <dig> . in this sense, our spectroscopic data and its analysis support the hypothesis of the disordered nature of cnidoin.

to further experimentally confirm the sequence-based prediction of high disorder in cnidoin, we performed afm single molecule force spectroscopy using a cnidoin construct with a c-terminal type i dockerin tag and an n-terminal ybbr tag . while the ybbr tag allowed for attaching the construct covalently to a coenzyme a surface, the dockerin tag enabled specific non-covalent binding of the construct to a type i cohesin functionalised cantilever tip . by retracting the tip from the surface, cnidoin molecules were stretched via the c-terminal dockerin tag while force-distance traces were recorded. as previously shown in afm experiments, forced dissociation of the type i cohesin-dockerin interaction preferentially goes along with a characteristic double peak of 8 nm separation in contour length space  <cit> . this characteristic feature was used as a positive indicator for a specific stretching event . force-distance traces of cnidoin molecules showed characteristic worm-like chain  behaviour without any further pronounced features . the latter would indicate conformational rearrangements, as seen in stretching of structured proteins  <cit> . the lack of such features in force-distance traces of cnidoin corroborates the disordered nature of the protein. fitting a wlc model yields a distribution of both contour  and persistence length . within a standard deviation of 43 nm, the average contour length of 94 nm is in good agreement with the estimated contour length of 110 nm  linker and the cellulose-binding module -cohesin-dockerin anchor). the slight shift to smaller contour lengths may result from non-specific adsorption of cnidoin molecules to the surface. because of the harsh disulphide treatment, oppressing intermolecular bonds, only a minor fraction of curves yield contour lengths significantly larger than expected. importantly, the featureless wlc characteristic of force-distance traces does not vary with the contour length, nor does the persistence length. the persistence length, which measures the apparent flexibility of a polymer against entropic force, yields an average of  <dig>  ±  <dig>  nm. this value matches the persistence length of  <dig>  nm, which is frequently assumed for stretching unfolded proteins at similar force ranges in afm experiments  <cit> . the standard deviation of the persistence length results predominantly from intrinsic uncertainty of the zero force in afm experiments. in conclusion, the featureless and wlc like force-distance traces of cnidoin measured by afm confirm the high disorder of the protein’s structure.figure  <dig> 
afm force spectroscopy on recombinant cnidoin monomers.  schematic diagram of the afm force spectroscopy experiment on single cnidoin molecules, containing several cysteins with thiol groups . for breaking disulphide bonds and preventing their reformation, cnidoin was treated with tcep and iodoacetamide.  typical force-distance traces of cnidoin displaying a final double peak, which is characteristic of the cohesin-dockerin rupture  <cit> . force-distance traces show characteristic worm-like chain  behaviour and lack further pronounced features, corroborating the disordered nature of cnidoin molecules. for quantification of contour and persistence length, a wlc model was fitted to the data .  histogram of the contour length distribution of stretched cnidoin, yielding an average contour length of 94 nm and a standard deviation of 43 nm.  histogram of the persistence length distribution of cnidoin, yielding an average persistence length of  <dig>  nm and a standard deviation of  <dig>  nm. afm, atomic force microscopy; tcep, phosphine).



to complementary assess the elasticity of cnidoin, we calculated the force-extension profile of two representative repeat units of cnidoin using umbrella sampling  <cit> . to this end, cnidoin peptide conformations were extensively sampled at varying end-to-end distances dz . resulting average resisting forces against cnidoin extension are shown in figure 5b, with the resulting free energy shown in the inset. we observed a force plateau followed by a steep increase in force at larger extensions. the mean forces were fitted by the wlc model ,  <cit> , which predicted persistence lengths of  <dig>  ±  <dig>  and  <dig>  ±  <dig>  nm for the cnidoin repeat units shown in figure 5b in red and black, respectively. therefore, cnidoin is found to be as elastic as silk disordered peptides, which have formerly been reported to have a persistence length of  <dig>  nm in md simulations in the force range probed here  <cit> . hence, the md simulations confirm the finding from afm experiments of a featureless force-extension curve resembling a disordered protein such as silk. we note that for both silk  <cit>  and cnidoin investigated here, the persistence length from simulations is higher than in experiments, although the second simulated cnidoin repeat unit lies within the experimental range .figure  <dig> 
molecular elasticity of cnidoin peptides from md simulations.  two representative  conformations of a cnidoin peptide unit. to obtain force-extension curves, n-terminal c-alpha atoms  were fixed, while the c-termini  were subjected to a force acted along the extension .  mean forces calculated from umbrella sampling. the force profiles of two different cnidoin repeat units  were fitted with the worm-like chain model . resulting free energy profiles along the end-to-end distance are shown in the inset.  residue-averaged hydrophobic surface burial of two cnidoin peptides measured by disappearance of solvent accessible surface area .  ppii conformation content in the cnidoin peptides along peptide extension.  and  use the same colour code as . md, molecular dynamics; ppii, polyproline ii.



as demonstrated in figure  <dig>  cnidoin has a strong tendency for aggregation, which might be additionally enhanced by intermolecular disulphide links in the elastic domain. in order to assess cnidoin in the biological environment of mature nematocysts, we resorted to md simulations of single cnidoin fragments and of a cnidoin fragment embedded into a bundle of fragments, respectively. in agreement with the prediction of high disorder from sequence and the absence of forced unfolding events in afm experiments , cnidoin peptide units did not form stable secondary structures in our simulations. the secondary structure of two cnidoin peptides was monitored during 500-ns equilibrium md simulations by dssp: dictionary of secondary structure for proteins  <cit> . the peptides were found to form coils, bends and turns as well as a polyproline-ii type structure , all of which are typical backbone propensities of disordered peptides. the sequence motif gcgqq was found to exist as a turn, and thus structurally related, but, due to the missing proline, not identical to the π-helix formed by the silk protein motif gpgqq  <cit> .

a mean force of  <dig>  ±  <dig>  pn was found to dominate at low extensions between  <dig>  to  <dig>  nm of single cnidoin peptides. this mean resisting force results from both rupturing non-specific interactions along the chain and also entropic effects. we find the burial of hydrophobic side-chains from water to be one of the key driving factors that generate resisting forces against extension of cnidoin. as shown in figure 5c, the hydrophobic surface of cnidoin buried during collapse is  <dig>  ±  <dig>  nm <dig> per amino acid, as measured by the decrease in hydrophobic solvent accessible surface area . this hydrophobic surface burial is similar in magnitude to the related silk peptides, and one of the highest among reported disordered proteins  <cit> . together with the extraordinarily high mean hydrophobicity of these two types of disordered proteins, cnidoin and silk have been apparently designed to self-assemble into larger aggregates driven by the hydrophobic effect. polyproline ii  conformation, an extended peptide conformation frequently observed in high proline-content peptides, was also monitored as a function of peptide extension  <cit> . as depicted in figure 5d, the ppii content in the cnidoin peptide increased with stretching as observed for other disordered proteins previously  <cit>  and is another factor contributing to the resistance against extension and, thus, to the elasticity. we find the stretching of cnidoin molecules within a bundle of cnidoin proteins to give rise to higher force-extension curves . fitting yields an apparent persistence length of approximately  <dig>  ±  <dig>  nm,  which is lower than the one obtained for single cnidoins , reflecting a stronger coiling propensity. thus, in the context of mature nematocysts, intermolecular interactions of similar nature as those discussed here for a single peptide can give rise to a further increase of the apparent elasticity of cnidoin in bundles or networks.

the hypothesis that the shortening of cnidoin peptides drives the extremely fast discharge of nematocysts has been confirmed by the observation that cnidoin is equipped with the elasticity required to drive such a discharge. fast collapse dynamics of cnidoin would be required given the short sub-microsecond time scale of discharge  <cit> . to test the collapse dynamics, highly stretched conformations of the two repetitive cnidoin peptide units were subjected to force-quench simulations to monitor collapse dynamics in comparison to other disordered peptides, namely two silk amorphous peptides and two domain linker peptides in the von willebrand factor . both are also disordered peptides but with sequence compositions similar to folded proteins   <cit> . the number of trajectories in which a fully stretched peptide has reached the collapsed state is shown in figure  <dig>  from which the lifetime of the extended state was calculated. the cnidoin peptide was found to have a lifetime of  <dig>  ns, which is longer than that of silk  and shorter than that of the vwf linker . thus, cnidoin has a moderate collapse dynamics between the highly elastic silk protein and the vwf linker, for which an elastomeric function is unknown. the lifetime of extended mutated cnidoin peptides lacking methionines was found to be  <dig>  ns, suggesting that the large methionine side chains do not favour fast collapse. the high content of methionine residues in cnidoin thus is likely to have a function different from enhancing collapse.figure  <dig> 
cumulative successful collapsing events of four disordered proteins. each data set contains  <dig> independent collapse simulations along with an exponential fit  to determine the lifetime of the extended state.



discussion
elastomeric proteins confer the biomechanical properties for fibres and matrices that undergo reversible and repetitive deformation  <cit> . they have evolved in a diverse range of animals and often fulfil highly specialised biological functions as in lung alveoli of higher vertebrates, wing joints of flying insects or in spider silk  <cit> . although exhibiting a broad range of sequence variations, rubber-like elastomeric proteins share common properties in combining repetitive, highly disordered sequence elements with cross-linking motifs. in addition, most elastomeric proteins undergo spontaneous self-assembly to polymers by their hydrophobic nature  <cit> .

our combined experimental and computational study suggests that cnidoin shares elastomeric functions with other disordered proteins. having a similar persistence length with silk protein, the cnidoin repetitive sequence features high flexibility among unstructured peptides. the extension of cnidoin requires a noticeable mean force of around  <dig> pn for extensions between 10% and 70% of the contour length. we believe this high elasticity confers the high internal pressure of the nematocyst and agrees with the mechanical work upon collapsing cnidoin with an apparent persistence length of  <dig>  nm from 50% of its contour length to a fully collapsed state. this scenario brings the molecular measurements in line with the macroscopic mechanical observations, supporting the notion of a pressurised nematocyst that comprises a wall of assembled and highly extended elastomeric cnidoin cross-linked by largely inextensible minicollagen and possibly disulphide bonds .figure  <dig> 
model of elastic nematocyst discharge.  schematic representation of nematocyst architecture and minicollagen and cnidoin components .  model of the elastic, tear-proof minicollagen-cnidoin copolymer facilitating nematocyst discharge.



the biological function of the remarkably high methionine content of 17% in cnidoin is intriguing. as the metabolic costs for methionine synthesis are the highest among all amino acids  <cit> , rendering it a rare residue in proteins on average, and yet methionines do not favour fast peptide collapse nor feature outstanding hydrophobicity, they should contribute to the mechanics of nematocysts in a distinct way. the sulphur atom in methionine side-chains might be used as an additional cross-linking point, for example, via thioether bonds, in the peptide matrix of the nematocyst wall, which is subject to further investigations.

apart from the extraordinary methionine and cysteine content, cnidoin exhibits an overall amino acid composition, which on first sight is contradictory to its mechanical function. most disordered proteins feature a lower hydrophobicity and higher net charge than natively folded proteins, which is key to abstaining from forming a well-structured protein hydrophobic core. however, here and analogously for silk, the remarkably hydrophobic cnidoin impedes core formation by a high glycine and proline content and yet drives self-assembly into a robust protein wall withstanding high pressure without leaking.

interestingly, the high proline content of cnidoin falls into the region covered by silk spidroin type- <dig> proteins and is known to be the primary reason for the high extensibility and elasticity of silk fibers  <cit> , suggesting that prolines take over the same role in the nematocyst wall.

cnidoin as a highly extensible and yet robust wall material provides the elasticity for a fast discharging nematocyst. our computational analysis on single cnidoins and cnidoin bundles suggests that the disordered region can gain additional rubber-like elasticity through intermolecular interactions, which may additionally include covalent cross-links between cysteines and possibly methionines. pressing questions are how numerous these cross-links are in the nematocyst wall, how they can cause a limited order in the network, how they possibly provide additional elasticity, similar to the tyrosine- or lysine-mediated cross-links in the elastomers resilin and elastin, and how they prevent leaking even under extreme pressures.

CONCLUSIONS
our data show for the first time how the extremely fast and powerful dynamics of nematocyst discharge in hydra can be explained on the molecular level . the extraordinarily high speed of discharge is due to the release of energy stored in the stretched configuration of the minicollagen-cnidoin copolymer of the capsule wall that is under a very high initial osmotic pressure . during discharge the capsule collapses and releases the energy . the mode of copolymer formation as suggested by the possession of homologous crds in cnidoin and minicollagens represents an attractive mechanism for biotechnological approaches as it offers unlimited fine-tuning of the ratio between elastic and stress-resistant components in forming polymers with different mechanical properties. future research will show how the formation of such polymers might be feasible under controlled conditions.

