BACKGROUND
the effects of inbreeding arising from non-random mating or random mating in small populations have been widely explored, and an inbreeding depression of fitness has often been documented for a great variety of organisms . by contrast, the effects of outbreeding resulting from mating between individuals originating from different locations that can vary in their degree of genetic relatedness have been analysed to a lesser extent  <cit> . when individuals from two populations mate, either positive or negative consequences can arise for offspring fitness  <cit> . such unpredictable consequences of outbreeding result from complex genetic processes. according to edmands' review  <cit> , increased fitness, known as hybrid vigour, frequently follows outcrossing; this hybrid vigour is thought to be caused by dominance , overdominance or epistasis. conversely, diminished fitness, known as outbreeding depression, can also arise. outbreeding depression can appear as early as the f <dig> generation and is attributed to underdominance, disruption of local adaptation or epistatic interactions. however, this type of depression is more frequent in the f <dig> or in backcross generations, when the original parental gene combinations are disrupted  <cit> .

the consequences of outcrossing can affect population genetic differentiation, since gene flow could either be promoted by hybrid vigour  <cit>  or hindered by outbreeding depression  <cit> . the unexpected population genetic structure detected for continental zooplankton organisms such as cladocerans and rotifers turns this relationship into a subject worthy of exploration. high levels of genetic differentiation regarding neutral markers, as well as ecologically relevant traits, have been detected, even among nearby populations of cladocerans  <cit>  and rotifers  <cit> . this differentiation is striking, since evidence for high passive dispersal ability via dormant propagules exists for these organisms  <cit> . de meester et al.  <cit>  extended the 'persistent founder effects' idea of boileau et al.  <cit>  to postulate the 'monopolisation hypothesis', which explains the unexpected genetic differentiation detected among populations of pond-dwelling organisms. according to this hypothesis, such differentiation is due to persistent founder effects, caused and maintained by a large population size reached rapidly from a few colonisers, and local adaptation in the descendants of these first colonisers. these mechanisms seem to be powerful enough to hinder the establishment of late-comers, i.e., to hamper gene flow and consequently to maintain genetic differentiation. nevertheless, as mentioned above, outbreeding effects could also be relevant in shaping this genetic structure.

rotifers are small invertebrates  commonly found in the water column of ponds and lakes  <cit> . most rotifer species are cyclical parthenogens, combining sexual and asexual reproduction. initially, a cyclically parthenogenetic rotifer population consists of only diploid asexual females, which produce asexual daughters by ameiotic parthenogenesis. thus, the rotifer population is a set of clones. production of sexual females is induced by environmental factors such as population density  <cit> . rotifer sexual females produce haploid eggs that develop into haploid males, or, if fertilised by a male, into diapausing eggs , which can tolerate adverse environmental conditions. when sexual reproduction is initiated, it affects only a fraction of the population, so that parthenogenetic proliferation does not stop. rotifer populations persist for part of the year as diapausing eggs in most places. a fraction of the diapausing eggs hatch into asexual diploid females when favourable conditions resume, and the rest remain viable in the sediment and form an 'egg bank'  <cit> . cyclical parthenogenesis is thought to facilitate population differentiation via resource monopolisation because:  high population sizes are rapidly reached and maintained though asexual reproduction and the diapausing egg bank in the sediment; and  clonal selection during the phase of asexual reproduction and the release of hidden genetic variation through recurrent sexual reproduction enables the emergence of local adaptation  <cit> .

cyclical parthenogenesis can also affect the consequences of outbreeding between populations of the same species and, in turn, the effect of outcrossing on gene flow. evidence for clonal selection has been detected in natural rotifer populations  <cit> . this could favour the formation of coadapted gene complexes or the appearance of local adaptation. consequently, regardless of the relative contribution of other potentially involved genetic mechanisms, one would expect the appearance of negative epistatic effects after outcrossing, and thus an outbreeding depression of fitness hindering gene flow. an additional factor that could affect outbreeding effects in cyclical parthenogenetic rotifers is male haploidy, which is thought to favour the purging of deleterious recessive alleles from populations through haploid males  <cit> , thereby diminishing the probability of inbreeding depression in rotifer populations and providing fewer advantages for outbreeding. surprisingly, evidence for inbreeding depression has been detected for rotifers after selfing  <cit> . these findings indicate that the question as to whether hybrid vigour, rather than outbreeding depression, occurs in rotifers remains unanswered. this question is relevant to assess how population genetic differentiation is maintained. the uncertainty about outbreeding effects and the genetic structure detected in their populations makes cyclically parthenogenetic rotifers an excellent model to study population outcrossing effects and their consequences on gene flow.

the cyclically parthenogenetic rotifer brachionus plicatilis  is a model species in ecological genetics and population ecology . in this study, individuals of b. plicatilis from different populations were crossed to investigate the effect on offspring fitness. the objective was to shed light on the consequences of between-population outbreeding on gene flow. the experimental design tried to mimic the sequence of crosses that would be likely to occur in a large  population after the arrival of immigrant individuals, so it focused on the crosses that would offer the opportunity for immigrant genes to be introduced into the resident population. four b. plicatilis populations  were selected. tos was regarded as a resident population where immigrants would arrive, and the other three were alternative immigrant source populations. crosses between clones from these populations were conducted in the laboratory, and offspring fitness from intra- and interpopulation crosses was estimated by measuring life-history traits throughout the rotifer life cycle, from the diapausing-egg stage to the induction of sexual reproduction. furthermore, the number of females obtained per incubated diapausing egg at the end of the experiment was used as a compound fitness measure. additionally, the parental fertilisation proportion was estimated from the cross-mating experiments. as the negative effects of outbreeding often do not appear until the second generation  <cit> , backcrosses were carried out to obtain a backcross  generation. for backcrosses, two types of crosses were compared:  crosses between the f <dig> 'resident × immigrant hybrids' and 'resident' clones ; and  crosses between the f <dig> 'resident × resident' and 'resident' clones . a clone was not used in more than one cross. the 'immigrant × immigrant' crosses were not tested, as they were assumed to be unlikely to occur in nature due to the dilution of immigrants in a large population of residents. zooplankton mobility  and water column turbulence make spatial clustering of relatives improbable, thus reducing the chances of mating among the parthenogenetic offspring of an immigrant.

RESULTS
f <dig> generation
significant effects of the type of cross  on the f <dig> generation fitness components were detected for the three between-population comparisons, i.e., tos-hos, tos-tur, and tos-chi. the type of cross affected the diapausing egg-hatching proportion and the initial net growth rate of the viable clones, r, for the three immigrant populations, and the proportion of male producing clones in two of the three comparisons. the diapausing egg-hatching proportion was positively affected by outbreeding. evidence for hybrid vigour was found for tos-hos and tos-chi comparisons , since the hatching proportion was significantly higher for f <dig> diapausing eggs produced in interpopulation crosses than for f <dig> diapausing eggs produced in both types of intrapopulation crosses . in the case of the tos-tur comparison, the hatching proportion of the eggs produced in interpopulation crosses was significantly higher than those produced in the intrapopulation crosses within the resident population, but it was very similar to the hatching rate of the immigrant offspring. in the case of the growth rate r for the three between-population cross comparisons, offspring of interpopulation crosses presented significantly lower average r values than offspring of intrapopulation crosses of the resident population . interpopulation average r values were lower than immigrant average r values, except when chi acted as immigrant source population .

no significant differences were observed in clone viability between 'resident × resident' and 'resident × immigrant' crosses in any of the three comparisons between populations. moreover, there was no consistent trend suggesting either hybrid vigour or outbreeding depression . the proportion of viable clones that were male-producing was lower in the outcrosses than in the intrapopulation crosses of the resident population; this effect was significant when chi and hos acted as immigrant populations . nevertheless, interpopulation offspring always had values for the proportion of male-producing clones intermediate to those of immigrant and resident offspring.

despite the diverse results among fitness components, the results for the compound measure of fitness  showed that offspring from interpopulation crosses produced a higher average number of females per incubated diapausing egg than the offspring from both types of intrapopulation crosses, except in the case of the tos-tur comparison where interpopulation offspring showed lower values than 'immigrant × immigrant' intrapopulation crosses offspring. to sum up, there was a global trend for hybrid vigour, except when tur acted as the immigrant population. interestingly, the compound measure of fitness ranked in the same order as the genetic distance between the outcrossed populations, as assessed by mitochondrial and microsatellite markers, such that an increase in genetic distance was associated with an increase in f <dig> fitness.

results on the parental fertilisation proportion differed depending on the immigrant population. tos-chi interpopulation crosses had a significantly higher average fertilisation proportion than both intrapopulation crosses of the resident population and intrapopulation crosses of the immigrant population . on the other hand, when tur or hos acted as immigrant populations, interpopulation crosses had a lower average fertilisation proportion than the intrapopulation crosses of the resident population. nevertheless, values for the fertilisation proportion in interpopulation crosses where higher than in immigrant intrapopulation crosses. finally, significant asymmetries in the fertilisation proportion, which depended on whether the immigrant clone was paternal or maternal in the cross combination, were detected for tos-tur and tos-chi comparisons .

a. for f <dig>  clones used as immigrants were collected from the field; for bc, immigrant refers to f <dig> clones produced in 'immigrant × resident' crosses.

parental fertilisation percentages and p-values for chi-square tests applied to the three interpopulation crosses for f <dig> and bc generations.

backcross generation
in the bc generation, diapausing egg-hatching proportion, clone viability, and r -i.e., all the fitness components related to the asexual phase of the life cycle - were significantly affected by the type of cross  in at least one of the three between-population cross comparisons , and the same trend was found regardless of the immigrant population. however, depending on the fitness components, either a trend to decreased or increased average values in the crosses involving immigrants was found. diapausing egg-hatching proportion was lower in the backcrosses involving immigrants , while the opposite trend was observed for clone viability and r of the viable bc clones .

results for the compound measure of fitness  indicate a global tendency towards higher fitness in the backcrosses involving immigrants in two of the three between-population cross comparisons, while in one case  the mean value for this trait was virtually the same for resident-resident and hybrid-resident offspring. in contrast to the f <dig> generation, in the backcrosses the compound measure of fitness did not rank with the genetic distance between the outcrossed populations.

concerning the proportion of viable male-producing clones, a fitness component related to the sexual phase of the life cycle, there were no significant differences between bc clones produced from resident-resident and hybrid-resident crosses . likewise, no significant results were found for the bc fertilisation proportion . nevertheless, the analysis of differences depending on whether the resident was the paternal or the maternal clone revealed that, when tur and hos acted as immigrant populations, there were significant asymmetries .

discussion
how population differentiation occurs and how new species arise in invertebrates with high dispersal capability are crucial evolutionary questions. application of molecular markers to aquatic invertebrates is showing previously unnoticed levels of species richness and population divergence. for aquatic invertebrates with high dispersal capability, knowing the fate of immigrants arriving in a population is highly relevant to understanding how populations maintain their genetic differences. even though they are largely constrained to living in ponds and lakes, rotifers have been successful at diversifying in order to occupy a wide range of ecological niches. within-species differentiation in rotifers, sometimes associated with local adaptation, has been reported  <cit> . population differentiation in rotifers, likely a necessary step leading to speciation, might be promoted or prevented depending on the effects of outcrossing on fitness. however, in spite of its relevance, data on these effects are extremely scarce for continental zooplankters, particularly for rotifers  <cit> . in contrast to the previous studies on the phylum rotifera, the present study adopts a population approach by exploring a high number of clones collected in four populations with known genetic distances  <cit> . moreover, outcrossing effects are studied by:  performing controlled cross-mating experiments to obtain two generations with a well-known rotifer species; and  analysing offspring fitness throughout the full life cycle.

our results suggest that outcrossing between a resident population and three alternative immigrant source populations of the rotifer b. plicatilis resulted in hybrid vigour in the f <dig> generation. a trend towards hybrid vigour was observed regardless of the immigrant source population, according to the results for the compound fitness measure. nevertheless, we also found differences in the performance of the within-population offspring among the four experimental populations. these differences imply that the outcrossing effects act in opposite directions, depending on which population is regarded as immigrant and which as resident. this ambivalence appears in the f <dig> generation for the compound fitness component in the tos-tur comparison: the outcrossed offspring had higher fitness  than the offspring from residents, but not than the offspring from crosses between immigrants. as it can be observed in figure  <dig>  experimental conditions, which were intended to be close to real tos habitat conditions, were especially favourable for tur, since within-population offspring for this pond presented very high values for this fitness component. this caveat on ambivalent results does not affect the other immigrant populations. the hybrid vigour observed in the f <dig> generation for the compound measure of fitness seems to be largely due to the effect of the hatching proportion, since these two parameters showed similar patterns, which is not true for other fitness components. when compared to the offspring produced by clones from tos, the higher the genetic distance between populations, the higher compound fitness measure of the offspring. since only four populations are compared, the hypothesis of a relationship between genetic distance and hybrid vigour in the f <dig> generation should be considered preliminary. signs of hybrid vigour persisted in the backcrosses between the f <dig> hybrids and the resident population, except when chi acted as the immigrant source population. however, lack of backcrosses between 'immigrant' and 'immigrant-resident hybrids' makes it more difficult for this finding to be conclusive.

hybrid vigour in the f <dig> generation is generally expected after population outcrossing  <cit> , and examples for a great variety of taxa abound in the literature , although the reverse result has also been found . by contrast, outbreeding depression is usually expected in subsequent generations  <cit> , or in the offspring of backcrosses. however, the majority of studies on outbreeding effects addresses a single generation  <cit> , leaving open the question as to how these effects could affect gene flow between populations.

a zooplankter where outcrossing has been extensively studied is the marine copepod species tigriopus californicus. in this invertebrate, outcrossing effects over several generations--including backcrosses--have been widely studied , in addition to its underlying genetic basis . in general, these studies reveal hybrid vigour in the f <dig> generation, but hybrid breakdown in the f <dig> and bc generations. however, edmands et al.  <cit>  suggested that, if the offspring from backcrosses were allowed to reproduce over several generations, hybrid inferiority could change to hybrid superiority in later generations. aside from copepods, two other common groups in the continental zooplankton are rotifers and cladocerans. these groups share features of their life cycles, as most of them are cyclical parthenogens, but they differ in their maximum growth rate, generation time, and maximum population density and size. they also differ because cladoceran males are not haploid, although the role of rotifer haploid males in purging recessive deleterious alleles is likely unimportant  <cit> . these similarities and differences make comparison between rotifers and cladocerans interesting. using the cladoceran daphnia magna, which is a cyclical parthenogen, ebert et al.  <cit>  performed a study using an experimental-field metapopulation that showed a trend towards hybrid vigour, as estimated from genotype frequency change. in contrast, de meester  <cit>  found negative outbreeding effects on the diapausing egg-hatching proportion for d. magna in a laboratory study on inbreeding and outbreeding depression. the hybrid vigour exhibited by cladocerans observed by ebert et al.  <cit>  is in agreement with the results of the present study for the compound measure of fitness. it is noteworthy that the local cladoceran populations studied in ebert et al.  <cit>  were highly inbred. by contrast, inbreeding does not seem to be important in the rotifer populations considered here. evidence for inbreeding by non-random mating has not been found  <cit> , while inbreeding by drift is unlikely in the typically large, genetically diverse populations studied here  <cit> . according to the results of the present study, outbreeding depression can be found in some fitness components, while hybrid vigour is detected if assessed by the compound measure of fitness. this finding may help to explain the contrasting results found in daphnia.

the few studies dealing with the effects of population outcrossing on rotifers  <cit>  used different experimental schemes, making comparisons with the present work difficult. for example, birky  <cit>  compared the viability of offspring by crossing eight clones from two geographically distant populations and selfish offspring. this author found no significant difference, which could be in agreement with the absence of a significant and consistent pattern of outbreeding effects for f <dig> viability in the present study. given the scarcity of data on outbreeding effects in zooplankters, generalisations are difficult. the effects might be very dependent on the system studied, for instance on the age of the population. moreover, laboratory conditions are expected to be more benign compared to conditions in the wild, although, qualitatively, the relative effects of outcrossing vs. within-population crosses are likely to hold under natural conditions.

the results of this study highlight that opposing effects are possible for the same fitness component when different sexual generations are compared. this was the case for the diapausing egg-hatching proportion--the first step of life cycle in which the fitness of a cross was measured--and the net growth rate. the pattern found for the diapausing-egg hatching proportion is coincident with the theoretical expectation of f <dig> hybrid vigour followed by hybrid breakdown in subsequent outcrossing events  <cit> . it is common to find either inbreeding or outbreeding effects in those fitness components related to the initial phases of the life cycle. often the effects are observed in connection with embryo development . such effects seem very likely to be due to the high quantity of genes expressed during development. concerning the net growth rate, the opposite patterns between f <dig> and bc generations found here suggest outbreeding depression in the f <dig> generation, followed by hybrid vigour in the bc generation. outbreeding depression in f <dig> can be explained by a disruption of local adaptation or epistatic interactions between heterozygote loci  <cit> . a positive effect of outbreeding on the growth rate in the backcrosses could be explained if low-fitness hybrids are eliminated at the beginning of the life cycle . hatchlings from the diapausing eggs are expected to harbour high genetic diversity, since they are produced sexually, and some of them could have high fitness. nevertheless, in both f <dig> and bc generations, the compound measure of fitness suggests advantages to the hybrid offspring produced from immigrants coming from some populations.

our results on fertilisation proportions do not suggest outbreeding avoidance. in f <dig>  in one case  fertilisation was much lower between immigrant and resident than between residents, but it can be explained by the lower fertilisation proportion between immigrants. asymmetry between the sexes was detected for the fertilisation proportion in crosses performed to produce the f <dig> and bc generations. in the f <dig> generation, gene flow is not consistently preferentially mediated by a sex. by contrast, in the bc generation gene flow is mainly mediated by females where significant asymmetries were found. given the few populations analysed, our results do not consistently support a preference in the sex mediating gene flow.

results on outbreeding effects showed some variation with regard to the populations crossed. this could be due to the genetic distance between the populations crossed. the relationship between the compound fitness measure at f <dig> and the genetic distance between populations, even based on few populations, is suggestive. another factor that could contribute to the differences in the results for the three between-population comparisons concerns the strength of the negative inbreeding effects within the outcrossed populations. a previous study with tos and hos populations showed that inbreeding depression occurred at the population level for some of the life-history traits studied here  <cit> , which is in accordance with the pattern of hybrid vigour detected here for these populations.

cyclical parthenogenesis is expected to facilitate the development of coadapted gene complexes because selection acts on the total genetic variance during the parthenogenetic phase. in fact, clonal selection has been reported in rotifers  <cit> . if coadapted gene complexes are frequent, outbreeding depression is likely to occur. however, our results are not consistent with this prediction. this discrepancy can be explained if ecological differentiation between rotifer populations is weak. it has been proposed that temporal fluctuations can prevent high ecological specialisation in brachionus populations  <cit> . moreover, our results suggest that the negative effects of outbreeding arising in post-f <dig> generations could be purged in the first steps of the life cycle, while genetic variance from the outcrosses would allow selection of high-fitness genotypes. if so, outbreeding depression would not be important in maintaining genetic differentiation.

CONCLUSIONS
this study focuses on the consequences of outcrossing between populations of the cyclically parthenogenetic rotifer b. plicatilis. this is relevant to assessing the mechanisms that maintain among-population genetic differentiation, which is high despite the high passive dispersal capability of these organisms. in the first outcrossed generation, some fitness components associated with different life-cycle stages were significantly affected, with the overall effect of outcrossing being positive. backcrosses resulted in lower diapausing  egg hatchability. however, the clones founded from these hatchings showed high fitness. we found that the higher the genetic distance between immigrant and resident population, the higher the compound measure of fitness in the hybrid f <dig>  a general conclusion of our study is that outbreeding depression is not likely in the studied populations. this conclusion seems to rule out outbreeding depression as a key factor maintaining population genetic differentiation. rather, hybrid vigour opens up opportunities for gene flow into recently founded, small rotifer populations, where the dilution effect of immigrants would not be strong yet.

