BACKGROUND
advances in dna sequencing technology in recent years has seen the completion of a large number of genomes, with the completion of many more planned for the future. however, the generation of a dna sequence map is only the first step in obtaining an understanding of an organism or species. one of the main goals of the post-genomic era is to obtain knowledge of genes and gene products, such as the biological roles of proteins, their molecular functions, localizations and their interaction networks in living organisms.

in the past, protein function would be determined by an experimental investigation of activity and quantification of abundances in specific locations. however, with the sheer quantity of data awaiting processing, this method of classification alone is no longer sufficient and more automated large scale methods of experimental analysis are required. examples of these techniques include microarray gene expression profiles  <cit> , protein interactions revealed by yeast two-hybrid system  <cit>  and protein complexes identification by mass spectrometry <cit> . while these methods have all been successful in the characterization of biological systems, they have in turn generated additional large quantities of data which also require analysis to extract useful information. many software tools have been developed to aid the scientist in mining these data to identify features and defining characteristics. the existing genome-scale protein function prediction methods currently in use can be  grouped into three categories:

 <dig>  methods based on sequence or protein characteristics. the most common of these are tools such as fasta  <cit>  and psi-blast  <cit> . several non-homology-based methods have also been introduced, e.g. the rosetta stone  <cit> , the phylogenetic method  <cit> , the chromosomal proximity method  <cit>  and the combined method  <cit> .

 <dig>  methods based on mining single types of genome-scale data. examples of this data includes microarray gene expression profiles, yeast two-hybrid systems and protein complexes using established techniques such as clustering analysis  <cit> , or alternative methods such as the shortest-path approach  <cit> , the method based on overlapping transcriptional clusters  <cit>  and temporal gene expression patterns  <cit> .

 <dig>  methods based on integration of heterogeneous data formats. since valuable information also exists in relationships between aspects of data existing in different datasets, several data integration and mining methods have been introduced to utilize these relationships when predicting proteins function. these include formal bayesian reasoning  <cit> , e.g. bayesian statistical methods combined with a boltzmann machine and simulated annealing  <cit>  and a hopfield network approach to integrate gene expression and protein interaction data  <cit> .

while many of the analytic methods outlined in classifications  <dig> and  <dig> have been successfully applied to identify unknown functions for protein, it is the third classification of analysis techniques which has the most potential for identification of function  for unknown proteins. this is because these methods collate experimental information from an eclectic range of sources before making any predictions. however, two of the major complications faced by this type of analysis are the  variation in terminology that exists between different datasets and  the differences in storage format. these disparities can make discoveries of even simple correlations a formidable challenge and may result in important relationships being overlooked.

the gene ontology consortium   <cit>  attempts to address these types of problems by providing a method by which different datasets may be related via a common set of definitions. the go defines a number of vocabularies to allow classification of gene properties with a degree of precision that may be defined by the end user. for example, a gene involved in a cellular process may simply be defined in these terms, or, if more information is known, a more specific definition might be given as "cellular process->cellular physiological process->cellular metabolism". thus, data from two different sources which relate to the cellular process may be linked via this vocabulary and used together to permit a more detailed analysis or definition of the process. within the go, gene properties may be defined via three vocabularies which specify biological process , molecular function  and cellular component . thus, the go provides a means of correlating data from a wide range of sources to generate a much broader data set for function prediction.

here we propose a method which addresses many of these issues by firstly relating a broad range of experimental data sets via the go index and secondly by using a neural network to mine the combined information to imply novel protein function through identified relationships . we have demonstrated the capabilities of this method by applying it to several experimental data sets associated with the yeast genome and have identified several novel relationships between unknown proteins and annotated protein complexes.

RESULTS
model evaluation by applying cross-validation on known annotations
our training and evaluation data was generated from a set of  <dig> yeast orfs with known go and sgd annotation in the ratio of 9:  <dig>  after network training we evaluated the precision of the network predictions using the evaluation data. since the evaluation data also consisted of orfs with known function we were able to evaluate the consistency of the predictions with the original annotation and the trade-off between precision and the sensitivity of predictions. this data could also provide useful feedback for improving the prediction performance of the neural networks . we also compared the performance of the network when using aggressive prediction and normal prediction . for each different go vocabulary , we trained and validated two neural networks; one for aggressive prediction mode and one for normal prediction mode .

compared with aggressive prediction, normal prediction returned a consistently better prediction performance in almost all subcategories . this is not unreasonable since this method assigns function according to higher level, less specific nodes on a go graph which tend to be statistically more reliable.

the best predictions were achieved for two closely related subcategories: the structural constituent of the ribosome  and the ribonucleoprotein complex . this prediction is consistent with the results both from analyses of gene expression data  <cit>  and from other studies involving the integration of additional datasets  <cit> . this is possibly because the expression results for the ribosome consist of clusters of highly correlated genes which are readily identified by the network.

we also examined the ability of the network to predict function using only a single data source. while the complexity of the network topology obviates such a simplistic analysis of the contribution of each data source to the final prediction, it does provide some indication of the bias of the information within each set. it was found that the best results were achieved with three types of mips data  <cit> : physical interaction, genetic interaction and complex , which are commonly considered by the yeast research community to represent the most reliable data sets. for gene expression profile data, three evidence sources: cell-cycle data, the rosetta compendium, and mapk data, demonstrated that mrna co-expression data have greater ability to predict cellular component and biological process than to predict molecular function. this is in agreement with many previous genome-wide analyses, which demonstrated that mrna transcript expression patterns or co-regulation are similar for groups of functionally related genes and subcellular protein localizations  <cit> .

using the model to predict go annotation of unknown proteins
once we had trained and optimized the network, we applied it to a set of previously un-annotated yeast orfs. based on the trade-off between precision and sensitivity of the predictions shown in fig.  <dig>  we selected a precision threshold of  <dig>  as an acceptable level for predictions. using this threshold, we produced predictions for  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> un-annotated orfs in the bp , mf , and cc  annotation categories and made  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> predictions respectively . the sensitivity-precision curve for all the predictions is shown in figure 4a. a complete list of all the predictions is available . a graph of the genes with the most predictions and their associated precision is shown in figure 4b. the cellular component categories that have the most predictions and best precision  are the cytoplasm and nucleus. for biological process, nucleic acid metabolism, protein metabolism, and biosynthesis all principally occur in the cytoplasm and are also well represented in the predictions. once again, this is also consistent with other systematic analyses of gene expression profiles and cellular processes related to metabolism in the cytoplasm  <cit> .

the mips database provides information such as functional category, protein classification, and localization category, which are similar to the biological process, molecular function, and cellular component, respectively, in the go index. we therefore compared our predictions with annotations within the mips database. we found that our predictions generally agreed with those from mips . we found that our predictions generally agreed with those of previous studies aiming to predict go annotations  <cit> . however, our results generally provide more detailed information for protein function. also, in many cases, we had multiple predictions to nodes that were related by a parent-child relationship. in these situations the more specific predictions of the child node were supported by the related parent assignments which further improved the confidence of our predictions.

in addition, we made  <dig> higher quality predictions  corresponding to  <dig> orfs which have been assigned new or updated go annotation in the latest sgd release . we compared our  <dig> predictions with their corresponding go annotation by calculating the shortest distance on the go graph from our prediction to the go node assigned in the release. we found that gmup was particularly successful at predicting orfs with functions associated with the ribonucleoprotein complex, protein metabolism and transportation . based on this, we made a cautious prediction for the function of several of the remaining un-annotated orfs, which gave  <dig> predictions for  <dig> orfs at an acceptable precision level .

generating a glimpse of how biological processes are implemented by the interactions of proteins
to demonstrate the application of gmup to the discovery of unknown orf function, we ran a query to fetch assigned unknown orfs that are predicted to have a role in rna processing , and found a number of proteins with interaction or co-existence relationships with complexes that have been identified to contribute to rna processing . we identified stp <dig> as having a strong interaction with the trna-intron endonuclease complex  and a role in the trna splicing process . this agrees well with its mips annotation and sgd description: "involved in pre-trna splicing and in the uptake of branched-chain amino acids". another example was ifh <dig>  which was annotated to the nucleus  <cit>  by the evidence string "inferred from direct assay  in sgd". however, our results indicate its more precise localization as a component  of the ribonuclease mitochondrial rna processing  complex and small nucleolar ribonucleoprotein complex. because the mrp complex is a ribonucleoprotein complex that performs the first cleavage in rrna transcript processing, this prediction is consistent with one of its biological process annotations, rrna processing  <cit> , and the mips description on cellular complexes: "rrna splicing". compared with previous annotations to the cellular component category, our prediction descended two levels and identified the leaf node . recently, the component annotation of ifh <dig> was also assigned to nucleolus  <cit> , which confirmed our results which were derived independently.

discussion
we have proposed a universal knowledge discovery framework to generate hypotheses for protein function annotation to the gene ontology biological process, molecular function and cellular component hierarchies in an automated fashion through mining of genome-scale data. compared with previously published methods on protein function prediction, our method is distinctive in the following aspects:

 flexibility in prediction. un-annotated proteins can be assigned to less specific or more precise annotations in all three hierarchies of the go. a conservative estimation of precision for each prediction is also provided with these comprehensive descriptions of unknown protein function. this is in contrast to most other methods, in which proteins were assigned to a limited number of function categories  <cit>  such as the mips or ypd   <cit> , which are less detailed than go, or to a single go biological process hierarchy  <cit> . the universal and flexible characteristics of our protein function prediction, as demonstrated, for example, by aggressive prediction and normal prediction in this report, is significantly different from methods which use abstract categories in go  <cit> . although our results were consistently better using normal prediction, this was a reflection of the limited size of the data sets. as more data is accumulated, the statistics associated with aggressive predictions will improve and this prediction method will become more valuable.

 integration of evidence data. gmup combines a much wider range of experimental data than previous analyses. this provides the opportunity to make new predictions based on more complex relationships. this strategy is universal to protein function prediction on any branch of go and, in theory, it could be applied to other types of hierarchical ontologies beyond the gene ontology. furthermore, it might also be used as an evaluation tool to study reliability and prediction capabilities of various data sources.

 architecture of the model. we have made our predictions based on  <dig> sources of evidence data. however, since the evidence-pair database provides the abstraction layer by which all datasets can be related to each another, our method can easily accommodate additional datasets as they become available. for instance, nucleic acid sequence order information might provide specific contributions to the prediction of molecular function category in the go.

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, we have described a universal mapping strategy, in which protein-pair generation serves as a bridge from heterogeneous experimental evidence to knowledge representation. we have successfully applied the technique to make a number of novel predictions for genes associated with ribosomal function and which provide some insights into the mechanism and modes of interactions that are taking place. as more experimental evidence accumulates, the system can generate more comprehensive insights of how a certain biological process is implemented by the coordination of a group of proteins. this implementation is demonstrated by showing where the protein exists , in what manner it operates , and with what components it collaborates . the ongoing development of knowledge representation systems such as hierarchical ontology and their interaction with high-throughput experiments are becoming increasingly important in modern biology. the significance of these systems is not only in their ability to bridge gaps between hypotheses and the supporting data, but is also based on the potential to model complex biological systems based on well-structured hierarchical ontologies. the architecture of gmup readily lends itself to the inclusion of additional data sources and we propose to add more features and datasets for optimizing the predictive performance. additionally, we plan to investigate improving the accuracy of predictions by replacing the neural network with a support vector machine . svms often obtain a greater success rate for this type of classification problem and can be easier to analyze theoretically. finally, we also plan to incorporate weighting of go assignments to reflect the accuracy of such assignments. the go uses a series "evidence code" to represent the different source of annotation, such as "ida: inferred from direct assay", "iea: inferred from electronic annotation" etc. in the current study we used all such evidence without regard to source. by incorporating this data, we can filter the annotation data according to evidence-code and set criteria to adapt different reliable part of go annotation to investigate its effects on protein prediction precision and sensitivity.

