BACKGROUND
approximately  <dig>  billion people smoke cigarettes worldwide contributing to almost  <dig> million preventable deaths per year  <cit> . smoking is a significant risk factor for lung cancer, the leading cause of cancer-related death in the united states, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease , the fourth leading cause of death overall. approximately 90% of lung cancer can be attributed to cigarette smoking, with 10–15% of smokers developing this disease  <cit> . despite the well-established causal role of cigarette smoke in lung cancer and copd, the molecular mechanisms by which these diseases arise are poorly understood and there are no tools currently available to determine individual variations in response to smoking.

previous work has demonstrated that cigarette smoke creates a field of injury in epithelial cells that line the respiratory tract. several studies have shown that histologically normal large airway epithelial cells of current and former smokers with and without lung cancer display allelic loss  <cit> , p <dig> mutations  <cit> , changes in promoter methylation  <cit>  and increased telomerase activity  <cit> . using epithelial cells collected from brushings of the mainstem bronchus at the time of bronchoscopy, we have previously characterized the effect of smoking on the bronchial airway epithelial transcriptome and found that smoking induces expression of genes involved in regulation of oxidant stress, xenobiotic metabolism, and oncogenesis while suppressing those involved in regulation of inflammation and tumor suppression  <cit> . in addition, we recently developed a profile of bronchial airway gene expression that can distinguish smokers with and without lung cancer and serve as an early diagnostic biomarker for disease  <cit> . although these studies of intrathoracic airway epithelium obtained via bronchoscopy have successfully identified candidate biomarkers of smoking-related lung damage, there remains significant impetus to develop biomarkers of these events from tissue obtained via less invasive collection procedures. use of material from a less invasive collection site would allow for the use of larger cohorts for developing and validating biomarkers of tobacco exposure and susceptibility to tobacco-related disease.

oral and nasal epithelium are attractive candidate tissues for assaying the host response to tobacco-smoke exposure since, like the bronchial airway, they are exposed to high concentrations of compounds contained within cigarette smoke. we have previously shown that it is feasible to obtain sufficient rna from buccal mucosa for gene expression analysis  <cit>  despite the high level of rnases in saliva  <cit> . few studies have characterized global gene expression in either buccal or nasal mucosa, and none have attempted to establish a link between extra- and intrathoracic airway gene expression changes that occur with smoking. smith et al. used brush biopsies of buccal mucosa from smokers and non-smokers to obtain rna for cdna microarrays and found approximately  <dig> genes that could distinguish the two groups in training and test sets  <cit> . while this study provided evidence that buccal gene expression changes with smoking, it did not address the relationship between the gene expression response to tobacco smoke in the mouth and bronchial airways. using real-time pcr, spivack et al. found a qualitative relationship between matched buccal mucosa and laser-dissected lung epithelial cell samples across nine carcinogen or oxidant-metabolizing genes in  <dig> subjects being evaluated for lung cancer  <cit> . smoking has also been implicated in the formation of dna adducts in nasal mucosa  <cit> , and the correlation between adduct formation in bronchial and nasal epithelium has been previously reported  <cit> . while global gene expression profiling of nasal epithelial brushing has been recently reported in children with asthma  <cit>  and cystic fibrosis  <cit> , there are no studies that address the effects of smoking on global gene expression in nasal epithelium or explore relationships in gene expression between epithelial cell types throughout the respiratory tract in response to cigarette smoke.

in this study, we examined relationships in gene expression between bronchial, nasal, and buccal epithelial cells in current and never smokers. using previously published microarray data, we evaluated the relationship of buccal, nasal, and bronchial epithelial gene expression in never smokers compared to other epithelial and non-epithelial tissues. we subsequently compared gene expression consequences of smoking in bronchial epithelial cells to those seen in buccal and nasal epithelium. our results suggest that gene expression changes occurring in bronchial epithelium in response to cigarette smoke are reflected in buccal and nasal epithelium. as a result, we believe that gene expression biomarkers of host response tobacco exposure may ultimately either be applied to or derived from these tissues.

RESULTS
study population
twenty five subjects were recruited for nasal and buccal mucosa microarray studies and  <dig> additional subjects were recruited for real competitive pcr validation experiments on buccal mucosa samples. demographic data for the microarray study group is presented in table  <dig>  demographic data for the real competitive pcr validation group is presented in additional file  <dig> 

demographic data for patient samples used in the microarray studies . clinical information including sex, age, and race are included . statistical comparisons were performed between smokers vs. nonsmokers within each tissue type. p-values for sex and race were determined by fisher exact test.

relationship of gene expression profiles between intrathoracic and extrathoracic airway epithelium in never smokers
in order to explore gene-expression relationships between different airway epithelial tissues in healthy non smokers, principal component analysis  of the normal airway transcriptome  <cit>  was performed across  <dig> different non-diseased tissue datasets . nine microarray datasets containing normal tissue samples from previously published studies were collected from the gene expression omnibus . these datasets were analyzed along with the  <dig> normal nasal epithelial and  <dig> normal buccal mucosa samples from this study. a detailed list of the different datasets used is shown in table  <dig>  seven of the eleven datasets analyzed came from tissues of epithelial origin, including an additional set of normal nasal epithelial samples from a separate study  <cit> . the co-localization of bronchial and nasal samples in a graph of the first two principal components suggests a relationship between these two tissues when compared to other epithelial tissues analyzed. buccal mucosa samples did not group with either bronchial or nasal epithelial samples.

microarray datasets from  <dig> studies obtained from geo, as well as the  <dig> datasets from this study are listed. tissue type, total sample numbers, microarray platform, geo accession number, and a brief description of each dataset are included.

to determine the similarities in the expression of functional categories of genes that are over represented in the never smoker bronchial airway transcriptome  <cit>  and are likely to play a role in mediating the response to tobacco smoke exposure, we examined the expression of fifty-nine genes involved in detoxification , as well as important epithelial cell structural components  across the  <dig> normal tissue datasets . bronchial and nasal epithelial samples clustered together based on the expression of these  <dig> genes, with many being expressed at higher levels in these two tissues, including genes belonging to the dynein, cytochrome p <dig>  and aldehyde dehydrogenase gene families. buccal mucosa samples clustered with lung tissue, with specific keratin genes being highly expressed in both tissues. while some keratins were expressed specifically in skin and esophageal epithelium, other keratins, such as krt <dig>  krt <dig>  krt <dig>  and krt <dig> were expressed primarily in bronchial and nasal samples. the same pattern was seen with mucin genes, with muc <dig>  muc5ac, and muc <dig> being expressed primarily in the bronchus and nose, while muc <dig> was expressed in other epithelial tissues. glutathione genes were expressed highly in bronchial and nasal epithelial tissue as well as other tissues.

effects of cigarette smoke on intrathoracic and extrathoracic epithelial gene expression
to examine the similarities of tobacco-induced differential gene expression between the bronchus and the buccal and nasal epithelium, gene expression profiles from buccal  and nasal  epithelial samples collected from current and never smokers were analyzed together with previously published bronchial epithelial samples collected from current and never smokers   <cit> . three hundred and sixty-one genes differentially expressed  between current and never smokers in bronchial epithelium  <cit>  distinguish the bronchial and nasal epithelial samples by smoking status using principal component analysis, with separation among buccal mucosa samples being less clear . these results suggest that the gene-expression response to smoking is similar in bronchial and nasal epithelium.

gene set enrichment analysis  was performed  to determine which of the genes that are affected by smoking in bronchial epithelium are among the most highly perturbed by smoking in nasal and buccal epithelium. genes up-regulated in the airway in response to smoking are significantly enriched among the genes most up-regulated by smoking in buccal mucosa , with  <dig> genes composing the "leading edge subset" . the leading edge consists of the subset of bronchial smoking-related genes that are most differentially expressed in response to smoking in buccal mucosa. bronchial smoking-related genes are also significantly enriched among the genes that are differentially expressed in nasal epithelium in response to smoking , with  <dig> genes comprising the leading edge subset . forty-five genes are common to both leading edges , suggesting that these genes represent common tobacco-induced changes that occur in all airway epithelial cells that are exposed to tobacco smoke. genes with oxidoreductase and electron transporter activity are enriched among these commonly smoking-induced genes . genes from the mainstem bronchus that are down-regulated in response to smoking were not significantly enriched among buccal mucosa genes most altered by smoking. however, down-regulated bronchial genes are enriched among genes most down-regulated in response to smoking in the nasal epithelium , yielding a leading edge subset of  <dig> genes . genes involved in cell motility, cell migration, development, and localization of cellular complexes are enriched among these smoking-repressed genes . in addition, we performed gsea using the top  <dig> up- or  <dig> down-regulated-by-smoking genes from buccal and nasal epithelium and found that genes up-regulated in these tissues are enriched among the genes that are most perturbed by smoking in bronchial epithelium .

validation of buccal mucosa changes using real competitive pcr
three genes from the buccal mucosa leading-edge subset were chosen for validation using real competitive pcr  <cit>   in an independent set of buccal epithelial samples obtained from  <dig> subjects . using a maldi tof mass spectrometry platform, gene expression analysis showed that all three genes  were more highly expressed in the oral epithelium of smokers compared with non-smokers, consistent with the microarray findings .

discussion
we have studied global gene expression in bronchial, nasal, and buccal epithelial cells in never and current smokers. our findings suggest that similar functional categories of genes are expressed in nasal and bronchial epithelial cells of healthy never smokers. we have shown that there are similarities between the effect of smoking on bronchial epithelial gene expression and the gene expression response to smoking in buccal and nasal epithelium. this implies the potential to study disease-relevant responses to tobacco smoke in any of these tissues. this represents a significant advantage as buccal and nasal mucosa can be readily collected from large study cohorts as a result of their ability to be collected non-invasively. given the burden of smoking-related disease, there is a need for non-invasive biomarkers of the individual-level variability in host responses to cigarette smoke.

the similar pattern of gene expression in bronchial and nasal epithelial cells of never smokers suggests a shared architecture and function. the nasal passage and bronchus are both lined with ciliated pseudostratified columnar epithelial cells, and some of the functions of genes that are highly expressed in both nasal and bronchial epithelial cells are likely due to this common cellular architecture. for example, cilia-related genes such as dnah <dig>  dnah <dig>  and dnai <dig> were highly expressed in both bronchial and nasal airway epithelium. consistent with this finding, previous studies have shown that normal ciliated airway epithelial cells express these genes  <cit> . other dynein light chain genes such as dynlrb <dig> which have been characterized in other non-epithelial tissues  <cit>  were found to be specifically expressed in bronchial epithelial cells, while dynein light chain genes such as dynll <dig> shared relatively high expression specifically in nasal epithelium as well as non-epithelial tissues. many genes involved in host defense are also expressed at high levels in extra- and intrathoracic airway epithelial cells. glutathione expression has been previously well characterized in bronchial epithelium as well as in the lung  <cit> . our data show high expression of glutathiones such as gstm <dig> in bronchial, nasal, and buccal epithelium relative to other non-airway epithelial cells. we also observed high expression of mucins such as muc <dig>  muc <dig>  and muc5ac in bronchial and nasal epithelium and somewhat lower expression of muc <dig> in buccal mucosa and lung tissue. expression of these genes has been well documented in respiratory tract epithelium  <cit> . we found the genes belonging to the cytochrome p <dig> family and several aldehyde dehydrogenase genes  <cit>  are highly expressed the bronchial and nasal epithelium. cytochrome p <dig> genes have previously been shown to be expressed highly in both bronchial epithelial cells  <cit>  and nasal mucosa  <cit> . our global analysis of gene-expression of the airway epithelium of healthy never smokers recapitulates gene expression patterns previously observed within these tissue types, thereby lending support to the similarities and differences between tissues that are suggested by our analysis of gene expression in the normal intrathoracic airway transcriptome.

smoking altered the expression of a set of genes in bronchial epithelial cells which were also commonly altered in nasal and buccal epithelial cells. gene set enrichment analysis of  <dig> smoking-induced bronchial genes yielded a subset of genes that were among the most up-regulated by smoking in the mouth , as well as a subset of genes that are among the most up-regulated by smoking in the nose . forty-five genes were common to both sets, representing genes that share similar smoking-related expression patterns across all three airway epithelial tissues. this analysis demonstrates a common response to cigarette smoke exposure in cells lining the respiratory tract. within this set are multiple genes involved in each of several processes including detoxification, cell cycle progression and cell adhesion. in addition, a common set of genes was down-regulated in response to smoking in both bronchial and nasal epithelium.

several cyp <dig> genes were commonly up-regulated by smoking in only the nose and airway including cyp1a <dig> and cyp1b <dig>  as well as cell cycle  and cell adhesion genes . the presence of mutations in cyp1a <dig> in nasal and bronchial mucosa has been shown previously in smokers  <cit> , and cytochrome p <dig> genes are known to be involved in xenobiotic metabolism in bronchial mucosa  <cit> . exposure of alveolar epithelial cells to environmental toxins has been shown to promote cell cycle progression  <cit> , which could explain the increased expression of cell cycle genes in the nasal epithelial cells of smokers. glutathiones such as gpx <dig> were up-regulated in both bronchial and buccal epithelial cells. aldo-keto reducatse genes which are activated in response to cigarette smoke in human oral squamous cell lines  <cit> , are also up-regulated in both bronchial and buccal epithelial samples. oxidoreductase genes are up-regulated in all three airway epithelium including other cyp <dig> genes , aldehyde dehydrogenases , and aldo-keto reductases , suggesting that smoking activates common detoxification pathways in exposed airway epithelial cells.

gene set enrichment analysis also identified genes that are among the most down-regulated in both nasal and bronchial epithelium in response to tobacco exposure. slit <dig>  which is a known tumor suppressor that is down-regulated in lung cancer  <cit>  is among these genes. we found hnmt, which is expressed highly in both bronchial and nasal mucosa  <cit> , and has been shown to be down-regulated with smoking in other mucosal cells  <cit> , to be down regulated in smoking in bronchial and nasal epithelium. the genes that are among the most down regulated by smoking in both bronchial and nasal epithelium were enriched for those with functions in cellular localization, migration, and motility genes. these data suggest that smoking results in the down-regulation of structural genes in these tissues.

based on the data presented here, we suggest that aspects of the bronchial gene expression response to smoking are also changed by smoking in nasal epithelium, with certain of these genes also being perturbed by smoking in buccal mucosa. this suggests that there are common features in the field of injury caused by cigarette smoke throughout the airway. our data also suggest that the gene-expression consequences of smoking are less pronounced in buccal mucosa . this could be due to a number of factors: 1) the effects of smoking on buccal mucosa might indeed be less pronounced; 2) there may be more inter-subject variability in buccal mucosa gene expression; 3) the partial degradation of the rna in the buccal mucosa samples may contribute to variability in gene expression estimates. due to the high concentration of rnases found in saliva, rna obtained from buccal epithelial cells was subject to degradation, and relatively small amounts of rna were extracted from these cells. this required us to pool samples collected from the same individual serially over several weeks. previous studies report similar issues with salivary rna run on microarrays  <cit> . consistent with the low yield of partially degraded rna from buccal samples, we detected sequence-specific hybridization intensity for fewer probesets in the buccal samples than in the nasal or bronchial samples. despite these technical limitations, there was considerable overlap between genes that are among the most altered in response to smoking in the nose and bronchus and those that are most differentially expressed in the mouth based on the overlap between the leading edge subsets from gene set enrichment analysis. differential expression of several genes seen to be induced by smoking in buccal mucosa was validated in buccal mucosa samples from independent volunteers using real competitive pcr. taken together, these findings indicate that gene expression is perturbed by smoking in buccal mucosa and suggest that techniques for assaying gene expression in the context of partially degraded rna will facilitate further studies to determine if buccal-mucosa specific factors contribute to the apparent differences in the magnitude of the smoking response of buccal mucosa relative to that seen in other airway epithelia.

CONCLUSIONS
this study highlights the relationships between gene expression profiles in epithelial cells that line the intra- and extra-thoracic airway and identifies a common set of genes that are induced by tobacco smoke in buccal, nasal and bronchial epithelium, supporting the concept that smoking induces a common field of injury throughout the airway. these similarities suggest that easily collected buccal and nasal epithelium can be used to measure an individual's physiologic response to tobacco smoke.

