BACKGROUND
despite the growing recognition of the importance of chromosomal inversions for adaptation and evolution of species  <cit> , the evolutionary forces responsible for rearrangement establishment and maintenance remain an enigma of evolutionary biology. comparative mapping has yielded important insights into patterns and mechanisms of genome rearrangements in plants, mammals, fruit flies, and yeasts  <cit> . one of the important findings is that inversions are distributed nonuniformly across different chromosomes. cytogenetic studies performed on malaria mosquito species of subgenus cellia provided some of the most obvious examples of the nonuniform inversion distribution  <cit> . cellia is the largest subgenus within genus anopheles and is restricted to the old world. it includes some of the most important malaria vectors, such as, an. gambiae, an. funestus, and an. stephensi. the polytene chromosome complement of anopheles female consists of the x chromosome and four autosomal arms: 2r, 2l, 3r, and 3l. a study of the distribution of  <dig> polymorphic inversions in an. gambiae s.s. has found that the chromosome  <dig> is the most inversion-rich. it has  <dig> inversions versus only five inversions on chromosome  <dig>  <cit> . in an. funestus and an. stephensi, polymorphic inversions tend to cluster on the chromosomal arms that are homologous to the 2r and 2l arms of an. gambiae  <cit> . these observations suggest that genome rearrangements have chromosome-specific facilitators or inhibitors. the major consequence of unequal rates of chromosome evolution is a disproportionally large role of genetic content of certain chromosomal arms in adaptation and, possibly, speciation. however, the mechanisms that govern the unequal distribution of rearrangements among chromosomes are poorly understood.

the common inversions 2rb, 2rbc, 2rcu, 2ru, 2rd, and 2la of an. gambiae s.s. are widespread in the arid sub-saharan africa but almost absent in the humid equatorial africa  <cit> . similarly, multiple inversions on arms 2r and 3r in natural populations of an. funestus are fixed in the southern humid rainforest area of cameroon and decrease in frequency going northwards, with their complete absence in the northernmost dry sahelian savannas  <cit> . chromosomal studies of the asian malaria vector an. stephensi reveal striking differences in the kinds and frequencies of paracentric inversions on 2r and 3l between rural and urban populations, especially with respect to the common 2rb inversion  <cit> . these observations suggest that the genes on the 2r and 2l arms of an. gambiae and on the homologous arms of an. funestus and an. stephensi are more sensitive to variation in the environment experienced by these species and thus show evidence of selective response to environmental pressures. more recent studies provided ecological evidence that sympatric species an. gambiae and an. funestus inhabit a wide range of the same ecoclimatic settings in cameroon  <cit> , suggesting an intriguing possibility that polymorphic inversions capture identical sets of genes in different species and, thus, confer similar ecological adaptations. it has been proposed that inversions 2st of d. buzzatii and inpayne of d. melanogaster have common genes because both inversions are associated with body size  <cit> . however, the nonrandom occurrence of similar sets of genes within polymorphic inversions of different species has not yet been demonstrated. the presence of common genes within inversions of homologous chromosomal arms would indicate that natural selection favors certain adaptive gene combinations when different species are exposed to similar environmental variables.

polytene chromosomes, which are present in many species of anopheles, provide an opportunity to develop high-resolution physical maps and to study genome organization and evolution in malaria mosquitoes. we previously reported a 1-mb resolution physical map for an. stephensi and analyzed the evolutionary dynamics of chromosomal inversions in subgenus cellia  <cit> . the study has shown that despite the paucity of inversion polymorphisms on the x chromosome, this chromosome has the fastest rate of inversion fixation, while the 2r arm has the highest inversion fixation rate among autosomes. the results have also indicated that the rapidly and slowly evolving chromosomal arms have different genome landscapes characterized by distinctly enriched gene subpopulations and classes of repetitive dna. although the propensity of chromosomes to rearrangements seems to play a major role in the rates of inversion origin, negative and positive selections may differentially control the establishment and maintenance of polymorphic inversions on different chromosomal arms. for example, chromosome arms 3r and 3l of an. gambiae and homologous arms in other mosquito species have the lowest rates of inversion polymorphism and fixation  <cit> . the low tolerance of a chromosome to gene order disruption could contribute to the low rate of inversion establishment. large blocks of genes that are conserved in the evolution of several species may represent functionally important combinations that are maintained together by natural selection  <cit>  and/or genomic fragments devoid of evolutionary fragile regions  <cit> . comparative analysis of gene order preservation and disruption across species can determine possible differences in the chromosomal arm tolerance to rearrangements.

here, we report evolutionary insights from a comparative physical mapping among three species of malaria mosquitoes. we demonstrated that polymorphic inversions on the 2r arm, involved in environmental adaptations in these three species, nonrandomly share similar sets of genes. these results suggest that distantly related species acquire parallel adaptations through capturing common genes by independent polymorphic inversions. we also found that the chromosomal arms differ in their tolerance to gene order disruption during mosquito evolution. the distribution of breakpoint regions is evolutionary conserved on slowly evolving arms and tends to be lineage-specific on rapidly evolving arms. the arm-specific tolerance to chromosomal breakage could be responsible for the nonuniform establishment of inversions.

RESULTS
inversion distances among an. stephensi, an. gambiae, and an. funestus
to avoid a lineage-specific bias in pair-wise analyses of gene orders, we estimated the chromosomal divergence among the mosquito species. three-way comparative mapping can be very efficient in determining inversion distances among species. the cdna and bac clones physically and in silico mapped to polytene chromosomes of an. funestus, an. stephensi, and an. gambiae  <cit>  were used to identify conserved gene orders among the three species . the comparison of the physical maps of these species has identified the whole-arm translocations and paracentric inversions and detected no pericentric inversions or partial-arm translocations . therefore we were able to determine the arm homology among species  <cit> . accordingly, chromosome x  and arm 2r  are homologous across all three species. the 2l arm of an. gambiae corresponds to the 3r of an. funestus and the 3l of an. stephensi . the 2l arm of an. funestus corresponds to the 3r arms of an. gambiae and an. stephensi . the 2l arm of an. stephensi corresponds to the 3l arms of an. funestus and an. gambiae . we have calculated inversion distances among an. stephensi, an. gambiae, and an. funestus based on locations of  <dig> common autosomal dna markers in all three species . this comparison has been done at the ~ <dig> -mb level of resolution using the multiple genome rearrangements  program   <cit> . the mgr program has estimated  <dig> fixed inversions between an. stephensi and an. gambiae,  <dig> fixed inversions between an. stephensi and an. funestus, and  <dig> fixed inversions between an. gambiae and an. funestus. we also used the genome rearrangements in man and mouse  program without assuming directionality of the markers  to perform a pair-wise analysis of rearrangements  <cit> . the grimm program calculated  <dig> fixed inversions between an. stephensi and an. gambiae,  <dig> fixed inversions between an. stephensi and an. funestus, and  <dig> fixed inversions between an. gambiae and an. funestus. these data indicate that the three species have approximately equal chromosomal divergence from each other.

presence of similar sets of genes in polymorphic inversions of an. gambiae, an. stephensi, and an. funestus
the presence of common genes within inversions of homologous chromosomal arms could indicate that natural selection favors certain adaptive gene combinations when different species are exposed to similar environments. we tested for the presence or absence of physically and in silico mapped cdna and bac clones, which contained genes, in common polymorphic inversions of three mosquito species  <cit>  at ~1-mb level of resolution . in the previous study, we performed a test on the uniformity of the marker distribution across the chromosomes in an. gambiae, an. stephensi, and an. funestus using the Χ <dig> statistic  <cit> . the distribution of the dna markers was shown to be uniform for each arm and each species. the observed number of shared genes in polymorphic inversions of an. stephensi and an. gambiae , as well as of an. funestus and an. gambiae , were compared to those that would be expected under pure chance. under the hypothesis that the genes are distributed due to pure chance with respect to polymorphic inversions and to each other, identical markers would be randomly distributed across a pair of chromosome arms from different species. our results rejected this hypothesis as we found cases of nonrandom clustering of markers within polymorphic inversions in different species. figure  <dig> shows the heat plots for the test statistic: 2/ei,j, which demonstrate the difference between the observed and expected number of shared markers in each inversion of an. gambiae and an. stephensi, as well as an. gambiae and an. funestus. simulated p-values were computed from monte carlo simulated distributions, based on our test statistic, by considering the number of simulated replicates which were larger than the observed statistics . additional file  <dig> shows the probabilities that the intensity rate exceeds one for shared genes between an. stephensi and an. gambiae. figure 5a, b shows the corresponding intensity heat map 2/ei,j, which aids in visually assessing the locations of shared hot and cold spots. we define γi,j as the estimated factor of increased gene sharage, over what we would expect at random . inferred values where γi,j =  <dig> suggest the shared polymorphism is in line with what we might expect to see at random. on the 2r arm, we observed that marker pairs 2rf  and 2ru  correspond to an activity hotspot  with posterior probability pr =  <dig>  the level of increase over expectation is dramatic . similarly, additional file  <dig>  accompanied by figure  <dig> c, d, details results for shared polymorphic inversions between an. funestus and an. gambiae. again we observed on the 2r arm that marker pairs between 2rt  and 2ru  determine a hotspot of shared polymorphisms  =  <dig>   <dig>  times). another example of nonrandomly shared genes is the small 2rb inversion of an. gambiae  and the overlapping inversions 2rd and 2rh of an. funestus . the large 2la inversion is the only common inversion in an. gambiae on this arm . we found from little to no co-occurrence of the same markers in this inversion and polymorphic inversions on 3r of an. funestus and 3l of an. stephensi  . the results provide evidence that several polymorphic inversions at least on the 2r arm of an. gambiae nonrandomly share gene combinations with inversions of an. stephensi and an. funestus.

it is important to note that chromosomal arms 2r and 2l of an. gambiae had the most rapid reshuffling of gene order in evolution among autosomes. the mean length of conserved gene blocks is  <dig>  mb on 2r and  <dig>  mb on 2l . these lengths are much smaller than the sizes of the common polymorphic inversions:  <dig>  mb   <cit> ,  <dig>  mb  ,  <dig>  mb  ,  <dig>  mb   <cit> , and  <dig>  mb    <cit> . in some cases, the presence of similar sets of genes within inversions in different species could be explained by preservation of ancestral gene orders. for example, all three markers mapped to inversion 2ru of an. gambiae and inversion 2rf of an. stephensi formed a conserved block . however, many of the common markers did not belong to conserved gene blocks. moreover, we observed the reshuffled positions of small conserved blocks within polymorphic inversions in different species . therefore, colocalization of the common markers within polymorphic inversions is not only a result of the ancestral gene order but also a result of new genes combinations independently originated in different species.

to support the conclusion that gene sharing is more common in inversions than outside inversions, we have formed a metric for comparing the outside regions to the inverted regions. table  <dig> shows the ratio of average levels of gene sharing , between the outside regions relative to the inversions. we notice that for all comparisons the outside regions have less shared genes than inversions, as shown by the expected posterior assessments of the ratios being less than  <dig>  for all except the an. gambiae/an. funestus 2l/3r comparisons, 95% posterior credible intervals are bounded above by  <dig>  which demonstrate these results are significant. for an. gambiae/an. funestus 2l/3r, the 95% interval has strong overlap with  <dig>  which demonstrates the level of connectivity  is similar between inverted and outside regions.

conservation and disruption of gene order in mosquito evolution
to determine possible differences among chromosomal arms in the tolerance to generating evolutionary breakpoints, we performed comparative analysis of gene order preservation across species. conserved gene blocks were defined as regions with the same order and distance between at least two markers in two or more different species. for example, there were small conserved blocks  on arm 2r  as well as large conserved blocks  on arms 3r and 3l of an. gambiae . in this study, we identified two types of conserved blocks of genes:  blocks that were conserved among all three species  and  blocks that were conserved between two species, but were disrupted in the third species . the largest fully conserved and disrupted gene blocks are shown in figure  <dig> and figure  <dig>  respectively. for each of the four autosomal arms, we counted blocks that were conserved between only an. gambiae and an. funestus, an. gambiae and an. stephensi, and those that were conserved among all three species simultaneously. given the most recent common ancestor between each of our species of interest, disrupted blocks have accumulated through time, accounting the current level of block disruption in our sample . we focus our attention on two primary features of the blocks: the number and length of such blocks. the level of block disruption was inferred using a compound poisson process, in which the number of conserved blocks follows a poisson distribution and the length of the chromosomal arms scales the rate of the process . while we were primarily interested in the level of block disruption, and how it differs between groups, we explicitly model levels for fully and partially conserved blocks , since the counts are higher for these sets of blocks, and yield better estimation properties. the rate parameters {λj, γj} measure the abundance or block counts, and lengths, respectively on arm j ∈ {2r, 2l, 3r, 3l}.

we denote the fitted compound poisson process rate parameters as {λj, γj} and {λj, γj}, where the superscripts  and  denote whether the rates were fitted to conserved+disrupted or conserved blocks.

the difference between these sets of rates  =λj - λj and γj = γj - γj) models the rates governing the disrupted blocks, which were then used to compare the levels of block disruption between groups. we report these rate parameters in conjunction with the combined summary  γj)/lj, where lj is the total length of arm j. this combined summary has the interpretation of blocks per region length per total length . for both fitted processes, posterior summaries are displayed in table  <dig>  we demonstrated that the rate of accumulation of conserved and conserved+disrupted blocks was mildly higher for arms 2r and 3l. however, the lengths of the blocks were dramatically smaller on 2r than those found on other arms. for inferences of disrupted blocks, we considered the difference of these parameter pairings λj = λj- λj and  = )- <dig> -)- <dig>  strong overlap with zero, in each of the above parameter differences, indicated a negligible disruption rate. on the other hand, highly negative values indicated that the rates for the disrupted blocks were less than those for the conserved blocks. conversely, large values suggested higher rates for the disrupted blocks. the analysis revealed that the 2r arm has the highest rate of accumulation of disrupted blocks per unit length, λj, with a probability equal to  <dig>  . the effects for the other arms were less pronounced. moreover, the 3r arm of an. gambiae and the homologous arms of the other species had the lowest λj value with a probability of  <dig> , and all identified gene blocks in this arm were preserved among an. gambiae, an. funestus, and an. stephensi. the data suggest that this chromosomal arm possesses evolutionary conserved breakpoint clusters and has low tolerance to generating new breakpoints.









*the last numbers in the cells for λj and  refer to probabilities.

discussion
parallel evolution of adaptive inversion polymorphisms in mosquito species
natural selection seems to play a role in maintaining inversion polymorphisms on 2r and 2l of an. gambiae and their homologous arms in an. stephensi and an. funestus  <cit> . our previous study has shown that chromosomal arms rich in polymorphic inversions  have higher gene densities  <cit> . this observation confirmed the assumption that an inversion with fewer genes would have a smaller selective advantage  <cit> . moreover, the study of gene ontology terms has provided evidence that 2l is enriched with genes involved in the structural integrity of a cuticle, while the 2r arm has an overrepresentation of genes involved in cellular response to stress   <cit> . these data strongly support the role of natural selection in maintaining polymorphic inversions associated with adaptation of mosquitoes to the dry environment  <cit> . a study of larval ecology demonstrated that sympatric species an. gambiae and an. funestus inhabit a wide range of the same ecological settings in cameroon  <cit> . we hypothesized that if polymorphic inversions in the distant species confer the same adaptations than similar sets of genes can be present within inversions of these species. the presence of similar sets of genes within independent inversions would imply the role of natural selection acting on similar genetic content of homologous chromosomal arms and creating parallel phenotypes of the evolutionary distant species. a theoretical model suggests that the probability of parallel evolution under natural selection is about two times bigger than that under neutrality  <cit> . our results demonstrated that inversions on 2l of an. gambiae, 3l of an. stephensi, and 3r of an. funestus have almost random sets of genes . however, we found that the several 2r inversions in an. gambiae, an. stephensi, and an. funestus do share common genes. the 2rf inversion of an. stephensi has an increased frequency in the urban environment  <cit>  and nonrandomly share common genes with overlapping inversions 2rc, 2rd, 2rbk, and 2ru of an. gambiae. another "urban" inversion in an. stephensi, 2rb, had a gene homology to the inversion 2rc of an. gambiae . in contrast, the 2re inversion of an. stephensi has an increased frequency in the rural environment  <cit>  and nonrandomly shares common genes with inversion 2rb of an. gambiae and overlapping inversions 2rd/2rh of an. funestus. this nonrandom distribution of markers is not only the result of preservation of ancestral gene order. in fact, we observed cases with extensively reshuffled gene orders within independently originated polymorphic inversions .

the gene shuffling is common in malaria mosquitoes  <cit> , and these species are phylogenetically distant enough from each other  <cit>  to have independently originated polymorphic inversions, which differ in chromosomal positions and size. the nonrandom presence of homologous genes within inversion 2rb of an. gambiae and inversion 2rh of an. funestus is especially interesting in the light of ecological adaptations associated with these inversions. the high frequency of the 2rb inversion of an. gambiae has been found strongly associated with increased degree of aridity. in contrast, the low frequencies of this inversion have been recorded in humid areas  <cit> . the 2rh inversion of an. funestus has a similar  pattern of association with aridity. correlation of the 2rh inversion with the higher vapor pressure has been demonstrated the strongest among all studied inversions of an. funestus. in contrast, the standard  arrangement has been found associated with the lower vapor pressure  <cit> . thus, it is likely that natural selection favors adaptive gene combinations within polymorphic inversions on 2r when distantly related species are exposed to similar environmental pressures. the availability of these gene complexes would support long-term maintenance of polymorphic inversions. this knowledge could be useful for the discovery of genes responsible for an association of inversion polymorphisms with phenotypic variations in multiple species. if candidate genes were indentified within a polymorphic inversion in one species, the orthologous genes in another species likely play a similar role in adaptation if they are captured by a polymorphic inversion involved in the parallel adaptation. future studies should identify specific alleles associated with parallel adaptation of species of subgenus cellia.

arm-specific tolerance to disruption of gene order
we hypothesized that the arm-specific tolerance to chromosomal breakage could be responsible for the nonuniform distribution of inversions in autosomes. the comparative analysis of conserved and disrupted gene blocks in chromosomal arms across the three species provided evidence that 2r is more tolerant to disrupting gene orders and generating new evolutionary breakpoints than other arms . we observed that if a block on 2r was conserved between two mosquito species it was likely disrupted in the third species . in contrast, all identified gene blocks remain preserved on the 3r arm of an. gambiae and the homologous arms of the other species suggesting the existence of arm-specific constraints to breakage . these constraints could be controlled by negative selection acting against disruption of certain gene combinations. it is possible that slowly and rapidly evolving chromosomes may differ in sizes or abundance of coregulated gene clusters. purifying selection against genomic rearrangements may preserve physical colocalization of coexpression clusters  <cit> . for example, clusters of genes deregulated in trx mutant d. melanogaster larvae are not uniformly distributed along the genome; 60% of them are located on chromosome 3l  <cit> , which is a slowly-evolving arm in drosophila  <cit> . physically clustered genes may have shared regulatory regions, common expression pattern, and chromatin-level regulation, or they may represent clusters of essential genes  <cit> . additionally, conservation of gene order in certain regions of the genome has been explained by long-range gene regulation  <cit> . if the 3r arm of an. gambiae is enriched in large functional gene clusters, then generating inversions on this arm or inserting a transgene into 3r will likely have a negative effect on mosquito fitness. alternatively, the location of breakpoint clusters in only specific chromosomal regions of the 3r arm of an. gambiae and the homologous arms of the other species could be responsible for the preservation of the gene order in evolution. indeed, a recent study has shown that fragility of certain regions rather than functional constraints plays the main role in nonuniform distribution of inversions in drosophila chromosomes  <cit> . if this is the case in mosquitoes, than the distribution of breakpoints is lineage-specific on 2r and evolutionary conserved on the 3r arm of an. gambiae and the homologous arms of the other species. our previous study has found that the 2r arm has the highest density of regions involved in segmental duplications that clustered in the breakpoint-rich zone of the arm. in contrast, the slower evolving 2l, 3r, and 3l, arms were enriched with matrix-attachment regions  <cit> . future analyses of the genome sequence in different species will shed light on the exact mechanism of breakage in each individual chromosomal arm. regardless of the mechanism, it is clear that new rearrangement breaks are more easily allowable on 2r than on other arms in different mosquito lineages, thus, contributing to the arm-specific differences in rates of chromosomal evolution in anopheles.

CONCLUSIONS
our study demonstrated that polymorphic inversions on the 2r arm nonrandomly captured similar sets of genes in an. gambiae, an. funestus, and an. stephensi. this finding suggests that natural selection favors specific gene combinations within polymorphic inversions when distant species are exposed to similar environmental pressures. this knowledge could be useful for the discovery of genes responsible for an association of inversion polymorphisms with ecological adaptations in multiple species. we also found that the autosomal arms differ in their tolerance to disruption of syntenic blocks during mosquito evolution. the arm 2r has the highest level of inversion fixation among autosomal arms and the highest tolerance to disruption of syntenic blocks in evolution of subgenus cellia. in contrast, the 3r arm of an. gambiae and homologous arms of the other species have few inversions and the lowest tolerance to disruption of syntenic blocks. all syntenic blocks found on this arm in two mosquito species were also preserved in the third species. therefore, the distribution of breakpoint regions tends to be evolutionary conserved on slowly evolving arms and lineage-specific on rapidly evolving arms. these data support the chromosomal arm specificity in rates of gene order disruption during mosquito evolution.

