BACKGROUND
the maintenance of species integrity between sexually compatible sympatric populations largely depends on several reproductive barriers that together determine the reproductive isolation acting between species 
 <cit> . isolating barriers act sequentially and are conveniently classified in pre-mating  and post-mating barriers  
 <cit> . because of the sequential action of these isolating mechanisms, it is generally assumed that pre-mating isolation barriers are more important to reproductive isolation than post-mating barriers, although conclusive evidence for this is still largely lacking 
 <cit> .

comparative analyses of pre- and post-mating barriers in a wide range of species of the food-deceptive orchid genera anacamptisneotinea and orchis have revealed relatively weak pre-mating isolation barriers 
 <cit> . this is because most food-deceptive orchid species are pollinated by generalist pollinators – most often bees and bumblebees – and most orchid species show considerable overlap in their pollinator community 
 <cit> . on the other hand, early-acting post-mating barriers appeared to be much stronger 
 <cit> , suggesting that these barriers played a significant role during speciation and still play an important role in the maintenance of the species’ identity. late-acting post-mating barriers  were shown to contribute further to reproductive isolation in food-deceptive species 
 <cit> . in 56% of potentially hybridizing species, hybrid inviability has been reported and in most crosses involving hybrid individuals reduced fertility was found, suggesting that intrinsic post-mating isolation strongly contributes to the maintenance of reproductive boundaries among these species 
 <cit> .

notwithstanding hybridization has been frequently observed in the genera anacamptisneotinea and orchis <cit> , it can be expected that due to the cumulative effects of post-mating barriers 
 <cit>  hybridization in natural populations should in most cases be restricted to the f <dig> generation. as a result, introgression should be rare and species boundaries well-conserved. most studies investigating the extent of hybridization using molecular markers have indeed shown little crossbreeding beyond the f <dig> generation 
 <cit> . for example, in two species of the genus anacamptis , molecular analyses based on nuclear its and aflp markers showed that all examined hybrids were f <dig> hybrids 
 <cit> . these results were corroborated by hand-pollination experiments, which showed that hybrids produced no viable progeny, indicating that late-acting post-mating barriers  prevented gene introgression 
 <cit> . similarly, most hybrids between orchis mascula and o. pauciflora and between o. italica and o. anthropophora belonged to the f <dig> generation and very few putative backcross individuals were present 
 <cit> . hand-pollination experiments also confirmed the low viability of progeny originating from backcross pollinations 
 <cit> . on the other hand, recent analyses investigating hybridization in the sister species anacamptis morio and a. longicornu have shown that reproductive barriers were insufficient to prevent genomic admixture 
 <cit> , suggesting that in closely related species pre- and post-mating barriers were insufficient to maintain species boundaries. similarly, analyses of pre- and early acting post-mating barriers acting between the closely related orchis militaris and o. purpurea have shown that reproductive isolation, including pollinator sharing, fruit abortion, seed abortion and seed mortality, was low compared to the average reproductive isolation reported for the genus 
 <cit>  and smaller for crosses between o. militaris♀ and o. purpurea♂  than for crosses between o. purpurea♀ and o. militaris♂  
 <cit> . given that both species display considerable overlap in flowering time and often grow in the same area, the observed degree of reproductive isolation may be insufficient to prevent interspecies mating and thus genomic admixture. however, at present little is known about the frequency of later-generation hybrids and what factors drive their occurrence in hybrid populations.

previous analyses using aflp markers have provided evidence of asymmetric introgression in a sympatric population of o. militaris and o. purpurea in belgium 
 <cit> , but the mechanism causing this pattern of introgression remains unclear. one hypothesis may be that interactions with animal pollinators are the primary source for the observed trend towards more o. purpurea-like plants. in this case, it can be predicted that female fitness of o. purpurea-like plants is higher than that of o. militaris-like plants. to test this hypothesis, we combined molecular analyses with morphological measurements to estimate the extent of hybridization and introgression in the same sympatric population of orchis purpurea and o. militaris in belgium. more in particular, data from allopatric populations were included in the molecular analyses to investigate in more detail the extent of introgression and genome-wide admixture. we also assessed genomic clines and tested for deviations from neutral expectations. finally, the morphometric data were related to fitness data  to assess selection through female function on floral traits in the hybrid population.

RESULTS
genetic diversity and differentiation
the three primer combinations generated a total of  <dig> polymorphic bands, of which  <dig> were polymorphic in the admixed population. each individual displayed a unique banding pattern. genetic diversity was consistently higher in the hybrid zone than in the pure populations . genetic differentiation was high . pairwise fst values were high between the pure o. militaris and o. purpurea populations , but substantially lower between the hybrid population and the pure o. militaris  and o. purpurea  population. the pcoa identified three groups: i) pure o. purpurea individuals, ii) pure o. militaris individuals, and iii) a large cluster of putative hybrids . however, not all individuals sampled in the hybrid population appeared to be hybrids, and some individuals clearly clustered within the pure o. militaris group. very few individuals of the hybrid zone clustered within the pure o. purpurea group . bayesian admixture analyses using structure yielded similar results. the likelihood ) increased greatly between k =  <dig> and k =  <dig>  but less so after k =  <dig>  which, together with the fact that Δk reached its maximum at k =  <dig>  suggests the existence of two clusters. population clustering at successively higher k values demonstrated a consistent pattern indicating that individuals from pure o. militaris and o. purpurea populations formed largely independent clusters with hybrids exhibiting an admixed genotype . pure populations of o. purpurea and o. militaris were almost entirely composed of purebreds . the genotypes of both parental taxa contributed to the genotypes in the hybrid population, but despite of the detection of a substantial number of pure o. militaris plants, individuals of the admixed population showed a larger contribution of the o. purpurea genome  , which is in line with previous analyses 
 <cit> . 

genome-wide admixture and hybrid indices
hybrid indices for plants of the hybrid populations varied between  <dig>  and  <dig>  . however, the results indicated that the frequency of hybrid indices was significantly skewed to the left, implying that a substantial amount of pure o. militaris individuals was present in the population , whereas only one plant had > 99% of o. purpurea in its genome . on the other hand, more than half of all individuals  had a hybrid index larger than  <dig> , indicating that most individuals had a larger fraction of orchis purpurea in their genome. there was also an abrupt change in hybrid indices between  <dig>  and  <dig> , after which changes in hybrid indices leveled off .

analyses using newhybrids and a threshold q-value of  <dig>  showed that  <dig> out of  <dig>  individuals sampled in the hybrid population were unequivocally assigned to pure o. militaris, pure o. purpurea or the four predefined hybrid classes  . in total, 36 f <dig>   <dig> backcrosses with o. purpurea, eight backcrosses with o. militaris and five f <dig> genotypes were identified . twenty one pure o. militaris plants were found, whereas only five pure o. purpurea individuals were observed.

estimates of genomic clines for each marker locus across the hybrid population revealed that, after correcting for multiple testing using the false discovery rate procedure 
 <cit> ,  <dig>  out of  <dig> polymorphic aflp markers that were detected in the admixed population deviated from a model of neutral introgression . of these,  <dig> and  <dig> markers showed steeper and shallower genomic clines than expected given neutral introgression, respectively . 

morphological analyses
the first and second axis of principal component analysis explained  <dig>  and  <dig> % of the variation, respectively, and the measured flower characters allowed distinguishing unambiguously the two parental taxa from each other and o. militaris individuals from plants of the hybrid zone, but failed to separate pure o. purpurea individuals from putative hybrids .

the number of flowers was significantly different  between pure o. purpurea , o. militaris  and putative hybrids . all other flower traits were also significantly different between pure o. militaris, o. purpurea and the putative hybrids . in four out of eleven traits , plants from the hybrid zone were intermediate between the two parental taxa. in three out of eleven traits  plants in the hybrid zone were morphologically more extreme than either parent . in three flower traits  plants from the hybrid zone resembled o. militaris more than o. purpurea . only in the width of the arm and the width of the labellum hybrids resembled o. purpurea more than o. militaris.

all values are given in mm. values with different letters in superscripts are significantly different at the α =  <dig>  level.

the canonical discrimant analysis yielded the function : d = − <dig> c +  <dig>  g +  <dig>  j. based on this function, individuals of o. militaris received negative values, while those of o. purpurea had positive values . morphological hybrid indices calculated for plants of the hybrid population corresponded strongly with the molecular hybrid indices .

relationship between fitness and phenotypic traits
in the hybrid population, the number of fruits produced by a single plant varied between  <dig> and  <dig> fruits , corresponding to percentages fruit set of  <dig> and  <dig> % . the proportion of viable seeds varied between  <dig> and  <dig>  . significant selection on the number of flowers  and the first pca axis  were found . the variance inflation factors were small , indicating that there were no problems with collinearity.

discussion
hybridisation between o. militaris and o. purpurea
species integrity between closely related sympatric species strongly depends on the strength of reproductive isolation. if parental species are not sufficiently reproductively isolated, the survival of pure parentals may become a challenge when occurring in close proximity. using detailed morphological and molecular data, we showed that hybridization and genetic admixture had occurred in a population where o. purpurea and o. militaris grew in sympatry. our data further showed that hybridization had occurred beyond the f <dig> generation, confirming previous reports that have shown that hybrid swarms can arise between these two species 
 <cit> . across the entire genus orchis, the formation of hybrid swarms is rare, and has been reported in only three other species combinations  
 <cit> . nonetheless, some pure individuals were still present in the studied population, indicating that the parental species are sufficiently isolated to survive the challenge of sympatry.

in species that display overlap in phenology, reproductive isolation can be achieved by specific pollinators, post-pollination barriers or a combination of both. because o. purpurea and o. militaris are pollinated by the same suite of generalist pollinators  
 <cit>  and display considerable overlap in flowering time, frequent exchange of pollen between the parental species is likely. moreover, experimental pollinations between o. purpurea and o. militaris also showed that both species are capable of producing high levels  of fruit set when they are pollinated with pollen of the other species 
 <cit> . these findings also comply with the fact that they have the same chromosome number  
 <cit> , allowing them to cross relatively easily. therefore, the occurrence of pure o. purpurea and o. militaris individuals is more likely the result of late-acting post-mating barriers that limit crossbreeding between the hybrid and parental types or that lead to hybrid sterility.

the evolution of hybrid sterility has been shown to have played an instrumental role in determining reproductive isolation in food-deceptive orchids, as only two out of seven hybrid combinations were able to produce viable seeds when hybrids were backcrossed with parental plants 
 <cit> . in the studied population, average fruit set was similar to that observed in allopatric populations of o. purpurea <cit> , indicating that barriers to cross-breeding between hybrid plants and parental types were weak. on the other hand, fruits contained only about 25% of viable seeds, which is significantly lower than that observed in pure individuals, suggesting that the lower fitness of hybrids may to some extent have contributed to the maintenance of species integrity. however, since seed germination and protocorm development in orchids are dependent on suitable mycorrhizal fungi, and because both species and their hybrids associated with specific sets of mycorrhizal fungi 
 <cit> , the patchy distribution of mycorrhizal fungi that are able to support germination of both pure and hybrid seeds may have further contributed to the maintenance of pure parentals. seed germination experiments have indeed shown that germination of pure o. militaris seeds was mostly restricted to areas where pure o. militaris plants were growing, whereas hybrid seeds and seeds from pure o. purpurea mainly germinated in areas where o. purpurea was most abundant 
 <cit> .

asymmetric introgression
bayesian admixture analyses using structure indicated that introgression was asymmetric with o. purpurea contributing more to the genomic composition of the hybrids than o. militaris. hybrid indices also covered the entire range between  <dig> and  <dig>  but there was an abrupt change between  <dig>  and  <dig> , suggesting that backcrosses with o. militaris were rare. analyses using newhybrids indeed showed that only very few backcrosses with o. militaris were present in the population. these results were corroborated by the morphometric analyses, which also failed to unambiguously distinguish hybrids from pure o. purpurea plants based on flower characteristics. however, failure to distinguish hybrid plants from pure o. purpurea plants may also be explained by the fact that flowers of o. purpurea display considerable variation and that therefore clustering of individuals based on morphological data was less stringent than that based on molecular data. nonetheless, our data on individual characters of the parental species were remarkably similar to those presented for different allopatric populations of o. purpurea and o. militaris in the uk 
 <cit> . for example, the average width of the leg, which can be considered as taxonomically useful character clearly distinguishing the hybrids from the parental species 
 <cit> , varied between  <dig>  and  <dig> , and between  <dig>  and  <dig>  in british populations of o. militaris and o. purpurea, respectively, whereas it was  <dig>  and  <dig>  in this study. therefore, failure to distinguish pure individuals from hybrids most likely reflects severe mixing rather than the use of uninformative characters.

asymmetric introgression can arise when the two parental species show different abundances or when parental species and hybrids display spatial segregation in the population, so that first-order hybrids will mate more frequently with the most abundant parent, or with the parental species it grows closest next to. in our previous analysis, we have shown that the spatial distribution of o. militaris was not related to that of hybrids or pure o. purpurea individuals, but that hybrids and pure o. purpurea individuals occupied the same area. hybrids and pure o. purpurea individuals also showed similar mycorrhizal association patterns, whereas the community of mycorrhizal fungi associating with pure o. militaris plants was significantly different. moreover, o. militaris plants showed a highly clustered distribution pattern 
 <cit> , which may have favored pure, intraspecific pollination. in contrast, the distribution of f <dig> hybrid plants largely overlapped with that of backcrosses to o. purpurea and pure o. purpurea individuals, potentially contributing to pollen flow between hybrids and pure o. purpurea plants.

our results further indicated that in the absence of other forms of selection, plants with large floral displays and thus resembling more o. purpurea and/or plants with floral traits similar to those of flowers of o. purpurea were favored. the large number of backcrosses with o. purpurea is in line with this observation. these results thus suggest that floral characters of o. purpurea are selectively favored in the hybrid zone. genomic clines analysis also showed that about 27% of all aflp markers deviated from neutral expectations, suggesting that they may introgress less  frequently than expected under neutrality 
 <cit> . such deviations can be interpreted as evidence of selection and suggest that gene movement across the hybrid zone is not fully random. depending on the direction, deviations can either represent an increase in introgression rates  or a decrease in introgression rates . we have shown that about 60% of all markers that deviated from neutrality showed evidence for an increase in introgression rates.

CONCLUSIONS
the analyses of morphometric and molecular data provide evidence for substantial introgression between orchis militaris and o. purpurea. they also indicated that this hybrid population was dominated by individuals resembling more o. purpurea. moreover, selection analyses based on cumulative female reproductive success showed that o. purpurea-like individuals were selectively favored. nonetheless, a substantial amount of pure o. militaris individuals was observed. probably, the highly clustered spatial distribution patterns and spatially restricted seed germination, most likely mediated by patchy distributions of suitable mycorrhizal fungi, contributed to maintenance of genetic integrity in this species. future research should therefore incorporate associations with mycorrhizal fungi to understand speciation in orchids.

