BACKGROUND
since the first genetically modified  plants were authorized for release and commercial food production in the mid 1990ies, the global gm acreage has increased rapidly every year. for example 57% of all soybean and 25% of all maize grown on the world market in  <dig> was gm  <cit> . the diversity of food crop species and traits introduced is also rapidly increasing, and with the prospective use of food crop plants in for instance production of pharmaceuticals and biofuels, the risk is also increasing for introduction of unauthorized gm material into the foodchain or release of unauthorized gm plants into the environment. recent examples of such introduction are the presence of event bt <dig> in us maize and ll <dig> rice in us rice exported to europe  <cit> . international and national regulations require that distribution and release of gm organisms  is under strict control and surveillance, and that gmos are only authorized on the basis that they do not pose a risk to human or animal health or the environment  <cit> . with the increased global focus on biosafety, and the realistic scenarios of unintended release of unauthorized and potentially unknown nature of the gm materials, there is a need for availability of technology that rapidly can detect and provide information about a possible unknown gmo.

genetic modifications of plants  involve the stable introduction of a novel genetic construct  into a target organism's genome. in plants, the most popular traits introduced include herbicide tolerance, insect resistance and ripening delay  <cit> . in addition to the particular gene associated with the trait of interest, other genetic elements are also transferred to the target plant during a transformation event. for correct expression, promoters such as the cauliflower mosaic virus  35s promoter  are needed. among the most popular terminators/polyadenylation signals are the nopaline synthase  terminator from agrobacterium tumefaciens and the camv 35s polyadenylation signal . in addition, selection markers, polylinkers and transit peptides are often included in gm constructs. depending on the transformation technique used, as well as other factors, additional parts of the carrier vector may also be co-transformed into the target genome.

the most widely used methods for detection of genetic modifications in plants rely on real-time pcr. primers can be designed either to be used as screening tools where consensus primers target a commonly used gm element, gene-specific primers can be used to detect the presence of an introduced trait gene, construct specific assays can be used to specifically target a particular configuration of gm elements, or host/transgene junction-specific primers can be designed to make an assay event-specific  <cit> . in addition to fluorescent real-time pcr, some methods have also been described where amplified products are labeled and hybridized to arrays  <cit>  and multiplex setups have been suggested  <cit> . still, singleplex pcr remains the most commonly used strategy, and if the genetic modification in question is unknown or poorly characterized, multiple individual pcr experiments are set up. each pcr assay is designed to target a particular sequence, and multiple assays  have to be performed in order to check for the presence of different genetic constructs.

we have developed a high resolution microarray-based method for the detection of both known and unknown genetic modifications in plants. the method is pcr-independent, applies direct hybridization of total genomic dna and takes advantage of the high degree of recycling and sequence similarity between elements commonly used in genetic modifications in plants. using custom designed microarrays, we have analyzed genetically modified lines of arabidopsis thaliana and oryza sativa  as model systems. we show that without prior knowledge about the transgene sequence in question, fragments  of the elements used in the genetic transformation can be detected.

RESULTS
nimbleexpress arrays  were designed to have  <dig> basepair probes tiled throughout  <dig> vector sequences downloaded from genbank  of dna given the volume of hybridization mixture that could be injected into the affymetrix array cartridge. ninety μg seemed to be the upper limit , and this corresponds to roughly  <dig> fmole haploid a. thaliana genomes and  <dig> amoles of haploid rice genomes.

six arrays were run, representing two transgene a. thaliana lines, two experimental duplicates of wildtype a. thaliana, as well as one transgene and one wildtype rice line. average signal intensities for the array probes were  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig>  . after normalization of the arrays, signal/background ratios were calculated for all probes using the average signals from the wildtype replicates as an estimate for the level of probe signal background . the complete set of signal data is available upon request.

the analysis did not yield any false positives looking at wildtype vs. wildtype a. thaliana dna . as expected for the other experiments, a large fraction of the sequence windows detected formed small sets of overlapping and nearly identical sequences. the initial analysis gave  <dig> positive windows for salk/wt,  <dig> for ida/wt and  <dig> for ceca/wt . after sequence filtering  of data from the ida experiment, we were left with  <dig> unique sequences. in the salk experiment,  <dig> sequences were reported and analysis of the rice dna yielded  <dig> unique windows. detected windows ranged in size from  <dig> to  <dig> bases, representing  <dig> to  <dig> probes . all of the high ranking matches could easily be matched back to their corresponding t-dna loci . for salk, the highest ranking windows were dominated by elements containing the nos terminator. this element is present twice in the salk insert and this might lead to a bias due to stronger signals from these probes. this same phenomenon was observed for the double enhancer version of the camv 35s promoter in the ceca rice. all of the sequences detected matched close to 100% perfectly with the target sequences except for some single basepair differences .

subsequent southern blotting of dna from the salk line using probes targeting the insertion cassette indicated that this was indeed a single copy line, and analysis of sequence data showed that the dna transferred during the transformation appeared to be limited to the t-dna region . neither the t-dna tagging vector pmha <dig>  <cit>  used to generate the ida plant nor the salk insertion line t-dna  were part of our set of camv p35s-containing vectors used for array design. the rice construct contained a large fragment derived from the pcambia- <dig> vector, which was included in our target sequence compilation.

discussion
the recent increase in feature density and lowered cost associated with the use of microarrays has prompted several groups to develop whole-genome based protocols for characterization of eukaryotic genomic content  <cit> . most of these groups have relied on currently available  microarrays. using a single color system, we decided to see if this approach would work using custom designed arrays and unfiltered probes tiled throughout a set of reference sequences in the context of genetically modified plants.

neither of the transgene plant lines tested were transformed using constructs where complete sequence information had been submitted to genbank, so in the context of this study they were treated as unknown genetic modifications. but, the method does make some assumptions about the genetic elements that can be uncovered. for example, with the applied minimum window size of  <dig> probes, the transgene sequence in question must contain at least one element of a significant size  that has a reasonably high degree of sequence similarity with one or more of the elements that were included in our target sequence compilation. in this sense, the method is not able to detect all 'truly unknown gmos'. an array-based method that makes fewer assumptions has been suggested by our group previously  <cit> , but currently no methods  can be said to guarantee the accurate detection of a genetic modification without making any assumptions. window sizes of  <dig> and  <dig> probes were also tested but these yielded too many false positives. the absolute optimal combination of window size and match cutoff  was not determined in the present study.

in our array design, more than  <dig> million bases of sequence were used to design the overlapping probes. the fact that less than  <dig>  probes were sufficient to get a degree of coverage of on average one probe per five bases  gives an indication of the level of conservation and reuse when it comes to the elements used in designing genetic constructs for plant transformations. although a novel, unknown gmo might contain a trait gene not included in a reference sequence database, it is highly likely that other elements, such as promoters, selection markers, terminators etc. will be used that have been described in the literature. the entire genbank vector sequence collection now includes information from about  <dig>  entries , but this only constitutes about  <dig>  ×  <dig> unique  <dig> basepair sequences . the highest number of features currently synthesized on commercially available affymetrix-type arrays is >  <dig> ×  <dig> , so it should be possible to make an array with any degree of probe tiling scheme throughout both dna strands of any set of cloning vectors in genbank.

even though our probes were designed using a set of  <dig> sequences, our window-based approach for detecting gm elements could be used with reference to any set of relevant sequences. we have only screened our results using the same reference sequences we used for the array design, but as long as the probe coverage is reasonably high, data from an array design such as the one described in this study may be compared against a much broader sampling of transgene sequences.

with the current design, it cannot be assumed that very long stretches of target sequence can be detected in their entirety . for instance, the vector used in the generation of t-dna salk insertion lines was not included in the target sequence compilation used for our array design, but it has a t-dna sequence with a stretch of  <dig>  bases with 100% match to one of the vectors in our target sequence compilation . still, we were not able to detect a continuous window for this part of the t-dna construct. in our experiments, 35–48% percent of the probes that should yield a positive signal were scored as true positives . poor performance of a fraction of the probes was not unexpected since they were designed without in silico filtering  <cit>  or empirical testing. it is, however, also important to remember that the cutoff value for scoring a probe as positive using our strategy relies on the standard deviation of the signal/noise ratios. the standard deviation will be affected by the number of potentially positive probes in an experiment. if a large number of probes on the array match the gmo analyzed, the standard deviation is likely to increase. so, the number of probes that are scored as positives is linked to the size of the gm element in question. an a. thaliana line transformed with for instance a truncated version of the ida construct would probably have led to a smaller standard deviation, and would have given a different set of positive probes and probe windows. so, the sensitivity of the method is likely to increase when the number of potentially positive probes decreases. while at first glance, the results for wt/wt in table  <dig> seem to indicate that without true positives in the sample, the method becomes oversensitive , the window-based approach readily discriminates between false positive individual probes and false positive windows .

thus, the presented method should be seen more as a tool for detecting discrete transgene elements than a protocol for detailed characterization of genetically modified plants. by using sequence similarity search tools such as blast  <cit> , it is fairly straightforward to at least partly annotate the positive windows. as a starting point for further characterization of the transgene sequence detected, we recommend using defined genetic loci within the hits rather than the raw sequences. the most commonly used protocols for characterization of gm events rely on anchor-pcr followed dna sequencing of amplified products  <cit> , see also  <cit>  and the sequences detected by our method should be sufficient for initiating a more detailed study using these standard approaches.

the general concept described herein should work well for organisms other than the plant lines described herein, albeit it is likely that a significantly larger genome  size will decrease the signal/noise ratio using our current protocol for dna labeling and hybridization. given the upper limit on the amount of dna that can be hybridized, a larger genome will give a smaller number of target dna copies per feature on the array. one way to avoid this problem might be to implement a more sensitive labeling strategy, using for instance quantum dot technology  <cit> . an alternative approach would be to co-hybridize differentially labeled control and sample dna and use the signal ratios directly.

CONCLUSIONS
the whole genome based concept described herein should be useful for both detection and characterization of known as well as unknown genetic modifications in plants. the method requires access to a small amount of gmo material of high purity, but the only other limitations are availability of sequence data from gmo constructs and the minimal size of the transgene sequence to be detected. it is expected that the upper limit for number of features that can be fitted onto an array will continue to increase, and combined with decreased array cost, we believe that unbiased array-based detection of gm constructs will be a helpful tool not only for research on plants, but for genetically modified organisms in general.

