BACKGROUND
species in the francisella genus are facultative intracellular, gram-negative bacteria, and well known for causing tularaemia in mammals. francisella was first found by the american bacteriologist edward francis in 1922
 <cit> . the francisella tularensis subspecies strains can be serious pathogens for human and can cause tularaemia that lead to mortality, making these bacteria a potential bio-weapon
 <cit> . until recently the francisella genus only consisted of two species, f. tularensis subsp. tularensis and f. philomiragia subsp. philomiragia where francisella philomiragia subsp. philomiragia is a non-virulent species. recently, more francisella species and strains have been isolated from several new sources. from farmed atlantic cod, a new and highly virulent species of francisella was recently described and has later been given the name f.noatunensis subsp. noatunensis <cit> . francisella has also been reported from other fish species and another fish pathogenic strain, f. noatunensis subsp. orientalis toba <dig> has been obtained from tilapia
 <cit> . in addition, francisella has been identified in environmental samples and from invertebrates like ticks
 <cit> . although the available francisella genomes are fairly close to each other in their features, their genomes are highly rearranged
 <cit> . the molecular phylogeny of francisella species and strains has been reported previously and the family francisellaceae currently contains one genus only and there is no close pathogenic relative to this bacteria family
 <cit> . the subspecies of f. tularensis are classified into human virulent, non-virulent, and moderately virulent. f. tularensis subsp. tularensis and f. tularensis subsp. holarctica are human virulent strains, the latter being less virulent
 <cit> . f. tularensis subsp. mediasiatica is moderately virulent to human
 <cit> . f. tularensis subsp. novicida and f. philomiragia subsp. philomiragia are not virulent to human. the f. noatunensis strains are not able to grow at 37dc and hence they are not virulent to human
 <cit> .

the francisella species can also be categorized into metabolically competent and metabolically incompetent. the metabolically competent strains have been found in environmental samples while the incompetent depend on a host for growth. the metabolic competence of a species relate to the number of intact metabolic genes present in its genome
 <cit> . f. tularensis subsp. tularensis, f. tularensis subsp. holarctica and f. tularensis subsp. mediasiatica are metabolically incompetent and have a larger number of disrupted genes  in their genomes while f. philomiragia subsp. philomiragia and f. tularensis subsp. novicida are metabolically competent and have few disrupted genes. the characterized genomes of strains within the f. tularensis subspecies are highly rearranged between themselves and insertion elements  have been regarded as a key feature to create these rearrangements. the genomic breakpoints are typically flanked by is-elements and associated with a large number of pseudogenes
 <cit> . the f. tularensis subspecies genomes possesses two copies of fpi , while the metabolically competent have one copy of fpi. although several studies comparing human virulent, moderately virulent strains and non-virulent strains have been reported, the mechanisms behind the pathogenecity of francisella strains are still largely unknown.

identification of several new highly virulent strains of francisella from farmed fish has opened up for a broader comparison between members of this important and very special group of bacteria. the f. noatunensis strains are highly pathogenic to fishes and can cause high mortality and losses in farmed fish
 <cit> . to gain more detailed information about f. noatunensis subspecies we sequenced f. noatunensis subsp. orientalis toba <dig> strain genome using pyrosequencing. we were able to assemble the f. noatunensis subsp. orientalis toba <dig> genome into one high quality scaffold. the genome sequence and assembly of the virulent fish pathogen f. noatunensis subsp. orientalistoba <dig> has been annotated and used in a comparative genomic approach to analyze the properties that are shared with the mammalian pathogenic and environmental francisella strains. we also tried to understand the factor influencing virulence among the francisella strains used for comparative studies. our sequence analysis revealed that the f. noatunensis subsp. orientalis toba <dig> strain lack is-elements shedding new light on the role and possibly the mechanisms of genome rearrangement in the francisella species. one feature shared between the orientalis and the human pathogenic francisella strains is the presence of disrupted genes and metabolic incompetence.

RESULTS
genome features
we were able to assemble the genomic reads for f. noatunensis subsp. orientalis toba <dig>  into one contig with a size of  <dig>  mbp . we have predicted  <dig> protein coding genes in the f. noatunensis subsp. orientalis toba <dig> genome and most of the encoded  proteins are most similar to proteins encoded in the f. philomiragia subsp. philomiragia genome  followed by f. tularensis subsp. novicida. the fish pathogenic francisella genome share properties both with virulent and non-virulent francisella species . the parasitic francisella species have in general a more compact genome with fewer protein coding genes and with a relatively large number of pseudogenes compared to f. philomiragia subsp. philomiragia and f. tularensis subsp. novicida . a striking difference between the fish parasitic francisella and the mammalian parasites is the lack of insertion elements  and only one copy of the pathogenecity island  in the fish parasite.

francisella became pathogenic long before it became pathogenic to mammals
several studies have addressed the molecular phylogeny of francisella species and subspecies
 <cit>  and we conducted a whole genome phylogenetic analysis based on all available francisella genomes [figure
1b and a tree based on the core set of genes present in the francisella species [figure
1a. we were able to find all the core genes from f. noatunensis subsp. noatunensis in the incomplete assembly from our sequence data and included that strain only to build the tree. this analysis confirms previous studies that there are two main groups of francisella, the f. tularensis subspecies group and the f. philomiragia subspecies group, where the fish parasitic species belong to the latter. the phylogenetic distance between the species in the “philomiragia group” is larger than between the species in the tularensis group. however, the distance between the two groups is quite large. hence, neither this nor other studies show a close phylogenetic link between the different pathogenic species within the francisella genus. it appears likely that the mammalian pathogenic species and the fish pathogenic species result from  independent events of a free-living francisella ancestral species acquiring a pathogenic lifestyle, and the phylogeny analysis is consistent with the fish pathogenic francisella being result of an ancient event resulting in the genome containing no is elements. this result is also supported by the recent publication conducting evolutionary analysis between fish and mammalian pathogens
 <cit> .

the lack of is elements in the genome of f. noatunensis subsp. orientalis toba <dig> suggests that its acquisition of a pathogenic lifestyle happened a long time ago. moran and plague found that pathogens or symbionts that have recently adopted an obligate host association have numerous is elements while ancient obligate host associations most often have no is elements
 <cit> . this suggests that the present francisella strain pathogenic to tilapia results from an ancient event where free-living francisella-like bacteria infected fish  and underwent a period of gene decay and genome rearrangement where is elements may have played a major role. as observed by moran and plague, bacteria that have ancient obligate host associations, lack is-elements, and the present data on f. noatunensis subsp. orientalis toba <dig> suggests that it falls into this category. this is also supported by the results of our analyses of phylogeny and pseudogenes content summarized below.

the two fish infecting francisella does not form a monophyletic group  and this is an indication that they can have become parasitic at two independent events. this further indicates that they have lost there is-elements independently and this view is supported by the fact that the two fish parasitic bacteria have different re-arrangements in their genomes.

francisella species have highly rearranged genomes
a hallmark between sequenced francisella genomes is a high degree of genomic rearrangements. these rearrangements are believed to be created by is-elements and the elements are typically flanked by pseudogenes
 <cit> . in addition, it has been reported that rearrangements may have been created by recombination near rrnas
 <cit> . comparing f. noatunensis subsp. orientalis toba <dig> with the f. philomiragia subsp. philomiragia genome revealed several rearrangements  but there are no is elements present in f. noatunensis subsp. orientalis toba <dig>  even in the recently published paper where they have sequenced another f. noatunensis subsp. orientalis strain found weak evidence of a single is element
 <cit> . this opens for several different scenarios that could create the observed rearrangements seen in the tilapia parasite. one possibility is that the rearrangements are created by recombination near the rrna genes. however, only  <dig> among the  <dig> rrna genes in f. noatunensis subsp. orientalis toba <dig> are close to the breakpoint of just one block indicating that these rrnas are not responsible for the other rearrangements observed between the two species . another possibility is that the fish parasitic francisella subspecies have had is elements previously but have lost them and that the rearrangements have taken place prior to the loss of the is elements. if the parasitic life-style in the fish infecting francisella species is ancient this could also explain the lack of is-elements in the genome .

the pseudogenes of f. noatunensis subsp. orientalis toba <dig> are old
we identified  <dig> putative pseudogenes in the f. noatunensis subsp. orientalis toba <dig>  a number comparable with the other pathogenic francisella species . we have manually curated the pseudogenes using the artemis tool
 <cit>  aiming to avoid problems due to mutation error in homopolymer tracts often observed on pyrosequencing data. since rearrangement is believed to be a major mechanism for generating pseudogenes in francisella species one would expect that pseudogenes in f. noatunensis subsp. orientalis toba <dig> then would be older compared to those in f. tularensis strains which is still under-going genomic rearrangement and genome decay. in order to access the age of the pseudogenes in the sequenced francisella genomes we counted the number of inactivating mutations in the different species. the analysis shows that f. noatunensis subsp. orientalis toba <dig> pseudogenes have significantly more inactivating mutations than the other pathogenic francisella strains . if we assume a similar mutation rate in the different species, this indicates that the pseudogenes in f. noatunensis subsp. orientalis toba <dig> on average are older than the pseudogenes in the mammalian pathogenic francisella strains . the high number of pseudogenes identified in the pathogenic francisella species  is typical for bacteria associated with eukaryotic hosts
 <cit> . it has been suggested that pseudogenes may be quickly removed from bacterial genomes  and the majority of pseudogenes will only possess  <dig> inactivation mutation. the data obtained from the fish pathogenic f. noatunensis subsp. orientalis toba <dig> clearly demonstrate a higher proportion of pseudogenes with multiple inactivation mutations  pointing towards older pseudogenes in this species.

old pseudogenes under neutral evolution in f. noatunensis subsp. orientalis toba04
several recent papers have addressed the extinction dynamics of pseudogenes in bacterial pathogens. kuo and ochman found that in salmonella, there appears to be positive selection for deletion events leading to rapid removal of pseudogenes
 <cit> . we performed two analyses with the pseudogenes present in f. noatunensis subsp. orientalis toba  <dig>  f. tularensis subsp. tularensis schus <dig> and f. tularensis subsp. holarctica osu <dig> to investigate the frequency and nature of pseudogenes in these genomes. for every pseudogene we counted the number of inactivating mutations and also calculated the nucleotide substitution rate between the pseudogenes and homologous gene. given that the pseudogenes are not under selection , one would expect a linear line in the log-normal graph. to some approximation, this is what we observe for all strains expect for f. noatunensis subsp. orientalis toba <dig> where we see fewer than expected pseudogenes with one inactivating mutation and also a larger than expected number with many  inactivating mutations . the reason for this deviation may be that f. noatunensis subsp. orientalis toba <dig> has evolved more extensively after its transformation into an intracellular pathogen so that most pseudogenisation events are old. this is also consistent with old genomic rearrangements  since pseudogenisation is often a consequence of rearrangements. it may also be that francisella noatunensis subsp. orientalis toba <dig> already lost all its non-essential genes some time ago so that losses of additional genes are deleterious. this would be consistent with the data for the other strains analysed if these have become pathogenic  more recently and the process of genome decay is still on-going. in the nucleotide substitution rate calculation analysis we found large number of pseudogenes at the rate of  <dig> - <dig>   for f. noatunensis subsp. orientalis toba <dig>  this is also in agreement with the suggestion that the pseudogenisation has happened a long time ago in the tilapia parasite. in none of the strains analyzed we see the pattern reported by kuo and ochman for francisella indicating positive selection for pseudogenes deletion. this may relate to the difference in lifestyle between salmonella and francisella pathogens. the recent publication from sjödin et al., also showed that francisella noatunensis subspecies has evolved well before francisella tularensis subspecies and francisella noatunensis subsp. orientalis has no is elements and the same scenario might have appeared in those strains as well
 <cit> .

comparative analysis of f noatunensis subsp. orientalis toba <dig> with other available francisella genomes
we performed a comparison between the francisella genomes  in order to find shared and unique genes for each of the genomes. for this analysis we grouped similar genes shared between the species into ortholog clusters and the gene numbers given below refer to the number of ortholog clusters. we identified a set of  <dig>  genes present in all the analyzed genomes – representing a potential core set of genes for francisella . as expected, the free-living metabolically competent strains had the highest number of unique genes although the fish and mammalian parasites each have  <dig> and  <dig> unique genes among the francisella genomes analyzed. this indicates that the pathogenic strains not only have lost genes after turning parasitic but they have also acquired genes. whether gene loss or acquisition has happened before or after this transition cannot be ruled out from the available data. gene acquisition is likely to happen by horizontal gene transfer. for  <dig> genes unique to f. noatunensis subsp. orientalis toba <dig> and for  <dig> genes unique to f. tularensis subsp. tularensis we found significant homology  to genes in genbank from bacteria species likely to be present in the same environment as the respective francisella strains . it is not unlikely that most of the other acquired genes in each of these pathogenic strains may be a result of horizontal gene transfer.

intact unique genes present in free-living francisella genomes
we identified  <dig> genes present only in the metabolically competent genomes. the assumption is that these genes have been present also in the ancestors of the analyzed pathogenic strains but lost after they became parasites. in agreement with previous reports, we find that many of the  <dig> genes are involved in metabolism, intracellular transport and amino acid biosynthesis
 <cit> . in addition we identified  <dig> membrane-associated proteins and  <dig> proteins annotated with signal-peptide  which might play an important role in immunity during host parasite interactions, which are present only in metabolically competent genomes. genes like the capsule polysaccharide biosynthesis protein required for immunity to destroy foreign antigens are present only in the metabolically competent genomes. we used david
 <cit>  to identify over-represented functional terms  among the unique genes from the metabolically competent species. functional terms related to dna , amino acid metabolism, transporters, membrane-association and signal peptides are among the most significant terms . the present analysis narrows down the list of genes unique to free-living francisella. taken together, these results are consistent with earlier analyses and indicate that pathogenic francisella strains have lost a substantial number of genes , and many of these have functions related to metabolism and dna. this indicates that the parasitic francisella species share many features in their adaptation to a parasitic lifestyle and that the fish pathogen may serve as a valuable model to study features of the mammalian parasitic francisella.

intact unique genes present in the fish parasite f. noatunensis subsp. orientalistoba04
we found  <dig> genes unique for the f. noatunensis subsp. orientalis genome. performing blastp search against non-redundant protein database we were able find significant matches for  <dig> genes which are not present in any of the other francisella strains. among these genes a putative lipopolysaccharide biosynthesis membrane protein is present. it is important for the virulent causing serious diseases in human and animals
 <cit> . the other genes represent transporters, transferases, purine biosynthesis, thiamine biosynthesis, oxidation reduction, catalytic activities and hypothetical proteins and could be important for the pathogenecity of the strain.

intact unique genes present in the human parasitic francisella genomes
the human parasitic francisella genomes contain  <dig> genes that are not present in the other francisella genomes studied. we compared these  <dig> genes with all genes in the non-redundant protein database using blast to find homologs in other mammalian strains and found  <dig> unique genes that are shared between f. tularensis subsp. tularensis, f. tularensis subsp. holarctica, and f. tularensis subsp. mediasiatica . there are  <dig> genes which are present only in f. tularensis subsp. holarctica strain, all of them hypothetical proteins. in f. tularensis subsp. mediasiatica  <dig> genes are unique and includes a protein involved in the type iii restriction-modification system , part of the defence mechanism against foreign dna
 <cit> , where as f. tularensis subsp. tularensis has  <dig> unique genes and all of them hypothetical proteins. the unique proteins present in this strain might be related to the highly virulent nature in this strain although functions of these proteins are unknown. the other  <dig> genes are shared between these three strains.  <dig> of these genes have homologs in other bacteria and their presence in the francisella genomes may be due to horizontal gene transfer. these genes represent functions like atp binding, transferase activities and lipopolysaccharides biosynthesis and  <dig> of them are hypothetical proteins.

the genomes of the studied fish and human pathogenic genomes all contain genes unique among francisella species. it seems unlikely that they have all been present in an ancestral francisella genome and more likely that some genes have been horizontally transferred from other organisms, likely in most cases from environmental bacteria. most of the genes like lipid biosynthesis, polysaccharides biosynthesis, cold-shock dna-binding domain-containing protein, membrane protein and other genes in the horizontal gene transfer list could have been useful for survival of the pathogen or be involved in virulence. the hypothetical proteins present in f. tularensis subsp. tularensis could be important to determine the high virulent nature of this species. having a novel pathogenic francisella genomic sequence available, we use the opportunity to analyze in a comparative manner with the selected set of francisella genomes  with focus on systems that are believed to be important for virulence. the distant evolutionary relationship between the human pathogenic and the fish pathogenic strains, can potentially give some insight into virulence and also genome decay and what is the essential, core, set of genes in francisella.

virulence mechanism
francisella pathogenecity island and its role in virulence
most of the intracellular pathogen’s virulence mechanisms are activated by type iii or type iv secretion system
 <cit> . however, in francisella species the genes involved in pathogenecity island is related to type vi secretion system
 <cit> . the genomes of the human parasitic francisella species possess two copies of fpis where as f. noatunensis subsp. orientalis toba <dig> and the free-living, metabolically competent species, only contain one copy. the human parasites have likely acquired an extra copy of the fpi after diverging from the free-living relatives
 <cit> . the fpi consists of  <dig> genes.

we compared the fpi regions between the human pathogenic, the free-living, and the fish pathogenic f. noatunensis subsp. orientalis toba <dig> genome ; we found that pdpd is missing only from the f. tularensis subsp. holarctica genome. previous studies report that replacement or loss of pdpd reduced the expression of igla
 <cit> . it may be a factor for the less virulent nature of these genomes in human. we also found that the pdpc gene is missing in f. noatunensis subsp. orientalis toba <dig> and f. philomiragia subsp. philomiragia, but present in all other genomes analyzed. it has been suggested that pdpc is essential for infection in mammalian cells
 <cit> . the absence in f. noatunensis subsp. orientalis toba <dig> suggests that pdpc is not essential for francisella to infect fish. in agreement with the phylogenetic analyses presented earlier, most of the amino acid sequences of the proteins encoded in the fpi region of f. noatunensis subsp. orientalis are more similar to the corresponding genes in f. philomiragia subsp. philomiragia than to those in the human pathogenic genomes analyzed.

oxidative stress response
oxidative stress response plays a major role in virulence. the lysr family of regulatory proteins are regulators for oxidative stress response
 <cit> . in the f. noatunensis subsp. orientalis toba <dig> genome there are  <dig> genes encoding for lysr protein family regulators . there are  <dig> lysr proteins present in f. tularensis subsp. tularensis schus <dig> and  <dig> lysr proteins in f. tularensis subsp. holarctica osu <dig>  interestingly lysr proteins are not found in f. tularensis subsp. mediasiatica strains and the absence of lysr proteins in f. tularensis subsp. mediasiatica could be a factor explaining their moderate virulence.

secretion system
bacterial pathogenesis is fundamentally regulated by secretion systems playing a role in transferring the virulence factors through the cell wall from the pathogen to the host. previous papers report that components of twin arginine translocation , type i, type ii, type v, and type vi secretion system, have been found in f. tularensis subsp. tularensis <cit> . searching the genome for t3ss components, resulted in identification of  <dig> predicted proteins which have components of the t3ss effectors . among them are methionine aminopeptidase and haloacid dehalogenase-like hydrolase . we also note that the pila gene represented by three orfs in f. tularensis subsp. tularensis  and one orf  in f. tularensis subsp. novicida important for mediating virulence
 <cit>  is absent in f. noatunensis subsp. orientalis. a pila gene family protein  with different amino acid sequence is present only in f. noatunensis subsp. orientalis toba <dig> and f. philomiragia subsp. philomiragia.

two-component regulatory system
two-component regulatory systems are important for recognition of environmental changes and virulence in bacterial pathogens
 <cit> . the kdpd gene belonging to the two component regulatory system
 <cit>  is present in f. tularensis subsp. tularensis, f. tularensis subsp. mediasiatica, f. tularensis subsp. novicida, f. philomiragia subsp. philomiragia but absent in f. noatunensis subsp. orientalis toba <dig> and f. tularensis subsp. holarctica. in addition, we found that the two-component regulatory sensor histidine kinase  gene is present only in metabolically competent francisella species and not present in all the metabolically incompetent proteins including f. noatunensis subsp. orientalistoba <dig>  this protein is important for the stimulus response when any virulent species enters into the host organism.

iron acquisition system
iron acquisition is crucial as a virulence factor. bacteria need iron inside the phagosomes for growth and iron deficiency leads to abnormal cell development
 <cit> . ferric uptake regulatory protein  is modulating the iron uptake system in f. tularensis subsp. tularensis <cit> , and no other gene has been found in this genome regulating iron content. two proteins iuca/iucc  and ferrous iron transporter  involved in siderophore synthesis and iron transport are present only in f. noatunensis subsp. orientalis toba <dig> and in the metabolically competent genomes. siderophore synthesis is one of the major mechanisms for iron aquisition in fish. absence of genes required for siderophore synthesis in f. tularensis subspecies shows a different host adaptation for human virulent francisella subspecies.

comparison of metabolic pathways from f. philomiragia subsp. philomiragia atcc  <dig>  f. noatunensis subsp. orientalis toba <dig> and f. tularensis subsp. tularensis schus4
a metabolic network for f.tularensis subsp. tularensis schus <dig> was published together with its genome
 <cit> . we performed computational prediction of the metabolic pathways for the f. philomiragia subsp. philomiragia using f.tularensis subsp. tularensis schus <dig> as reference model. then we used f. philomiragia subsp. philomiragia and f. tularensis subsp. tularensis schus <dig> as reference to predict the corresponding pathways for f. noatunensis subsp. orientalis toba <dig>  in f. noatunensis subsp. orientalis toba <dig>  we predicted  <dig> enzymes involved in small molecule metabolism in a total of  <dig> enzymatic reactions. in addition,  <dig> small molecule metabolic pathways were predicted from the genome data. not all pathways are complete since for some of the reactions the enzymes involved have not been found in the genome. our analysis identifies  <dig> such ”pathway holes” and none of these could be filled using pathway tools software . the large number of pathway holes indicates many disrupted pathways and is consistent with genome decay often found in intracellular pathogenic bacteria .

the values represent the number of enzymes present compared to the total number of enzymes needed.

there are  <dig> amino acid pathways essential for the growth of the francisella tularensis subspecies 
 <cit> . in addition, the f. tularensis subsp. tularensis schus <dig> pathways for sulphate assimilation, threonine biosynthesis, valine biosynthesis and isoleucine biosynthesis are incomplete together with pathways for methionine, arginine, histidine, lysine and tyrosine biosynthesis in the same subspecies
 <cit> . however, in our computational prediction of pathways in f. tularensis subsp. tularensis suggests that it has pathways for synthesis of all amino acids except arg and his. for f. noatunensis subsp. orientalis toba <dig> we are not able find the pathways for his, asp and cys.

enzymes required for the his biosysnthesis pathway is only found in f. philomiragia subsp. philomiragia. in f. noatunensis subsp. orientalis, the genes required for his biosynthesis are present as pseudogenes. the pathway is also absent in f. tularensis subsp. tularensis schus <dig>  it is of interest to note the absence of the pathway for asp synthesis. asparagine is an essential amino acid in fish specific f. noatunensis subsp. orientalis toba <dig>  suggesting that this amino acid may be taken from the host. we were able to find complete pathways for asp, cys, thr, pro, arg, val and leu in f. philomiragia subsp. philomiragia indicating that pathways for synthesizing all these amino acids were present in the ancestral francisella genome and lost in the metabolically incompetent genomes. the pathway for sulfate assimilation is absent in f. tularensis subsp. tularensis schus <dig> and present in f. philomiragia subsp. philomiragia .

CONCLUSIONS
we have presented the whole genome characterisation of f. noatunensis subsp. orientalis toba <dig> and extensive comparative analysis against other francisella subspecies. all the francisella strains that are non-virulent to human possess one set of pathogenecity island and very low number of is elements. f. noatunensis subsp. orientals toba <dig> which is most closely related to f. philomiragia subsp. philomiragia has no is elements present in its genome. is elements are important for generating genomic rearrangements typically observed between francisella species. since the f. noatunensis subsp. orientalis toba <dig> genome is significantly rearranged compared to other francisella species we propose that is elements have been present but they are now lost. in addition, we identified  <dig> pseudogenes in f. noatunensis subsp. orientalis and they are typically created as a result of genomic rearrangements. the analysis of the pseudogenes from francisella species demonstrated that the pseudogenes from f. noatunensis subsp. orientalis are old by having more than one inactivating mutation. the whole genome phylogenetic analysis revealed two main branches that separate the mammalian and fish parasitic francisella species.

although the pathogenic francisella species resides on different phylogenetic branches they share a set of common features like a large number of pseudogenes and several interrupted metabolic pathways resulting in metabolic incompetence. the metabolic incompetence is like an adaptation to an intracellular life style and points to similar evolutionary constraints from the different vertebrate hosts.

our work provides insight into studies of francisella subspecies evolution, and our comparative analysis and results will help to understand the pathogenecity mechanisms for each francisella subspecies. we have also listed important genes influencing the virulent mechanisms in each pathogenic strain specifically so that researchers working on francisella could work on those genes for further understanding on virulent factors. in addition, we found both fish and human pathogens share many features and it may be possible to use the fish parasites as models to enhance our knowledge about host parasite interactions for this important group of pathogens.

