BACKGROUND
the basic chromosome number in potatoes , tomatoes , and the most closely related outgroups  is 2n = 2x =  <dig>  potatoes are alone in the group in possessing polyploids. approximately 70% of the over  <dig> potato species are diploids, with most of the rest tetraploids  and hexaploids , with rare triploids and pentaploids  <cit> .

potatoes, tomatoes, and outgroups are characterized by relatively small chromosomes. karyotypic and genomic analyses have included crossability success of interspecific combinations, hybrid sterility, hybrid viability, pollen fertility and in the degree of chromosomal homology  <cit> . chromosome pairing relationships in interspecific hybrids and in polyploid potato species have been interpreted by genome formulae, although authors gave them different symbols. according to these hypotheses, five genomes  are recognized in the tuber-bearing species of section petota. genome symbol e was given to species of section etuberosum based on the specificity of meiotic behavior and sterility of their diploid hybrids with the a-genome tuber-bearing potato species  <cit> . symbol l was proposed for tomato  on the bases of preferential chromosome pairing and clear-cut parental genome discrimination by using genomic in situ hybridization  and llee or artificial amphidiploids of tomato and s. etuberosum  <cit> .

wild and cultivated potatoes   grow from the southwestern united states to southern chile. hawkes  <cit>  recognized  <dig> species in section petota, and divided it into  <dig> tuber-bearing and two non-tuber-bearing series. he further divided these  <dig> tuber-bearing series into two superseries based on corolla morphology . he distinguished "primitive" and "advanced" forms of each superseries and recognized four groups based on morphological characters: primitive stellata, advanced stellata, primitive rotata, and advanced rotata. he hypothesized the evolution of the advanced rotata morphology from primitive stellata-like ancestors. he postulated that the ancestral wild potato species were diploid, possessed b genomes, produced white stellate corollas, and originated in north or central america in the late cretaceous to eocene eras. subsequent dispersal of one or more of these species to south america took place before the sinking of the central american land bridge during the mid-eocene to pliocene eras, gradually leading to the evolution of species with a genomes and rotate corollas. he also postulated that when the bridge was restored in pliocene times, a remigration of one or more of these diverged a genome species back into north and central america allowed the hybridization and allopolyploidization with the native mexican or central american b genome taxa. this produced the tetraploid members of series longipedicellata . a second, comparatively recent migration of a second species  from south america formed the demissa hexaploids   <cit>  by crossing with series longipedicellata tetraploids and possibly other series. in north and central america are also another group of allopolyploids, members of series conicibaccata , but only series longipedicellata was designated ab, and the source of the c and d genome donors of series conicibaccata and demissa is unknown. however, recent molecular clock data indicated that eggplant and tomato/potato shared a common ancestor approximately  <dig> mya and potato and tomato  <dig> mya  <cit> . so it seems unlikely that the timing for the events proposed by hawkes really took place in the cretaceous – eocene eras but the events are still possible.

the latest taxonomic interpretation  <cit>  recognized fewer species  and predicted even further reductions in species. spooner et al.  <cit>  used plastid dna restriction site data and morphological data to reinvestigate the relationships of potatoes, tomatoes , farther outgroups in solanum, and other genera of the solanaceae. their results confirmed placement of all members of hawkes's  <cit>  tuber-bearing species into sect. petota , but the non-tuber-bearing species were shown to be outgroups although with very low support . yet other plastid dna restriction site marker data and dna sequence data from plastids and single-copy nuclear dna supported these relationships  <cit> .

subsequent plastid dna phylogenies documented section petota  to be divided into four clades that often showed little relationship to hawkes's taxonomic series   <cit> . these clades contain: 1) north and central american diploid species, with the exception of s. bulbocastanum, s. cardiophyllum, and s. verrucosum; 2) s. bulbocastanum, and s. cardiophyllum; 3) all examined members of series piurana and some south american species belonging to other series ; 4) all remaining south american species, s. verrucosum from mexico, and north and central american polyploid species. only two clades were highly supported, clade  <dig>  and clade  <dig> , these clades contained all species with b genome, but they did not resolve together and the monophyly of the b genome was not supported. clades  <dig> and  <dig> were poorly supported , but their sister relationship was highly supported . single-copy granule-bound starch synthase   <cit>  and nuclear nitrate reductase gene data   <cit>  recovered the same four clades except united clades  <dig> and  <dig> as a single clade , the nuclear phylogenies recognized the monophyly of b genome species , and supported allopolyploid origins for some of the polyploids with species from different clades. the main difference between the two nuclear phylogenies was the relationship among main clades; in nia clade 1+ <dig> and  <dig> were sister in the most parsimonious tree although with very low support , and waxy could not show any close relationships among the clades.

taxonomic interpretations in tomato  differed widely depending upon whether morphological or biological species concepts were used  <cit> . rick et al.  <cit>  recognized nine species of tomatoes, based mainly by their ability to intercross, and divided them into two crossing groups. peralta et al.  <cit>  summarized morphological studies of tomatoes  <cit> , increased the traditional nine species of rick et al.  <cit>  to  <dig> species, and recognized tomatoes within solanum. tomato has two endemic species in the galápagos islands, and weedy escaped forms of s. lycopersicum are distributed worldwide. the remaining species and immediate tomato outgroup sections juglandifolia  and lycopersicoides  are endemic to western south america from ecuador to northern chile.

peralta et al.  <cit>  interpreted the many and sometimes conflicting morphological and molecular data sets to recognize four informal "species groups" within sect. lycopersicon: the "lycopersicon species group" including the four red to orange colored fruited species s. cheesmaniae, s. galapagense, s. lycopersicum, and s. pimpinellifolium; the "neolycopersicon species group" containing only s. pennellii, the "eriopersicon species group" containing s. chilense, s. corneliomulleri, s. habrochaites, s. huaylasense, s. peruvianum and, the "arcanum species group" including s. arcanum, s. chmielewskii, and s. neorickii. they recognized sect. juglandifolia as the sister group to sect. lycopersicon.

in the past, comparative anatomy, cytogenetics, ecology and morphology had been used to infer phylogenetic relationships among taxa. lately, with the development of molecular techniques, many fragments of the genome have been used in phylogenetic inference and multiple data sets have become available. as a result, phylogenetic studies now usually involve data sets from different gene regions, or different marker systems, or molecular and morphological data sets. there has been an active and controversial debate over the best ways to derive a phylogeny that incorporates all existing data. there are three different traditional approaches that have been used to analyze data from different sources: taxonomic congruence, character congruence and the prior agreement approach. they all seek to maximize evidence, the first one from the relationships  using the summaries of data as evidence, and the other two derived directly from characters using data observation as evidence  <cit> .

proponents of the consensus approach argue that partitions should not be combined before estimating the phylogenetic tree; rather, the trees should be estimated separately from each partition and combined using taxonomic congruence  <cit> . the decision to keep data sets separate generally reflects a hypothesis that either 1) different evolutionary processes are acting on different data sets, or 2) different data sets reflect different evolutionary histories  <cit> .

character congruence, also known as the total evidence approach, involves all the data available for a group of terminal taxa. the goal is to seek a single, best-fitting hypothesis, which in cladistics involves maximizing character congruence  <cit> . the prior agreement approach or "conditional combination" tests for character incongruence before analysis, and only combines the data when no significant character incongruence exists between partitions.

farris et al.  <cit>  proposed the incongruence length difference  test that many researchers use to assess whether or not data sets should be combined. the idea is to determine if there is more incongruence between data sets than is expected between similarly sized random partitions of a homogeneous data set.

baum  <cit>  proposed that the identification of the primary concordance tree  could be a valuable summary of the dominant phylogenetic history among a group of organisms. the pct is composed of clades with higher concordance factors  than any contradictory clade. ané et al.  <cit>  developed a bayesian-based methodology that estimates the distribution of evolutionary histories within a multi-gene data set and summarizes the results allowing genealogical information from one gene to influence our estimates of another gene's genealogy. it also allows the identification of genes with outlier gene-tree topologies that permits estimation of the proportion of the genome that was transferred during a possible introgression event. baum  <cit>  pointed out the possible outcomes that can arise if reticulation events had happened during the evolutionary history of a group of organisms. if a single event of horizontal gene transfer  had occurred, one primary history and one minor history are expected. under lineage sorting or introgression, one primary history and co-minor histories are expected. but, if hybridization occurs two co-primary histories are expected. thus, the concordance approach is considered a modified consensus tree method that allows the identification of different phylogenetic histories in the face of reticulation, where estimated cfs are metrics that give an indirect measure of reticulation. furthermore, it can be assumed that high cfs provide evidence that relationships among the organisms under study have been mostly divergent, and that low cfs are indicative of reticulate evolution. baum  <cit>  stressed that the acquisition of a divergence structure increases gradually as a result of gene lineage extinction in reproductively isolated populations or demes. thus, the speciation process reaches its ultimate point when a cf of  <dig> is reached. finally, he stated that a clade which has a cf that is greater than all contradictory clades has some genealogical unity that indicates a history of genetic isolation and suggested that this clade can be formally named.

recently, single- to low-copy nuclear dna markers have been explored for phylogenetic reconstruction. here we test a specific subset of these markers called conserved ortholog set ii  markers in the sister clades potato and tomato  <cit> . orthologs are genes sharing a common ancestor by descent, in contrast to paralogs that are duplicated copies within a genome through polyploidization or tandem duplications  <cit> .

the purpose of our study is to test a diverse range of cosii markers and data analyses for phylogenetic reconstruction in the sister clades tomato and potato. the phylogenetic relationships between and among species from these two groups have been the subject of study by many researchers, but these relationships remain unresolved because of the use of a limited number of molecular markers. our study was greatly aided by cosii conversion into a set of consensus pcr primers that amplify these orthologues in the solanaceae, referred to as universal primers for euasterid i   <cit> . upas are designed to amplify either intronic regions  that provide the polymorphism needed for the proposed tomato and potato study, or exonic regions  that are more appropriate for comparisons of more distantly related species. our study uses many more molecular markers than prior phylogenetic studies in the tomato and potato clades. it does not attempt to provide a definitive study of the evolutionary relationships within these clades, but rather to identify appropriate markers for future studies that should incorporate a wider species sampling. our approach consists of examining 1) diverse markers on all  <dig> linkage groups, 2) amplification of a single band  of representative taxa, 3) markers with length between 600– <dig> bp that amplify with single pass sequencing, and 4) markers with over 60% intron content appropriate for this taxonomic level of closely related species.

RESULTS
allelic variation and sequence alignment
of the  <dig> species analyzed, four tomato species had two alleles: s. chilense and s. huaylasense in cos5c and cos13b, s. peruvianum and s. habrochaites in cos7b, s. huaylasense in cos10b, s. peruvianum in cosx <dig> and cos11b, s. chilense in cos1b; s. chilense, s. peruvianum and s. habrochaites in cos8b, and s. chilense, s. peruvianum and s. huaylasense in cos15b . in four of these  <dig> cases alleles from the same species form a clade; in four cases alleles formed polytomies; and in eight cases alleles from the same species formed a clade with another species  <cit> .

complete sequences  were generated for the  <dig> cosii. in general, the farthest outgroups, datura inoxia and s. dulcamara, showed the longest sequence and the tomato species and their closest outgroups showed more gaps in aligned sequences in comparison with potato  <cit> .

model selection
in general, likelihood models that account for rate variation, allowing for gamma-distributed rate variation among sites , resulted in the greatest increase in maximum likelihood . in more than 90% of the cases the hky model that includes five parameters best fitted the data  <cit> . in cases where the two criteria for selection chose different models, the model that is implemented in mr. bayes was preferred.

phylogenetic analysis of individual loci
analysis of individual cosii sometimes showed incongruent results. to illustrate this we discuss our data using maximum parsimony analysis in potato and direct the reader to  <cit>  for details in the tomato and complete data sets and with maximum likelihood and bayesian inference. in the potato data set the number of parsimony informative sites per individual cosii varied from  <dig> to 64; in tomato, from  <dig> to 286; and for the potato and tomato data set from  <dig> to  <dig>  all data sets showed high consistency, retention and rescaled consistency indices, with consistency indices ranging from  <dig>  to  <dig> , and rescaled consistency indices ranging from  <dig>  to  <dig> . there was a moderate level of homoplasy  with less than 25% for all loci.

in the potato data set seven of the  <dig> cosii sequenced supported the three main potato clades as a monophyletic group. in eight of the  <dig> cosii clade 1+ <dig>  was monophyletic with bootstrap support over 54%; in three of the  <dig> cosii, clade 1+ <dig> failed to resolve into a distinct clade; one cosii placed s. polyadenium outside of clade 1+ <dig>  when we forced the monophyly of clade 1+ <dig> for this cosii, the shortest tree was ten steps longer than the unconstrained tree, which was significant by the templeton test  and the monophyly of this clade was rejected  <cit> .

clade  <dig>  had bootstrap support more than 50% in nine of the  <dig> cosii; one cosii failed to group these species in their own clade, and two cosii grouped one of the two species in clade  <dig>  forcing these species to be monophyletic resulted in trees only three and two steps longer than the unconstrained tree, and the templeton test failed to reject their monophyly . thus, stochastic noise alone can explain the misplacement of these species.

clade  <dig>  had bootstrap support more than 59% in ten of the  <dig> cosii; in the remaining two cosii s. raphanifolium did not form a clade with the other two species, and trees forcing all three species to group together were only one and three steps longer than the maximum parsimony  unconstrained tree. the templeton test failed to reject their monophyly and revealed that the entire clade  <dig> became unresolved in trees that were one and three steps longer than the mp tree. this indicates that the observed non-monophyly is not significant   <cit> .

regarding the relationships among the three main clades, four of the  <dig> cosii supported clade 1+ <dig> as sister to the rest of potatoes, with bootstrap support ranging from 59–100%. three cosii placed clade  <dig> as sister to the rest of potatoes and only two of these three cosii gave bootstrap support of 69% and 90%. two cosii placed clade  <dig> as sister to the rest of potatoes with a bootstrap support of 60% and 100% respectively. the remaining three cosii did not support any of the three basal relationship alternatives in their most parsimonious trees. attempts to force species to follow either of these three possibilities were not rejected for cos2c, because constrained trees were only four or five steps longer than the mp unconstrained tree. in contrast, cos <dig> could not reject clade 1+ <dig> as sister to the other potatoes, and cos5c could not reject clade  <dig> species as sister to the others.

combined data analyses
we explored three approaches to combine the data: total evidence, prior agreement, and the consensus approach.

total evidence, potato data set
we concatenated the  <dig> cosii of the potato data set into a data matrix of  <dig>  characters, with introns accounting for 85% of the total concatenated length. the concatenated alignment contained  <dig>   variable sites, of which  <dig>  were parsimony informative. phylogenetic analyses of the concatenated sequence using mp, ml and bi, all yielded a single fully resolved tree with high bootstrap support and bayesian posterior probability .

total evidence, tomato data set
eighteen cosii were concatenated; the data matrix contained  <dig>  characters, 82% of these representing introns, with the total data set containing  <dig>  variable sites of which  <dig>   were parsimony informative. mp, ml and bi supported at least the same  <dig> of  <dig> nodes as completely resolved with very high bootstrap values  and posterior probability  . two nodes were not very well supported in mp, ml and bi, one of them was the placement of the clade formed by s. arcanum-s. chmielewskii-s. neorickii . in mp and bi this clade was resolved with the red-orange tomatoes , and in ml it resolved as sister to a clade containing the red-orange tomatoes and s. huaylasense. the second unresolved node was the placement of the clade formed by s. chilense-s. corneliomulleri-s. peruvianum; ml and bi revealed that this clade was closer to the red-orange tomatoes than the clade formed by s. habrochaites-s. pennellii . on the other hand, mp showed that s. habrochaites-s. pennellii was closer to the red-orange clade than the clade s. chilense-s. corneliomulleri-s. peruvianum . finally, mp and ml resolved s. chmielewskii and s. neorickii with very low support . on the other hand, bi resolved s. arcanum and s. chmielewskii with a posterior probability of  <dig> ; the terminal branch that resolved s. arcanum-s. chmielewskii-s. neorickii had 96%, 99%  and  <dig>  support in mp, ml and bi respectively.

total evidence, potato and tomato data set
after the concatenation of  <dig> cosii, the matrix contained  <dig>  characters;  <dig>  were variable and  <dig>   were parsimony informative. bayesian inference showed a completely resolved phylogeny. on the other hand, both mp and ml had two nodes with very low support : 1) the placement of the clade with s. arcanum, s. chmielewskii, and s. neorickii, and 2) the node that showed relationships among these three species. additionally, in mp the potato clade had only 57% bootstrap support .

prior agreement, potato data set
a prior agreement approach combines only congruent data and excludes data partitions with a significant level of incongruence, as they can introduce error that can obscure reliable data and lead to erroneous topologies  <cit> . we explored the congruence of the different gene phylogenies in potato using ild tests. from the  <dig> original cosii in potatoes,  <dig> pairwise comparisons were made with a level of significance of  <dig>  , and nine of them showed a high level of discordance . three of these cosii  counted for eight of these nine discordances , and the last one was between cos <dig> and cos10b .

through reiterative analyses we proceeded to eliminate discordant cosii and constructed a set of six cosii that were highly congruent and produced highly resolved topologies similar to the entire concatenated data set and named this "6coscon"  rodriguez  <cit> . mp, ml, and bi of 6coscon gave the same phylogeny as the  <dig> cosii combined with 100% of bootstrap in all nodes except one that was supported at 99% .

we further explored a minimum number of cosii to be used in a large number of species without losing resolution by further reducing the "6coscon" to three cosii by choosing the best three by two criteria: 1) length of the sequence, and 2) number of parsimony informative sites and called this "3cosa" . mp, ml, and bayesian analyses produced phylogenetic results almost identical to the  <dig> cosii set .

consensus approach, potato data set
consensus approach, tomato data set
in the first concordance analysis performed with the tomato data set, the tomato clade was supported as monophyletic for almost all cosii in all runs and with all α. results from α =  <dig> and  <dig> placed sect. lycopersicoides as the closest tomato outgroup to the tomato clade with just 50% of cosii supporting this relationship ; the other 50% of the cosii supported sect. juglandifolia as the closest tomato outgroup. on the other hand, for α infinite, which corresponds to assuming that all gene trees are independent, and no concordance is assumed a priori, sect. juglandifolia was placed as the closest tomato outgroup for only 40% of the cosii ; sect. lycopersicoides was supported as the closest outgroup to tomato for  <dig> % of cosii . section juglandifolia and lycopersicoides resolved together in only  <dig> % of cosii, and the remaining 18% of cosii supported other relationships that could be considered as noise. even though sect. lycopersicoides was supported by a little more than 50% of the cosii as the closest outgroup to tomato with α =  <dig> and 10; and sect. juglandifolia was supported by at least 40% of the cosii and by more cosii than any other contradictory clade with α infinite, the confidence intervals for all these cf overlapped. we conclude that sect. juglandifolia and sect. lycopersicoides are the closest tomato outgroups but concordance analysis cannot distinguish which is sister to the tomato clade for most of the cosii markers. given that we have two primary histories that have the support of 50% of the genes with α =  <dig> and  <dig>  hybridization could be invoked as the main driving force  <cit>  but since more than two histories are revealed with α infinite more testing of the concordance approach should be done and more genes should be sampled before we can conclude with confidence that hybridization or introgression was the main driving force .

results from the second tomato concordance analysis placed the clade consisting of s. habrochaites and s. pennellii as sister to the rest of tomatoes, indicating that those are the most divergent group; the cf was 30%  with α infinite, 63%  for α =  <dig> and 66%  for α =  <dig>  and the credibility intervals for the cf of conflicting clades did not overlap. thus, we conclude that s. habrochaites and s. pennellii are the most divergent tomatoes and are monophyletic . this analysis also placed s. corneliomulleri with s. peruvianum in all the runs with cf of 33% to 47% of cosii, and s. chilense outside of the clade conformed by s. corneliomulleri-s. lycopersicum-s. peruvianum, with cf ranging from 18% to 32% .

in the last concordance analysis with the tomato data set, all  <dig> cosii supported s. huaylasense as the sister to two clades, one formed by the red-orange colored fruit tomatoes  and the other formed by three species, s. arcanum-s. chmielewskii-s. neorickii; it also resolved s. chmielewskii with s. arcanum in all three α values .

discussion
as was pointed out in the background, all three approaches summarizing multiple data sets seek to maximize evidence, but there are questions about when each approach should be applied. combined analysis of multiple data sets is justified when each data set has evolved under the same underlying history, in which differences in the estimated tree are due only to sampling error or model mis-specification  <cit> . under this assumption, the combined phylogenetic analysis improves the signal to noise ratio. it potentially allows for more accurate estimation of the single shared genealogy. it also produces a more accurate phylogeny than from a consensus approach. but, in cases where genes have tracked more than one underlying history, some of the differences among data sets would not be due to sampling error, but to genealogical discordance. in this case we may wish to estimate the primary history with information quantifying the extent to which different genes have followed that history. that primary history can be obtained using a combined analysis if there are similar amounts of phylogenetic signal in each sampled gene. but, because combined analysis assumes that there is only one evolutionary history, the discordance is assumed to be caused by homoplasy, and when reticulation has occurred the inferred tree may not resemble any of the underlying histories. in such a case, bayesian concordance analysis  would be a better procedure to use, because it does not assume one single evolutionary history. rather, it allows us to make statements of statistical confidence in the estimated concordance factors by taking into account the prior evidence of discordance, uncertainty in gene tree estimates, and the number of genes sampled. it also allows the investigation of potentially interesting biological processes, such as incomplete lineage sorting, hybridization, and lateral gene transfer  <cit> . for this reason, bca is becoming a tool to analyze genealogies that are neither fully reticulate nor fully divergent  <cit> . therefore, we followed all three approaches to get insights into the evolutionary processes in tomato and potato.

cosii analyses support many aspects of prior phylogenetic interpretations of potato and tomato, show some new relationships, but most notably, when total evidence is invoked, one single predominant history is highlighted with complete resolution in potato  and nearly so in tomato . in potato, the four clades discovered from plastid dna restriction site data  <cit>  is supported except, like waxy sequence data  <cit>  and nia sequence data  <cit>  clades  <dig> and  <dig> are united into a single clade. results from total evidence highly support the hypothesis of a north and central american b-genome origin of the tuber-bearing members of solanum section petota, as it was shown to be sister of the rest of potatoes. it resolves the controversy among all previous individual gene sequencing studies that showed different relationships among main clades. on the other hand, when a prior agreement or consensus approach was invoked, other evolutionary histories in potatoes are revealed but with less support . of interest is that the branches showing these two alternative histories  are shorter than the branch showing the predominant evolutionary history . these alternative histories could be explained by past hybridization events or fast rates of speciation.

in tomato,  <dig> of the  <dig> nodes are completely resolved and for the first time this study highly supports the monophyly of five clades: 1) a clade that includes s. arcanum-s. chmielewskii-s. neorickii, 2) a clade conformed by s. chilense-s. corneliomulleri-s. peruvianum, and the sister relationship between s. corneliomulleri and s. peruvianum; 3) a clade formed by s. habrochaites-s. pennellii as basal in tomatoes, 4) a clade that includes s. cheesmaniae and s. galapagense, and 5) a clade formed by s. lycopersicum and s. pimpinellifolium . cosii data also clearly support the segregation of s. peruvianum sensu lato into at least three species, s. arcanum, s. huaylasense, s. peruvianum+s. corneliomulleri  as a possible single species, or all four of these species, following peralta et al.  <cit> . the data show s. arcanum and s. huaylasense to be very distinct from s. corneliomulleri and s. peruvianum that were on the same clade . the two branches that remain unresolved are the placement of the clade s. arcanum-s. chmielewskii-s. neorickii and the relationship among these three species. both of these branches are very short , indicating the possible need for additional markers as was pointed out by zou et al.  <cit> , who showed the need for  <dig> gene sequences to resolve two small branches in the phylogeny of rice. the sister group relationships of sect. lycopersicon to sect. juglandifolia and to sect. lycopersicoides were completely resolved thereby clarifying ambiguities in previous studies.

concordance analyses in tomatoes reveal the same relationships as total evidence, but the monophyly of the clade with s. chilense-s. corneliomulleri-s. peruvianum is not supported and the placement of sect. juglandifolia or sect. lycopersicoides as the closest tomato outgroup remained unresolved. furthermore, concordance analyses reveal and summarize the extensive discordance among cosii markers. this discordance is precisely why a large sample of nuclear loci was necessary for the reconstruction of a robust phylogeny in potato and tomato. some potential reasons for discordance could be methodological, to include systematic errors due to using a wrong model of sequence evolution, coupled with long branches, or mixtures of branch lengths within cosii, or undetected paralogy or alignment bias. other reasons could be biological processes such as hybridization or lineage sorting or fast speciation.

in the complete data set, where potatoes and tomatoes are analyzed together, the sister relationship between the potato and tomato clades is highly supported in all analyses and sect. etuberosum is supported as sister to both , confirming these controversial relationships as was first shown by spooner et al.  <cit> . additionally, our study highlights the importance of high intron content , and pcr amplification length between  <dig> and  <dig> bp to be useful to investigate relationships among potato and potato. it shows the importance of intensive screening of cosii primers to maximize their utility in potato and tomato and allows us to propose the use of a reduced set of cosii primers for maximum efficiency. for example, for the major clades of sect. petota, three cosii  were enough to reveal the predominant history with high support, and we suggest beginning with these cosii in future studies in potato. this suggestion has to be taken with caution because when more taxa and more accessions per taxon are sampled the resolution can be reduced. finally, the utility of gaps as additional characters in phylogenetic studies is not questionable but it is advisable to use them when their inclusion does not increase homoplasy. however, in this study, gap characters usually increased phylogenetic signal.

CONCLUSIONS
cosii sequence data are useful for potato and tomato phylogenetic studies. intron contents more than 60% were the best to investigate relationships within this group of closely related species. when total evidence is invoked, a well-supported predominant history is revealed in both potato and tomato. in the case of potato, with the prior agreement and consensus approaches, two additional possible histories were revealed, although with less statistical support. we show that 11– <dig> loci are enough to get the dominant history in potato and tomato respectively, but a reduced set of three cosii provide the same phylogeny in potato. finally, we determined that there is not a single evolutionary history for potato and tomato, as at least three different possible histories were revealed. more loci would be needed to discern the distribution of gene genealogies in more depth, and thus detect which mechanism most likely shaped discordance among individual cosii.

