BACKGROUND
with the advent of microarray technology, whole genome dna methylation profiling has become a common approach to understand the systemic effects of this aberrant epigenomic mark in basic, translational, and clinical research. dna methylation in vertebrates is a heritable somatic modification in which a methyl group is added to the cytosine residue of a cg dinucleotide. significant accumulation of dna methylation in critical regions of the genome correlates with respect to reduction in gene transcription. the human genome contains regions with higher than expected occurrence of cg dinucleotides which are called cpg islands or cgis. under normal conditions, the cgis in the repeat regions are highly methylated whereas those found close to active gene promoters are free of methylation. this scenario reverses in diseased states . in cancer samples, for example, aberrant dna methylation occurs in the promoter region of tumor suppressor genes thereby contributing to cancer development and tumorogenisis  <cit> . as an explanation, it has been proposed that dna methylation cooperates, both structurally and functionally, with chromatin modification in the repression of gene expression  <cit> .

two-color microarrays quantify the relative abundance of rna or dna between experimental samples. recently microarrays have been employed more frequently to assay methylation profiles. the pixel intensity of the two colors can be interpreted as the amount of material hybridized to a given probe sequence. dna arrays have been developed to interrogate the methylation signatures of the entire genome or at least focused regions such as cgis. two general experimental protocols have been developed to take advantage of these assays: methyl-dna immunoprecipitation  and differential methylation hybridization .

the medip methodology  <cit>  employs antibodies specific for 5-methyl-cytosine residues to enrich methylated dna fragments in the sample. the pull down dna fragments are pcr-amplified and co-hybridized with a whole genome sample to generate a two-color image. this method has been successfully used by different groups; however, the antibody recognition motif is not well-defined thereby potentially biasing the experimental outcomes.

the dmh protocol  <cit>  employs methylation-sensitive restriction enzymes as opposed to antibodies to investigate the methylation status of the genome. sonicated dna fragments are ligated to linkers and subsequently interrogated by these enzymes which will cleave any fragments containing unmethylated enzyme recognition sequence. the unrestricted fragments are pcr-amplified to generate a sample mainly consisting of methylated fragments. two different samples  interrogated by the dmh protocol are then co-hybridized to generate a two-color image.

the literature is rich with discussion regarding varying experimental, hybridization, and technological effects that contribute non-biologically relevant signal  to the measured probe intensity. the fluorescent dyes employed in the sample labeling  behave differently in a hybridization experiment   <cit> . biases that vary across or are correlated with position on the array are the most often cited array effects  <cit> , and are attributed to the differences among print-tips on the array printer and the strike pattern over the course of the probe printing process. dna fragments may bind to array probes with only partial complementarity. this cross-hybridization results in higher than expected probe signals  <cit> .

probe-target binding efficiencies associated with the probe sequence construct also contribute bias to array signals  <cit> . this is likely due to the higher energy needed to dissociate guanine  and cytosine  with three hydrogen bonds, as opposed to thymine  and adenine  with only two hydrogen bonds. a possible source of signal bias unique to the dmh protocol is associated with restriction cut-site density in the genomic neighborhood surrounding a probe's target region. it is reasonable to suspect that dmh samples may consist of a higher proportion of fragments with few restriction recognition sites between the pcr linkers since all restriction sites have to be methylated before the fragments can be amplified. it is potentially necessary to give more weight to probes with targets surrounded by many restriction sites. in this paper we develop a linear model that attempts to capture probe-sequence effects as well as dye-bias and restriction cut-site density effects in microarray studies obtained from dmh experiments. the microarrays used in these studies were printed using agilent's sureprint technology which utilizes the non-contact inkjet approach to generate probes, and thus spotting effects due to surface tension interactions and print-tip variability is a nonissue. effects associated with cross-hybridization are best dealt with during the background correction of microarray preprocessing and our model assumes that this issue has been addressed.

there have been two well-accepted preprocessing strategies for gene expression and chip-chip microarray data that correct for probe-sequence effects: gc-rma  <cit>  and mat  <cit> , respectively. gc-rma is a model-based background correction approach for affymetrix gene expression arrays. the probe-target binding affinity α is modeled as a sum of position-dependent base effects:

  α=∑k=125∑j∈{a,c,g,t}f5i, 

where k indicates the position along the probe; j indexes the nucleotide base letter; bk represents the nucleotide base of the probe at position k; i is the indicator function that is  <dig> when the equality within the argument holds and is zero otherwise; and f <dig> captures the affinity of base j in position k and is fit to the data using a spline with  <dig> degrees of freedom.

mat is a model-based analysis method for affymetrix tiling-arrays hybridized with dna samples from chip-chip studies. in the mat model, the probe baseline intensity m is estimated via a linear combination of position-dependent base effects as well as target copy number:

  m=αnt+∑k=125∑j∈{a,c,g}βjki+∑j∈{a,c,g,t}γjnj2+δlog⁡ 

where k, j, bk, and i are as in equation 1; nj is the abundance of nucleotide j in the probe's sequence; α is the baseline value with respect to the amount of ts in the sequence; βjk is the effect of each nucleotide j at each position k; γj is the effect of the squared abundance of nucleotide j; and δ is the effect of the log of the probe copy number c.

in this work we propose two model-based approaches for signal correction of dmh data similar to those described above. we show that position-dependent base effects as well as dye-interaction and cut-site density effects are significant. the results are comparable between the two models; however, the interpretation of the parameters and subsequently their biological significance differ.

RESULTS
two models are proposed which address the probe-sequence binding affinities in two different ways. the first, herein referred to as the full-model, is similar to the mat model in that the effect of each nucleotide at each position is estimated. the second model, herein referred to as the quadratic-model, is similar to the gc-rma model in that the nucleotide effect is modeled as a quadratic polynomial with respect to sequence position. for a more detailed description of either model, refer to the methods section.

in order to assess the appropriateness of either model for dmh preprocessing, we fit the model to dmh microarray data obtained from the lbnl  <dig> breast cancer cell lines  <cit> . for readability we only discuss in detail the results from estimating parameters with respect to  <dig> of the lbnl-dmh data sets selected randomly.

nucleotide effect
full-model
in the full-model there are a total of  <dig> parameters:  <dig> blocks of  <dig> parameters each are associated with the position within the probe sequence of nucleotides a, c, and g, respectively. the other three parameters associated with the dye, restriction cut-site density, and amount of nucleotide t. the majority of the parameters in the full-model are significantly different from zero . of exception are the parameters associated with the effects of the nucleotides at the 5' and 3' ends of the probe sequence. these parameters have relatively larger p-values and in many cases the effects are not significantly different from zero . this result supports the premise that binding events in the central portion of the probe are much stronger than events occurring at the tail end of the probe sequence and thus have a more significant effect on probe signal. the range of the nucleotide parameters across all experiments is - <dig>  to  <dig> , while the observed data ranges between  <dig> and  <dig> with the central 50% of the values ranging between  <dig>  and  <dig>  across all nine samples. the cofficient of variation of the the parameter estimates across the  <dig> samples was less than  <dig>  in all but two of the parameters . the cofficient of variation for the majority of the parameters was less than  <dig> .

quadratic-model
the statistical insignificance of nucleotide effects near the ends of the probes and the apparent parabolic relationship between the expected probe intensity and the position of a given nucleotide within the probe sequence  lead to the proposal of the quadratic-model. in the quadratic-model there are a total of  <dig> parameters, three of which are cofficients for each of the three quadratic relationships associated with nucleotide position within the probe sequence, giving rise to nine of the parameters. the remaining parameters were associated with the dye, restriction cut-site density, and abundance of thymine. nearly all of the parameters of this model are significantly different from zero across the  <dig> samples . the quadratic model was fit to standardized data; therefore, the estimated parameters are directly comparable. all of the effects, save na, have relatively large absolute estimates . the estimated effects are fairly stable across the  <dig> samples with average variance well below the empirical probe variance across arrays. the cofficient of variation for all but one of the parameters was less than  <dig>  . the majority of the parameters had cofficient of variation less than  <dig> .

                                 a
                                 a
                                 c
                                 c
                                 g
                                 g
nucleotide effect cofficient estimates for the quadratic-model across the lbnl-dmh' <dig> data

to provide an interpretation of the observed effects, we can compute the expected baseline value of a probe with sequence comprised completely of one of the nucleotides a, c, or g. the predicted baseline signal of a hypothetical probe comprised of 100% adenine is half that of a hypothetical probe comprised of either 100% cytosine or guanine. this supports the biological premise that nucleotide effects can be explained by the extra hydrogen bond between cytosine and guanine.

restriction density
in both models considered, the estimated restriction cut-density was statistically significant. the estimated values were relatively smaller, in absolute value, than the estimated nucleotide effects . the estimates are extremely robust across the nine samples with a standard deviation of  <dig> . the estimated values are negative, corresponding with the hypothesis that loci with a larger density of cut-sites should have reduced expected signal intensity. with all other factors held, there is a greater than  <dig> -fold predicted decrease in intensity for each increase of  <dig> cut-sites.

dye effect
in both the full- and quadratic-model the dye effect was significant . the estimated value of the dye effect is highly variable with an interquartile range  <dig> .

comparison
many methods have been proposed for the normalization of dual-channel microarray data, but typically these procedures neglect any effect related to probe sequence information. a commonly employed method is m – a loess normalization  <cit>  that assumes that most probes should have similar value between the two channels. other standardization procedures such as median adjustment and qq-normalization  <cit>  have also been employed to normalize multiple arrays before across-array comparisons are conducted. a more recent method, ma2c, has been proposed for the normalization of dual-channel arrays that takes into account the gc-content of the probes  <cit> .

discussion and 
CONCLUSIONS
in this paper we have described two separate though related models for within-slide correction of signal effects associated with probe sequence construct. the first model assumes independence of positional effects, while the second model assumes a quadratic relationship in terms of nucleotide position. in either model, almost all parameters were significantly different from zero.

the two models correct for signal effects associated with probe sequence construct in an approach similar to that in the gc-rma  <cit>  and mat  <cit>  models developed for gene expression and chip-chip data, respectively. the results presented in either paper demonstrate that the probe sequence effect estimates are statistically significant; however, their estimated values are not biologically relevant. as the portion of predicted baseline signal associated with probe sequence in the gc-rma model is relatively small, it contributes minimally to signal correction for gene expression data and could likely be ignored without detriment to the results purported in  <cit> . similarly, the small sequence effects presented in  <cit>  suggest that the overall baseline signal in chip-chip studies is explained by the other parameters in the mat model, i.e, abundance of thymine, the squared abundance of each of the four nucleotides, and probe copy number.

the extremely small p-values associated with the majority of the parameters of the full-model support their statistical significance as well as the appropriateness of the proposed model. however, the relatively small estimated values for these parameters  are close to  <dig>  and thus their biological significance are suspect. the individually estimated regression intercept was  <dig>  ±  <dig>  while the estimates for the nucleotide effects were  <dig>  ±  <dig> ,  <dig>  ±  <dig> , and  <dig>  ±  <dig>  for a, c, and g, respectively. thus the nucleotide effects are statistically significant for the full-model but each individual effect contributes almost nothing to the overall expected baseline signal for a probe. this is due in large part to the unlikeliness that the the nucleotides contribute independently to the observed signal. in fact, the cumulative values in the full-model are biologically significant, that is, when the parameters are added in order to predict the baseline intensity for a given probe, the value is relatively large in comparison to the individual effects at each location.

unlike the full-model, the estimated parameters of the quadratic-model are both statistically and biologically significant. in particular, when the model is fit to the standardized data, the degree-one and -two effects have estimated values near to  <dig> for many of the nucleotides across the  <dig> samples . further, the quadratic-model is able to capture the cumulative effect of the nucleotides in a probe's sequence while also capturing the positional effect observed in figure  <dig>  thus, we propose that the quadratic-model  more appropriately characterizes the nucleotide effect observed in dmh studies.

interpretation of the models presented in this paper can provide some insight into some of the peculiarities of hybridization experiments. as is observable in figure  <dig>  the average signal for probes with adenine and thymine in the 3-prime and 5-prime ends, respectively, do not fit the general trend of the plot and are outliers. the effects of adenine are directly modeled in both models presented here. in the full model, the estimates of the adenine effect for the first  <dig> positions is relatively unstable across the  <dig> samples:  <dig> out of the  <dig> estimates have cofficient of variation greater than  <dig> . a similar story unfolds in the quadratic-model in that the only parameter with a large cofficient of variation is that associated with the number of adenine nucleotides in the probe. these values suggest that there is a larger than expected variability in signal associated with probes with adenine nucleotides in their tails. this effect may be explained in part by the weaker binding between adenine and thymine; however, we suspect the effect is likely more complex. it has been suggested that the dye effect does not vary constantly across the range of signal intensity but is instead correlated with average signal intensity across the two colors  <cit> . as an alternative to the approach herein described for capturing the dye effect, this relationship may be modeled by a step function with respect to the observed probe intensity with steps at say the 1st, 2nd, and 3rd quartile. such an approach is appealing, as it incorporates the previously observed relationship of dye effect and probe signal intensity. however, an interaction between dye and nucleotide composition is neglected. though such an interaction is easy to describe mathematically and could be estimated from the data, the additional parameters would likely lead to over-fitting as was likely the issue with the full-model.

another alternative to modeling dye-effect and nucleotide effect in concert would be to first correct for dye-effect in a non-parametric manner and then estimate the nucleotide effects using the dye-corrected data for the observed values. for example, one could employ the dye-correction strategy proposed in  <cit>  in which the dye-effect is modeled by a loess curve in terms of average log <dig> probe intensity across the two channels. care must be taken when correcting for dye effect in this manner, for in our experience, we have seen that this approach to dye-correction can introduce unexpected noise. for instance, correlations between a probe's spatial location on the array and the ranking of its n value have been observed .

