BACKGROUND
during skeletal muscle development, myoblasts undergo a series of cell divisions before they became post mitotic. a number of biochemical and morphological changes occurs in post mitotic myoblasts before their fusion into multinucleated myotubes. these changes include myoblast elongation to a bipolar shape, membrane recognition and alignment, culminating in myoblast fusion. changes in the composition and structure of the plasma membrane accompany all muscle differentiation steps. one key molecule that regulates the structure and function of the sarcolemma is cholesterol. it has been shown that the addition of cholesterol to the cultured medium before fusion onset inhibits fusion, and that a decrease in membrane cholesterol is necessary for myoblast fusion
. using filipin and freeze-fracture electron microscopy, sekiya and collaborator
 <cit>  showed that the early stages of myoblast fusion were characterized by the depletion of cholesterol from the membrane apposition sites, at which the plasma membranes of two adjacent cells were in close contact. since cholesterol plays an essential role controlling both plasma membrane fluidity and the organization of specialized micro-domains , it is important to understand its role during myogenesis. one simple approach to study the role of cholesterol during muscle differentiation is to selectively deplete membrane cholesterol from in vitro grown myogenic cells. a widely used way of depleting the cholesterol content of cell membranes in a variety of cell types is the incubation of cells with methyl-β-cyclodextrin , a compound that has a hydrophobic cavity with a high affinity for cholesterol
 <cit> . our group has shown that cholesterol depletion by mbcd enhances the fusion of chick-cultured myoblasts and induces the formation of multinucleated myotubes that are more than  <dig> times thicker than untreated cultures
 <cit> . we also showed that mbcd induces the activation of the wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway and increases the proliferation of myoblasts
. however, it is not yet known the genes that are involved in the cellular events that occur after cholesterol depletion of muscle cells. here, we investigated the effects of membrane cholesterol depletion in the whole transcriptomic profile of chick skeletal muscle cells, using an ion torrent-based sequencing. in addition, the morphology of the cholesterol-depleted cells was also evaluated by means of immunofluorescence microscopy.

RESULTS
differences in transcription between untreated and mbcd-treated myogenic cells
to better understand the molecular and cellular basis involved in mbcd-induced muscle differentiation, we analyzed the transcriptome of chick cultured muscle cells after cholesterol depletion. over  <dig>  million sequences were obtained, from which over  <dig>  million passed quality control, representing  <dig>  mega basepairs of information .

from a total of  <dig>  identified transcripts,  <dig>   had their transcription significantly modified. among these,  <dig> genes were overexpressed in the mbcd-treated myogenic cells compared to the control, indicating up-regulation . on the other hand,  <dig> genes had reduced expression in the mbcd-treated myogenic cells compared to the control, indicating down-regulation . the cellular processes that were affected  after cholesterol depletion were cell growth and death, cell communication, transport and catabolism, and cell motility .table  <dig> 
transcriptomic metadata of chick myogenic cells



mg-rastid

transcriptome size  

average size  

total number of sequences 

classification cog
control
mbcd
total

different categories identifiable 

statistically different functions

up-regulation with mbcd treatment

down-regulation with mbcd treatment
n.a. not applicable, 1percentage of total different categories, 2percentage of statistically different functions.

from a total of  <dig>  identified transcripts,  <dig>   had their transcription significantly modified. among these,  <dig> genes were up-regulated and  <dig> were down-regulated after cholesterol depletion.
most abundant down-regulated functions






the group of genes with the highest down-regulation levels after mbcd treatment is involved in apoptosis, focal adhesion, phagosome, tight junction, cell cycle, lysosome, adherens junctions and gap junctions . interleukin- <dig> receptor-associated kinase  <dig> mrna was found to be the highest down-regulated feature .

genes coding for proteins related to adherens junctions, apoptosis, lysosome, p <dig> signaling pathway, cell cycle, focal adhesion, endocytosis, regulation of autophagy and regulation of actin cytoskeleton were up-regulated after mbcd treatment . lim domain only protein  <dig>  mrna was found to be the highest up-regulated feature . another highly up-regulated mrna after cholesterol depletion was the lysosomal-associated membrane protein 1/ <dig> .

morphological analysis of cholesterol-depleted myogenic cells
in order to correlate the transcriptomic analysis with structural characteristics, we analyzed the effects of cholesterol depletion in the morphology of myogenic cultured cells. the effects of mbcd in chick myogenic cultures can be clearly visualized after an immunofluorescence labeling using an antibody against the sarcomeric protein alpha-actinin and the nuclear dye dapi . myofibrils labeled with alpha-actinin can be seen in untreated and mbcd-treated cells, but it is noticeable that mbcd treated-cultures displayed a higher number of myofibrils than control cultures . quantification of the number of myofibrils present within myotubes showed that mbcd treatment induces a 80% increase in the number of myofibrils. the presence of well defined striated myofibrils is an indicator of myogenic differentiation. the presence of much thicker myotubes and a higher number of nuclei within mbcd treated-myotubes as compared to control was also observed . quantification of myoblast fusion  in cultures grown for 48 hours  showed that treatment of myogenic cells with mbcd induces a 15% increase in myoblast fusion. these results showed that mbcd enhances myogenesis by the increase in myoblast fusion which leads to the formation of thicker well-striated myotubes.figure  <dig> 
methyl-β-cyclodextrin enhances muscle differentiation. chick myogenic cells were grown for 24 hours, treated with 2 mm of methyl-β-cyclodextrin  for 30 minutes and grown for the next 24 hours. untreated  and mbcd-treated cells  were fixed and double-stained with an anti-sarcomeric α-actinin antibody  and the nuclear dye dapi . merged images are shown in a and b. note the α-actinin distribution in z-lines along sarcomeres in both untreated and mbcd-treated muscle cells . scale bar in b represents 10 μm.



interstingly, alpha-actinin mrna was up-regulated in myogenic cells after mbcd treatment . these transcriptomic results are in accordance with the enhancement in the number of striated myofibrils observed in the immunolabeling for alpha-actinin in mbcd-treated myotubes as compared to untreated cultures .a schematic representation of the effects of cholesterol depletion in chick cultures of myogenic cells is shown in figure 
 <dig>  briefly, primary cultures of chick myoblasts treated with mbcd shows an enhancement in cell proliferation and fusion leading to the formation of thicker myotubes, as compared to untreated cultures. nuclei appear clustered in the central region of mbcd-treated myotubes, while in untreated cultures the nuclei are well aligned at the periphery of myotubes . cholesterol depletion induces the formation of large areas of membrane adhesion in adjacent myoblast prior to cell fusion . in both control and mbcd-treated cultures it is possible to see the formation of periodic striations in myobrils, but there is a higher number of myofibrils in mbcd treated-myotubes than in control myotubes.since the lim domain only protein  <dig>  mrna was found to be the highest up-regulated feature, we decided to investigate the distribution of lmo <dig> protein in chick myogenic cells. immunofluorescence labeling of untreated muscle cell cultures with a polyclonal antibody against lmo <dig> revealed a strong perinuclear distribution in multinucleated myotubes, plus diffuse cytoplasmic fibrillar localization in both mononucleated and multinucleated cells . no differences were observed in lmo <dig> distribution in chick myogenic cells after mbcd treatment.figure  <dig> 
a proposed model for the effects of mbcd-induced cholesterol depletion in chick myogenic cells. our experiments suggest that cholesterol depletion by methyl-β-cyclodextrin  enhances myoblast proliferation and its subsequent adhesion and fusion into multinucleated myotubes. schematically, in normal myogenesis , myoblasts withdrawal from cell cycle  and became bipolar myoblasts. these bipolar myoblasts will then align with each other, guided by recognition between their plasma membranes  and fuse to form long multinucleated myotubes, with sharp striations and aligned nuclei . conversely, myoblasts treated with mbcd  display an enhancement in cell proliferation  and fusion  leading to the formation of thicker myotubes . note that nuclei  are well aligned at the periphery of control myotubes and are clustered in the central region of mbcd-treated myotubes. areas of membrane adhesion are shown in red.
lim domain only protein  <dig>  localizes at the nuclei region of chick myotubes. chick myogenic cells were grown for 48 hours and double-stained with an anti-lmo <dig> antibody  and the nuclear dye dapi . b is an inset of a region of image a. a merged image is shown in d. note the strong nuclear envelope staining of the anti-lmo <dig> antibody in multinucleated myotubes , plus a diffuse cytoplasmic fibrillar staining in both mononucleated and multinucleated cells. scale bar in c represents 20 μm.



discussion
the transcriptomic analysis presented in this study constitutes the first characterization of the genes involved in the response of muscle cells to membrane cholesterol depletion. our results suggest that the cholesterol depleting drug methyl-β-cyclodextrin induces major changes in the expression of several genes related to apoptosis, focal adhesion, phagosome, tight junction, cell cycle, lysosome, adherens junctions, gap junctions, p <dig> signaling pathway, endocytosis, regulation of autophagy and regulation of actin cytoskeleton. some of the induced genes observed in this study code for well-characterized proteins. for instance, lim domain only protein  <dig> , lysosomal-associated membrane protein 1/ <dig> , hepatocyte growth factor-regulated tyrosine kinase substrate and calpain  <dig> were all up-regulated in muscle cells after cholesterol depletion.

lmo <dig> mrna, which was found to be the highest up-regulated feature, is an emerin-binding protein that regulates the transcription of muscle-specific genes
 <cit> . it has been shown that lmo <dig> localizes in the nucleus, cytoplasm and cell surface, particularly in cadherin based-adhesion junctions and focal adhesions
 <cit> . holaska and colleagues speculated that specific signals might release lmo <dig> from the cell surface, favoring its nuclear localization and enhancing the expression of emerin and other lmo7-dependent genes involved in muscle differentiation. in the present study, we found lmo <dig> in a perinuclear distribution in multinucleated myotubes, and with diffuse cytoplasmic fibrillar localization in both mononucleated and multinucleated cells. our group is currently investigating the role of lmo <dig> during mbcd-induced muscle differentiation. interestingly, other adhesion proteins, besides lmo <dig>  were found to have their transcription regulated by cholesterol depletion. adhesion proteins related to adherens junctions, tight junctions, gap junctions and focal adhesion belong to the group of transcripts altered after mbcd treatment . myoblast migration and its subsequent fusion into multinucleated cells are two processes that are highly dependent on cell-cell and cell-extracellular matrix adhesion proteins, and since mbcd enhances myoblast fusion
 <cit> , we can hypothesize that the adhesion-related transcripts that were regulated after mbcd are involved in the enhancement of myoblast fusion.

calpain  <dig> is one of the adhesion-related mrna that was up-regulated after cholesterol depletion. calpain  <dig>  also called m-calpain, is a cytosolic protease, which has been shown to be involved in the membrane reorganization that precedes myoblast fusion
 <cit> . further, goudenege and colleagues
 <cit>  demonstrated the presence of active m-calpain in myotube caveolae. the increase in the expression of m-calpain after mbcd treatment is in agreement with our previous work showing that cholesterol depletion induces an increase in myoblast fusion
 <cit> .

mrnas that are involved in the regulation of membrane traffic were also altered after cholesterol depletion, as we can observe by the changes in the expression of transcripts related to endocytosis, lysosomes and phagosomes . another was the lysosomal-associated membrane protein 1/ <dig> . lamp- <dig> and lamp- <dig> are the most abundant glycoproteins of lysosomal membranes, and its mrnas were found in our study to be highly up-regulated after cholesterol depletion. in embryonic fibroblasts, mutual disruption of both lamps is associated with an increased accumulation of autophagic vacuoles, altered lysosomal appearance, and disturbed cholesterol metabolism. it has been shown that unesterified cholesterol accumulates in endo/lysosomal compartments in lamp double deficient cells
 <cit> . these results suggest a clear connection between the expression and localization of lamp proteins and cholesterol. the precise role of lamp proteins during mbcd-induced muscle differentiation needs to be further investigated.

another transcript involved in the regulation of membrane traffic and which transcription was found altered after mbcd treatment was the hepatocyte growth factor-regulated tyrosine kinase substrate . it has been reported that galactosylceramide expression factor- <dig> , a rat homolog of hepatocyte growth factor regulated tyrosine kinase substrate, induces myogenesis in mdck and c3h10t1/ <dig> cells
 <cit> . since previous data from our group shows that cholesterol depletion enhances skeletal muscle myogenesis
, we can suggest that hgs is involved in the induction of myogenesis observed in chick myogenic cells after exposure to mbcd.

interestingly, many cell cycle-related mrnas were found to have their transcription altered  after cholesterol depletion. a previous work from our group has shown that cholesterol depletion by mbcd interferes with myoblast proliferation by enhancing the proliferation of chick myogenic cells grown in culture
 <cit> . we found an increase in the levels of p <dig> expression in mbcd treated-cells when compared to untreated cells
 <cit> . in the present transcriptomic analysis we found the following regulators of cell cycle and p <dig> signaling pathway altered after mbcd treatment: regulatory protein swi <dig>  atp-dependent lon protease, growth arrest and dna-damage-inducible protein, regulator of sigma e protease, proliferating cell nuclear antigen, cell cycle checkpoint protein rad <dig>  cyclin dependent kinase inhibitor 1a, cyclin e, cytochrome c and bh <dig> interacting domain death agonist.

importantly, our results show that from a total of  <dig>  identified transcripts,  <dig>   had their transcription significantly modified in myogenic cells after mbcd treatment. mbcd is widely used as raft-disorganizing agent, since it can remove cholesterol from cell membranes and rafts are highly enriched and dependent on cholesterol. these experiments assume that the major effect of mbcd is the removal of membrane cholesterol. our work describes a high number of transcripts that have altered  expression, and therefore care should be taken when using mbcd as a raft-disrupting agent without looking at other possible mbcd-related effects.

CONCLUSIONS
this study analyzed the transcriptome of chick cultured muscle cells after cholesterol depletion. our data shows that alterations in the availability of plasma membrane cholesterol lead to transcriptional changes in myogenic cells. these results could contribute to the understanding of the role of membrane cholesterol during normal skeletal muscle differentiation, as well as in pathological muscular degenerative disorders.

