BACKGROUND
understanding the evolution of animal complexity requires an understanding of how new traits arise. studies of novel trait evolution typically invoke either the origin of new genes  <cit>  or the evolution of new relationships among conserved genes  <cit>  as the primary drivers of evolutionary innovation. collectively, these studies suggest that novel genes can be generated in several ways, including: duplication and divergence of conserved genes, rna-mediated duplication/retroposition, exon shuffling/mis-splicing of rna and other modifications to coding sequence, horizontal transfer of genes from other taxa, de novo evolution of an open reading frame in previously non-coding sequence, and overprinting   <cit> . indeed, this diversity of mechanisms underlying the generation of new coding sequence has led to the suggestion that novel genes are generated with high frequency across lineages  <cit> . in support of this, approximately 10-20 % of the genes in all sequenced genomes  comprise novel/taxonomically-restricted genes  <cit> , but the putative role of these abundant novel genes in driving evolutionary innovation is far from clear.

a recent study of drosophilids demonstrated that equally large proportions of novel  and conserved genes  were critical for viability, supporting the idea that recently evolved genes can be essential to the biology of the organism  <cit> . several additional studies provide support for novel/taxonomically-restricted genes in generating lineage-specific morphological features  but surprisingly, most of these studies have identified only few novel genes to be contributing to the novel morphological trait of interest. thus, despite their focus on the role of novel genes in the evolution of a novel trait, these studies actually reveal that the majority of the genes involved in evolutionary innovation are conserved. one challenge to studies of evolutionary novelty is the identification of a truly novel tissue to use as a model  <cit> . additionally, limited availability of data from closely related taxa means that many genes identified as “novel” may actually reflect sparse taxon sampling. poor tissue sampling may pose an even bigger problem, leading to a general overestimation of the value of novel genes in the evolution of novel tissues merely because no other tissues were sampled. in fact, only few studies have explicitly examined the abundance and distribution of novel genes across cell/tissue types  <cit>  and their results regarding the importance of novel genes have been conflicting.

cnidarians have become a valuable model for the evolution of novelty because they possess an unequivocal example of a single-celled novelty: the cnidocyte . cnidocytes are complex sensory/effector cells that exhibit significant morphological diversity across cnidarians . used primarily in prey capture and defense, cnidocytes are abundant in the tentacles, which are the primary feeding apparatus of cnidarians. among anthozoans , one of the notable synapomorphies is the presence of mesenteries  <cit> , multifunctional internal tissues of mixed developmental origin  that contain gonadal and digestive cells as well as a diverse repertoire of other cell types, including cnidocytes. during feeding, the mesenteries become apposed to ingested prey items, presumably enabling the use of their cnidocytes and ectodermal gland cells to assist in immobilization/digestion of prey tissues  <cit> . the mesenteries of sea anemones in the superfamily metridioidea  <cit>  are modified to include threadlike distal extensions called “acontia” which are replete with cnidocytes. interestingly, the suite of cnidocytes that populate the acontia can be distinct from that of the mesenteries, their tissue of origin  <cit> . while cnidarians may superficially appear simple, they clearly exhibit tissue-specific distributions of cell types resulting in a surprisingly high level of morphological complexity.

nematostella vectensis  has emerged as an important model for diverse studies of cellular and molecular biology  <cit> ; yet one of the most intriguing tissues in this animal remains largely unstudied: the nematosomes. first described by stephenson in  <dig>  <cit> , nematosomes are an enigmatic free-floating tissue that circulates through the gastrovascular cavity  in adult sea anemones, occasionally coming to rest along the internal surface of the body wall   <cit> . the presence of nematosomes in n. vectensis, milne-edwardsia polaris , and milne-edwardsia nathorstii , and their absence in other members of the edwarsiidae led to the early designation of the nematosomes as the defining apomorphy of the genus nematostella . despite this, little is known about the biology of this tissue. nematosomes are small, multicellular masses of cells comprised largely of cnidocytes  and, like the acontia of metridoidean cnidarians, nematosomes are derivatives of the mesenteries  <cit> . given the critical role of cnidocytes in the feeding behavior of sea anemones, early hypotheses of nematosome function suggested a role for this novel tissue in facilitating immobilization of ingested prey  <cit> ; yet support for this hypothesis has been inconclusive  <cit> . histological studies of nematosomes confirmed that this tissue lacks gland cells leading to the conclusion that nematosomes play no role in digestion  <cit>  but provided no convincing alternative function and no further information about the cell types present in these structures. the observation of abundant nematosomes in the jelly matrix surrounding the spawned egg masses  <cit>  led to a hypothesized role in protection of the developing embryos; yet, this hypothesis, too, has received mixed support  <cit> . the long history of conflicting results regarding the putative function of nematosomes even led to the hypothesis that nematosomes play no role at all in the biology of n. vectensis  <cit> , ultimately relegating the diagnostic morphological feature of the genus nematostella merely to an intriguing curiosity.fig.  <dig> nematosomes in n. vectensis. a a live image of a young adult polyp ; several nematosomes  are visible at rest along the internal surface of the body wall near the insertions of the mesenteries . the pharynx  and tentacles  are also visible. b a dic optical section of an isolated nematosome



nematosomes are thought to develop continuously throughout the adult life of n. vectensis  making them a tractable model for understanding patterning and identity in an adult tissue. since nematosomes are restricted only to the genus nematostella  and they are found only in adult polyps , these unique structures are an unequivocal example of a phenotypic/tissue-level novelty  <cit> . whether this novel tissue expresses novel genes and cell types, however, is unknown. herein, we  assess the function of this tissue by explicitly testing existing hypotheses from the literature,  examine the morphology of this tissue for evidence of novel cell types,  characterize the gene expression profile of the nematosomes , and  test hypotheses about the contribution of novel genes to novel structures by evaluating the distribution of novel and conserved genes in nematosomes and other tissues. together, our results confirm that nematosomes comprise more than just a mass of sloughed cnidocytes and provide support for a novel role for this tissue in the innate immune system of n. vectensis. we further report that nematostella-specific genes are indeed overrepresented in this nematostella-specific tissue but these novel genes also comprise a large proportion of the upregulated transcripts across tissues, suggesting that novel genes may play important roles in the tissue-specific biology of all tissues.

RESULTS
nematosome development
nematosomes first appear in the body cavity of n. vectensis near the onset of reproductive maturity, after development of the ciliated tracts of the mesenteries . although material can be observed circulating through the body cavity of small polyps before maturation , this material is largely unicellular and does not contain cnidocytes. similar material can be seen circulating through the cavity of adult polyps  but a comparison of the size of these particles with the nematosomes that also circulate in the cavity of adults makes clear that the former are not nematosomes. as noted by previous studies, nematosomes form by budding from the ectodermal  portion of the mesenteries  <cit> . here, we demonstrate that nematosomes bud from regions of the mesenteries that are already rich in mature cnidocyte capsules  and the presence of cells in s-phase  suggests that the process of budding involves proliferation of the cells around the mature cnidocytes. two pieces of evidence suggest that nematosome budding occurs only after completion of cnidocyte development: first, proliferative cells cannot be detected in this tissue. despite the many thousands of nematosomes we assayed , we have observed only three nematosomes with proliferative cells . these results suggest new cells  are not being made in the nematosomes after they leave the mesentery. second, our attempts to identify developing cnidocytes directly have all failed. using tem, we have identified developing cnidocytes in the tentacle ectoderm from their unusual appearance  but have never seen developing cnidocytes in thin sections from nematosomes . also, using antibodies directed against three different minicollagens , which are known to label only developing cnidocytes  <cit> , we demonstrate that early planula stage embryos have abundant developing cnidocytes throughout the ectoderm while nematosomes assayed at the same time with the same antibodies, do not . in concert with the previous observation that nematosomes appear to lack cells expressing minicollagen rna  <cit> , these data suggest that nematosomes are shed from distinct regions of the mesenteries only after their cellular complement has been determined.fig.  <dig> nematosome budding. a clusters of cnidocytes  are visible in the ectodermal mesentery before budding . b a later stage in the budding process showing the abundance of mature cnidocytes  as the nematosome begins to protrude from the mesentery epithelium. c proliferative nuclei  are visible in the basal region of the epithelium, between and below the cnidocytes . proliferation also occurs outside of the budding zone . d a developing cnidocyte from tentacle ectoderm; white arrows indicate the cnidocyst tubule which develops outside of and around the cnidocyst capsule . e-g immunohistochemistry performed in early planula stage embryos reveals abundant developing cnidocytes labeled with anti-mcol <dig>  anti-mcol <dig>  or anti-mcol <dig> antibodies . nematosomes incubated at the same time in the same aliquot of each antibody lack staining ; the number of tissues  observed to have mcol+ cells is indicated. the blastopore of each embryo is indicated by * for orientation. all scale bars represent 10 μm unless otherwise specified



nematosomes subdue prey
to test the hypothesis that nematosomes are essentially non-functional waste material sloughed from the mesenteries  <cit> , we assessed the capacity of nematosomes to subdue prey. to do this, we isolated live nematosomes from freshly spawned egg masses and concentrated them in a small amount of 1/3x filtered seawater  in a small glass dish. when recently hatched brine shrimp  were introduced into the dish with the nematosomes, the shrimp became immobilized almost immediately , at a rate consistent with the rate at which these animals are subdued by the tips of the tentacles in an adult n. vectensis polyp . by contrast, 1/3x fsw alone failed to have any adverse effect on the shrimp . high-magnification images taken at the end of the experiment reveal the presence of nematosome clusters adhering to the exoskeletons of the subdued shrimp  and at even higher magnification, discharged cnidocysts can be seen penetrating the exoskeleton . likewise, a highly magnified image of an individual nematosome reveals the presence of multiple discharged cnidocysts . these data confirm that nematosomes possess the ability to subdue prey and that this is a result of cnidocyte firing.fig.  <dig> live nematosomes are capable of subduing brine shrimp .  a aggregates of nematosomes  are attached to subdued brine shrimp. b higher magnification reveals the presence of two spent cnidocysts  protruding from the exoskeleton of the shrimp. c a high-magnification image of an isolated nematosome reveals two spent cnidocysts . black arrow indicates a spent cnidocyst in another focal plane. all scale bars represent 10 μm unless otherwise specified



nematosomes: more than just cnidocytes
nematosomes have previously been reported to contain two of the three cnidocyte types found in n. vectensis: basitrichous haplonemes  and microbasic p-mastigophores  <cit> . we find both of these cells types in abundance across nematosomes . . to determine if other cell types  might be present in nematosomes, we counted nuclei  and cnidocyst capsules  in two independent samples of nematosomes, each spanning the range of nematosome size . both the total number of nuclei and the number of cnidocyst capsules increase linearly with size over the range of nematosomes examined , but these relationships differ in slope . because nematosomes do not contain developing cnidocytes , these relationships suggest two things: first, all nematosomes have more nuclei than cnidocyst capsules and, therefore, must contain non-cnidocyte cells, and second, that large nematosomes contain more non-cnidocyte cells than do small nematosomes.fig.  <dig> nematosomes comprise multiple cell types. a a single dic optical section through an isolated nematosome in which two types of cnidocyte are abundant: basitrichous isorhizas  characterized by a thin shaft extending nearly the full length of the capsule, and microbasic-p-mastigophores  which have a thick shaft that extends only half the length of the capsule and has a distinctive v-shaped notch  <cit> . ciliary cones are visible  at the apex of two mastigophores and several long cilia  can be seen emerging from the perimeter of the tissue. b a 3d rendering of a confocal z-stack through a nematosome indicating nuclei . nuclei in cnidocytes often appear semi-lunar in shape  as they conform to the shape of the cnidocyst capsule. c a 3d rendering of a confocal z-stack through another single nematosome showing the presence of abundant mature cnidocytes . d the numbers of nuclei  and cnidocytes  in individual nematosomes increase as a function of nematosome diameter but these relationships differ across the range of nematosomes studied . all scale bars represent 10 μm



nematosome apical morphology is marked by abundant sensory cones
in addition to cnidocytes, nematosomes are known to have abundant motile cilia  <cit> , although the nature of the cell type from which these cilia emerge has not been examined. using fluorescence microscopy and an antibody directed against acetylated-tubulin, we confirm the presence of abundant cilia emerging from each isolated nematosome . quantitative comparisons of cilium length  reveal the presence of two distinct types: type i cilia are short, averaging  <dig>  +/-  <dig>  μm in length  while type ii cilia are nearly four times as long . double-labeling with phalloidin  indicates the presence of numerous actin-rich apical cones , previously described in tentacle epithelia of n. vectensis . using field-emission scanning electron microscopy , we confirm the presence of at least two types of apical cones, associated with cilia of different length : type i cones have abundant short stereocilia organized into concentric whorls  from which a short  cilium emerges  <cit> . by contrast, type ii cones are composed of a single ring of stereocilia connected by inter-ciliary links  from which type ii cilia emerge. both types of ciliary cones were abundant in nematosomes of all sizes. thin sections indicate that type i ciliary cones are found at the apex of cnidocytes while cells with type ii ciliary cones are often found adjacent to cnidocytes  in a cell type that shares morphological features with the previously described cnidocyte support cells  <cit> .fig.  <dig> ciliary structures on the surface of a nematosome. a double labeling of f-actin  and acetylated-tubulin  indicates the presence of dense actin-rich apical cones  and two types of cilia: type i, short  and type ii, long . b cilium length differs significantly between type i and type ii cilia . c numerous ciliary cones of different morphologies  are visible among the abundant microvilli covering the surface of a nematosome. d type i ciliary cones  are wide, assembled from multiple layers of stereocilia , and surround a short central kinocilium . e type ii ciliary cones are narrow and are composed of a single layer of stereocilia  that surround a long kinocilium. f a thin section reveals the relationship of the ciliary cones and their underlying cell types. higher magnification  shows a type i ciliary cone  at the apex of a cnidocyte  and a type ii ciliary cone  at the apex of a cell type with sub-apical vesicles of various size and electron density immediately adjacent to the cnidocyte. all scale bars represent 10 μm unless otherwise specified



phagocytes: a new cell identified among nematosomes
using tem, we also identify an additional cell type in nematosomes with the morphology of a phagocyte. thin sections reveal the abundance of large vacuolated cells in the periphery of an individual nematosome . high-magnification imaging of one of these peripheral cells  reveals vesicles with the morphology of lysosomes, primary endosomes, and mature endosomes , all within 1-2 μm of the apical membrane, consistent with the components of the endocytotic pathway in anthozoans  <cit> . additionally, live nematosomes readily engulfed fitc-labeled heat-inactivated e. coli  and fitc-labeled latex beads , confirming the capacity of nematosomes to phagocytose various types of particles. together, these data provide the first evidence of phagocytotic capacity in nematosomes and suggest nematosomes may play a role in clearing the gastrovascular cavity of foreign particles.fig.  <dig> phagocytes in nematosomes. a a thin section of a nematosome showing four cnidocytes  and at least five cells with abundant apical vacuoles . b at higher magnification, several organelles are visible:  multivesicular body,  lysosome-like vesicle, and  endosome-like vesicle. c an optical section through a single nematosome showing sub-surface localization of fluorescently-labeled e. coli  and latex beads 



constructing the nematosome transcriptome
one of the advantages of working with n. vectensis is the availability of genomic resources, including a publicly available reference genome  <cit>  and several independent sources of transcriptome data . however, tissue-specific transcriptome data are lacking and there have been no efforts to explicitly sequence the nematosomes. considering the small size of the nematosomes and the fact that their abundance varies widely across individuals and throughout the year  <cit> , it is likely that this tissue was not well-represented in previous transcriptome studies. to gain insight into the molecular profile of nematosomes, we sequenced the complete set of transcripts expressed in the nematosomes and compared the expression profile of this tissue with that of the mesenteries  and the tentacles .

all three tissues  were collected from adult polyps and sequenced in triplicate using illumina technology, resulting in over 100 m paired-end 100 bp reads per tissue. in order to identify novel  transcripts with confidence, we chose to avoid the use of published gene models  and instead to assemble a reference transcriptome de novo, using reads from all three tissues and the de novo assembler trinity  <cit> . erroneous assembly of numerous transcript “isoforms” is a common problem with de novo assemblers and a challenge to producing reliable differential expression results  <cit> ; to avoid interpretation of these assembly errors as novel sequences, we aimed to minimize the number of assembled transcripts. to this end, we evaluated three reference transcriptomes assembled using different methods: a full transcriptome  was assembled from the complete set of reads from all three replicates of all three tissues trimmed for adapters and low-quality bases using trimmomatic  <cit> , a second transcriptome  was assembled from all the trimmed reads from single replicate of each tissue, and a third transcriptome  was assembled from a single replicate of each tissue after trimming and subjecting reads to error-correction using allpaths-lg  <cit> . all raw reads and the three transcriptomes assembled from them have been deposited in the european nucleotide archive, project accession: prjeb <dig> 

to evaluate the quality of our three transcriptomes, we first examined each for the number of transcripts and open reading frames  they generated. to minimize the number of spurious orf predictions, we used the default settings in transdecoder  which limits predictions to only those sequences with an orf > <dig> amino acids  in length. we further examined the number of expressed transcripts by mapping our complete set of reads back to each reference transcriptome using bowtie <dig>  <cit> ; aligned reads were then counted with the multibamcov utility in bedtools  <cit> . finally, we examined each transcriptome for completeness with cegma  <cit> , which uses blast to search a set of  <dig> conserved eukaryotic genes against each assembled transcriptome. cegma scores represent the percent of the  <dig> conserved genes that were present in each assembly; assemblies with higher cegma scores are considered to be more complete.

the full transcriptome comprised  <dig>  transcripts but only 9 % of these  encoded orfs > 100aa , suggesting the majority of the assembled transcripts are very short. additionally, each orf-encoding transcript produced an average of  <dig>  unique orfs. while this resulted in  <dig>  total predicted orfs, the majority of these putative proteins  were estimated to have no expression . together, these data suggest that tr <dig> does indeed contain a large number of erroneously assembled transcripts, however, this assembly also had the highest cegma score, as 242/ <dig>  conserved eukaryotic genes from the cegma database were present in this transcriptome. thus, tr <dig> is useful for identifying complete transcript sequences but not for assaying differential expression across tissues.table  <dig> comparison of transcriptome assembly statistics

assembled “transcripts”a
transcripts with predicted orfsb
predicted orfsc
orfs with no expressiond
cegma score  e

atotal number of contigs assembled using trinity  <cit> . bopen reading frames  ≥  <dig> amino acids  in length were predicted using transdecoder . cthe average number of orfs predicted from each transcript is listed in parentheses. dtotal number of transcripts with at least one orf and abundance estimated at <  <dig> counts in at least one of the three sampled tissues; counts were assayed using bedtools  <cit> . ecegma scores are listed as % of the  <dig> conserved eukaryotic genes that form the cegma database  <cit>  that were present in the indicated transcriptome 



the transcriptome assembled from one trimmed replicate of each tissue  produced  <dig>  transcripts, 16 % of which  encoded long orfs; this assembly, therefore, resulted in fewer erroneously assembled short transcripts than tr <dig>  however, those  <dig>  transcripts produced  <dig>  predicted orfs, which equates to an average of approximately  <dig> unique orfs per transcript. like tr <dig>  tr <dig> was characterized by a large number of sequences  with no expression and also a very high cegma score, making this transcriptome also useful for identifying complete transcript sequences but not expression analyses.

finally, the reference transcriptome assembled from trimmed/error corrected reads from a single replicate of each tissue  produced  <dig>  transcripts, most of which  encoded long orfs and produced only  <dig>  orfs per transcript. this resulted in  <dig>  total predicted orfs, 37 % of which  were estimated to have no expression. the completeness of this reduced transcriptome was lower than either tr <dig> or tr <dig>  suggesting that error correction limited our ability to assemble full length transcripts. as an additional measure of assembly quality, we explicitly examined mapping concordance  following trimming and error correction . over 75 % of the reads from each sample mapped back to our reference assembly and error correction increased this number considerably . given these metrics of assembly quality and our goal of confidently assembling truly novel transcripts we chose to use nvecref <dig> assembled from trimmed/error-corrected reads as our reference transcriptome for differential expression and orthology analyses. our differential expression and qpcr analyses  confirm that nvecref <dig> accurately represents the distribution of transcripts across tissues, supporting our decision to take this conservative approach.table  <dig> error correction increases the mapping concordance for transcriptome nvecref32743

samplea

asamples m <dig>  m <dig>  mes are from mesenteries; n <dig>  n <dig>  nem are from nematosomes; t <dig>  t <dig>  ten are from tentacles. btrimming was performed using trimmomatic  <cit> . cerror correction was performed using the errorcorrectreads utility from allpaths-lg  <cit> . dalignments were performed using bowtie <dig>  <cit> 



to ensure all assembled transcripts in our reference transcriptome were from n. vectensis, we used the program alien_index  to identify putative foreign/contaminating transcripts. from the assembled transcriptome of  <dig>  transcripts, we identified  <dig> sequences of potential foreign origin and examined each manually using blastn in the published n. vectensis genome. those sequences with alien index scores greater than  <dig>  i.e., with a high likelihood of foreign origin  that also had high quality blast hits in the genome  were retained for further analysis; all other sequences were considered putative contaminants  and were removed . in summary, our cleaned reference transcriptome consisted of  <dig>  n. vectensis transcripts which encoded  <dig>  predicted orfs,  <dig> of which lack models in the published jgi database .table  <dig> reference transcriptome nvecref <dig> statistics



our goals for differential expression and orthology analyses were three-fold: first, we wanted to generate a molecular profile of the nematosomes by describing the types of genes expressed in this tissue with a specific focus on any novel transcripts that might have been missed in previous sequencing projects. second, we wanted to explicitly test the hypothesis that the nematosome transcriptome comprises a subset of the genes expressed in the mesenteries  and further, that nematosomes share more genes in common with the mesenteries than with the tentacles. third, we aimed to evaluate the hypothesis that nematostella-specific genes are restricted to  this novel tissue.

nematosomes are molecularly distinct from mesenteries and tentacles
we used principal components analysis to assess variation among replicates and across tissues. while variation was highest among the nematosome samples, all three tissues formed distinct clusters along the first two components , confirming that variation among tissues exceeds variation among replicates and that the expression profiles of our three tissues are indeed distinct. to examine differences in gene expression across tissues, we performed hierarchical clustering based on fold-change expression differences in variance stabilized count data using deseq <dig>  <cit>  . for this study, we consider only those transcripts with ≥ |2| fold-change differences between tissues with a false discovery rate of <  <dig>  as differentially expressed. while numerous transcripts had largely ubiquitous expression across tissues, we also identified clusters of transcripts that were highly expressed exclusively in the nematosomes and clusters of transcripts with high expression in either mesenteries or tentacles .fig.  <dig> expression analyses in three n. vectensis tissues. a principal components plot indicating variation within and among tissue types. pc <dig> describes 57 % of the variation among tissues and pc <dig> describes 34 % in the top  <dig> expressed transcripts. b heatmap indicating gene expression  of the top  <dig> expressed transcripts. transcripts are clustered using the ward’s d method ; warmer colors indicate higher expression. dotted lines indicate clusters with ubiquitous expression across tissues, the arrow indicates a cluster with high expression in nematosomes only, and arrowheads indicate clusters with high expression in only mesenteries or tentacles. c nineteen out of twenty transcripts identified by rna-seq as being significantly upregulated in nematosomes relative to both other tissues were also found to have significantly lower expression in the mesenteries and tentacles, relative to nematosomes, using qpcr. expression of nv <dig> in the tentacles  is not significantly different from  <dig>  dotted lines indicate 2-fold change in expression between nematosomes and the other tissues. mean ± sd



to validate our differential expression patterns, we examined the expression of several transcripts found to be upregulated in the nematosomes using qpcr in independent samples  of each tissue. we randomly selected twenty transcripts from the set of  <dig> transcripts identified as being upregulated in nematosomes for quantitative pcr analysis. nineteen of these twenty transcripts exhibited significantly lower expression  in both the mesenteries and tentacles relative to the nematosomes . together, these data suggest that our approach was effective at identifying differentially expressed transcripts across tissues.

lineage-specific genes are overrepresented in nematosomes 
to characterize the types of transcripts upregulated in each tissue, we performed orthology analysis  <cit>  and assayed the distribution of transcripts of different taxonomic origins in each tissue. specifically, we examined the distribution of nematostella-specific genes, genes found only in representatives of the edwardsiidae, genes found only among anthozoans, those found only among cnidarians, and conserved genes shared across metazoans . in the complete dataset , the largest proportion of transcripts  grouped with orthologs from across metazoa, whereas nematostella-specific transcripts comprised only 16 % of the dataset  . a previous study estimated the number of nematostella-specific genes to comprise approximately 11 % of the genome  <cit> , suggesting our efforts to assemble a reference transcriptome de novo was an effective method for identifying additional predicted genes.fig.  <dig> analysis of taxon-restricted gene expression. a of  <dig>  expressed transcripts identified in this study, approximately 16 %  are nematostella-specific, 2 %  are edwardsiidae-specific, 14 %  are anthozoan-specific, and 7 %  are cnidarian-specific. the largest class of transcripts sequenced in this study  were found in at least one other group of metazoans . as compared with the complete set of expressed transcripts,  differentially expressed transcripts were characterized by a higher proportion of nematostella-specific sequences: 26 % in nematosomes and mesenteries  and 31 % in tentacles . shared/metazoan sequences comprised less than half of the differentially expressed transcripts in each of the three tissues. e-g
nematostella-specific sequences make up an even larger proportion of the uniquely expressed transcripts in each tissue: 65 %  in the nematosomes, 50 %  in the mesenteries, and 47 %  in the tentacles. h among the differentially expressed transcripts , nematostella-specific sequences were more likely to be expressed in only a single tissue  than were pan-cnidarian sequences  or shared/metazoan sequences 



conserved/metazoan transcripts represented a smaller proportion of the upregulated genes in all tissues  than in the whole dataset . of the  <dig> transcripts found to be upregulated specifically in nematosomes , only 32 %  grouped with orthologs from diverse metazoans. nematostella-specific transcripts comprised 26 % of the upregulated genes from nematosomes  and fully 68 % of the transcripts in the upregulated genes in this dataset were cnidarian-specific . this pattern was conserved across tissues, with nematostella-specific genes comprising 26 % of the upregulated genes from the mesenteries  and 30 % of the tentacle dataset , and the majority of the transcripts in both mesenteries and tentacles  also grouping only with other cnidarian sequences. we further examined the subset of transcripts that were expressed uniquely in each tissue  to test the hypothesis that nematostella-specific genes are expressed uniquely in a nematostella-specific tissue. of the  <dig> upregulated transcripts in the nematosomes ,  <dig> were found to be expressed uniquely in this tissue . the majority of these uniquely expressed genes  were indeed nematostella-specific but, surprisingly, 90 %  of them grouped only with other cnidarian sequences. genes expressed uniquely in both mesenteries and tentacles showed a similar pattern : in the mesenteries 50 % were nematostella-specific and 88 % cnidarian-specific, and in the tentacles 47 % were nematostella-specific and 83 % were cnidarian-specific. thus, nematostella-specific transcripts comprise a larger proportion of the uniquely expressed transcripts in nematosomes  than in both other tissues , but the largest number of nematostella-specific transcripts was expressed uniquely in the tentacles . broadly, cnidarian-specific sequences dominate the set of differentially expressed transcripts in all tissues.

finally, we ignored tissue type and examined the proportion of transcripts from each orthology group expressed in one or more tissues . thirty percent of the differentially expressed nematostella-specific transcripts  were expressed only in a single tissue. by contrast, only 21 % of the cumulative group of cnidarian-specific transcripts  were expressed uniquely, as were only 9 %  of the conserved/metazoan transcripts . together, these patterns provide further evidence that lineage-specific transcripts tend to be tissue-restricted whereas conserved/metazoan transcripts tend to be expressed across multiple tissues.

functional annotation supports a role in immunity
to characterize the suite of differentially expressed genes from each tissue, we used gene ontology  functional annotation implemented in r  <cit>  . first, we examined the functional annotation of the ten transcripts with the highest expression in each tissue . while nematosomes are characterized by transcripts with extracellular/immune function , the highest-expressed transcripts in mesenteries were almost exclusively digestive enzymes . intriguingly, highly expressed transcripts from tentacles tended to be unannotated sequences although two sequences appear to be involved in vertebrate immunity: hemicentin and rhamnose binding lectin. these results are consistent with a role for the nematosomes in the immune biology of n. vectensis and also suggest, surprisingly, that the functional identity of the nematosomes may be more similar to that of the tentacles than to the mesenteries.table  <dig> pfam/conserved domain analysis of the top expressed transcripts from each tissue


a protein family  domains were identified from the embl-ebi database  and conserved domains  were identified from ncbi’s conserved domain database . trid internal transcript id from nvecref <dig> de novo assembly, grid orthology group, n nematostella-specific, a anthozoan-specific, c cnidarian-specific, m shared/metazoan, jgi id protein id from the jgi database 



to further explore these hypotheses, we identified the top ten go terms from nematosomes  and compared the number of transcripts that mapped to each term across tissues . two go terms associated with potassium ion activity  were found to be over-represented in nematosomes relative to both other tissues , confirming the unique identity of this tissue and suggesting potentially novel cell physiology or cell signaling processes in this tissue. these analyses also revealed several go terms that were common to nematosomes and tentacles but were absent from the mesenteries , including terms associated with arachidonic acid metabolism, known for its important roles in cell signaling and inflammation  <cit> . overall, nematosomes were found to have  <dig> go terms in common with mesenteries and  <dig> with tentacles .fig.  <dig> gene ontology  analyses of rna-seq data. a the top  <dig> go terms from nematosomes for each go category and the number of transcripts that map to them from other tissues. white arrowheads indicate go terms unique  to nematosomes and black arrowheads indicate go terms shared only by nematosomes and tentacles. b venn diagram showing the number of go terms shared among tissues



finally, we assayed the set of upregulated transcripts  from the nematosomes explicitly for genes associated with immunity using a reciprocal blast approach and a previously published database of stress genes from the n. vectensis genome  <cit> . this analysis revealed that over 20 % of the transcripts found to be upregulated in nematosomes  had reciprocal best blast hits with genes commonly associated with wound, pathogen, or chemical stressors . by comparison, only 17 %  of the upregulated transcripts from the mesenteries had significant hits in this stress database and this value dropped to 13 %  for the tentacles. the stress categories “wound” and “pathogen” were associated with the most transcripts from each of the three tissues, but the distribution of transcripts annotated to these categories varied by tissue. whereas transcripts associated with pathogen stress comprised the majority of the transcripts from nematosomes , less than 70 % of the transcripts from tentacles were associated with pathogen stress and only 56 % of the transcripts from mesenteries were associated with this stress category. wound-associated transcripts comprised 33 % and 37 % of the transcripts from nematosomes and tentacles, respectively, and nearly 50 % of the transcripts from mesenteries. in summary, several pieces of data point to a novel immune capacity for the nematosomes.table  <dig> abundance of candidate stress genes across tissues

transcripts assayeda
transcripts with reciprocal best hits in stress databaseb

athe complete set of upregulated transcripts for each tissue. bdatabase of putative stress-related transcripts identified by reitzel et al  <cit>  for the categories: wound, pathogen, and chemical. for a list of genes in each tissue/class see additional file  <dig>  cvalues represent the number  of the transcripts with reciprocal best hits in the stress database that were associated with the indicated stressor. the sum of these values exceeds the number of transcripts with reciprocal best hits because some transcripts had equally high blast hits in two different stress categories



discussion
evaluating the cell biology and function of nematosomes
our data provide support for several previous hypotheses about the function of nematosomes, including their role in the prey capture and defense, and a novel potential role in the immune system of n. vectensis. in support of hand  <cit> , we confirm that the cnidocytes in nematosomes are capable of subduing prey , and that this function results from the firing of their abundant cnidocytes. however, like williams  <cit> , we find no evidence of gland cells in nematosomes; thus, our results are in conflict with the recent suggestion that the venom responsible for subduing prey derives from ectodermal gland cells adjacent to the cnidocytes in n. vectensis, rather than the cnidocytes themselves  <cit> . as noted in the early descriptions of nematosomes , spirocytes are absent from this tissue, so it is possible, though speculative, that ectodermal gland cells work in tandem with spirocytes, which is why both are abundant in the tentacles.

cnidocytes were once thought to behave as “independent effectors” responding autonomously to stimulus  <cit>  but subsequent studies have revealed that this behavior may be modulated by chemical and mechanical stimuli  <cit>  and by neuronal/synaptic input  <cit> . the ultrastructural data presented in fig.  <dig> suggest that nematosomes lack the sensory cell complexes necessary for mechanosensitization and neuronal modulation of cnidocyte discharge  <cit> ; however, certain types of cnidocyte/support cell complexes are known to fire either as a result of physical contact alone or in response to combined physical and chemical stimuli  <cit> . currently, we cannot discriminate between these two possibilities in nematosomes but future studies aimed at localizing chemoreceptors in the putative nematosome support cells will provide important insight on this topic. furthermore, the absence of neurons from nematosomes may suggest that this tissue has evolved a means to limit the firing response of their cnidocytes to only physical stimuli, perhaps as a means to maximize firing success while nematosomes are “tumbling” around in the gastrovascular cavity.

beyond the ability to subdue prey, we propose that nematosomes may also play a role in defense of the spawned egg masses. unlike broadcast spawning species of sea anemone, n. vectensis produces egg masses bound by a jelly matrix  <cit> . although the lifespan of nematosomes is reported by some to be < 21 h at room temperature  <cit> , we routinely observed living nematosomes embedded in the egg jelly as planulae larvae begin to swim and emerge from the egg mass  . considering this long lifespan and the proximity to the developing embryos in the egg mass, nematosomes could reasonably play a role in defense of the spawned egg masses. anecdotal observations of live killifish behavior also suggest that these potential predators may be deterred by cnidocyte discharge from the abundant nematosomes embedded in the jelly matrix . together, these data suggest that nematosomes are an important component of the ecology of n. vectensis.

our data also suggest that nematosomes may play an important part in the immune system of n. vectensis. inflammation in cnidarians has been described as a global phagocytic response . in support of this claim, the few previous studies of anthozoan immune function have demonstrated a dramatic increase in the number of mobile phagocytic cells following injury  <cit> . immune function has not been functionally characterized in n. vectensis but nematosomes might be an important reservoir for the phagocytes that comprise the putative inflammatory response in this species. figure  <dig> demonstrates the propensity of cells in the nematosomes to engulf particles of various types , confirming the presence of phagocytes in this tissue. furthermore, two of the top-expressed transcripts in the nematosomes share homology with uromodulin , a glycoprotein known to be involved in protein-protein interactions associated with the inflammatory response of mammals  <cit>  and previously shown to be upregulated during wound-healing in n. vectensis  <cit> . although the behavior of nematosomes during wound-healing/regeneration has not been studied, the presence of phagocytes suggests this tissue may play a role in clearing damaged tissue from a wound site. in this regard, it would be very interesting to determine if nematosomes aggregate at the site of a wound in n. vectensis.

we show that nematosome size is associated with its cellular composition ; while cnidocytes make up half of the cells present in small nematosomes, they comprise only ~30 % of the cells in large nematosomes. we have also shown that nematosomes do not typically contain proliferative cells and likely do not undergo growth after they leave the mesentery epithelium, meaning that nematosome size is determined during the development and budding processes. given that larger nematosomes have more non-cnidocyte cells than smaller nematosomes, and that at least some of these cells are phagocytes, we suggest that both nematosome size and budding rate may correlate positively with the animal’s perceived pathogen load. in this light, it would be interesting to raise n. vectensis polyps in the presence of antibiotics to determine if nematosome number decreases in this pathogen-free environment. we could further hypothesize that pathogen-related genes might be upregulated in nematosomes from polyps exposed to higher pathogen loads.

toward a molecular identity of nematosomes
the data presented herein represent the first tissue-specific transcriptome data from n. vectensis, an important model for cell biology and development, and the first molecular description of the nematosomes. using these molecular resources, we evaluated two hypotheses about evolutionary innovation in n. vectensis. first, because nematosomes bud from the mesenteries and contain the same two types of cnidocytes found in the mesenteries , we hypothesized that the transcriptional profile of the nematosomes would constitute a subset of the transcripts expressed in the mesenteries. differential expression, qpcr, and go analyses independently verify the unique gene expression profile of the nematosomes  and reinforce their putative role in immunity  but also suggest that nematosomes may have more cell types or cell functions in common with tentacles than with mesenteries. these similarities in gene expression between nematosomes and tentacles may reflect the relative abundance of cnidocytes in these tissues, suggesting this dataset will be important for identifying novel markers of cnidocyte and support cell identity. additionally, because mesenteries give rise to new nematosomes, the genes responsible for specifying this novel tissue at the onset of its development must be among the mesentery-specific dataset. future studies aimed at identifying these nematosome developmental genes would be extremely valuable in understanding the evolutionary and developmental origin of this novel tissue. thus, using comparative transcriptomics, we reject the hypothesis that nematosomes are merely sloughed portions of the mesenteries and suggest that nematosomes constitute a novel tissue with a unique identity and have characteristics consistent with cell functions that have not yet been characterized in n. vectensis.

the second hypothesis that we evaluated with these comparative transcriptome data was motivated by the assertion that lineage-specific genes are expected to be expressed in higher frequency in lineage-specific tissues  <cit> . given that nematosomes are unique to the genus nematostella, we expected nematostella-specific genes to be overrepresented in the nematosomes, relative to the two other tissues, one of which is specific to anthozoans  and the other is specific to cnidarians . we found that nematostella-specific genes comprised a larger proportion of the transcripts expressed uniquely in nematosomes than in either mesenteries or tentacles, but the largest number of nematostella-specific transcripts was expressed uniquely in the tentacles. these results can be interpreted in several ways: first, the broader expression of conserved genes may simply reflect that a large proportion of the conserved genes we sequenced play a role in conserved functions that are common to all cells . second, this pattern could reflect that conserved genes are expressed in cell types common to all three tissues, yet this hypothesis is harder to support considering that the only cell types known to populate all three tissues are cnidocytes. a third possibility is that this pattern reflects a greater level of pleiotropy in older genes. indeed, novel genes are thought to arise rapidly  <cit>  and have been shown by us and others to be uniquely expressed in adult tissues ; whether these novel genes all acquire functions important for the phenotype of the tissue, however, is an unanswered question. thus, despite the abundance of novel sequences produced, the percent of novel genes that actually take on a critical role in the biology of any given tissue may be relatively modest.

although uniquely expressed transcripts were dominated by nematostella-specific genes in all tissues, conserved/metazoan genes were among the top expressed transcripts from all three tissues . these data are interesting in the context of two recent studies of the role of novel genes in the evolution of novel hymenopteran social behaviors  <cit> . like us, jasper et al  <cit>  found that the proportion of lineage-specific genes in honey bees varies only little across tissue types but they suggest that the level of expression of these novel genes is responsible for driving the novel tissue identity. they show that the greatest proportion of gene expression in the venom/stinger and hypopharyngeal glands  is attributable to transcription of novel genes, but the patterns they describe appear to be driven by the exorbitantly high expression of a single gene in each tissue. in our study, the nematosomes  were characterized both by a larger proportion of nematostella-specific  genes and a larger proportion of the top expressed genes were also found to be lineage-specific .

are novel genes important?
it is well-established that both changes in gene regulation  <cit>  and changes in the coding sequences of conserved genes  <cit>  drive morphological innovation but this does not preclude novel genes from also playing a critical role in this process  <cit> . in fact, there are several examples of novel proteins that are essential for defining the identity of the adult cell or tissue types . interestingly, these novel products are largely secreted proteins that appear to have been incorporated into the terminus of an existing gene regulatory network. from an evolutionary perspective, the simplest way to link a novel protein into an existing regulatory network involves the smallest number of connections between the novel gene and the other components of the network  <cit>  and this network connectivity issue may explain why duplicated genes at the ends of pathways may be maintained at a higher rate than duplicated transcription factors  <cit> . in the context of this study, nematostella-specific transcripts expressed uniquely in the nematosomes that encode secreted or structural peptides may well have a critical role in dictating the function or phenotype of this novel tissue.

CONCLUSIONS
cnidarian genome projects have revealed surprising levels of gene conservation between cnidarians and bilaterians; despite this, cnidarians have several cell and tissue types that are not found in other taxa. this study confirms that a novel tissue  plays an important role in the biology of n. vectensis and reveals, for the first time, that this novel tissue has a unique gene expression profile that differentiates it from its tissue of origin. considering there are only 3- <dig> cell types present in this tissue, this unique molecular profile of nematosomes must be associated with the identity of only few cell types. nematosomes, therefore, provide a valuable opportunity to evaluate the relationship between the expression of novel genes and the evolution of novel cell and tissue functions. rather than being intriguing curiosities, novelties provide a unique opportunity to evaluate the mechanisms of evolution that result in the origin of new structures and have ultimately contributed to the morphological and genomic diversity exhibited in the animal kingdom.

