BACKGROUND
the development of high-throughput technologies for discovering interactions between proteins has made it possible to screen entire proteomes and produce large protein-protein interaction  datasets. different methods of ppi detection, including yeast two-hybrid assays  <cit> , mass spectrometry of coimmunoprecipitated protein complexes  <cit> , and correlated messenger rna profiles  <cit> , discover ppis of variable reliability and the majority of putative ppis are of low confidence. despite the presence of false positives, the wealth of ppi data generated over the past several years is the source of many publicly available databases, such as the database of interacting proteins  and the mips mammalian protein-protein interaction  <cit> . the availability of these large datasets is now enabling researchers to predict undiscovered ppis and hypothesize the function and sub-cellular localization of proteins.

ppi data has been used to analyse domain-domain interactions , based upon the widely accepted hypothesis that proteins interact with one another via conserved domains . large-scale ppi databases are used to identify correlated domains that are implicated in the binding of protein partners. when one of these sequence signatures is observed in a newly discovered protein, it is possible to predict its interactions with other proteins based on the knowledge base of correlated domains. ddis were thus used to predict the function and ppis of newly discovered proteins  <cit> . deng et al.  <cit>  used maximum likelihood estimation to discover ddis, which were then used to predict the likelihood of interaction for any protein pair. other recent forms of ddi analysis include the use of interacting domain profile pairs  <cit> , and a domain combination based probabilistic framework  <cit> .

very recently, ppi data, in conjunction with structural information, were used to produce a set of putative binding motif pairs  <cit> . the significance of motif discovery stems from the idea that the actual binding sites most directly responsible for the binding of proteins are probably smaller than whole domains. thus, the discovery of these smaller sequence signatures allows researchers to structurally characterize ppis with more precision.

this study was also based on the assumption that ppis result from the interactions of conserved sequence signatures. unlike li and li's work  <cit> , our method of ppi data mining did not use structural data, which are well known to be biased towards small, globular proteins. in this paper, a set of guest proteins represents those proteins known from ppi database to share a common interacting partner, i.e. a host protein. if a protein interacts with itself, it is a host as well as a guest. signatures shared by sets of guest proteins were initially discovered using the program meme  <cit>  on a large ppi dataset. searches of sequence signature databases for the identified motifs revealed that  <dig> distinct motifs had not been characterized previously. the significance of these newly discovered signatures was then demonstrated by their application in predicting the sub-cellular localization of yeast proteins and identifying potential interacting sites.

RESULTS
a sequence signature is defined as a "highly conserved region", a sequence pattern that is found repeatedly in a group of related protein sequences  <cit> . by this definition, a sequence signature could be a protein family, functional domain, functional site, or any conserved region of unknown function, and thus the actual physical manifestation of a signature can vary greatly in size. in our study, sequence signatures were derived from meme motifs. we wrote numerous perl scripts and used a mysql relational database to facilitate the processes of data collection, program execution, and data analysis.

discovery of sequence signatures
the  <dig> batch executions of meme yielded  <dig> sequence signature models shared by the  <dig> distinct guest proteins of  <dig> host proteins from saccharomyces cerevisiae  . of the  <dig> distinct ppis actually involved in building these signature models,  <dig>  were identified as high confidence interactions in the ppi dataset. when compared to the percentage of high confidence ppis in the input files , the percentage of high confidence ppis used to construct motif models represents a statistically significant difference .

signature model length varied from  <dig> to  <dig> residues: the minimum and maximum lengths specified for each meme execution. only  <dig> models  were as long as  <dig> residues, which indicated that the maximum length used in this study was appropriate. meme splits one sequence signature in two if its length is greater than the specified maximum. thus, less than 2% of the  <dig> models were the result of splitting sequence signatures. the average model length was  <dig>  residues, with a standard deviation of  <dig> . it should be pointed out that there was redundancy among these signatures because different host proteins may interact with similar sets of guest proteins. we did not attempt to identify distinct signatures because that was not the main goal of the present study. instead, we identified distinct novel sequence signatures . thus, we estimated that overall about half of these signatures were distinct.

occurrence of discovered sequence signatures in the yeast genome
using the  <dig> signature models discovered in meme as input, mast  <cit>  was used to scan the entire genome of s. cerevisiae for occurrences of these sequence signatures in proteins that were not used to build the motif models.  <dig>  protein sequences contained one or more of the sequence signatures, a 28% increase over the  <dig>  proteins used to construct the signatures. although this increase indicates that the newly discovered sequence signatures have some potential predictive value, any predictions based on these sequence signatures would be limited to approximately one-third of the s. cerevisiae genome. a broader application will be feasible only when more reliable ppi data are available.

novelty of discovered sequence signatures
using the standalone version of interproscan, the consensus sequences of  <dig> of the discovered motif models were found to match signatures listed in one of the interpro member databases. when the online version of interproscan was used, an additional  <dig> sequence signatures were matched to un-integrated entries of the interpro member databases.  <dig> novel sequence signatures remained. fasta searches, which were the basis for the grouping of similar/identical sequence signatures, resulted in the creation of  <dig> distinct, novel sequence signatures. the length of these novel sequence signatures ranged from  <dig> to  <dig> residues. table  <dig> provides a list of several of these novel signatures. a complete list can be found on the supplementary website . interestingly, when interproscan was used to match consensus sequence signatures to the pfam database alone, only  <dig>  of the signatures were matched to known signatures.

localization prediction
using signature sharing information, the sub-cellular localizations of  <dig> proteins were predicted based on the known locations of  <dig> budding yeast proteins .  <dig> predictions agreed with the ontology annotations of the sgd and  <dig> disagreed . the accuracy of the remaining  <dig>  predictions could not be assessed, as the locations of these proteins have yet to be determined empirically. it is reasonable to believe these predictions would have similar prediction accuracy.

homology modeling and detection of putative interacting sites
the exact biological meanings of these novel sequence signatures can only be determined by web-lab experiments. one possible role of these signatures is to serve as the binding sites for protein-protein interactions. a binding site should have significant exposure to solvent. in order to assess this possibility, we built homology models for those yeast proteins containing novel signatures and having good model templates . using dssp software program  <cit> , we calculated the proposition of residues of signatures appearing on the surface . statistical analysis  confirmed that residues of signatures occurred on the surface more frequently than would be expected by chance . thus we hypothesized these signatures are potential binding sites and plan to use site-directed mutagenesis and nmr spectrometry to verify the bioinformatics results.

discussion
although independent, the ppi data mining method presented here is similar to that proposed by li and li  <cit> . their research focused on motif pairs located on protein surfaces, and motif discovery was, in part, based on three-dimensional structures of proteins. our method did not rely on pdb structural information, which is known to be biased towards small, globular proteins. even without the additional structural information, many of the novel sequence signatures discovered in this study appear in the surfaces of proteins. thus they are likely interacting sites.

approximately 94% of the sequence signatures discovered in this study matched known sequence patterns, confirming the ability of this method to discover sequence signatures involved in various biological functions. it is our contention that the  <dig> novel sequence signatures reported in this study likely play biological roles such as interacting sites, and we are planning wet-lab experiments to investigate their functions.

the lengths of the novel sequence signatures are quite short, ranging from  <dig> to  <dig> residues. this is not surprising, as the yeast genome has been the subject of a remarkable number of studies and the majority of long sequence signatures are likely already known. additionally, longer sequence signatures tend to contain gaps, and will thus be interpreted as multiple shorter signatures by meme. nevertheless, the discovery of short, novel sequence signatures, based on medium- and high-confidence ppis, suggests that short sequence signatures do play biologically significant roles.

only  <dig>  of the discovered sequence signatures matched known signatures in pfam: a significantly smaller number than the  <dig> signatures matched to one or more interpro member databases. this result highlights a potential shortcoming of ppi predictions based on the analysis of ddis inferred from pfam data alone . the use of a single domain databases, such as pfam database with the average length of  <dig> amino acids  <cit>  might cause a researcher to miss many important short sequence signatures, thereby decreasing prediction accuracy.

the use of ppi data to predict the sub-cellular localization of proteins is based on an intuitively simple idea: proteins that are found in the same location within a cell are more likely to interact with one another than proteins that are not. ten subcellular compartments were actually used in our study. the resulting accuracy of ppi-based prediction of sub-cellular localization is reasonably good in this study and, at ~68%, represents a substantial increase in accuracy relative to what would be achieved  if cytoplasm, the most populated compartment, was predicted for all systems. our accuracy is comparable to that achieved in other recent studies. for example, using a hybrid system of gene ontology, functional domain and pseudo amino acid composition approaches, chou and cai obtained 70% of overall success identification rate  <cit> . our accuracy rate was inferior to others that used fewer localization categories , but it is perfectly natural that a more ambitious categorization scheme such as ours should have a greater margin of error. also we should emphasize that our approach represents a very intuitive and simple scheme based on ppi induced sequence signatures alone, in contrast to complicated hybrid systems employed in previous studies. admittedly, our approach can only be used in predicting the localization of proteins involving in currently known ppis, thus a broader application will be feasible only when more ppi data are available.

one of the major challenges to mining ppi data is the presence of numerous false positives, resulting from the deficiencies of current high-throughput screening techniques. the ppi data produced by some screening techniques such as yeast two-hybrid systems has been estimated to contain as much as 91% false interactions  <cit> . the  <dig>  ppis used as input to meme were identified as medium or high confidence interactions, of which  <dig>  % were high confidence. of the ppis actually used to build sequence signatures,  <dig> % were high confidence interactions, a statistically significant increase of  <dig> % over the original dataset. the disproportionate use of high-confidence ppis to build sequence signatures supports the validity of the original reliability assignments, and suggests a method by which one may increase confidence in putative ppis. nevertheless, the quality of the results generated by all forms of ppi data mining remains constrained by the quantity and quality of the ppi data currently available. consequently, the reliability of predictions based on ppi data is expected to increase as ppi databases increase in accuracy, size and taxonomic range.

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, we have reported a novel procedure by which sequence signatures were discovered based on a large ppi dataset from saccharomyces cerevisiae. the majority of these sequence signatures were matched with known sequence signatures present in the interpro member databases. nevertheless,  <dig> distinct sequence signatures were novel, and may be involved in the interactions of the proteins containing them. the sub-cellular localizations of  <dig> proteins of the yeast genome were predicted, based on the known locations of other proteins and ppi dataset. of the  <dig> localization predictions,  <dig> agreed with sgd annotations, and  <dig> disagreed. the localization of remaining  <dig> proteins was experimentally unknown. however, it is reasonable to believe these predictions would have similar prediction accuracy.

wet-lab experiments to determine the biological function of the discovered novel sequence signatures are being planned. we are also in the process of developing an algorithm that will enable the discovery of gap-containing sequence signatures based on ppi data. the ppi data mining method presented here is imminently applicable to other genomes associated with large ppi datasets. for example, we conducted similar study on the e. coli genome and were able to identify  <dig> novel signatures .

