BACKGROUND
studies of differential expression of individual genes often find genes that are up-regulated in some tumors, and down-regulated in others. microarray studies typically seek to identify differentially expressed genes using use fold-change  <cit> , t-tests  <cit> , and models  <cit> . studies of global gene expression patterns in cancer have focused largely on the identification of novel cancer subtypes via classification  <cit>  or the identification of differentially expressed genes  <cit> . such studies typically use fold-change  <cit> , t-tests  <cit> , and models  <cit> . the methods of analysis for identifying differentially expressed genes in data from microarray experiments vary widely  <cit> , but all are focused on the question of whether genes are over-expressed or under-expressed in samples in group a  compared to samples in group b . these patterns can efficiently be referred to as ab  and ba  patterns. typically, researchers use study designs that favor biological replication to maximize the ability to detect reproducibly genes that are differentially expressed in a patient population, at a sacrifice of the ability to detect individual-specific patterns of differential expression with technical replication. most cancers are diseases with heterogeneous etiologies; moreover, the development of every primary tumor in different individuals is a unique biological event. thus, the expression levels of genes in the individual patient are also important; some important gene dysregulation may be highly specific to each individual. statistical methods that average gene expression may hide important expressotypes . current tests that compare mean group expression intensities are not likely to find genes that are in fact significantly dysregulated in only a proportion of the individuals in the case population, unless the magnitude of differential expression is very high in the subset of individuals. unsupervised clustering can be used to attempt to identify unknown partitions, or subgroups within patients, but clustering is not a well-defined method for finding differentially expressed genes, and, upon discovery of novel groups, researchers are restricted to comparing group means, and cannot identify genes that may be dysregulated in subsets of patients where the combined patterns of dysregulation patterns do not suggest coherent subgroups.

RESULTS
a remarkable pattern emerges when the ppst test is applied to published cancer data sets, including breast cancer  <cit> , ovarian cancer  <cit> , colon cancer , lymphoma  <cit> , and lung cancer  <cit>  at the 99th percentile. we find an abundance of ab and ba pattern genes, with roughly the same number of genes called significant under the parametric t-test. we also find large numbers of genes with significant aba test scores, and some with 'bab' pattern genes . there is a marked tendency in most data sets for more aba  type genes than bab pattern genes. these patterns are also reflected in 'expression pattern grids' of gene with significant s <dig> statistics . these patterns are reproducible at more stringent levels of α .

the capability of the ppst test to identify genes that are in fact differentially expressed in only a subset of patients is made evident by a comparison of genes that are found to be significant under the ppst test, but missed by, for example, the t-test . these are listed in table  <dig>  for the lymphoma data <dig>  and notably include b-cell growth factor  <dig> . furthermore, 'classic' oncogenes such as cyclin d <dig> are found by the ppst test in the lung cancer data set  <cit>  are not reported to be significant by the t-test. cyclin d <dig> ranks 1009th among significant genes in the colon cancer data set under the t-test but ranks 90th under the ppst test .

discussion
our initial results are compelling in that they suggest that we can expect biomarkers of high clinical significance for subsets of patients to be important for distinct subsets of patients. this also suggests that clinical validation of the utility of biomarkers should examine panels of expression biomarkers, not individual biomarkers. disruption of genomic function via these patterns cannot be studied in the population level biomarker framework for the simple reason that methods that compare, say, group means, will find no difference between the sample groups if the number of case samples found in the two tails are even approximately equal. this is a sensible approach even from within the framework of population-based hypothesis testing, because the ppst test can be expected to be more robust to one or two outliers that might mislead simple parametric tests. note that a number of genes are 'nearly significant' under the t-test but are strongly significant under the ppst test for the ab/ba patterns .

our re-analysis of two independently generated data sets on astrocytoma progression demonstrates the utility of extending analysis to include a search for genes that are differentially expressed in a subset of patients. of the tests examined, the parametric t-test showed the least internal consistency, while the ppst exhibited the highest internal consistency in identifying progression markers. comparison to the non-parametric t-tests demonstrates that ppst is most similar to the nonparameteric t-test, but is more self-consistent. while the aba test showed the least internal consistency across populations, it also exhibited low overlap with any other test, so the genes reported are unique and tend not to be found by others tests, matching expectations.

our results are consistent with knudsen's 'two-hit' hypothesis on the genomic etiologies of cancer  <cit>  with some insight into the diversity of genomic pathologies  that may be relevant in patient populations. studies of differential gene expression – and its role in the etiology of cancer and its responses to treatment – should seek these types of genes in addition to population-wide biomarkers, because they represent a subset of the genes that are expressed differentially in a significant subset of cancer patients. we recommend a major shift in perspective on the study on gene expression dysregulation away from the study of 'tumor populations' – which do not exist – toward the study of genomic pathologies in individual patients. for example, tumor subtypes are typically characterized by morphological characters, and these classifications may conflict with important expressotype subtypes that do not follow classical morphological tumor classes. imposition of these subtypes on a study design may interfere with identifying expressotypes that provide high diagnostic, prognostic and theranostic value to the individual – and sets of individuals with similar expressotypes. this view is also consistent with the hanahan-weinberg model of oncogenesis  <cit> , which envisions multiple possible mechanistic strategies to the acquisition of characteristics and capabilities of cancers including self-sufficiency in growth signals, insensitivity to anti-growth signals, tissue invasion & metastasis, limitless replicative potential, sustained angiogenesis and evasion of apoptosis. we also expect that individual cancers in different patients will be found to have evolved unique sets of solutions to each of these problems. current prevailing methods for finding differentially expressed genes such as fold-change and t-tests do not allow for such complexities.

our comparison of the methods  highlights the uniqueness of the aba test. it is an extension of the ppst test; it specifically focuses on genes that are differentially expressed in subsets of patients. this ability is extremely important in search of genes with expression patterns that correlate with drug response. the aba and the two-tailed t-test are not comparable because the aba test allows us to find genes that the t-test specifically cannot . such test will have high variance  and low mean difference, and will thus not be significant. the ppst and the aba tests extend our abilities beyond the t-test. other improvements or even superior alternatives to these tests may be possible. the performance of these tests and all tests described to date for the ab type patterns and now for aba patterns should be compared using extensive numerical simulations and cross-validation. developments are needed to determine how best to select a threshold to allow deliberate control of the false positive and false negative error rates.

CONCLUSIONS
the two major conclusions these results suggest are  that the most commonly applied tests for identifying differentially expressed genes will miss important genes that are dysregulated in only a fraction of patients, and  that important aspects of differential expression may be, to a degree, highly individualistic in most cancers. some potentially important genes with this form of unusual differential expression  would be missed by methods that compare group means, because the means of the two sample groups would be approximately identical, and the variance in tumors would be high, leading to a large error term. the high internal consistency of ppst compared to the non-parametric t-test and our observation that the ppst test exhibited high consistency with the nonparametric t-test suggests that the ppst test may be of interest to researchers interested in identifying both population-level biomarkers and biomarkers important to a subset of patients.

an online implementation of this test, it source code , and that for many other methods of analysis, are accessible online in the cancer gene expression data analysis tool . it is hoped that the development and application of more approaches like this will lead to a more complete representation of differential expression, leading to more meaningful and specific hypotheses of dysregulation, and thus a better comprehension of how diverse genomic pathologies contribute to the etiologies of cancers, and thereby facilitate the identification of targets that may lead to individual-specific therapies.

