BACKGROUND
proteinases play an essential role in numerous biological processes such as cell growth and differentiation, embryonic development, wound healing, antigen presentation etc., but also for pathological events like inflammation, coronary heart failure or cancer  <cit> . above all, tumour invasion and metastatic spread of tumours require the activity of proteolytic enzymes  <cit> . some proteinases have been identified as prognostic markers for the overall survival of a patient, as well as an indicator for a metastasis-free outcome post therapy. for instance there is evidence for a positive correlation between the expression of matrixmetalloproteinases  <dig> and  <dig>  and a poor prognosis in almost all kinds of cancer  <cit> . urokinase , the urokinase receptor and the upa inhibitors pai- <dig> and - <dig> are enhanced in several female tumours  <cit> . also, the cathepsins b, l, k and s may play an active role in cancer development  <cit>  and inflammation diseases like rheumatoid arthritis  <cit> . because of the importance of proteolysis in vivo, it is of great interest to better understand how the balance between active proteolytic enzymes and their endogenous inhibitors is controlled. furthermore, it is also important to learn at which level  a disturbed proteolysis is caused. the introduction of synthetic inhibitors of proteinases as therapy concepts drew high expectations for controlling or limiting the degradative potential of proteinases in e.g. cancer or rheumatoid arthritis  <cit> . however, several aspects of such treatments are still uncertain. expression analysis using dna microarray technology is one potent tool to study the involvement of proteases in various normal and pathological processes or to follow the expression during an inhibitor treatment. however, it must be urgently stressed that such analyses require confirmation by independent methods such as e.g in vivo activity measurements of enzymes or at least qrt- pcr measurements.

recent developments in dna microarray technology led to a variety of open and closed devices and systems including high and low density microarrays for high-throughput screening applications as well as specific diagnostic purposes  <cit> . beside predefined microarrays for specific applications manufacturers offer the production of custom designed microarrays adapted to customers' wishes  <cit> .

array technology demands a complex procedure including both the reproducible and robust array production and the many steps in sample preparation , hybridization and detection which may frequently lead to a high variability of the results between several and even equal experiments. therefore, standardization and normalization procedures are very important and yet one of the most time-consuming steps in the development of new array based assays.

while analyzing rna of clinical samples the amount of material available often limits the examination. direct sample labelling via reverse transcription requires 20– <dig> μg total rna  <cit>  making this simple protocol inapplicable for most routine diagnostic processes of clinical samples. two main concepts offer solutions for this dilemma. one possibility is to increase the labelling efficiency . this has been achieved using techniques like e.g. tyramide signal amplification and/or amino-allyl labelling  <cit> . other protocols amplify the rna necessary for labelling in a different manner. one basic protocol is the amplification of arna  by ivt , the so called eberwine protocol  <cit> . a variety of alternatives to this costly and lengthy procedure have been developed: spa   <cit> , smart technology  <cit> , ribo-spia™ rna amplification   <cit> , amplification using terminal continuation   <cit>  etc. numerous researchers investigated the conservation of differential expression and reproducibility by comparison of different amplification techniques, standardization and normalization of array results  <cit> , respectively.

the main challenge is to maintain the differences of expression levels between different rna species during the labelling procedure in a reproducible manner. we work with custom designed microarrays of low density in the arraytube® format. this offers a cost effective platform and requires only standard laboratory equipment and an array tube reader . by application of standard labelling procedures  we noticed a loss of some gene signals. in order to overcome this problem we developed a modified spa protocol. we included target specific primers designed individually for each spotted target oligomer. here we present the results by amplifying, labelling and hybridizing specific transcripts of interest.

RESULTS
comparison of different labelling methods
labelling in the course of reverse transcription of as much as  <dig> μg total rna resulted in non detectable or only very poorly detectable hybridization signals . this was expected and corresponds to descriptions in literature and to protocols recommending 25– <dig> μg total rna for direct reverse transcription labelling reactions  <cit> . therefore, we prepared samples according to the alternative and modified protocols, respectively.

pcr experiments
in order to exclude false positive results on the array we reverse transcribed the rna of the three cell lines into cdna, which was then used as a template for pcr. a template free control and a positive control were carried along each pcr reaction. a negative result  should be confirmed by the absence of any pcr product of the expected size . however, as can be seen in fig.  <dig>  the pcr results did not completely correspond to the array data. the array showed weak but significant signals for pai- <dig> but we did not receive any pcr product for dld- <dig> and 97tm <dig>  and the signals for matriptase were nearly equal in all three cell lines, although human fibroblasts did not show a pcr product. these unexpected results required an explanation. first, we increased the stringency of the washing procedure of the array in order to minimize cross hybridization reactions, but we were unable to change the arrangement and intensity of the hybridization signals due to this. furthermore, we excluded the possibility of false positive hybridization signals by initially testing all spotted oligos of functionality by hybridization with biotinylated pcr products generated with specific primers from a corresponding plasmid cdna . we did not observe any cross hybridization with the cdnas generated from plasmids.

another possibility to explain the results was that they were based by the labelling procedure itself. therefore, we decided – in contrast to the overall amplification with spa primer – to try a specific linear amplification as described in the methods section where instead of the spa primer specific primers for every target were used. additionally, we incorporated biotinylated dutp in the linear amplification reaction using the primer mixture and thus, diminished the number of steps required for sample labelling compared to original spa protocol.

for orientation, initially six oligonucleotides specific for  <dig> targets  were tested together. these experiments resulted in highly specific hybridization signals matching exactly the expected targets , however, revealed a strong dependence on the primer concentration.

optimization of the labelling protocol with specific primers
we investigated the influence of amplification temperature, primer concentration, reaction volume and ds-cdna concentration in order to further improve the labelling protocol in the course of linear amplification with specific oligonucleotides. as one example, fig.  <dig> shows the signal intensity and hybridization pattern at different primer concentrations at an annealing temperature of 62°c. for further investigations we have chosen a primer concentration of  <dig> nm each . it was applied in all assay investigations to prevent cross reactions and thus, false positive signals. in addition, that primer concentration was the lowest one yielding detectable hybridization signals of all expected signals. the assay was well functioning for that little primer set. this was in accordance with descriptions of a similar procedure to amplify genomic dna with  <dig> oligos in a linear manner <cit> .

experiments with an increased number of specific primers
consequently, the behavior of the system was investigated with a stepwise increasing number of specific primers. because of the complex reaction mixture cross hybridization reactions may be expected which had to be ruled out.

the experiments were carried out with ds-cdna from human fibroblasts. in each experiment  <dig> ng total rna were used. in a first series of experiments thirty two primers for  <dig> target genes were used and divided into  <dig> groups.

-group 1: matriptase, pai- <dig> and  <dig> 

-group 2: mmp <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and gapdh

-group 3: mmp <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  β-actin

-group 4: cathepsins k and s, timp <dig>  timp4

the single primer groups were used in amplification reactions. the hybridization patterns were compared with the results of pcr to omit false positive signals. hybridization signals were confirmed by positive results of the respective pcr measurements. false positive signals were not detected. in the following and final experiment all available specific primers were combined and used for an amplification reaction. we compared the hybridization pattern of the three cell lines human fibroblasts, dld- <dig>  97tm <dig>  respectively, already chosen for the first experiments . we noticed a remarkably improved specificity of the hybridization pattern compared to the traditional labelling protocols. the results were in accordance to the results of qualitative pcr experiments – the number of hybridization signals essentially corresponded with the number of positive signals in qualitative pcr.

validation of results with real time measurements
the expression of selected genes was determined using qrt- pcr in order to confirm the results of the array experiments by an independent method. we have chosen pai- <dig>  matriptase and timp <dig> because these target genes showed differences in the development of hybridization signals. figure  <dig> shows the expression levels of these  <dig> genes in  <dig> different samples, normalized to the ß-actin level: 97tm <dig>  dld- <dig>  an established human fibroblast line, primary synovial fibroblasts treated for  <dig> h with either tgfβ or il- <dig>  respectively, or not treated. the normalized signals obtained by qrt- pcr were compared with those of the array experiments. a good overall correspondence was found of the results achieved by the two independent methods.

however, the graphic points to the qualitative screening character of array experiments, too. we found a good but did not find an absolute conformity between the signals obtained by the different methods. figure  <dig> points out one reason for that finding. we calculated a lower limit for the detection on the array of  <dig>  fg of pai- <dig>  matriptase and timp <dig> cdna, resp., in the sample . we consider this limit also as valid for all other target sequences. the linear range of signal development on the array is limited and was found to be between  <dig> and  <dig> fg specific cdna in the sample. above this concentration, a further increase in signal intensity can not be reached. the dynamic range of array analyses like this is always limited and does never reach that of qrt-pcr. the spotting of our arrays can only be minimally changed in order to achieve a broader dynamic range due to technical reasons. the detection method  is a limiting factor for the dynamic range. however, the enzymatic reaction on the array surface which proceeds in a non linear manner and enhances the hybridization signal allows a very sensitive detection of the signal intensity at every time point during the process of development . this means, the development of rare signals may be seen when high concentrated targets are already in the saturation range. as a consequence of that, the amount of cdna resulting from the reverse transcription which is used for the specific linear amplification may be enhanced by a factor of  <dig> or  <dig> or may be diluted tenfold, respectively, in order to achieve reliable data. we are generally using about  <dig> ng of cdna for that purpose, knowing that not all transcription products are complete. signals of low expressed or incompletely transcribed genes would be lost if only one concentration of cdna is used. this underlines again the screening character of the array methodology which is further supported by results presented in fig. 6a. we generated synthetic polya-rna from sequences of spike-in controls by in vitro transcription. these different rna preparations served as control for sample labelling procedures, hybridization and detection. the absolute intensity of hybridization signals was related to the amount of rna spiked in. even in this case, we found a region of linear dependence, followed by signal saturation.

array analyses are extremely dependent on a high reproducibility. most problems to be solved by an array analysis are based on the direct comparison of a normal sample with samples in which different expression is expected. therefore, competitive hybridization where two different samples are labelled with e.g. cy <dig> and cy <dig>  respectively, and afterwards mixed and hybridized again one and the same array is the mostly used technique in array based expression profiling. in our experiences the modification of only one part of the assay – e.g. just the polymerase used for amplification – or of the protocol, results in non- or hardly comparable array results. not only the kind of labelling but also the conditions of the labelling protocol are very decisive for comparable and successful array experiments.

the protocol of probe preparation presented in this manuscript is part of a complete evaluated and optimized assay and results in a very specific signal development and a high sensitivity of detection. figure  <dig> refer to that fact by direct comparing of the hybridization patterns of samples generated from total rna of dld- <dig> cells by the different labelling procedures. the linear amplification procedure described here in combination with a signal enhancement after hybridization by an enzymatic precipitation reaction at the surface of the array produces a very specific signal beside the remarkably small amount of rna required. changes in gene expression of different proteinase rnas are well detectable, although the validation by independent procedures is absolutely required. the procedure is cost and time effective. the high specifity of signal development does not require an additional rna purification. hybridization in array tubes takes not more than  <dig> hours; it includes a control of signal development by biotinylated markers, and spike-in controls. the in-time registration of signal development makes it possible to analyze the array at a moment which is optimal for any selected target. this option is of importance in cases where some signals are quickly saturated at an early moment of measurement.

comparative hybridization experiments – affymetrix whole genome chip hu <dig> plus  <dig>  versus tube array
to elucidate the quality of the new protocol we performed comparative hybridization experiments with our assay and with the well-established affymetrix whole genome chip hu <dig>  however, only  <dig> of the  <dig> targets present on the tube array were also present on the affymetrix chip. we have chosen a stimulated and a non-stimulated sample  to detect differences in the expression profiles and to compare the results achieved using the two different analytic systems. we were aware of the difficulties to compare two absolutely different systems concerning both the probe labelling protocol and the detection method: affymetrix chip results in absolute fluorescence values; array tube system applies a non linear enzymatic precipitation reaction  to detect hybridization signals. the consequence is a much higher dynamic range for the affymetrix chip than the array tube may achieve. nevertheless, the gene expression profile should be the same applying the different array systems, subject to the condition of high quality of analyses.

only one gene  was significantly down regulated and that was found with both systems and was additionally confirmed by quantitative rt-pcr .

with one exception, all expressed genes detected with the affymetrix chip  were also found with the array tube, only mmp- <dig> which showed very high fluorescence values on the affymetrix chip was not detectable at the array tube. however, the quantitative rt-pcr measurement confirmed the result of the array tube .

on the other hand, some hybridization signals which were present at the array tubes were absent on the affymetrix system . in order to explain the differences we checked five of the positive array hits with pcr and quantitative rt-pcr, respectively. table  <dig> summarizes the results for the non-stimulated cell line. the expression levels of all genes listed in table  <dig> were close to the detection limit of quantitative rt-pcr or were detected as only faint bands at the agarose gel, respectively.

furthermore, we tried to correlate the hybridization signal strength of genes with the absolute amount of rna determined by quantitative rt-pcr. this result is illustrated in table  <dig> for five genes. the expression level of st <dig> is one order of magnitudes higher than that of mmp- <dig> as determined by rt-pcr, however, the relative fluorescence values obtained using the affymetrix chip gave a 6-fold higher value for mmp- <dig>  a similar phenomenon was also found using the array tube: whereas pai-i was found to be  <dig> times less expressed as cathepsin k, the tube array indicated only a 2-fold higher expression of cathepsin k than of pai-i. these findings again point to the screening character of array experiments.

however, the main application of array analyses is the direct comparison of two samples as stimulated vs. non-stimulated cells or normal vs. tumor tissue etc. for this purpose, we found a good correlation of the expression profiles determined with the two microarray systems/probe preparation protocols, respectively, and the quantitative rt-pcr results.

CONCLUSIONS
we designed a protocol for amplifying mrna in a linear mode from as little as  <dig> ng total rna. the protocol offers a simple method for detecting even low expressed genes by microarray experiments in a reproducible and sensitive manner. the central point of the method is the linear ssdna amplification step with concomitant labelling. preservation of signal integrity and the little amounts of total rna necessary for this labelling protocol make that method applicable for investigations with limited amounts of material like clinical samples from biopsies or tumours.

