BACKGROUND
affymetrix genechip® oligonucleotide arrays are a popular platform for the high-throughput analysis of gene expression in mrna. nguyen et al  <cit>  give an introduction to the technology for quantitative scientists. briefly, an oligonucleotide array contains 11– <dig> probe pairs for each gene. probe pairs consist of an oligonucleotide that is a "perfect match"  to a subsequence of the mrna transcript for a gene and a corresponding "mismatch"  oligo that differs from it in one base in the middle. these mm probes are meant to provide information on cross-hybridization.

quantitative researchers have proposed a variety of methods for handling probe-level data from affymetrix® oligonucleotide arrays. methods employ different procedures for adjusting for background fluorescence, normalizing the data, incorporating the information from "mismatch" probes, and summarizing probesets . in particular, the value and proper use of data from mm probes have been subjects of some controversy  <cit> . it is important to validate a method for its effectiveness in achieving scientific goals, such as estimating relative gene expression or detecting differentially expressed genes  <cit> . note that different methods may be preferable for different scientific goals  <cit> .

previously, spike-in studies have been used to study the variance and bias of different estimates of relative expression derived from oligo array data. these studies are useful and important, but are not the end of the story. first, spike-in datasets are inherently artificial, and may not realistically represent the operating characteristics of a methodology on real data  <cit> . for example, the affymetrix latin square dataset studied by bolstad et al  <cit>  has only  <dig> genes changing from sample to sample. in addition, this dataset was used to develop several methods, so it is not appropriate to use for validation. finally, a criterion often not considered in the spike-in studies is the accuracy of measurements across genes. instead, bolstad et al  <cit>  largely considered measurements across rna samples for single genes. obviously, these problems are related, yet they are not identical.

choe et al  <cit>  conducted a study using an experiment where 100– <dig> rnas were spiked-in at various fold-changes. all rnas other than the spike-ins had the same level in all samples. impressively, the authors considered over  <dig> different combinations of methods for background adjustment, normalization, use of mm probes, and probeset summary methods. many of the study's conclusions are based on the shared features of the ten best-performing combinations. however, eight of those ten combinations used a normalization based on the known subset of genes that were constant between the rnas that were compared. such a normalization scheme could not be implemented in an actual experiment where the identity of unchanging genes is unknown. this casts some doubt on the generalizability of the study's findings. further concerns about generalizability arise from the study's non-standard rna production protocol. in addition, one of the study's rna samples contained unlabeled poly rna, to unknown effect.

among evaluations that do not rely on spike-in datasets, ploner et al  <cit>  favored methods that produced zero correlation, on average, between randomly selected pairs of genes. though creative, this criterion unfortunately does not correspond to a scientific question of interest. furthermore, the criterion might favor methods that "over-normalized" the data – removed signal as well as systematic biases. shedden et al  <cit>  identified methods that optimized sensitivity for detecting differentially expressed genes. the authors relied on estimates of false discovery rates rather than using data from an independent validation technique for comparison.

in contrast to the studies that use spike-in datasets, our study is based on a real dataset that was collected to answer biological questions. the studies by choe et al  <cit>  and shedden et al  <cit>  are directed at identifying the best methods for selecting differentially expressed genes, which are not necessarily the best methods for estimating relative expression. in contrast, we focus here on the problem of estimating relative expression. we do not mean to suggest that previous approaches lack merit. rather, different approaches have advantages and disadvantages, and a plurality of studies is needed.

in our experiment, heart tissue was collected from  <dig> individual mice in a  <dig> ×  <dig> design . affymetrix genechips®  were used to assay rnas from these tissue samples. quantitative rt-pcr measurements for  <dig> genes were taken on these same  <dig> rnas. as the "gold-standard" method of measuring gene expression, we treat the qrt-pcr measurements as "truth" for the purposes of this study. in our "overview" investigation, array data were processed in six different ways to arrive at estimates of gene expression among the  <dig> mice. the six methodologies are mas <dig>  gcrma, rma, vsn, and two versions of dchip . we used pearson correlation to measure the agreement between array and qrt-pcr measurements on six group comparisons, or "contrasts," among the mice . in a follow-up investigation, we considered  <dig> different combinations of the components of these methods.

our choice to use pearson's correlation, r, is motivated by the following formula. while not the standard textbook definition of r, a more instructive approximate formula is

r≈β2varβ2var+var
 mathtype@mtef@5@5@+=feaafiart1ev1aaatcvaufkttlearuwrp9mdh5mbpbiqv92aaexatlxbi9gbaebbnrfifhhdyfgasaach8aky=wiffydh8gipec8eeeu0xxdbba9frfj0=oqffea0dxdd9vqai=hguq8kuc9pgc9s8qqaq=dirpe0xb9q8qilsfr0=vr0=vr0dc8meaabaqaciaacagaaeqabaqabegadaaakeaacqwgybgccqghijyudagcaaqaamaalaaabagaeqosdi2aawbaasqabeaacqaiyagmaagccqwgwbgvcqwghbqycqwgybgccqggoaakcqwgybawcqggpaqkaeaacqahyogydaahaawcbeqaaiabikdayaaakiabdafawjabdggahjabdkhayjabcicaoiabdifayjabcmcapiabgucariabdafawjabdggahjabdkhayjabcicaoiabdmfazjabcyha8jabdifayjabcmcapaaaasqabaaaaa@4dae@

where β is the slope of the line for predicting y from x, var is the variance of x, and var is the variance of y in groups that have the same value of x. in our application, x is the measurements from qrt-pcr and y is the measurements from array. x is fixed, and so also var, but y depends on what method is applied to the array data. since var appears in the denominator, a method's performance is improved if it minimizes var. therefore, this metric tends to favor methods with smaller variability. similarly, the larger the slope between y and x, the larger r is and the more favorable a method's performance. in this sense, by using pearson's correlation, we simultaneously take into account both the variance and bias of the measurements produced by arrays. that is, we seek methods that achieve the right balance between variance and bias to yield the strongest association between array measurements and qrt-pcr. however, it is also of interest to specifically examine variance and bias, and we will come back to this.

we note that the  <dig> genes assayed with qrt-pcr were selected based on primer availability, initial evidence for differential expression, signal intensity, and biological interest. the  <dig> genes do not comprise a random sample. in particular, the genes for which we have qrt-pcr data do not include low-intensity genes . the  <dig> genes are medium- and high-intensity genes, with the larger fold-changes tending to be for the medium-intensity genes. therefore, our results about inter-platform agreement pertain primarily to high- and especially medium-intensity genes. we will return to this important issue.

RESULTS
mas <dig>  gcrma, and dchip mismatch model achieve the best agreement between array and qrt-pcr
we examined six methods  to identify those that yield the strongest linear association between array and qrt-pcr measurements of relative gene expression . figure  <dig> shows that three methods, mas <dig>  gcrma, and dchip.mm, consistently outperform the other three. while we are not able to compute confidence intervals to evaluate the statistical significance of the differences, we argue that the improvement in correlation by using one of the three best methods is compelling. some caution is warranted however, due to the non-random selection of the genes; see discussion.

we conducted sensitivity analyses out of concern that a single gene or a pair of genes might disproportionately influence the results, which is a general concern with the correlation metric. table  <dig> gives the results of the leave-one-out sensitivity analysis. across the six contrasts, there were  <dig> instances where the ranking of methodologies changed when one gene was left out of the dataset. however, in  <dig> of these instances the ranking changed via a transposition of two adjacent methodologies in the rankings, or a shuffle of three adjacent methodologies. the only exceptions are  the interaction contrast and gene  <dig>  and  the owt-omcat contrast and gene  <dig>  removing gene  <dig> produces a shuffle of the top four performing methodologies for the interaction contrast. removing gene  <dig> produces a shuffle of the top five performing methodologies for the owt-omcat contrast. notice, however, that the rankings are inherently unstable for the interaction contrast simply because all methodologies performed comparably for this contrast . similarly, the top five methodologies performed comparably for the owt-omcat contrast, so a shuffle among them is not alarming.

variability is intensity-dependent
for medium- and high-intensity genes, variability is offset by reduced bias
no apparent relationship between gene characteristics and agreement between platforms
as an exploratory aspect of our study, we sought to identify factors that influence the level of agreement between array and qrt-pcr measurements. we considered whether gene sequence gc content or affy probe gc content was associated with agreement in the measurements produced by the two platforms. neither variable showed a consistent association. see probelevelanalysis.doc for more information on this exploratory analysis.

we also failed to corroborate the finding of etienne et al  <cit>  that large distance between qrt-pcr probe and the affy probe set leads to poor agreement between platforms. we believe the likely reason for this discrepancy is the difference in rt-pcr methods. etienne et al  <cit>  used standard  <dig> primer pcr followed by radioactive southern blot hybridization. the use of a real time pcr machine in our study allowed greater assurances that all amplifications measured were consistent, specific, and within the appropriate linear range. our use of the taqman system with a fluorogenic minor groove binding probe also increased specificity and stabilized binding sites. these factors combined could reduce any sequence-specific error in qrt-pcr measurement.

use of mismatch data or sequence-based background correction is the most influential factor
we sought to better understand why mas <dig>  gcrma, and the dchip mismatch model performed better in our correlation analysis. similar to choe et al  <cit> , we considered all compatible combinations of the components that comprise these three methods. table  <dig> delineates those methods and also gives a shorthand notation that we will use to discuss them here. altogether, we evaluated  <dig> combinations.

using the shorthand notation established in table  <dig>  figure  <dig> shows that the ba-gc and li-wong appear to work consistently well together . such combinations arguably work better than ba-gc combined with medianpolish , even though ba-gc was developed in conjunction with medianpolish. similarly, combining li-wong with subtractmm  instead of ba-gc does not correlate with rt-pcr data quite as well. in other words, combinations of components of two top-performing methods, gcrma and the dchip mismatch model, outperformed both.

as another example, the adjustedmm worked consistently well when combined with tukeyaverage  as long as ba-gc is not also used . both adjustedmm and tukeyaverage are components of mas <dig>  the green and red curves in figure  <dig> show the arguably worsened results when adjustedmm was combined with li-wong or medianpolish.

figures  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> also indicate that differences in normalization had a generally minor effect on results – performance changed little when normalization method varied while all other components were held constant. we do not identify any compelling evidence in favor of any particular method for normalization.

discussion
just as we pointed to limitations of previous studies, it is important to point out limitations of this study. one limitation is that the genes assayed with qrt-pcr were not a random sample or even a representative sample of genes on the array . genes were initially selected primarily for their biological interest, but then some of these candidates were excluded. two elements of the selection process are notable. first, genes were selected if they appeared to be promising candidates for differential expression based on processing the data with gcrma. this introduces a possible bias for gcrma into our results. second, genes with average signal intensity less than  <dig> were excluded. these factors resulted in the selection of primarily high- and medium-intensity genes. previous work  <cit>  has suggested that difficulties with methods that subtract mismatch data arise for low-intensity genes due to extreme variability. it is likely that the omission of low-intensity genes in our study favored mas <dig> and the dchip mismatch model. the remaining criteria used to select genes were the availability of rt-pcr assays and whether existing knowledge of a gene made it an interesting candidate in the study of aging. we are unaware of any biases produced by these latter selection criteria.

we argue that correlation is a reasonable measure of agreement in this study because it accounts for both the bias and variance of measurements, favoring methods that find the right balance between the two. however, figure  <dig> shows that "the right balance" really depends on signal intensity. for example, for highly expressed genes, the variability across methods is roughly comparable and so our metric favors methods with the least bias. figure  <dig> and figure  <dig> show that this is exactly what happens. for genes at the lowest level of intensity, methods that use mismatch probes have been found to be extremely variable  <cit> , which is consistent with our data . for such genes our metric favors methods with lower variability even if the bias is large. unfortunately, the qrt-pcr analysis did not include low intensity genes. while we had qrt-pcr data for some high-intensity genes, they tended to have smaller fold-changes across group and thus exerted less influence on the correlations . our correlation results really pertain to medium-intensity genes, where bias and variation both come into play as sources of error.

our results, narrowly interpreted, favor mas <dig>  gcrma, and the dchip mismatch model. however, our assessment of variability, together with previous studies that demonstrate the unreliability of using mm data for low-intensity genes  <cit> , leads to a more precise conclusion. specifically, the sequence-based background adjustment of gcrma emerges as a method that may be most effective across the intensity spectrum.

we have treated the qrt-pcr measurements as "truth" because they are the gold standard laboratory measurement of gene expression. yet qrt-pcr measurements are also subject to error. however, our sensitivity analysis should partly address this concern.

we reiterate that we have compared the performance of array methodologies for estimating relative gene expression levels for a chosen list of genes. we have not compared methods on their abilities to identify differentially expressed genes, which is an important goal that is related but not identical. still, it is useful to compare our findings with other validation studies, including those that used other criteria to evaluate methods. of the three recent studies  <cit> , our results are somewhat consistent with choe et al  <cit>  and ploner et al  <cit>  and least consistent with shedden et al.  <cit> . choe et al  <cit>  concluded that  regional background adjustment is better than foregoing background adjustment,  using the mas <dig> method for use of mm probe data is better than simple mm subtraction or discarding mm data, and  the probeset summary method used by gcrma and rma performs slightly better than the methods used by mas <dig> or the dchip model. our results suggest a more complicated scenario – that each of these sub-methods performs well if combined with particular other sub-methods. on the other hand, we clearly corroborate the finding of choe et al  <cit>  that no method of normalization appears to be advantageous, and that gcrma and mas <dig> perform well. ploner et al  <cit>  concluded that mas <dig> gave better results than rma or the dchip mismatch model. we also found that mas <dig> outperformed rma but it was not clearly better than the dchip mismatch model. the results of shedden et al  <cit>  favored the dchip method using mm subtraction over mas <dig> and gcrma, while these three performed comparably for the medium- and high-intensity genes in the main part of our study.

CONCLUSIONS
using qrt-pcr data as an independent measurement tool, we compared the performance of six methodologies for the quantification of gene expression from affymetrix oligonucleotide arrays. three methods – mas <dig>  gcrma, and the dchip mismatch model – performed better than vsn, dchip without mismatch, and rma. the factor driving these results was whether a method used mismatch data or, alternatively, a sequence-based background adjustment. other differences among methods, such as the normalization scheme, made little difference in overall performance. further analysis of variability lead us to favor the sequence-based background adjustment over procedures using mismatch probes. in summary, for estimating relative expression using oligonucleotide array data, we advocate  foregoing methods that use mismatch subtraction and  using the sequence-based background adjustment method in gcrma.

