BACKGROUND
for over 50 years, the mouse  has played a prominent role for studying mammalian development. studies in mouse have led to enormous progresses in our understanding of early human development, which are difficult to study directly due to the difficulty in obtaining suitable samples ethically and technically  <cit> . the identification of genes and the signaling pathways involved in mouse embryogenesis have helped us to better understand embryonic development in mammals, including fertilization, morulation, gastrulation, and organogenesis  <cit> . understanding the molecular mechanisms governing mouse embryogenesis is also important for translational and clinical research in diverse areas such as reproductive biology, regenerative medicine, and genetic therapy.

the advent of microarray analysis has allowed systematic analysis of gene expression changes during development. elucidating the transcriptomes of successive developmental stages in different animal species is critical for understanding the developmental mechanism and revealing the conservation and diversification at molecular level among species during embryogenesis. a number of reports on genome-wide expression profiles for different developmental periods during human and mouse embryogenesis have been published, which have provided valuable information on the gene and the molecular network underlining morphological changes during these periods  <cit>  these earlier studies so far focused mainly on oocytes and preimplantation embryos in mouse and revealed a number of similarities between mouse and human gene expression profiles. this perhaps was not surprising given the similarities between the two species at early stages of development . on the other hand, the arguably more critical period of embryogenesis is the period of organogenesis, when most significant morphological differences occur between human and mouse   <cit> . one of the most obvious differences between mouse and human embryogenesis is the time of birth. the mouse embryo is born almost immediately after all the organs develop . on the other hand, at the end of organogenesis , the human embryo has a disproportionally large head relative to the whole body and other organs. the embryo continues to stay in the uterus for a few more months, a period termed as the fetal stage. during this stage, many organs continue to grow and eventually develop into their proper sizes for birth. the underlying molecular basis for this developmental divergence remains unknown as there have been essentially no global gene expression data available for mammalian embryos past the peri-implantation period. interestingly, two recent studies on the global gene expression profiles during human organogenesis  revealed very interesting and informative information on the gene regulation networks governing organogenesis, distinct from those involved in early embryogenesis, which utilizes many maternal genes  <cit> .

here we report the first genome-wide study of the gene expression profiles of mouse embryos spanning all stages of mouse development. our analyses demonstrate conservations in the gene regulation networks underlying early embryogenesis in mouse and human but also reveal distinct molecular pathways that underlie the morphological and functional divergences during late organogenesis, leading to the birth at the end of organogenesis in mouse while several additional months of gestation in human.

RESULTS
dynamic changes in the transcriptome throughout mouse embryogenesis
the theiler stages are defined on the basis of anatomical features during mouse embryogenesis  <cit> , which serve as references for comparative study of embryogenesis among different species. to determine the developmental gene expression profiles, mouse c57bl/6 j oocytes , ts <dig>  and embryos at  <dig> theiler stages  <cit>  that covers the entire embryo development period were collected . to minimize the individual difference during embryonic development, each biological replicate included at least  <dig> eggs or  <dig> embryos and three biological replicates of each stage were subjected to affymetrix mouse  <dig> expression microarray analysis. in addition, a heatmap analysis showed that the data from different biological replicates at each time point were reproducible . finally, rt-pcr analysis of many genes on an independent rna set confirmed microarray findings .

for the microarray analysis, a transcript was scored as “detected” or “expressed” if significant signal was detected in two or three individual microarrays of the three independent samples  <cit> . overall,  <dig>  out of the  <dig>  transcripts on the microarray were detected at least in one of the eleven stages .

the goal of our study is to determine 1) whether and how transcriptome differs among different stages of mouse embryogenesis, and 2) how the changes in transcriptome correlate with the embryogenesis. to address these questions, we compared the expression profiles between adjacent stages during development. we observed that the extent of the changes in transcriptome, i.e., the number of genes that exhibited differential expression levels between two adjacent stages during mouse embryogenesis, correlated well with gross morphological changes of the embryo , that is, the more different the morphologies between two adjacent stages, the larger the number of genes whose expression was altered . for example, when embryos at the preimplanting zygote stage  developed into early gastrula stage , the individual zygotes or single cell fertilized eggs changed dramatically through zygotic division into differentiated gastrula embryos with three germinal layers  <cit> . such drastic changes in morphology were accompanied by the largest number  of genes with different expression levels . a similar large number  of genes with altered expression levels were detected between ts <dig> and ts <dig> when both stages are at the early stages of organogenesis and the mouse embryo grew and changed rapidly as the somites formed during early organogenesis . in contrast, there were relatively few genes with significantly altered expression between unfertilized eggs and ts <dig> or between ts <dig> and ts <dig>  when the gross morphology change was relatively minor . these results suggest that the extent of the morphological changes is well correlated with the number of genes whose expression is altered.

as the developmental changes between two adjacent stages vary during embryogenesis and may thus involve genes whose expression is only altered between these two adjacent stages, we examined the number of genes that were regulated only between any adjacent two stages, which we termed “uniquely regulated genes” . the numbers of such genes and the percentage of such genes in the total number of regulated genes between the two adjacent stages were shown in figure  <dig> . again, we found that the number as well as the percentage of uniquely regulated genes correlated with the extent of the morphological changes. interestingly, even in the percentage term, the more dramatic the morphological changes were between the two stages, the higher the percentage of the total regulated genes were uniquely regulated between two adjacent stages, suggesting that more dramatic morphological changes involves a higher proportion of genes specifically altered for the developmental processes. one exception is between ts13-ts <dig>  which involved a very high percentage of uniquely regulated genes, even though the total numbers of regulated genes were fairly small. this may be due to the fact that the embryo is beginning a major shift in development, the onset of organogenesis.

to investigate the possible role of the uniquely regulated genes, we identified the significantly enriched gene ontology  categories among the uniquely regulated genes. here we observed that the enriched go categories closely correlated with the specific morphological changes between two adjacent stages. for example, cell division was most active at ts01 ~ ts <dig> during mouse embryogenesis  <cit> . consistently, cell division- and mitosis-related genes were highly enriched in the uniquely regulated genes between ts <dig> and ts <dig> . likewise, between ts <dig> and ts <dig> as the embryo transitioned from gastrulation to organogenesis, genes belonging to the go categories such as skeletal and heart development were enriched among the uniquely regulated . in addition, between ts <dig> and ts <dig> when the nerve system develops  <cit> , a number of nerve development related go categories such as neuron migration and transmission of nerve impulse were significantly enriched among the unique regulated genes . even after ts <dig> when organogenesis was almost completed, the function of the uniquely regulated genes remained correlated with the landmarks of the developmental changes, albeit the number of the uniquely regulated genes was lower than those at earlier stages. for example, at developmental stage ts22 ~  <dig>  muscle tissues in some organs such as the tongue and the esophageal passage developed extensively. this was accompanied by the changes in many myofibril-specific and other striated muscle cell development-associated genes among the unique regulated genes for the stages  <cit>  . likewise, as the limb and nails become visible around stages ts <dig> to ts <dig>  the genes related to jaw and limb development were enriched among the unique regulated genes. these and the similar associations at other stages  suggest that the regulation in the expression of the uniquely regulated genes temporally correlate with the specific morphological changes and unique developmental events at these stages, supporting important roles of these uniquely regulated genes at these developmental stages.

major temporal regulation patterns correlate with specific developmental processes during mouse embryogenesis
it is well known that genes functioning in a given biological process tend to be coordinately regulated. to identify groups of genes that likely participate together in different processes during mouse development, we used the masigpro procedure  <cit>  to identify co-regulated gene groups across the  <dig> theiler stages. among the  <dig>  genes that were detectable at least in one of the  <dig> stages,  <dig>  genes were significantly regulated during embryogenesis. to determine the gene regulation pathways that control mouse embryogenesis, we grouped the  <dig>  regulated genes into  <dig> clusters according to their expression patterns by means of serial expression analysis . we further grouped the  <dig> clusters into six groups of related clusters, referred to as group  <dig> to  <dig> , based on the similarity in the temporal appearance of lowest and highest expression levels for each cluster. out of each group, we chose a cluster representing the most dominant temporal developmental patterns, shown in figure  <dig> as cluster i to vi, corresponding to group  <dig> to  <dig>  respectively .

to validate microarray findings, we selected a few dozens of genes within different clusters for quantitative rt-pcr  analysis on an independent set of rna samples. the results showed that the expression patterns obtained from the rt-pcr analysis agreed with those from the microarray .

to determine the potential functions of the genes within individual clusters, the genes within each of the  <dig> clusters above were analyzed by using david tools  <cit>  to determine their significantly enriched functional or regulatory features, including go categories, the associated biological pathways, and tissue distribution preferences. among the six clusters, clusters with “up-regulated” expression patterns, i.e., clusters i, ii, and iii, had the lowest expression levels at the beginning of embryogenesis and highest expression toward the end of development . however, significant differences existed among them at different development stages, consequently leading to distinct functional categories of genes enriched among them. genes in cluster i had a low expression level through pre-implantation, gastrulation, to early organogenesis, but then had their expression rise sharply near the end of organogenesis . this cluster was enriched with genes affiliated with epithelium development  and metabolic processes such as neutral lipid metabolic process  and carboxylic metabolic process  . the upregulation of epithelial tissue-specific genes at the late stages agrees well with the organ development and maturation during this period. a typical example is keratin  <dig>  which is involved in the development of the circumvallate papillae during the formation of tongue  <cit> . in addition, genes in some metabolic process-related go categories were enriched in most gene expression clusters and the metabolic process-related genes in cluster i were implied in liver functions. for example, sterol is mainly synthesized in the liver; cellular ketone metabolic process and neutral lipid metabolic process are also important for lipid metabolism in the liver. these findings agreed well with the facts that the mouse liver has a critical role in blood supply at the early stages  and begins to function in metabolism starting from ts <dig>  <cit> . thus, the genes identified in cluster i may play important roles in liver and epithelium development.

the expression of genes in cluster ii had a first sharp rise between pre-implantation and gastrulation, and a second rise between gastrulation and organogenesis . these two developmental transitions affect the entire embryo. not surprisingly, genes in the cluster ii were not clearly enriched for genes of particular organ systems. instead, the cluster was enriched with go categories for many common development events like organ development , skeletal system development , nervous system development  and urogenital system development , etc. . many well-studied genes known to be important for development such as gli <dig>  notch <dig>  foxc <dig> <cit>  were found in this developmental cluster.

compared with cluster ii, cluster iii is more likely a specialized “organogenesis” cluster since it contained groups of genes that had low levels of expression at pre-implantation and gastrulation stages but dramatically increased their expression at the beginning of organogenesis. interestingly, there was little overlap in the enriched biological function  categories between these two clusters. cluster iii was heavily enriched with genes in go categories associated with homeostatic process  and ion transport  although there was also enrichment for genes in nervous system development  and muscle organ development  . this suggests that genes that are involved only during organogenesis are distinct from those participating in both gastrulation and organogenesis.

the expression patterns for clusters iv and v were “arch-shaped” and were mirror image of each other, with the genes in cluster iv having highest expression levels at ts <dig> while those in cluster v having the lowest expression levels at ts <dig> . cluster iv was highly enriched with genes in cell cycle , m phase , mitosis  and cell division  , in agreement with the active cell proliferation during ts11 ~  <dig>  <cit> . in contrast, genes in cluster v had the highest expression levels in egg, and then a precipitous drop in gene expression during the first half of the embryogenesis and finally a rise during the second half. in general, the genes with high levels of expression in the egg are regarded as maternal genes. interestingly, the most noticeable, highly enriched go categories were immune system process , immune response  and lipid metabolic process  . it is palpable to understand that the immune system-associated genes are significantly upregulated at the late stages of mouse development when the mouse immune system is developed and begins to function. the abundance of these genes in the mouse eggs implies the involvement of these genes in innate immune system. these findings may provide new clues for studying the development of innate immune system.

cluster vi was the only “down-regulated” cluster among all major clusters, we expected to see that this cluster be enriched with genes in go categories related to “pluripotency” because of the prevailing understanding that stem cell pluripotency gradually disappears in parallel with progressive cell differentiation during embryo development  <cit> . surprisingly, the most noticeably enriched go categories in cluster vi were generic ones such as catabolic process  and gene expression  . this may reflect the fact that the major processes associated with early embryogenesis is yolk utilization and the genes associated with such metabolic processes are no longer needed subsequently.

thus, the different gene regulation clusters are enriched with genes that likely function together to facilitate the specific developmental processes at different stages of mouse embryonic development.

gene regulation during mouse organogenesis
as discussed above, mouse and human embryogenesis share extensive similarities but also have distinct differences. in particular, mouse and human development differs during organogenesis such as tail and sensory organ development. we have previous determined the gene regulation profiles at the 4 ~ 9th weeks of human embryogenesis, covering the organogenesis period  <cit> . these stages correspond to mouse organogenesis at ts13-27/ <dig> . to compared the human and mouse transcriptomes during organogenesis, we first analyzed the gene regulation profiles during mouse organogenesis.

analysis of the transcriptome of mouse embryos at  <dig> stages from ts <dig> to ts <dig>  namely ts <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig>  revealed that  <dig>  genes were significantly regulated during this developmental period. most of these genes could be clustered into  <dig> temporal groups  . group i represented the up-regulated gene clusters in which all the genes were gradually up-regulated from ts <dig> ; group ii represented the down-regulated gene clusters  in which all the gene were gradually down-regulated from ts13; group iii represented the arch-down regulated gene clusters in which all the genes were downregulated from ts <dig> and after reaching a trough at ts19-ts <dig>  were upregulated again ; the group iv represented the arch-up regulated gene cluster in which all the genes were first upregulated starting ts <dig> and after reaching a peak at ts19-ts <dig>  were downregulated again .

to investigate the potential roles of these different gene clusters in organogenesis, we determined the enriched go categories and tissue preference of the genes in the clusters by using the methods of huang da et al.  <cit> . the enriched go categories in the genes of group i included tissue development and muscle organ development, etc. they were preferentially expressed in skeletal muscle, brain cortex, skin, etc., tissues that develop at late stages of organogenesis  . this is consistent with the potential role of genes in group i during this period. on the other hand, the enriched go categories in the genes of group ii included cell cycle and cell division . their downregulation likely reflects the broad transition from cell division during early embryogenesis to mainly cell differentiation during organogenesis. another noticeable feature for this group was the enrichment of rna splicing-specific genes, especially ncrna  processing-associated genes. while the functional significance remains to be determined, many genes of this group were highly expressed in eggs  and were among the genes in the only downregulated gene cluster  during embryogenesis as described above, suggesting that the down-regulation of these genes started during early embryogenesis and continued during organogenesis.

the genes in group iii were enriched with genes in a series of go categories associated with energy generation and utilization such as lipid metabolic and lipid biosynthetic processes, transport, localization, oxidoreductase activity, and generation of precursor metabolites and energy. data from tissue expression enrichment analysis indicated that these genes were mainly expressed in those organs involved in metabolism such liver, kidney and the mammary gland  . these genes are likely involved during early development in cell proliferation but not critical for differentiation during organogenesis. toward the end of organogenesis, they are upregulated again as the organs mature to exert physiological function.

the enriched go categories in the genes of group iv included cartilage development, forebrain development, and eye development, with the genes preferentially expressed in the corresponding tissues/organs  . this appears to be consistent with the fact that as the development of these organs/tissues completes, the expression of these genes are no longer needed when the embryos prepares for postnatal life.

conserved as well as divergent gene regulation patterns underlying mouse and human organogenesis
based the most recent report of the mouse genome database   <cit> ,  <dig>  out of the  <dig>  mouse genes that were regulated during organogenesis have known orthologous human genes. during the corresponding period of human organogenesis, i.e., between the 4-9th week,  <dig>  genes were significantly regulated  <cit> , of which  <dig>  genes have known mouse orthologs. surprisingly, when we compared the  <dig>  regulated mouse genes with the  <dig> regulated human genes, we found that only  <dig>   genes were commonly regulated during organogenesis in both species . this ratio likely underestimate the commonly regulated genes between human and mouse since 1) many orthologous genes have not yet been annotated between mouse and human in the database and 2) there are likely other regulated genes not yet identified by the microarray studies. nonetheless, it is much less than the 95% homology between mouse and human genome, suggesting distinct regulation of the transcriptome during mouse and human organogenesis.

of the four major clusters of the genes regulated during mouse organogenesis, only three, groups i, ii, and iv , were identified among the genes regulated during human organogenesis  <cit> . when the genes in the corresponding groups were compared, we found that  <dig> genes were among the common upregulated genes in mouse and human , accounting for  <dig> % of the genes in the mouse up-regulated gene cluster and  <dig> % of the genes in the human up-regulated gene cluster, respectively . similarly, there were  <dig> genes were commonly downregulated in both mouse and human , comprising  <dig> % of the genes in the mouse down-regulated gene cluster and  <dig> % of the genes in the human down-regulated gene cluster, respectively . these shared upregulated or downregulated genes during organogenesis not only exhibited similar gene expression pattern  but, more importantly, also had similar enriched go groups as exemplified by genes in several signal transduction pathways . many of the commonly upregulated genes likely participated in the development of the individual organs while the shared downregulated genes were involved the cell proliferation prior to organogenesis. for example, the commonly upregulated genes included genes such as egfr, which is closely associated with epidermal development  <cit> , and bmp <dig>  which is important for skeleton development  <cit> . likewise, among the commonly downregulated genes, were birc <dig>  aurora a/b and many members of cyclin family genes whose functions were significantly associated with cell cycle and cell proliferation  <cit> . they were down regulated as the embryo changed from mainly cell proliferation to organ development. thus, these commonly regulated genes likely play critical roles for the conserved developmental processes between mouse and human.

for the third common cluster, group iv or the arch-up regulated gene cluster, there were only  <dig> common genes, comprised of only  <dig> % of the mouse arch-up regulated gene cluster and  <dig> % of the human arch-up regulated gene cluster, respectively , much less than the other two groups  , suggesting that this expression pattern  was not highly conserved during organogenesis. consistently, go analysis indicated that genes in this group might have different roles during mouse and human development. in human, the genes in this arch-up regulated gene cluster were enriched with genes associated with various metabolic processes,transcriptional regulation and eye development  <cit> , and there was no enriched tissue expression except for genes during eye development. on the other hand, in mouse, the genes in this cluster had enriched with genes associated with the forebrain development, neurogenesis, cartilage development in additional to eye development, etc. . the most noticeable common feature was that the genes associated with eye development, which is consistent with the conserved eye developmental events, such as the eye ball formation as well as pigmentation in the eyes, etc., in both mouse and human during this period.

unlike the above three groups of genes regulated during organogenesis, there was no significant group for the arch-down regulated genes during human organogenesis  <cit> . it is tempting to hypothesize that genes in this cluster may have important roles in determining the developmental divergence during mouse and human organogenesis. carefully examination revealed that many of the mouse genes in this group   were present in the group ii of the downregulated gene cluster during human organogenesis . these genes were expressed at very low levels toward the end of organogenesis in human, which contrasted sharply to their upregulation at the similar stages of mouse development . as indicated above, the genes in mouse group iii were enriched with genes in a series of go categories associated with energy generation and utilization. our finding suggests that one of the significant differences between the mouse and human development is on energy generation and consumption toward the end of organogenesis. the difference may be responsible for the major developmental difference between mouse and human, that is, the birth of the mouse embryo at the end of organogenesis vs. the extended in utero growth of the human embryo after organogenesis. the striking difference between the lengths of pregnancy in mouse and human requires different strategies for energy generation and utilization as well as other metabolic processes. during the period from stage ts <dig> to ts <dig>  the mouse depends on the placenta for energy supply, just like the human embryo at the similar stages. starting from stage ts <dig>  as the embryonic organs associated with metabolism such as the liver gradually mature, the placenta degenerates and the energy supply and metabolite exchanges are gradually switched from the placenta to the liver. this transition prepares the fetus for their independent postnatal life upon birth  <cit> . thus, the genes associated with energy metabolism in the eggs that are downregulated at the earlier stages will need to be upregulated again after ts <dig> when the placenta degenerates and the organs associated with energy metabolism such as the liver mature . on the other hand, the human embryo of similar stages and even after organogenesis still uses the placenta for energy and metabolite supply, so the genes associated with such functions do not need to be upregulated at late organogenesis stages.

thus, by comparing to the recently published gene expression profiles during human organogenesis, we identified  <dig>  commonly regulated genes during mouse and human organogenesis. our analyses showed that the genes in the up-regulated and down-regulated gene clusters were mostly conserved during mouse and human organogenesis and are likely responsible for the similarities between mouse and human organogenesis. on the other hand, the genes in the arch-up regulated gene cluster, which are less conserved between mouse and human organogenesis, and those in the arch-down regulated gene cluster, which is unique to mouse organogenesis, appear to be critical for the divergence between mouse and human embryogenesis.

a molecular interaction network governing mouse organogenesis
embryogenesis involves complex spatiotemporal interactions among diverse groups of genes. to determine if and how the genes that are regulated during mouse organogenesis interact with each other, we used the string database and the cytoscape visualizing tool to characterize the signaling and regulatory interactions among the regulated genes  <cit> . as show in figure 6a, all proteins encoded by the regulated genes were color-coded based on their expression pattern. among four groups of genes, proteins encoded by genes in the up-regulated, down-regulated and the arch-up regulated have more interactions among themselves than with proteins outside their own groups . to investigate the details of this protein interaction network, we analyzed densely connected regions of the network. figure 6b shows a sub-network with proteins closely related to cell cycle and mitosis  as detected by mcode analysis  <cit> . most proteins in this subnetwork were downregulated, as expected from the analysis of the downregulated group above. importantly, the interaction network showed that among the cell cycle related genes, the downregualted ones interacted with each other while the small fraction of upregulated cell cycle related genes were clustered into a different subnetwork, demonstrating that genes functioned together were coordinated regulated.

the interaction analysis also allowed us to assign the cellular localizations of the encoded proteins . interestingly, the arch-down regulated genes encoded disproportionally proteins located on the plasma membrane and they had more interactions with proteins encoded by genes in the other regulation groups than with themselves . our analysis above suggests that the arch-down regulated genes likely play important roles in determining the species-specific development in mouse. the interaction pattern of the downregulated group indicates that the arch-down genes may function to bridge interactions among genes in different regulation groups. as an example, by using the jactive-module of cytoscape  <cit> , we identified a subnetwork that included all four groups of expression patterns shown in figure  <dig> and were significantly enriched with genes related to nervous system development  , showing clearly that several proteins of the arch-down regulated group had extensive interactions with proteins encoded by genes in the other regulation groups .

efficiency of gene utilization as a potential developmental strategy in different organisms
evolution from lower to higher species can be exhibited in different aspects such as body morphology and size, organ functions, tissue structures, as well as genomic organizations, etc.  <cit> . at the genome level, the c-value enigma indicates that the size of genome does not represent the evolutionary order of different species  <cit> . based on our analyses of the transcriptome during mouse and human organogenesis, we wonder if transcriptome regulation may be an indicator of evolution. considering efficiency as a selective pressure in evolution, different species may need alter the expression of different number of genes for a similar developmental process. to investigate this possibility, we focused on the mouse developmental period from ts <dig> to ts <dig> and the corresponding human developmental period, i.e., from week  <dig> to week  <dig>  and analyzed the percentages of genes expressed or regulated. the total number of genes expressed in human  <cit>  and mouse  were  <dig>  and  <dig>  , accounting for  <dig> % and  <dig> % of the total genes identified in both species, respectively, which was statistically different . thus, a higher percentage of mouse genes than human genes participated in development. furthermore, we found that the number of genes that were regulated during human and mouse organogenesis, i.e., from stage ts <dig> to ts <dig> for mouse and week  <dig> to week  <dig> for human, were  <dig>  and  <dig> , which accounted for  <dig> % and  <dig> % of the total genes in human and mouse, respectively. again, the regulated genes as a percentage of total genes needed for organogenesis were significantly different between the two species , i.e., mouse needs a higher percentage of regulated genes than human does for organogenesis. taking together, we suggest that the more evolutionarily advanced species, e.g., human, the more efficient it is in gene utilization for development. to further test this possibility, we analyzed the transcriptome data for the organogenesis of zebrafish  <cit> , a less advanced species compared to mouse . we found that as many as  <dig> % genes participated during zebrafish organogenesis, significantly higher than that of mouse . thus, the evolutionary strategy for zebrafish appears to be using more genes than those during mouse development , consistent with the findings from the comparison of the mouse and human transcriptome. thus, the transcriptome activity during different periods of embryogenesis may serve as a new criterion to evaluate evolutionary strategy in different species. clearly additional data from deliberately designed studies are needed to further support and validate this hypothesis.

CONCLUSIONS
we have reported here the first genome-wide gene expression analysis of the entire mouse embryogenesis. our data indicate that the go categories or signaling processes that are significantly regulated during development correlate well with the developmental changes taking place at the particular stages. furthermore, our comparative analyses suggest that a unique group of genes with a distinct regulation pattern during mouse organogenesis that is absent during human development underlies the developmental divergences between human and mouse, while the majority of the genes in the three other major temporal regulation groups are conserved between mouse and human, consistent with the general similarity of mouse and human development. given our earlier observation that genes function in a given process tends to be developmentally co-regulated during organogenesis  <cit> , our microarray data here should help to identify genes associated with mouse development and/or infer the developmental functions of unknown genes. finally, our findings suggest that the complexity of gene regulation during development may serve as an evolutionary strategy in vertebrates.

