BACKGROUND
incongruence among gene trees is a widespread phenomenon in phylogenetic studies of recently and rapidly radiating species  <cit> . mitochondrial dna markers have several evolutionary properties that make them suitable for phylogenetic and phylogeographic studies, but inferences within and between closely related species can be misled by introgression and incomplete lineage sorting  <cit> . in recent years, the amplified fragment length polymorphism technique  has found application in evolutionary studies to resolve phylogenies both at the intraspecific population level as well as between several million year old lineages  <cit> . in cichlids and other rapidly diversifying taxa, where speciation events often precede fixation of alleles within a species , the combined analysis of numerous aflp markers recently has been shown to overcome the problems of incomplete sorting of alleles between speciation events  <cit> .

the tribe tropheini comprises a highly diverse assemblage of cichlid fishes endemic to lake tanganyika that radiated from a riverine ancestor and evolved into the most abundant group in the rocky littoral zone  <cit> . as a sister group to the tropheini, the remaining "modern haplochromines"  also originated in lake tanganyika and later dispersed through the rivers of eastern africa to colonise the younger lake basins of lakes malawi and victoria  <cit> . the genus tropheus represents the most impressive example for the phenomenon of geographic variation in body colour pattern in lake tanganyika's cichlid species, and over  <dig> mostly allopatric colour variants are recognised  <cit> . due to their diversity, tropheus represent a promising system for studies of colour pattern evolution, and for the same reason, specimens of the genus have become extremely popular among aquarists. so far, six nominal species have been described based on morphological characters . however, there are no scientific data on the distribution of the species around the lake, and many tropheus populations from different regions of the lake cannot be unequivocally identified to species  <cit> . due to the uncertainties in the species-level taxonomy of the genus and the high level of colour pattern diversity on small geographic scales, populations are generally identified by their locality rather than by species , and this practice is also adopted in the present work. the popularity of tropheus recently prompted attempts to improve the taxonomic coverage of the genus, which were presented in the popular literature but have not been validated by scientific studies. for example, in addition to the scientifically described nominal species, konings  <cit>  suggested five taxa  and proposed assignments of populations to the different species based on phenotypic traits such as body shape and coloration. schupke  <cit>  described more than  <dig> tropheus populations and arranged them into  <dig> colour lineages.

the evolution and phylogeographic history of the genus was investigated in four studies that were based on mitochondrial sequence data and revealed highly complex patterns of lineage distribution  <cit> . one concurrent finding of these studies was the paraphyletic status of the genus, as t. duboisi represents a distinct unit, which is not in a sister group relationship to the remaining species of the genus tropheus. sturmbauer et al.  <cit>  defined  <dig> mitochondrial lineages based on a phylogenetic reconstruction using a parsimony method implemented in tcs  <cit> , which have evolved in the course of two major radiations about 700– <dig> ka and 399– <dig> ka. both diversification events could be correlated to extreme changes of lake level, and a lowstand of lake tanganyika in the recent past  might have shaped the present distribution of lineages.

lake level fluctuations displace benthic populations and entail cycles of population admixture and isolation, and indeed, several tropheus populations comprise a mixture of different mitochondrial lineages, indicating introgression during secondary admixis of formerly differentiated populations. mitochondrial haplotype sharing across opposite shorelines further testifies that lineages were able to cross the lake along the ridges between the lake basins during periods of low lake level  <cit> . despite the historically unstable population distribution along the shore, tropheus populations display high levels of genetic structure across very short geographic distances in both mitochondrial and nuclear markers . gradual among-population differences in colour pattern generally increase with geographic distance between populations, and major habitat barriers  often separate phenotypically highly distinct morphs . however, populations displaying similar colour patterns are not always closely related in terms of mtdna phylogenetic reconstructions, which suggests introgression among lineages and convergent evolution of colour patterns in the genus. only recently, hybridisation has been proposed as an important factor for the generation of diversity in animals  <cit> , and recent phylogenetic studies showed that introgression has occurred between distinct lineages within the cichlid species flocks and even might have given rise to hybrid speciation in some cases  <cit> . some of the colour pattern diversity in tropheus may well be due to the introgression events indicated by mitochondrial data.

to overcome the limitations of phylogenetic inference from a single gene, both aflp and mtdna sequence data were collected from tropheus populations around lake tanganyika. mitochondrial and nuclear-multilocus tree reconstructions were tested for consistency, and hypotheses based on previous mtdna studies, such as introgression patterns and convergent evolution of certain colour patterns, were evaluated with respect to the aflp data. the different information provided by the two marker systems was used to address different processes affecting the evolutionary history and current phylogeography, such as large-scale migration and hybridisation between colour morphs. due to the uncertainty of species-level taxonomy in tropheus, we apply harrison's  <cit>  definition of hybridisation as "the interbreeding of individuals from two populations, or groups of populations, which are distinguishable on the basis of one or more heritable characters". finally, the molecular data were compared to current species assignments and to the suggested classifications of konings  <cit>  and schupke  <cit> .

RESULTS
mitochondrial sequence relationships
the  <dig> samples included in this study represent  <dig> of the  <dig> previously defined mitochondrial lineages based on parsimony network clusters reconstructed in the program tcs . the topologies of the trees derived by bayesian inference  and a nj analysis  were consistent with the nj topology inferred in a comprehensive analysis of  <dig> tropheus samples  <cit> . differences between tree topologies concern nodes with little support from posterior probability and bootstrap values. fifty-nine of the samples presented here were not included in the dataset of sturmbauer et al.  <cit>  and a description of their positions in the phylogenetic reconstructions is presented as supplementary information .

as previously observed , the mitochondrial phylogenetic reconstruction of tropheus populations was in several instances inconsistent with the geographic distribution of populations on the one hand and with colour pattern similarities among populations on the other hand. figure  <dig> shows that there is little agreement between mitochondrial sequence relationships and suggested species assignments  <cit>  and colour lineage classifications  <cit> .

aflp genotype clusters
aflp data were obtained with ten primer combinations and consisted of  <dig> fragments . the resulting tree topology was markedly different from the mtdna-based reconstruction. shimodeira-hasegawa  <cit>  lrt found the difference of  <dig> likelihood units between mtdna and aflp topologies to be significant .

unlike the mitochondrial sequence phylogeny, the aflp phenogram revealed clusters of phenotypically and, in part, geographically close populations . four major clades could be identified: the basal clade  comprised a heterogeneous group of samples from geographically quite distant localities, whose populations have been assigned to t. brichardi . clade aflp  <dig> contained t. polli sampled from ikola at the eastern shore of the central basin as well as t. "kongole" from kavala island at the southwestern shoreline of the northern basin, which phenotypically closely resemble t. polli. clade aflp  <dig> comprised the colour morphs displaying a dark body colour with a conspicuous yellow or red band or with blotches – e.g. the popular t. "kaiser" and "kirschfleck" – as well as the newly described morph "red belly" from mabilibili with a less contrast rich colour pattern. within this clade, the populations from kiriza, mboko, bemba and rutunga in the north, and from ikola and the kungwe mountain range in the east were grouped in two sister sub-clades consistent with their geographic distribution. finally, clade aflp  <dig> unites the t. moorii populations from the southern basin of the lake with tropheus from mpimbwe splitting at the base. within aflp  <dig>  the t. moorii populations were grouped according to their geographic range and phenotypic conformity , but statistical support for these subclades was weak. in more detail, the red-coloured morphs from chisanze to livua grouped together in one subclade. the colour morphs with a yellow blotch on their body side  were grouped as a subclade sister to the colour morphs displaying a bluish body colour . the population in katoto is apparently an admixture of both morphs  <cit> . "yellowish" morphs from lufubu, kabeyeye and inangu were placed in the "bluish" subclade, whereas the yellow ilangi morph was resolved as sister group to the clade that unites "bluish" and "yellow-blotch" morphs with more "red-brownish" populations from wapembe and namansi and from kalya further north.

samples from the same population always belonged to the same major aflp clade even when they were not grouped next to each other, whereas they were often distributed across several mtdna lineages. suggested species assignments  <cit>  and colour lineage classifications  <cit>  by and large agreed with aflp clades .

signals of introgression and hybridisation: aflp homoplasy excess test and mitochondrial relationships
hybrid genotypes contain aflp-fragments from both parental clades, which appear as homoplasies and reduce bootstrap support for the parental clades  <cit> . hence, removal of hybrid taxa from the phylogenetic analysis will increase bootstrap values for the parental clades significantly beyond any changes in bootstrap support induced by removal of any other non-hybrid taxa. such changes in bootstrap support caused by the removal of any random clades could, for example, be due to retained ancestral polymorphism in the data set. the procedure of removing various different clades from the analysis therefore serves to distinguish signals of hybridization from signals of ancestral polymorphism. note that ancestral polymorphism, introgression involving several clades as well as homoplastic mutations will prevent bootstrap support values for a parental clade from reaching 100% even when the hybrid taxon is removed from the data set. furthermore, it is theoretically possible that a "hybrid" signal in the aflp data is solely due to retained ancestral polymorphism, when drift was much weaker in some populations than in others.

we removed each of the  <dig> population samples at a time, and calculated bootstrap support for  <dig> nodes in the taxon reduced data set. additionally, in two instances, several populations were removed at once . the homoplasy tests identified a number of potentially introgressed populations, which is in line with the interpretation of the published mtdna based phylogeographic data claiming that very few populations experienced longer periods of independent evolutionary history. this made reconstruction of possible hybrid parents very difficult in most cases, as parental populations of hybrid taxa were probably often themselves affected by introgression. figure  <dig> shows boxplot diagrams of the distribution of bootstrap values obtained from the  <dig> taxon-reduced runs for selected examples, which were interpreted as possible hybrid origin of or substantial introgression into the taxon whose removal caused the significant increase in bootstrap support of a node. see figure  <dig> for positions of the nodes mentioned in the following text. the geographic distribution, mitochondrial lineage assignment and phenotype of the populations involved in the here described examples of introgression is given as supplementary information .

removal of the tropheus "red belly" individuals resulted in a rise of the bootstrap value at node 8a <dig> from  <dig> to  <dig> , which strengthens support for nuclear genetic cohesion of this – phenotypically plausible – group. our data suggest that the "red bellies" represent a hybrid morph with one parent in the aflp- <dig> clade – likely a t. "kirschfleck" –, but the aflp data failed to pinpoint the second candidate parent clade. removal of the yellow coloured morphs sampled near the lufubu estuary  increased the bootstrap values at node  <dig> , node 1a , node  <dig>  and node 4a , and slightly raised support at node 1b . these homoplasy signals together with mitochondrial haplotype composition of the "yellow" morphs  suggest ancient introgression between the "red" and "bluish" morphs. the removal of individuals from livua  resulted in a rise of bootstrap values at nodes 4b  and  <dig> , and removal of chisanze samples from the aflp dataset  had strong effects on the bootstrap values of node 4a , node 4b  and node  <dig> . both cases are suggestive of introgression between distinct lineages. the population at katoto, which is located near a bay that separates "bluish"and "yellow-blotched" morphs, has been assumed to originate from an admixture of the two morphs, since it displays an intermediate colour pattern and contains haplotypes from both sides of the bay  <cit> . in the aflp analysis, the removal of the two samples from katoto caused a slight increase of the bootstrap value at node 1b  from  <dig> to  <dig> , which was beyond the bootstrap value fluctuations caused by removal of other taxa. although the signal is weak, it is consistent with introgression of the "yellow-blotched" morph into the katoto population.

there was no significant increase in bootstrap support for nodes 5a,  <dig>  8a,  <dig> and  <dig> in any of the taxon-reduced runs.

discussion
our results demonstrate a high degree of incongruence between mtdna derived and nuclear based phylogenetic reconstructions, suggesting incomplete lineage sorting and introgression in the course of the evolution of the genus tropheus. alternatively, sex-biased dispersal behaviour could have contributed to the observed disparities. however, congruent genetic structure was detected in mitochondrial haplotype and nuclear microsatellite data in a population genetic analysis , which indicates that, at least on small geographic scales, both sexes show concordant dispersal behaviour. incomplete lineage sorting is not uncommon in the rapidly diversifying lacustrine cichlids of east africa, and was, for example, demonstrated in phylogenetic studies on lake victoria cichlids  <cit>  and the mbuna cichlids of lake malawi  <cit> . the importance of incomplete lineage sorting and/or hybridisation has also been discussed for lake malawi non-mbuna cichlids  <cit>  and the lake tanganyika cichlid species assemblage  <cit> , in particular with respect to the tribes eretmodini  <cit> , lamprologini  <cit>  and perissodini  <cit> . given the rapidity of the mitochondrial lineage diversification in the genus tropheus in combination with population displacements and admixtures triggered by lake level fluctuations  <cit> , it is reasonable to expect signals of both incomplete lineage sorting and introgression in the genetic data.

the phylogeographic distribution of the mitochondrial haplotypes of tropheus populations is highly complex. distribution ranges of mitochondrial lineages overlap in several regions of the lake and distinct mtdna lineages often comprise populations from geographically very distant localities and with distinct phenotypes . additionally, mitochondrial sequence relationships are much at odds with suggested species delineations in the scientific as well as in the aquarist literature  <cit>  and with a proposed classification of the genus into lineages based on colour pattern similarities . in contrast, the phenogram based on aflp data  is largely congruent with species classifications , colour pattern similarities , and in many cases also with the current geographic distribution of populations . besides the recently discovered "red belly", the morphs included in clade aflp  <dig> were classified as t. sp. "black" and t. sp. "ikola"  by konings  <cit> , and schupke  <cit>  elaborated an even more fine-scale subdivision of this clade into four colour lineages. mitochondrial sequences of these morphs were resolved in different lineages, and suggested convergent evolution of the conspicuous colour pattern. in contrast, the aflp data indicate monophyletic ancestry of the geographically disjunct, but phenotypically similar populations around bemba in northern lake tanganyika, and along the kungwe mountain range in the central lake basin, and furthermore signal genetic cohesion between the similarly coloured populations within each region . the separate taxonomic placement of the "kaiser" morph from ikola outside t. sp. "black" is not supported by our data.

within clade aflp  <dig>  there was no bootstrap support for the relationships between subclades. this lack of aflp-based resolution may reflect a high frequency of introgression among the populations inhabiting the shallow southern tip of lake tanganyika. here, even rather minor lake level fluctuations must have displaced littoral populations, which were forced to follow the shifting shoreline, and thus induced admixture of several previously isolated populations. likewise, the populations from the shallow northern tip of the lake  were not resolved by locality within their clade, probably due to the same reason. additionally, sampling sites along the southern shoreline were more densely distributed than in other regions, and signals of introgression between neighbouring populations were therefore picked up more readily. nevertheless, although significant bootstrap support is lacking, the grouping of the southern populations within clade aflp  <dig> is consistent with the geographic distribution and the phenotypic similarities, and by and large identifies the "red" morphs, the "bluish" morphs and the "yellow-blotched" morphs as differentiated units with genetic connectivity within colour morphs. still, the distinction of t. sp. "red" from t. moorii  <cit>  is not fully supported by our data.

in contrast to the continuous geographic distribution of clade aflp  <dig> containing the southern populations, the three other clades have a fragmented distribution along the lakeshore, which follows from the disjunct distributions of the species joined into these clades  <cit> . the processes leading to the patchy distributions of these species remain puzzling, but may be consequences of colonisation waves following lake level fluctuations and competitive interactions between differentiated colour morphs and species  <cit> .

despite the disparities between mtdna and aflp data, both marker types supply valuable and complementary phylogenetic and phylogeographic information. whereas aflp data for the first time demonstrated the genetic cohesion of some tropheus taxa, the mitochondrial data provided details about the colonisation history of the genus tropheus and revealed multiple waves of diversification and dispersal . for example, mitochondrial data give evidence of migration across the lake or into distant populations on the same lakeshore, where the introgressed mtdna haplotypes occasionally persisted and sometimes even drifted to high frequencies  <cit> . in the multi-locus aflp data, the signal of individual migration events was lost through recombination, whereas the genetic continuity between neighboring populations and the common ancestry of phenotypically discernible clades becomes visible. large-scale migrations are probably associated with isolated periods of severe lake level lowstands  <cit> . similarly, the gene flow between adjacent populations along a stretch of shoreline indicated by aflp data is likely to occur in a punctuated fashion, when occasional drops of the lake level impose secondary contact, rather than by ongoing dispersal, as populations have been shown to be genetically differentiated at distances of less than  <dig> km  <cit> .

in recent studies of cichlids, hybridisation has been advanced as an additional pathway for the generation of novel taxa  <cit> , and hybrids have been observed in nature . usually, hybrids are first recognised by their intermediate colour patterns or body shape, but in the case of tropheus, the great wealth of intergradient colour morphs complicates a phenotypic detection of potential hybrids. the aflp data revealed numerous potential cases of hybridisation and introgression between morphs, which may have given rise to novel morphs in some instances. positive colour-assortative mating between highly distinct tropheus morphs in secondary contact has recently been demonstrated in a population consisting of artificially admixed morphs, but reproductive isolation was weak between less distinct morphs  <cit> , and similar results were obtained in laboratory mate choice experiments . under natural conditions, genetic evidence for the admixture of morphs displaying distinct colour patterns exists in the population of katoto, while examples for the maintenance of a reproductive barrier between very distinct phenotypes is found in the sympatric t. sp. "black" and t. polli from ikola north, and in the sympatric occurrence of "kirschfleck"-morphs with t. polli and t. brichardi in different regions of the lake. hybridisation between very distinct morphs could also have been promoted by turbid water conditions such as in river estuaries or caused by strong rainfalls, like it is known for lake victoria cichlids  <cit> . there is some evidence in our data that the yellow morphs near the lufubu river estuary are strongly influenced by high levels of introgression from the neighboring "bluish" and "red" morphs or even may have originated from hybridisation between these morphs. in laboratory experiments, "bluish" and "red" morphs mate assortatively , but variables such as visibility and resource distribution may have considerable impact on mate choice in the field.

CONCLUSIONS
we conclude that the combination of mitochondrial and aflp data provides valuable information on different processes affecting the evolutionary history of tropheus. mitochondrial phylogeographic patterns retained signals of large-scale migration events triggered by major lake level fluctuations, whereas the genetic cohesion among local groups of populations indicated by aflp data results from gene flow between adjacent populations brought about by relatively frequent minor lake level fluctuations. introgression and hybridisation between differentiated populations, morphs and species was evident in both types of molecular data, and we suggest that lake level fluctuations drove the stunning diversification of tropheus morphs not only through population fragmentation, but also through hybridisation between differentiated morphs in secondary contact.

