BACKGROUND
filamentous and yeast-like growths are two ways for fungi to propagate in nature. under normal growth conditions, filamentous fungi grow as multicellular mycelium but yeasts form unicellular colonies. most species in the clade saccharomycotina are yeasts. in some special environments, these species can switch to pseudohyphal growth that is morphologically similar to filamentous growth, but they can not form real hyphal filaments  <cit> . ashbya gossypii, however, is classified as a filamentous fungus because it forms natural hyphal filaments for most of its life cycle  <cit> . what the nature of the molecular differences between a. gossypii and yeasts is that led to such a phenotypic divergence remains an open question. it has been proposed that the divergence might result from a modified cell cycle processes in a. gossypii  <cit> . however, comparative genomics studies reveal that a. gossypii shares an almost identical set of cell cycle genes with the typical yeast saccharomyces cerevisiae  <cit> . although loss or gain of genes among different species often play important roles in phenotypic diversity  <cit> , divergence of regulation in orthologous genes can also contribute significantly to this process  <cit> . the fact that a. gossypii and its closely related yeasts share a very similar set of cell cycle genes prompts us to investigate whether these genes have unique regulation patterns in a. gossypii.

genetic codes exhibit significant usage bias. selection for gene translation efficiency is the most common darwinian explanation for codon usage bias. under this scenario, codons corresponding to abundant trna would be preferentially used  <cit> . natural selection biases such preferred codons so as to enhance accuracy and speed of protein synthesis in highly expressed genes  <cit> . therefore, differential translation efficiency reflects protein expression difference, which in return can indicate differential functional requirements for these proteins  <cit> . therefore, divergence of translation efficiency could reveal orthologous gene functional differentiation across species  <cit> . by comparing codon usage patterns for orthologous genes between a. gossypii and nine yeast species  <cit> , we show in this study that in a. gossypii genes with significantly higher translation efficiency are enriched in cell cycle processes, whereas genes with significantly lower translation efficiency are enriched in metabolic processes. both these findings could account for phenotypic differentiation between multicellular a. gossypii and unicellular yeasts, and would shed light on the evolutionary processes that enable pseudohyphal growth in pathogenic yeast species.

RESULTS
trna adaptation index 
within a genome, codon usage, which matches trna pool of the organism, is an important indicator for gene translational efficiency  <cit> . in order to detect the differences in gene translational efficiency between a. gossypii and yeasts, a gene matrix containing  <dig>  orthologous gene groups for a. gossypii and nine yeast species was constructed. species-specific trna adaptation index , a measurement that evaluates translation efficiency of coding sequences  <cit> , was predicted for each gene based on trna pool in that species. because estimation of codon usage can be affected by species-specific factors such as genome-wide gc contents , in order to have cross species comparisons, we normalized the tai value of each gene by the median tai value of all studied orthologous genes in the same species. the tai values from nine yeast species were used to calculate the likelihood of observing the tai value for a. gossypii gene in each orthologous gene group.

based on statistical significance at the 95% confidence level, we divided all orthologous genes into three categories. group i:  <dig> genes showing significantly higher tai values in a. gossypii than in yeasts , group ii:  <dig> genes showing significantly lower tai values in a. gossypii than in yeasts  and group iii: the rest of  <dig>  genes that have no obviously different tai values between a. gossypii and yeasts . under the assumption that translation efficiency is a selected trait, genes in group i would have higher expression and be translated more efficiently in a. gossypii than their orthologous genes in yeasts, whereas genes in group ii would show the opposite pattern.

go  functional enrichment analysis
different tai values for orthologous genes indicate the distinct functional importance of these genes in compared species  <cit> . using go terms in s. cerevisiae as reference, we characterized functional enrichment for group i and group ii genes, respectively  <cit> . as shown in figure 2a , group i genes display significant enrichment in functions such as cell cycle regulation, mitosis and cytoskeleton organization. interestingly, these functions have been hypothesized to be important for the unique life style in a. gossypii  <cit> . in addition, group i genes also show enrichment of functions that are related with reproduction process, spore wall assembly and developmental process. by contrast, group ii genes show functional enrichment in amino acid and steroid biosynthesis . different from above two groups, group iii genes do not show any functional enrichment .

kegg  pathway analysis
in order to further see the impact of differences in gene translational efficiency, we assigned all studied orthologous genes into identified pathways according to kegg annotation for s. cerevisiae  <cit> ;  <dig> genes  are included in our orthologous matrix. among them,  <dig> genes belong to group i and  <dig> genes belong to group ii. a chi-square test was used to estimate distribution bias for each pathway. with a cut-off p value of  <dig> , six pathways show significant distribution bias . consistent with gene ontology analysis, two of the three pathways enriched with group i genes  are related to cell cycle regulation. as shown in figure  <dig>  cell cycle genes that belong to group i scatter at each phase of cell division, so the enhanced translation efficiency, hence the increased importance of these genes, would influence the whole cell division process in a. gossypii. it is noteworthy that some cell cycle genes also belong to group ii. interestingly, almost half of them are related with two protein complexes . group ii genes are enriched in metabolic processes such as lysine biosynthesis, steroid biosynthesis and aminoacyl-trna biosynthesis. at 95% confidence level another six biosynthesis pathways are enriched with group ii genes .

a: enriched with group i genes; b: enriched with group ii genes.

comparative analysis with experimentally confirmed genes in a. gossypii
the above observations are all based on functional annotations for genes in s. cerevisiae. in order to confirm that genes with significantly higher tai values in a. gossypii are truly enriched in cell cycle pathway genes, we identified all studied genes in a. gossypii according to ncbi database. twenty one genes in a. gossypii were confirmed to be related with cell cycle processes . eight of them have significantly higher tai values in a. gossypii , the other  <dig> genes do not show significant differences of tai values among species . fisher's exact test indicates that these confirmed cell cycle genes in a. gossypii are also enriched in group i .

a: comparison of tai values between a. gossypii and other yeast species.

discussion
codon usage bias in a. gossypii
among studied species, a. gossypii has the highest genome-wide gc content , while the gc contents in other species are from  <dig>  to  <dig>  . correlation coefficients of codon usage between a. gossypii and other nine species show strongly positive relationship with their gc contents, indicating that gc content might intensively shape codon usage in a. gossypii. relationships of gc contents  and codon usage bias  on further analysis in all studies species show us that the higher gc3s is, the stronger correlation between gc3s and nc is . for all studied orthologs in a. gossypii, gc3s is strongly correlated with nc, but not strongly associated with tai and cai  , indicating that change of gc content might have a larger impact on gene nc than on tai and cai values. as in man and piple  <cit> , we obtained low correlations between tai and nc, and between cai and nc , which might be due to the dramatic change of gc content, thus nc values in a. gossypii. nevertheless, both correlations are still statistically significant, while tai and cai show a very strong positive correlation in this species . because tai values for orthologs among studied species were normalized to remove the impact caused by some factors at genome level including gc content, it would still be an accurate indicator for expression level, thus the importance of a. gossypii genes during evolution.

possible effect of protein size on gene translation efficiency
natural selection biases synonymous codon usage to enhance accuracy and speed of protein synthesis in various organisms  <cit> . differential gene translation efficiency reflects differences in functional requirements for proteins among organisms  <cit> . however, as previously reported, the negative correlation between translation efficiency and gene length indicates that translation efficiency could also be affected by protein size  <cit> . we tested if the different gene translation efficiencies observed between a. gossypii and yeast species could be caused by protein size deviation in different species. at first, we computed correlation coefficient of the tai difference for each orthologs between a. gossypii and other nine yeasts and their protein size differences. to do this, for each orthologous gene, we calculated a protein size ratio, defined as the protein size of orthologous gene in a. gossypii  divided by the average protein size of orthologous genes in nine yeast species. pearson correlation coefficient between tai difference and protein size difference doesn't show significant association between the two . in addition, distributions of protein size ratio for genes in group i and ii are shown in figure  <dig>  there are no significant differences in protein size between a. gossypii and yeast species for both group i and group ii genes, indicating that our observations are not the results of protein size change of orthologous genes during evolution.

higher translation efficiency of cell cycle genes in a. gossypii
comparison of translation efficiencies for orthologous genes should uncover regulation divergence, and thus the differential functional importance of those genes in diverged species  <cit> . here by a comparative genomic approach, we identified two groups of orthologous genes showing differential translation efficiency between the filamentous fungus a. gossypii and its closely related yeast species. genes in group i have significantly higher translation efficiency in a. gossypii than those in yeasts. functional analysis indicates that these genes are significantly enriched in cell cycle processes. subsequent analysis of known pathways and experimentally studied genes in a. gossypii support such conclusion. because enhanced translation efficiency indicates increased functional requirement for a gene, our results suggest that the roles of cell cycle genes might be substantially different between a. gossypii and yeasts. this suggestion is consistent with the observation that cell cycle processes, such as polar growth modes, cell cycle control and asynchronous nuclear division, are more complex in a. gossypii than those in yeast species  <cit> . further experimental investigations for regulatory changes of cell cycle genes in a. gossypii could provide more insights into this conclusion.

for most pathogenic yeasts, transition from yeast form to filamentous form  is a key mark for their pathogenicity  <cit> . it has been reported that cell cycle genes play important roles in the morphological transition  <cit> . micro-array experiment also shows that cell cycle genes are more up-regulated in s. cerevisiae filamentous form than are those in yeast form  <cit> . our results indicate that cell cycle genes possess higher translational efficiency, and thus might be functionally more important, in filamentous fungus than those in yeast. therefore, understanding species difference between filamentous fungus and yeasts could be helpful for illustrating mechanisms underlying filamentous growth of pathogenic yeasts.

higher translation efficiency for metabolic genes in yeasts
genes in group ii have significantly lower translation efficiency in a. gossypii than those in yeasts. functional enrichment analysis indicates that these genes are enriched for metabolic process, such as amino acid and steroid biosynthesis. this functional distribution might be associated with rapid cell growth in yeasts through fermentative life style. all yeast species studied can carry out fermentative growth under anaerobic or aerobic conditions, but a. gossypii can only conduct aerobic respiration  <cit> . the cell division rate is usually much faster for fermentative than for respiratory growth  <cit> . for eukaryotic organisms, cell size is an important control at check points for cell division  <cit> . in order to attain critical size, cells need to synthesize cellular components much more rapidly during fermentative than during respiratory growth. therefore the metabolic processes should be in greater demand in yeasts than that in a. gossypii. the difference in metabolic rate could lead to differential translation efficiency for metabolic genes between a. gossypii and yeasts.

CONCLUSIONS
comparative studies revealed that more than 95% genes in multicellular organism a. gossypii share orthologs with unicellular organism s. cerevisiae  <cit> . it has been proposed that different growth modes between these species were controlled by a very similar gene set  <cit> . our studies of orthologous genes among a. gossypii and several yeast species show higher translation efficiency of cell cycle genes in a. gossypii, which is consistent with more complicated cell cycle processes in this multicellular organism. on the other hand, our results are also consistent with the faster growth of unicellular yeasts, which leads to greater demands of gene products for metabolic processes. emergence of multicellular organisms was one of the most profound developmental transitions in the history of life  <cit> . our results in this study, and further investigation for the difference between a. gossypii and yeast species might also be important for understanding this process.

