BACKGROUND
marine benthic environments contain a diverse assortment of microorganisms that are still just beginning to be explored and characterized  <cit> . the challenges associated with extracting and enumerating benthic microorganisms and the extreme variation of physical and chemical factors associated with the benthos have limited our understanding of these ecosystems  <cit> . nonetheless, both comparative morphological studies and environmental sequencing surveys have revealed a great deal of microeukaryotic diversity within the interstitial spaces of marine sediments  <cit> . the most conspicuous predatory flagellates in these habitats range from about 20– <dig> μm in size and fall into three major groups of eukaryotes that are very distantly related to one another: dinoflagellates, euglenids and cercozoans.

the cercozoa is a large and diverse group of amoeboflagellates, with tubular mitochondrial cristae, that cluster together in molecular phylogenies inferred mainly from ribosomal gene sequences   <cit> . although a robust morphological synapomorphy is currently lacking for the group, members of the cercozoa do share novel molecular traits , such as the insertion of one or two amino acid residues between the monomer tracks of highly conserved polyubiquitin genes  <cit> . nonetheless, molecular phylogenetic studies have demonstrated that several enigmatic taxa, previously treated as eukaryota insertae sedis, fall within the cercozoa, such as allantion, allas, bodomorpha and spongomonas  <cit> ; cryothecomonas  <cit> ; ebria  <cit> ; gymnophrys and lecythium  <cit> ; massisteria  <cit> ; metopion and metromonas  <cit> ; proleptomonas  <cit> ; and protaspis  <cit> . moreover, environmental sequencing surveys have demonstrated several cercozoan subclades without clear cellular identities, suggesting that the actual diversity of this group is composed of thousands of uncharacterized lineages  <cit> . it must also be emphasized that morphological information from cercozoans, especially at the ultrastructural level, is largely absent from the literature. accordingly, we characterized the ultrastructure and molecular phylogeny of a highly unusual and rarely encountered tetraflagellate, auranticordis quadriverberis n. gen. et sp. , isolated from sand samples collected in a marine tidal flat. uncultured cells were individually isolated and prepared for dna extraction , transmission electron microscopy  and scanning electron microscopy . this approach enabled us to describe the ultrastructure of intracellular pigmented bodies within a. quadriverberis that are most likely photosynthetic endosymbionts derived from cyanobacterial prey.

RESULTS
general morphology and behaviour
auranticordis quadriverberis was able to glide slowly using four tightly bundled flagella that were oriented posteriorly. the cells of a. quadriverberis were also able to change shape, albeit only slightly, and could be prominently lobed, heart-shaped or ovoid . in general, the cells had a narrower anterior apex and an expanded posterior end and were composed of four major lobes : l <dig>  l <dig>  l <dig>  and l <dig> . l <dig> was smaller than other three lobes and was separated from l <dig>  to the right, by a ventral depression  and separated from l <dig>  to the left, by a ventral groove  that contained the four recurrent flagella . apart from differences in cell shape and the effects of cell plasticity, there was also variation in the size of different individuals, ranging from 35– <dig> μm in diam. . the cells were conspicuously orange in color, caused mostly by the presence of linear arrays of tiny orange muciferous bodies that were distributed over the entire surface of the cell . microscopical observations indicated that these bodies secrete sticky mucilage when the cells are disturbed, suggesting that the bodies function for adhesion to the substratum. tem micrographs showed that the muciferous bodies were small compartments  positioned underneath the cell membrane and filled with amorphous material that was secreted as mucilaginous strands . the surface of a. quadriverberis was also corrugated and consisted of over  <dig> longitudinal ridges that spanned from the anterior apex to the posterior end . the grooves between the ridges contained numerous tiny pores through which the mucilage from the muciferous bodies was secreted . tem sections through the cell surface also demonstrated a single row of microtubules positioned beneath each ridge . no test or cell wall was present.

the four flagella of a. quadriverberis originated from an anterior flagellar pocket and nestled tightly within the ventral groove, making them nearly invisible under the light microscope . electron microscopy demonstrated that the flagella were arranged in two pairs and covered with flagellar hairs or mastigomenes . except for very slight differences in length, all four flagella were morphologically identical and slightly longer than the cell . the flagella were also homodynamic and associated with gliding motility along the substratum. pseudopodia were not observed.

main cytoplasmic components
auranticordis quadriverberis contained a large nucleus  situated in the anterior region of the cell . although the position of the nucleus in living specimens cannot be readily seen under the light microscope, the nucleus is visible in compressed cells as a comparatively clear area . tem sections demonstrated the nuclear envelope and a few prominent nucleoli . the nucleus was pointed at the anterior end and was connected to a striated band near the basal bodies and microtubular roots . moreover, bundles of  fibrous material were also observed within the cytoplasm near the cell periphery .

the cells of a. quadriverberis also contained an accumulation of black material near the anterior part of the cell, lipid globules and golgi bodies . although mitochondria with tubular cristae were not definitively observed, several elongated bodies that were highly reminiscent of acristate mitochondria were found near the periphery of the cell . the cells also contained 2– <dig> pale orange bodies that were variable in shape and usually about 4– <dig> μm in diam.; however, some of these bodies were  <dig> μm long . the pale orange bodies were distributed throughout the cell, but were most abundant in the anterior region of the cell. each pale orange body was enveloped by two tightly pressed inner membranes and surrounded by sac-like vesicles . the innermost membrane invaginated into the lumen of the body and formed several unstacked thylakoids around the periphery . the sac-like vesicles occasionally butted together to form perpendicular partitions outside of the two inner membranes . the central core of the pale orange bodies was devoid of membranes and contained a central electron dense region containing tailed viral particles .

molecular phylogenetic position of auranticordis
phylogenetic analyses of a 69-taxon dataset representing all major groups of eukaryotes showed a. quadriverberis branching within the cercozoa with very strong statistical support . this cercozoan clade, comprised of chlorarachnion reptans, cryothecomonas aestivalis, c. longipes, ebria tripartita, euglypha rotunda, heteromita globosa and a. quadriverberis, was strongly supported in both maximum likelihood  and bayesian analyses . a more comprehensive analysis of  <dig> homologous positions in  <dig> cercozoan ssu rdna sequences, including several shorter environmental sequences, placed a. quadriverberis near pseudopirsonia mucosa  and two unidentified cercozoans with  <dig>  bayesian posterior probabilities . accordingly, we performed phylogenetic analyses of  <dig>  positions in  <dig> cercozoan taxa that excluded the shortest environmental sequences and included the closest relatives of a. quadriverberis in the 126-taxon alignment.

discussion
comparative morphology
the distinctly orange color of a. quadriverberis sets these flagellates apart from other organisms living in the same benthic environment. to our knowledge, similar organisms have not been recorded previously  <cit> ; however, the orange color of a. quadriverberis is most reminiscent of the anoxic euglenozoan calkinsia aureus  <cit> .

the presence of four recurrent flagella in a. quadriverberis is another distinctive feature. most cercozoans possess two flagella, although cholamonas cyrtodiopsidis also has four flagella that are inserted subapically  <cit> . the flagella of c. cyrtodiopsidis form two symmetrical pairs comprising one long and one stubby flagellum  <cit> . this flagellar organization differs from a. quadriverberis, which has two pairs of tightly bundled flagella originating from the same flagellar reservoir. cholamonas cyrtodiopsidis was assigned to the cercomonadida due to possession of a microbody and kinetid architecture that is similar to some species of cercomonas  <cit> . although both a. quadriverberis and c. cyrtodiopsidis possess four flagella, this character state is unlikely to be synapomorphic for these species: a. quadriverberis inhabits marine sand, whereas c. cyrtodiopsidis inhabits the intestines of diopsid flies  <cit> . moreover, the distinctive features present in one species tend not to be shared by the other . because the phylogenetic position of c. cyrtodiopsidis has not yet been evaluated with molecular phylogenetic data, our ability to infer the evolution of the tetraflagellated state within the cercozoa is limited.

the flagella of a. quadriverberis are covered by hairs, and although this stands in contrast to the smooth flagella described in most other cercozoans, such as cercomonas and proleptomonas  <cit> , the hairs could be homologous to those described in the predatory soil-dwelling flagellate aurigamonas solis  <cit> . the four flagella of a. quadriverberis were also recurrent and homodynamic during gliding motility, which is unlike the heterodynamic flagella of most other interstitial cercozoans   <cit> . the gliding cells of a. quadriverberis were plastic and capable of slow changes in shape that was somewhat similar to that found in euglenids  <cit> . this plasticity is probably generated by the row of microtubules locating underneath the cell membrane .

the nucleus of a. quadriverberis is difficult to see in living cells, which is also unlike most other cercozoans   <cit> . the bloated shape of the cell and the dense distribution of minute orange muciferous bodies that subtend the entire surface of the cell obscured the nucleus. the ultrastructure of the nucleus is similar to that of other cercozoans   <cit> ; however, a. quadriverberis lacked permanently condensed chromosomes like those found in cryothecomonas, ebria, and protaspis  <cit> . the shape of the nucleus in a. quadriverberis was indented at one side, a feature also noticed in the nucleus of protaspis grandis  <cit> , and had a prominent anterior projection oriented towards the flagellar pocket. an anterior projection was also observed in the nucleus of cercomonas; in both genera, the anterior projection was associated with a broad striated band and the ventral  roots of the anterior and posterior flagella   <cit> . however, the characteristic microtubular cone present in cercomonas  <cit>  was not observed in a. quadriverberis.

the cytoplasm of a. quadriverberis contained lipid globules, golgi bodies and muciferous bodies. the muciferous bodies were compartments organized in linear arrays and filled with an amorphous matrix that appeared bright orange under the light microscope. extrusomes like these have also been reported in c. armigera as a minute peripheral concavities filled with a homogeneous matrix  <cit> . other types of extrusomes that have been found in different cercozoan species, such as trichocysts, microtoxicysts, kinetocysts and osmiophilic bodies,  <cit> , were absent in a. quadriverberis. the lipid globules varied considerably in size and were most abundant in the posterior region of a. quadriverberis. these globules were reminiscent of those described in protaspis  <cit> . although the mode of feeding in a. quadriverberis was not clearly observed, evidence of ingested bacteria was observed within its cytoplasm .

the cytoplasm of a. quadriverberis was highly vacuolated and looked similar to the cytoplasm described in cryothecomonas armigera and protaspis grandis  <cit> . the anterior part of the cell, however, contained black bodies similar to those that have been observed in other distantly related eukaryotes, such as some semi-anoxic euglenids and ciliates. moreover, distinct mitochondria with tubular cristae, which are characteristic of other cercozoans, were not found in a. quadriverberis. putative mitochondria were, however, observed around the cell periphery , and the lack of cristae in these organelles reflects either degenerate mitochondria associated with a low-oxygen environment or fixation artifact  <cit> . the size of the putative mitochondria ranged between 135– <dig> nm long, which is smaller than the mitochondria described in most cercozoans. for example, the mitochondria of aurigamonas solis are about  <dig> nm  <cit> , the mitochondria of cercomonas are about  <dig> nm  <cit> , the mitochondria of cryothecomonas longipes are about  <dig> nm  <cit> , and the mitochondria of p. grandis are about  <dig> nm  <cit> . although the implementation of fluorescent stains, like mitotracker, could help establish the identity of these structures  <cit> , this approach is limited by the scarcity of these organisms in natural environments and the unpredictability of finding them in our samples.

putative primary endosymbionts
several light orange bodies about 4– <dig> μm in diam. were distributed within the cell and were especially abundant towards the anterior end of the cell. although the ultrastructure of these pigmented bodies is novel, the presence of thylakoid-like membranes and a central space containing a densely stained inclusion is consistent with three possible identities that differ by the degree of integration with the host cell:  the bodies are ingested  prey cells that are in the earliest stages of being degraded,  the bodies are transient photosynthetic endosymbionts that are continuously replenished by kleptoplasty, or  the bodies are permanently integrated photosynthetic endosymbionts . the plausibility of each of these hypotheses is addressed below.

the orange color of these bodies is reminiscent of the plastids in some microalgae, such as dinoflagellates and diatoms that occupy the same habitats as a. quadriverberis. however, neither dinoflagellate theca nor diatom frustules were found associated with these bodies in any tem sections, and the ultrastructure of the bodies was very different from the known ultrastructural diversity in the plastids of diatoms and dinoflagellates. some cyanobacteria are known to have pale orange coloration that is similar to the orange bodies within a. quadriverberis  <cit> . these orange bodies were surrounded by two tightly compressed inner membranes and sac-like vesicles. whereas typical food bodies show degrees of being digested by cellular enzymes, nearly all of the pigmented bodies observed were completely intact in all of the cells we observed , suggesting that they are constant fixtures of the host cell cytoplasm.

primary endosymbiosis, involving a photosynthetic prokaryote within a eukaryotic cell, results in three surrounding membranes: two cyanobacterial inner membranes and a third, outer phagosomal membrane. green algae/land plants, red algae, and glaucophytes possess primary plastids  <cit> . two membranes surround the plastids of green algae and red algae, and the third outer phagosomal membrane is inferred to have been lost  <cit> . secondary endosymbiosis occurs through the engulfment, integration and maintenance of either a green or red alga by a predatory eukaryote. this process produced the plastids of cryptomonads, haptophytes, stramenopiles, dinoflagellates, apicomplexans, and euglenids  <cit> . two different lineages of cercozoans have independently acquired plastids through endosymbiosis:  chlorarachniophytes have secondary plastids derived from green algae  <cit>  and  paulinella chromatophora has primary plastids derived from cyanobacterial prey  <cit> .

like in paulinella and the cyanelles of glaucophytes, the ultrastructure of the pigmented bodies within a. quadriverberis is most consistent with the ultrastructure of free-living cyanobacteria, suggesting an independent primary endosymbiotic origin  <cit> . for instance, tem sections through the pigmented bodies demonstrated a mode of division that is similar to division described in the cyanelles of cyanophora paradoxa  <cit>  . moreover, the thylakoids in the endosymbionts of p. chromatophora, the cyanelles of glaucophytes, and coccoid photosynthetic cyanobacteria are unstacked and arranged concentrically around the periphery of the cell  <cit> . a similar arrangement was observed in the pigmented bodies of a. quadriverberis , although the majority of the thylakoids projected inward towards the core of the body. the central area within the pigmented bodies of a. quadriverberis resembled the pyrenoids in the cyanelles of glaucocystis nostochinearum  <cit> .

the thylakoid-free core of the pigmented bodies also contained polygonal viral particles. tem sections through these particles demonstrated complete tailed phages similar to those known to infect cyanobacteria  <cit>  . viral particles similar to those described in the pigmented bodies of a. quadriverberis have also been described in the same region in the plastids of other eukaryotes, such as the "polyhedral bodies" in the primary endosymbionts of p. chromatophora  <cit> , the cyanelles of the glaucophyte gloeochaete wittrockiana  <cit> , and the free-living photosynthetic cyanobacterium nostoc punctiforme  <cit> . two other important characters that have been used to infer a cyanobacterial origin for primary plastids are:  the presence of phycobilisomes and  the presence of a peptidoglycan wall  <cit> . however, as previously mentioned, neither phycobilisomes nor a peptidoglycan layer was present in the orange bodies in a. quadriverberis.

CONCLUSIONS
our characterization of a. quadriverberis n. gen. et sp. demonstrates several novel features within the cercozoa, such as four homodynamic flagella, densely distributed linear rows of orange muciferous bodies, and putative endosymbionts with an enigmatic overall structure. the discovery of this highly distinctive lineage underscores how poorly we understand the actual cellular diversity of cercozoans and, potentially, represents one of the few independent cases of primary endosymbiosis within the cercozoa and beyond. although endosymbioses are known to have occurred many different times independently, the transformation of endosymbionts into organelles is considered to be much less common  <cit> . in order to more confidently infer the origin of the pigmented bodies in a. quadriverberis, experiments involving autofluorescence and the amplification of plastid molecular markers  could be performed  <cit> . these studies will be hampered mainly by the scarcity and unpredictability of finding these cells in natural samples. nonetheless, additional studies on a. quadriverberis and its putative endosymbionts will enable us to better understand the extent of endosymbiosis across the tree of eukaryotes and the convergent processes associated with the establishment and integration of endosymbionts within eukaryotic cells.

taxonomic descriptions
taxonomic treatment for auranticordis quadriverberis
phylum cercozoa  <cit> 

genus auranticordis gen. nov. chantangsi, esson and leander 2008
diagnosis
uninucleate tetraflagellates; four recurrent flagella inserted subapically and bundled together within a ventral longitudinal groove; all flagella about one cell length; cell shapes are prominently lobed, ovoid or heart-shaped; nucleus at anterior end of cell, with nucleoli; no cell wall or test; minute orange muciferous bodies distributed in linear arrays over the entire cell; cytoplasm with pale orange pigmented bodies, usually concentrated at the anterior end; corrugated cell surface; black inclusions usually present at anterior part of the cell; locomotion by slow gliding; cell deformations possible; marine habitat.

type species
auranticordis quadriverberis.

etymology
latin aurantium, n. orange; l. cordis, n. heart. the generic name reflects two characteristic features of this taxon: orange cell coloration and inverted heart-shaped cells.

species auranticordis quadriverberis spec. nov. chantangsi, esson and leander 2008
description
cell shape ovoid, prominently lobed or inverted heart-shaped; cell size 35– <dig> μm long, 25– <dig> μm wide; four homodynamic flagella, inserted subapically and bundled within a ventral longitudinal groove; anterior nucleus with nucleoli; bright orange coloration caused by linear rows of minute orange muciferous bodies; corrugated cell surface with about  <dig> longitudinal ridges; no cell wall or test; cytoplasm with 2– <dig> pale orange pigmented bodies; black inclusions usually present at anterior part of the cell; locomotion by slow gliding. small subunit rrna gene sequences .

type locality
tidal sand-flat at spanish banks, vancouver, british columbia, canada. the specimen was found during march and may,  <dig> 

hapantotype
both resin-embedded cells used for tem and cells on gold sputter-coated sem stubs have been deposited in the beaty biodiversity research centre  at the university of british columbia, vancouver, canada.

iconotype
figures 1b, 1f, 1h and  <dig> 

type locality
spanish banks, vancouver, bc, canada .

habitat
marine sand.

etymology
the etymology for the specific epithet, latin quattuor, four; l. verberis, n. whip. the specific epithet reflects the presence of four flagella.

