BACKGROUND
the utilization of lignocellulose, one of the most abundant renewable resources on earth, has the potential to play an important role in energy and commodity supply  <cit> . structural polysaccharides, as part of the lignocellulose and therefore the plant cell wall, represent an extensive source of fermentable carbohydrates  <cit> . these polysaccharides, consisting of cellulose, hemicellulose and pectin, form a highly cross linked network providing the cell shape tensile properties and hence the structural stability of the plant  <cit> . these characteristics are also responsible for a major drawback in enzymatic lignocellulose utilization. plant cell walls have evolved the ability to resist the enzymatic attack from microbes  <cit> . therefore, without additional pretreatment the conversion of plant cell walls to fermentable sugar is comparatively slow and economically unfeasible  <cit> . to establish economically feasible processes utilizing lignocellulose, the recalcitrance of this substrate has to be overcome  <cit> . appropriate modification of plant cell wall polymers can be a promising way to increase the feasibility of plant biomass utilization  <cit> . plant cell wall synthesis is regulated by both biosynthesis and degradation with an extensive number of genes involved  <cit> . cellulose, the crystalline structure of the microfibrills is synthesized by the cellulose synthase modules  in the plasma membrane  <cit> . in contrast, the synthesis of hemicellulose and pectin begins in the golgi bodies  <cit>  followed by transport to the apoplastic space where further modification occurs. these are then incorporated into the matrix phase of the cell wall fibers  <cit> .

glycosyl hydrolases  e.g. endoglucanases  play an important role in development, remodeling and degradation of different organisms’ cell wall mainly plants but also for example fungi. plant ghs are mostly involved in fiber matrix remodeling or in cell wall plasticity during growth and development of the plant  <cit> . biomass decomposing microorganisms like fungi or actinobacteria produce these enzymes to convert plant cell wall polysaccharides into monosaccharides for their own metabolism  <cit> .

the recombinant expression of ghs in planta has been attempted for different reasons, low-cost enzyme production  <cit> , modification of starch  <cit>  and reducing the recalcitrance of cell walls  <cit> .

promising examples have been described for acidothermus cellulolyticus endoglucanase e <dig> in tobacco and maize which resulted in an improved conversion rate of the plant material  <cit> . similar advantages have been described for endoxylanase 229b from dictyoglomus thermophilum  <cit> . however, already described approaches did not allow a direct comparison between enzymatic effect and plant phenotype, e.g. cell wall structure and degradability  <cit> . therefore, additional research with systematic analysis is needed.

recombinant ghs have been targeted to various subcellular compartments with different results in expression level, stability and impact on the plant growth and development  <cit> . thermophilic ghs have been found to be expressed with no harmful effect to the plant due to their limited activity at low temperatures  <cit> . also sequestration by differential targeting and therefore limiting the access of hydrolytic enzymes to the plant cell wall has been addressed but with different effects. e.g. expression of aspergillus niger ferulic acid esterase in festuca arundinacea  with localization in er or golgi apparatus did show free mono- and dimers of ferulic acid and hence a higher degradability of the plant cell wall  <cit> .

here, we compare the heterologous expression of a mesophilic cellulase from trichoderma reesei targeted to the er and apoplast. we demonstrate a correct localization combined with high level expression of the active enzyme in both subcellular compartments. furthermore, we analyze and correlate the biochemical phenotype of the cell wall derived polysaccharides of both localization variants and evaluate their differences relevant for a subsequent hydrolysis.

RESULTS
transgenic tobacco plants with different trcel5a localization
in order to study the impact of trcel5a expression with differential subcellular localization, tobacco plants with two different subcellular localizations were analyzed. tobacco lines expressing trcel5a localized in the apoplast were taken from a previous study  <cit> .

for plants retaining trcel5a inside the er, the endoglucanase gene was fused to the sequence for a c-terminal kdel signal . successful cloning was verified by transient expression in n. tabacum  <cit>  followed by the detection of the enzyme by western blot .

constructs encoding the enzyme with and without the kdel tag were introduced into tobacco  leaf discs by agrobacterium-mediated transformation  <cit> . each generation of transgene plants was screened for the presence of the enzyme by western blot. transgene integration was confirmed by genomic pcr and the enzymatic activity was tested by the conversion of 4-methylumbelliferyl β-d-cellobioside  to 4-methylumbelliferon  and cellobiose . homozygous lines revealing a 3: <dig> segregation ratio consistent with a single locus insertion were used to produce subsequent generations of plants .table  <dig> 
expression of trcel5a in transgenic tobacco



construct
gene
subcellular localization
total plants
number of events
expression level t1

trcel5a
er

trcel5a
ap
events and plants that produced seed from vectors designed to express endoglucanase from t. reesei. the mean value of expression level  of all positive plants for each construct is shown. *values for second-generation represents the mean of three homozygous lines  with ten samples each are also shown.



western blots showed that homozygous transgenic plants expressing the secreted version of trcel5a yielded a recombinant protein with a molecular weight of ~35 kda, similar to that of the native catalytic domain  consistent with our previous findings that the enzyme undergoes proteolytic cleavage in plant cells  <cit> . in contrast, homozygous lines expressing trcel5a with a kdel tag revealed two fragments. the lighter but more prominent had a molecular weight of approximately 35 kda, similar to the weight of the catalytic domain  <cit>  while the heavier fragment with approximately 42 kda corresponds to the molecular weight of the holoenzyme. recombinant protein expression levels in transgenic tobacco plants were determined by measuring the activity of total soluble proteins  against the substrates azocmc and 4muc. t <dig> plants expressing the secreted version of trcel5a achieved a specific enzyme activity of up to  <dig>  u mg- <dig> tsp on azocmc  and 35 nmol 4mu min-1 mg- <dig> on 4muc , whereas the er-localized version achieved a specific enzyme activity of up to  <dig>  u mg- <dig> on azocmc and 46 nmol 4mu min-1 mg- <dig> on 4muc .figure  <dig> 
generation of transgenic tobacco expressing trcel5a. genomic pcr of dna prepared from wt and transgenic plants with primers binding in the camv 35ss expression cassette and below genomic pcr with primers binding in a highly conserved region in the chloroplast genome  <cit>  ; m, generuler™ 1 kb wt: sr <dig> wild type, nc: h2o, pc: control plasmid dna ptrakc-trcel5a-er. western blot for recombinant trcel5a from three different trcel5aap and trcel5aer lines . lanes contain 10 μg of tsp from transgenic plants; antibody system used in is mαhis <dig> /gamfc
ap; wt: sr <dig> wild type, pc: purified his <dig> tagged phenylammonium lyase from zea mays . in all transgenic lines the degraded trcel5a is detectable. additionally in trcel5aer lines also small amounts of the full enzyme are detectable. expression level of trcel5a in transgenic tobacco lines was determined by conversion of 4muc . three independent lines with five plants each were tested . white bars represent the average expression level in trcel5aap and trcel5aer lines respectively.



subcellular localization of trcel5a in tobacco plants
localization of trcel5a was examined in tobacco leaf tissue either by immunostaining with subsequent fluorescence or electron microscopy. stained with either rαcell and garfcfitc or mαkdel and gamfcfitc a strong green fluorescence indicated the recombinant enzyme in the transgenic tissue, while no signal was detected in the wild type  control line . stained with rαcell and garfcgold localization of trcel5a was confirmed for apoplast and er by electron microscopy .figure  <dig> 
localization of trcel5a in transgenic tobacco leaf tissue. plant tissue expressing trcel5a targeted to the er  and wt  were immunostained with the mαkdel primary antibody and gamfc
fitc. apoplast targeting was monitored by staining transgenic plant tissue and wt with rαcell primary antibody and garfc
fitc
. electron microscopy with immunolabeling  indicated localization for trcel5aap inside the apoplastic space or at the cell walls  and for trcel5aer inside the er . arrows mark accumulation of recombinant enzyme.



growth characteristics
the constitutive expression of trcel5a and its localization in the apoplast  reduced the growth of tobacco plants and significantly delayed their development as described previously  <cit> . the stem length and germination rate were both reduced. the expression of trcel5a with a kdel peptide for retention in the er  resulted in a less significant difference in growth and development . for both constructs, a few transgenic plants displayed a curly and asymmetrical leaf phenotype, and in the trcel5aap plants this was accompanied by necrotic areas on the leaf .figure  <dig> 
transgenic tobacco plants expressing trcel5a. eight-week-old n. tabacum sr <dig> wt plants were grown in soil under standard conditions. twenty plants of each line and wt were monitored on their stem size trcel5aap plants showed a significant reduction in size and growth rate, whereas trcel5aer plants were not significantly different from wt . the leaf shape of several transgenic plants was altered compared to wt . trcel5aer
 and trcel5aap plants  displayed a curly leaf phenotype which in the case of trcel5aap plants included additional necrotic lesions.



chemical analysis of tobacco cell walls
the structural carbohydrate composition of plants expressing differentially-targeted trcel5a was determined in leaf material from six-week-old tobacco plants. destarched alcohol-insoluble residue  was hydrolyzed with weak acid  <cit>  and the solubilized carbohydrates were measured as alditol acetate derivatives by gc/ms  <cit> . the crystalline cellulose content of the tobacco leaf material was determined by updegraff hydrolysis  <cit>  and the anthrone cellulose assay. transgenic lines expressing trcel5a in the apoplast and er were compared with wt. for transgenic lines accumulating trcel5a in the apoplast, we could confirm the previous findings showing dramatic changes in the content of crystalline cellulose, which was significantly lower than in wt plants  <cit> . in contrast, transgenic plants accumulating trcel5a in the er did not show such differences . in addition, the analysis of matrix phase polysaccharides revealed dramatic differences in the monosaccharide composition . the trcel5aap lines contained less glucose and more xylose. the trcel5aer lines showed similar but smaller differences in these sugar levels than the trcel5aap lines compared to wt levels. the amount of galactose increased in all transgenic lines. arabinose and rhamnose levels were lower in the trcel5aap lines but no change was found in the level of mannose. two of three trcel5aer lines contained lower levels of xylose, and all three lines contained slightly lower levels of mannose compared to wt plants. a significant reduction in the levels of arabinose and rhamnose was found in only one of the trcel5aer lines. the biochemical changes in the cell wall sugars of the trcel5aap lines were associated with a growth reduction phenotype, but as discussed above there was no significant visible change in the trcel5aer lines despite the modulation of sugar levels. in addition to our previous findings  <cit> , significant changes in the composition of matrix phase polysaccharides could be observed in transgenic lines with trcel5a targeted to the apoplast. in contrast, transgenic tobacco plants targeting trcel5a to the er did not show these differences in crystalline cellulose content but also exhibit changes in matrix phase sugar composition.figure  <dig> 
cellulose content and cell wall convertibility in transgenic tobacco. the crystalline cellulose content and stem length was analyzed in six-week-old wt and trcel5a transgenic tobacco plants grown in soil. asterisks indicate a significant decrease  in the crystalline cellulose content for trcel5aap compared to wt plants whereas trcel5aer plants show no significant difference . leaf tissue from transgenic tobacco lines trcel5aap and trcel5aer
. samples from both lines expressing ~30 mu/mg tsp  were hydrolyzed with the appropriate amount of the commercial cellulase preparation  <cit> . digestion was carried out at 55°c with constant shaking at 1000 rpm. the trcel5aap leaves showed higher hydrolysis levels than the trcel5aer and wt leaves after 8 h.
compositional analysis of matrix-phase polysaccharides in different transgenic tobacco lines



line
arabinose
glucose
galactose
mannose
rhamnose
xylose

wt

trcel5a
ap -1

trcel5a
ap -2

trcel5a
er -1

trcel5a
er -2

trcel5a
er -3
relative values  for sugar distribution in matrix polysaccharide fraction. data analyzed by two-sided student’s t-test; **indicates a significant p <  <dig> ; *indicates a significant p <  <dig> ; n =  <dig> 



hydrolysis of leafy biomass from transgenic tobacco
to determine the hydrolysis rate of transgenic leaf material, tobacco plants were selected with similar tsp and trcel5a activity levels . different transgenic lines with both localizations were compared to wt plants. after enzymatic hydrolysis with a commercial cellulase cocktail , the remaining crystalline cellulose was determined from the insoluble remnants. in comparison to wt, transgenic leaf material with trcel5aer did not show any significant change in the released relative cellulose values or the rate in hydrolysis, independent from the trcel5a expression level. in contrast, leaf biomass from trcel5ap lines showed a significantly accelerated hydrolysis after 8 h . however, after 65 h the relative amount of solubilized crystalline cellulose  did not differ from trcel5aer  and wt plants .

discussion
current research in the area of biofuels aims to achieve the economically feasible production of cellulolytic enzymes for the conversion of lignocellulosic biomass into soluble sugars. plants offer a relatively inexpensive production platform for industrial proteins  <cit>  and therefore plants have been used to express a number of biomass-degrading enzymes  <cit> .

several studies have demonstrated the potential of in planta recombinant cellulases by achieving the accumulation of functional enzymes at high levels  <cit> . however, several drawbacks are associated with constitutive cellulase expression, including growth inhibition, changes in leaf morphology, loss of cell wall integrity and reduced stress tolerance  <cit> .

plants express endogenous ghs that play an important yet barely understood role in cell wall synthesis  <cit> . both the overexpression and silencing of these ghs can have a negative impact on growth and cell wall development  <cit> .

these issues have been addressed by targeting cell wall-degrading enzymes to different subcellular compartments, which can increase the overall enzyme yields  <cit>  as well as keeping potentially harmful enzymes away from the cell wall  <cit> . we therefore established transgenic tobacco lines expressing the t. reesei mesophilic endoglucanase trcel5a retained in the er and compared them with transgenic lines from a previous study secreting trcel5a to the apoplast  <cit> .

for transgenic plants, trcel5a localization was confirmed by immunostaining thin tissue sections, though the staining did not reflect the expression level of the enzyme.

as already described, trcel5a underwent proteolytic cleavage within the linker region when expressed in tobacco  <cit> . however, the truncated enzyme remains active against soluble substrates such as azocmc or other β-glucans  <cit> . comparing the two localization strategies, the apoplast targeting yielded the truncated form of trcel5a alone, whereas retention in the er yielded a mixture of the truncated and full-length enzyme, although the latter was a minor product. trcel5a activity in the transgenic plants was determined by measuring the conversion of 4muc into 4mu, resulting in a maximum of 33 nmol 4mu min1 mg- <dig> in the trcel5aap plants and 46 nmol 4mu min-1 mg- <dig> in the trcel5aer plants. this probably reflects the relative scarcity in the number and quantity of proteases in the er lumen compared to the apoplast  <cit> .

as described previously, trcel5a showed remarkable residual activity under physiological conditions typical for tobacco plants  suggesting it potentially interferes with the synthesis of cell wall cellulose during normal plant growth and development  <cit> . affirming our precedent findings, the trcel5aap transgenic plants grew more slowly, germinated less frequently and showed a significant decrease in the amount of crystalline cellulose then wt. despite the higher expression level of trcel5a retained in the er, no significant difference between trcel5aer and wt were detected for these traits. endoglucanase expression targeted to the apoplast has the potential to interfere with endogenous cellulose synthesis, where er retention should avoid it, because the cellulose synthesis takes place in the plasma membrane by the cellulose synthase complexes. after polymerization, the glucan chains are extruded into the extracellular space  <cit> . this corresponds to our observation that the content of crystalline cellulose is reduced in trcel5aap plants but not in trcel5aer plants. however the role of endoglucanases during the synthesis of cell wall cellulose appears far more intricate. plant endoglucanases such as korrigan are necessary for the accumulation of sufficient cellulose and its absence leads to a cellulose deficiency and growth defects  <cit> . recent studies have shown that the overexpression of korrigan and other recombinant endoglucanases can also reduce the crystallinity of cellulose  <cit> .

the analysis of matrix polysaccharide composition of transgenic and wt tobacco plants revealed a significant reduction in the relative amounts of glucose, arabinose and rhamnose in the trcel5aap lines, but much higher levels of galactose and xylose. plant ghs have been shown to remodel cell wall polysaccharides in the apoplastic space and during the transport of polysaccharide precursors through the golgi apparatus  <cit> . therefore, trcel5a potentially interferes with the syntheses of xyloglucan . however, trcel5a is a strict endoglucanase and is only known to cleave β <dig>  linkages between glucopyranose units, while showing no activity against complex mixed glucans  <cit> . thus, the degradation is likely to take place at an earlier stage of xyg synthesis, when the glucan chains are still undecorated. the higher levels of galactose and xylose would directly reflect these losses of glucose.

the relative level of glucose was also lower in the trcel5aer lines, albeit not to the extent seen in the trcel5aap lines. galactose levels were also higher, as in the trcel5aap plants, but xylose levels were lower in two of three tested lines. all trcel5aap plants had lower levels of mannose and one line also showed lower levels of arabinose and rhamnose. these changes in the matrix polysaccharide composition for trcel5aer lines were not associated with a visible phenotype in contrast to the observed changes in the trcel5aap plants.

er localization was used to prevent the enzyme from entering the golgi apparatus where most hemicellulose and pectin synthesis takes place  <cit> . however, recent studies have shown that er-localized fungal enzymes can still affect matrix polymer synthesis. this has been shown for the deferuloylation of arabinoxylans in f. arundinacea by using a fungal ferulic acid esterase a. even if the detected enzyme values for golgi apparatus localization - the place of the synthesis - were higher, significant cleavage was observed for er retardation of the enzyme  <cit> . this may reflect the promiscuous behavior of kdel-tagged proteins, which can in some cases enter the golgi network from where they are later retrieved  <cit> .

xyg is the most abundant hemicellulose in the primary cell walls of dicotyledonous plants, representing up to 30% by weight  <cit> . in most dicots the main form is fucogalacto-xyg, but arabinogalacto-xyg is more abundant in solanaceous plants and monocots  <cit> . in fucogalacto-xyg, galactose is transferred to the xylosyl residue and then substituted with fucose, whereas in arabinogalacto-xyg galactose or arabinose can be transferred to the xylosyl residue  <cit> . the scarcity of glucose could then lead to the reduced levels of xylose in the matrix polysaccharides of trcel5aer plants. in contrast, xylose levels were normal in the trcel5aap lines. interestingly, galactose levels were elevated in all the plants. despite these differences in biochemistry, there was no significant morphological or developmental change in the trcel5aer plants, which is consistent with previous observations of mutant plants with changes in the xyg side chain composition  <cit> .

the remaining amount of crystalline cellulose was measured in the tobacco leaves after digestion with a commercial cellulase preparation, revealing a two-fold reduction in trcel5aap plants after 8 h compared to wt and trcel5aer plants. after 65 h however, all three lines contained the same relative amounts of residual cellulose, showing that degradation was accelerated but not enhanced overall in the trcel5aap plants. quantitative effects were ruled out by carefully selecting transgenic plants of both lines with similar overall enzyme expression levels, and we found no overall difference between the transgenic and wt lines. endoglucanases produced in planta have previously been shown to make the plant cell wall less recalcitrant to hydrolysis  <cit> . accordingly, our results confirmed a significant reduction in the levels of crystalline cellulose in trcel5aap plants followed by accelerated hydrolysis.

the altered matrix polysaccharide fraction of the trcel5aer plants appeared to have little impact on the enzymatic hydrolysis of leaf material, which was similar to the profile in wt leaves. this may reflect the relatively simple assay substrate, which does not consider the impact of lignin due to its low abundance in leaves compared to stems and roots  <cit> . the modification of cell wall hemicellulose using hydrolytic enzymes can promote lignocellulose degradation by reducing the amount of crosslinking between polymers  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
the heterologous expression of the mesophilic endoglucanase trcel5a had a significant impact on the composition of plant cell wall polysaccharides, although the precise changes were dependent on the subcellular localization of the enzyme. the secreted enzyme notably reduced the content of crystalline cellulose and inhibited both growth and germination, whereas keeping the enzyme in the er only altered the matrix phase polysaccharide composition without visible effects on plant development, suggesting a more important role of the crystalline cellulose for growth and development. this study obtained further insights on the impact of ghs on the plant and especially the cell wall polysaccharides, beneficial in designing crops to contribute to novel sustainable and renewable resources.

