BACKGROUND
rna silencing is a conserved defense mechanism that plants and other eukaryotes use to protect their genomes against aberrant nucleic acids. this process uses short rnas  to recognize and manipulate complementary nucleic acids  <cit> . at least five classes of these small regulatory rnas have been characterized, including micrornas , small interference rnas , transacting sirnas , natural antisense sirnas  and, in metazoans, the piwi-interacting rnas  <cit> . mirnas and sirnas are chemically indistinguishable and participate in partially overlapping pathways; both are derived from double-stranded rna  and are then processed into 21- <dig> nt single stranded molecules by dicer or a dicer-like enzyme; later, they are incorporated into the rna-induced silencing complex  to guide the cleavage or translational repression of the complementary strand  <cit> . the main differences between mirnas and sirnas lie in their biogenesis and in their target molecules. sirnas are generally derived from endogenous aberrant dsrnas or from exogenous agents such as viruses, and silence the same molecule from which they originated. mirnas, instead, originate from nuclear genes and act in trans, silencing mrnas from other genes  <cit> .

in plants mirnas were described first in arabidopsis  <cit> , and later in other species. to date, there over  <dig> plant mirnas from over  <dig> species available at the mirbase  <cit> . most of these mirnas target transcription factors and thus are implicated in diverse aspects of plant growth and development  <cit> .

in addition to regulate the endogenous expression of some genes, mirnas could have a direct role in viral defense. this has been shown for various cases in animal-infecting viruses. for example mir- <dig> restricts the replication of the primate foamy virus type  <dig>  mir- <dig> targets the hepatitis c virus and at least four mirnas expressed in t-cells impair hiv replication  <cit> . also an important role for mirnas in antiviral defense in humans has been suggested through bioinformatics  <cit> . likewise, animal-infecting viruses can encode mirnas to regulate both the viral life cycle and the interaction between viruses and their hosts  <cit> .

whereas sirnas are known to play an important and direct role in antiviral defense in plants  <cit> , so far, there has not been proof of naturally occurring plant micrornas with antiviral activity. it has been shown, using genetically modified viruses and plants, that complementarity between a plant mirna and a virus genome is enough for antiviral activity. transgenic tobacco and arabidopsis plants displayed resistance against cucumber mosaic virus , turnip yellow mosaic virus  and turnip mosaic virus  when expressing artificial mirnas directed against regions in the viruses' genomes  <cit> . also, inserting the target sequence of host plant's mirnas in the virus genome can impair virus infectivity; however, the virus can escape rapidly of the mirna action by mutations  <cit> .

it has been suggested that virtually any endogenous small rna could hold an intrinsic, albeit fortuitous, antiviral potential  that is independent of its cellular function  <cit> . also, several sequences of 20- <dig> nt located within arabidopsis intergenic regions share perfect or near perfect complementarity with a variety of plant virus genomes, but have not been validated as mirnas yet  <cit> . there are also a large number of non-conserved rnas with unknown targets  that could have an antiviral role and constitute a reservoir of defensive molecules due to their complementarity to invading viral genomes  <cit> .

in this work, we present a bioinformatics approach to explore the possibility of endogenous plant mirnas having a role in antiviral defense by targeting the genomes of plant-infecting viruses and the results are considered in the context of the evolution of plant-virus interactions.

RESULTS
the set of plant mirnas  from six plants was screened for targets against a set of genomes of plant infecting viruses  resulting in several putative targets . the plant with most hits was o. sativa with  <dig>  which was expected since most of the mirnas in the dataset belong to this species . the matching percentage, which relates the number of hits to the sample size , was similar for all species, around  <dig> %. the plant with the highest matching percentage  was z. mays, and the lowest was a. thaliana . overall out of the  <dig> plant mirnas used in the screenings,  <dig>  had targets in the genomes of plant viruses; we name these "positive mirnas". the percentage of positive mirnas was different for each plant, being lowest  in a. thaliana and highest  in z. mays. the percentage of "positive viruses"  was lowest for s. bicolor  and highest for a. thaliana  . thus every plant has a different repertoire of mirnas with a potential capacity of targeting viruses.

a) miranda predicted microrna:target pairs, b) micrornas with possible targets in viruses genomes, c) viruses with mirnas targets in their genomes.

in total,  <dig> of the  <dig>  viruses screened were "positive viruses", thus not all plant-infecting viruses can be targeted by their host's mirnas. some viruses were highly targeted by plant mirnas. for example, the barley yellow mosaic virus, to which both o.sativa and z.mays are unsusceptible, displayed the highest number of mirna targets   <cit> .

mirnas can be grouped according to sequence similarity in families. in total  <dig> mirna families were screened against the viral genomes and  <dig> families  resulted in positive targets. families that are relatively well conserved across the plant kingdom and have multiple copies in the genome were particularly successful in producing hits; this may be a consequence of this families being overrepresented in every screening . families  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig> which are present in at least five of the six plant species and are encoded by at least two loci in each plant genome were among the ones with more potential targets. some families with unknown or non-validated targets  also produced multiple, yet fewer, hits in the viruses' genomes. these results suggest that abundant and conserved plant mirna families potentially target viruses.

to validate our hypotheses that plant-infecting viruses are more likely to be targeted by plant mirnas than by other sequences and that plant mirnas preferentially target plant-infecting viruses over other sequences, we conducted the following analyses. we created a group of negative controls to screen for mirna targets in the following cases i) animal mirnas vs plant virus genomes, ii) random generated mirnas vs plant virus genomes, iii) randomized plant mirnas vs plant virus genomes and iv) plant mirnas vs animal virus genomes. as a positive control we screened the set of plant mirnas against their validated target sequences.

the screenings were compared using four miranda parameters: the free-folding energy of the mirna:target pair, the identity, the z-score and the miranda score. all putative targets in each screening had high identity percentage , high z-score  and highly negative free-folding energy  . no statistically significant differences were found between the different screenings for these three parameters, indicating that all the alignments found are very similar and therefore comparable. since there are no differences between the positive control screening and all the others, we can conclude that our positive mirnas are pairing with their targets as well as some plant mirnas pair with their known and validated targets in the plant genomes.

p values are the result of pairwise wilcoxon test between each screening and the plant micrornas vs plant viruses screening, * significant differences α =  <dig> , ↓ significantly lower, ↑ significantly higher

the miranda score of the positive control was significantly higher than the score of the plant mirna vs plant viruses screening, while the miranda score for three of the four negative controls was significantly lower. however, all miranda scores are above the threshold of what is considered necessary for biological activity. we should also take into account that this parameter gives a high weight to pairing in the 5'region of the mirna which is not as crucial for plant mirnas activity as for animal mirnas   <cit> .

next, our screening was compared with the negative controls using the matching percentage. to discard errors due to sample size effect, various data subsets with different sample sizes of mirnas and viral genomes were randomly generated, screened again and then averaged . the matching percentages for plants mirnas to plant viruses were significantly higher than to animal mirnas and the two types of random mirnas. this indicates that the plant viruses might be preferentially targeted by plant mirnas than by other sequences. on the other hand, comparisons of the matching percentages for plant mirnas to plant and animal viral genomes did not show a clear trend . for example, the mirnas of v. vinifera seem to preferentially target plant viruses than animal viruses  while the opposite was the case for a. thaliana, s. bicolor and z. mays . and, the mirnas from o. sativa and g. max showed similar preference for the genomes of both plant and animal viruses . no clear conclusion can then be drawn as to the specificity of plant mirnas for plant viruses.

a. thaliana- m vs
g. max micrornas vs
o. sativa micrornas vs
s. bicolor micrornas vs
v.vinifera micrornas
z. mays micrornas vs
p values are the result of pairwise wilcoxon test between each screening and the plant micrornas vs plant viruses screening, α =  <dig> , ↓ significantly lower, ↑ significantly higher

the genomes of plant viruses were targeted in multiple regions by several plant mirnas. the most targeted regions were those coding for rna polymerases, cylindrical inclusion  proteins, capsid proteins and nuclear inclusion body  proteins . silencing in any of these regions is likely to impair virus replication. plant mirnas also target most frequently the rna polymerase genes in animal viruses . however, there is a stronger preference to target coding sequences in plant viruses than in animal viruses. therefore, plant mirnas seem to be more directed to impair the fitness of plant viruses.

discussion
using a bioinformatics approach we found that plant mirnas potentially target genomic regions in plant-infecting viruses. to validate our results we carried out several positive and negative controls and these showed that the genomes of plant viruses are preferentially targeted by their host's mirnas but were not conclusive regarding the specificity of plant mirnas for the genomes of plant viruses. a similar trend has been found using a bioinformatics approach with animal mirnas vs animal viruses  <cit> , where the mirna pathway has been proved to have antiviral role in metazoans  <cit> . this suggests that our predicted pairings could also have a biological function, although an experimental biological validation is necessary. it is possible that some of the viral targets found in this study are the result of purely fortuitous matches as has been suggested by various authors  <cit> . even if these pairings are the result of chance instead of selection, it is possible that given the right physiological circumstances  these mirnas would efficiently silence the predicted targets. this hypothesis is supported by studies showing that artificial mirnas can mediate antiviral defense in plants and that complementarity with the target is enough to produce resistance  <cit> . also, plants defective in mirna-silencing have shown to be more susceptible to some viruses  <cit> .

it was reported that human mirnas were more likely to target the genomes of human-infecting viruses over non-host's viruses  <cit> . such specificity could not be demonstrated for plant mirnas in the present study. however, a large amount of the targets we found for plant mirnas in the genomes of animal viruses are in non-coding regions and are therefore unlikely to impair viral activity . additionally, some predicted targets of plant mirnas were found both in plant and animal viruses  which may indicate a preference to target conserved regions in viruses. finally, it is possible that the genomes of plant-infecting viruses are undergoing rapid evolution to avoid targeting by plant mirnas, therefore giving lower matching percentages than expected. this is plausible since it has been shown that viruses can rapidly evolve to escape mirna targeting in plants  <cit> .

to identify possible plant mirnas in the viruses genomes we used strict parameters based on experimentally valid mirna:target pairings to ensure potential biological activity. even considering the inherent difficulties of the computational prediction of mirna targets, which often results large number of false positive targets  <cit> , it is possible that our conservative approach has underestimated the number of candidate targets. increasing evidence has shown that mirna-mediated silencing in plants can occur in relaxed mirna:target pairings, mainly leading to translational arrest instead of mrna cleavage, although the mechanisms are not fully understood  <cit> . once the criteria for mirna-mediated translational arrest in plants are fully understood, new approaches searching for plant mirna targets in viral genomes may be necessary.

we found that mirnas from deeply conserved and highly expressed families  have more potential targets in the viruses' genomes. this could suggest a way in which abundant plant mirnas are selected to have multiplicity of functions including pathogen defense. this is supported by the fact that these families have multiple targets within the plant genomes  <cit> , and some of them have been shown to be differentially expressed in response to stresses. for example, mirnas  <dig> and  <dig> are responsive to abiotic stress   <cit> , and mirnas  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> are responsive to viral infections  <cit> .

by contrast, the more phylogenetically restricted families , may be participating in more specific plant-virus interactions. indeed, in some plants there is a large diversity of non-conserved and "young" mirnas with still unknown targets that could be potentially employed against viral sequences  <cit> . the lack of potential antiviral activity for some microrna families could also be the result of them being expressed at very low levels or in a tissue or cell-specific manner, thus being less likely to play a significant role in antiviral defense.

it is also important to consider some arguments that do not support a putative function of plant mirnas as an effective option for antiviral defense. first, most viruses encode for silencing repressors, which could directly interfere with the mirna machinery  <cit> . second, viral genomes evolve much faster than host mirnas  <cit> . third, the mirna signal is neither systemic nor quickly amplified  <cit> . nevertheless, using mirnas to protect against virus might be an advantageous preemptive measure  benefitting of their ability to pair with multiple targets  <cit> .

the apparent inadequacy of mirnas as an antiviral defense mechanism may indicate that their role is not as direct as sirnas. on one side mirnas may simply act as a support mechanism for sirnas. on the other side, the targets found here may be a reflection of a virus adaptation phenomenon in which they take advantage of the host mirnas to suppress their own replication to evade immune elimination and establish in this way a persistent infection as has been suggested by mahajan et al.,  <cit> . in this case the role of mirnas would be to reach an equilibrated host-virus interaction  <cit> .

also, these results can be discussed in the context of the hypothesis proposed by lu et al.,  <cit> , which states that early in plant evolution mirnas played an important role in anti-viral defense and then novel functions evolved after the requirements of survival were satisfied  <cit> . at this initial time, plant mirnas may have been crucial for shaping the host ranges of several virus groups. then, some of these "antiviral mirnas" might have been selected to regulate endogenous genes after fortuitous matching. both the rapid evolution of viruses and the necessity of precise gene regulation could have worked as selective pressures towards the modern mirna pathway since the requirement for a high degree of complementarity between plant mirnas and their targets can act as a stabilizer, preventing sequence drift even over long periods of evolutionary time  <cit> . many mirnas might have been originated from invading viral sequences, a pathway for mirna evolution that has been suggested previously for plants  <cit> . additionally, bioinformatics evidence suggests a transition from viral sequence to sirna to mirna gene in plants  <cit> . our candidate targets may be an indication of these virus-derived mirnas, especially those found for phylogenetically restricted mirna families with unknown genomic targets.

CONCLUSIONS
our work presents initial evidence for the suspected potential of antiviral activity mediated by plant mirnas, which is likely to have played a role in early plant evolution and in shaping host ranges for plant infecting viruses.

