BACKGROUND
many eukaryotic genes contain spliceosomal introns  <cit> : segments of non-coding sequences that are excised from the pre-mrna by the spliceosome complex  <cit> . spliceosomal introns have been found with huge varying rates in all sequenced eukaryotes and are absent in all prokaryotic genomes sequenced to date  <cit> . these findings have been discussed in the context of two alternative hypotheses. the introns-early hypothesis states that spliceosomal introns were present in the last common ancestor of prokaryotes and eukaryotes but were subsequently lost in all prokaryotes  <cit> . in contrast, the introns-late hypothesis links the origin of spliceosomal introns to the emergence of eukaryotes. in accordance to the introns-late hypothesis, spliceosomal introns were supposed to originate from self-splicing group ii introns during the evolution of eukaryotes  <cit> . this model is supported by similarities between group ii introns and the catalytic snrna components of the spliceosome, suggesting that they might have had a common ancestor  <cit> . the fact that group ii introns are found in bacterial and mitochondrial genomes suggests a possible evolutionary connection between spliceosomal introns and the development of mitochondria  <cit> . these cell organelles originated by endosymbiosis from an alpha-proteobacterial ancestor  <cit> . in the course of evolution, their genomes were reduced through gene loss but also to a large extent through the transfer of many genes to their host genome  <cit> . these endosymbiotic gene transfers could have spread group ii introns into the host genome, which, in turn, might have initiated the evolution of spliceosomal introns and the spliceosome. additionally, these influences might have also resulted in a selective force towards the evolution of a nucleus which forms physical boundaries between the splicing and translation processes  <cit> .

the introns-early and introns-late hypotheses have been discussed in the literature until recently  <cit>  with every new sequenced genome adding more information to our understanding of intron evolutionary dynamics throughout eukaryotic lineages. nowadays there is a larger consensus around the introns-late hypothesis, although the mechanisms and dynamics of intron gains and loss in eukaryotes are still a matter of debate. recently, many studies have focused on inferring rates of intron gain and loss across the evolution of eukaryotes. the results reveal large differences in intron gain and loss rates in different lineages  <cit> . other studies have traced the evolution of introns across the major eukaryotic lineages by using different evolutionary models  <cit> .

one of the difficulties of modeling intron-evolution is that ancestral gene structures are generally unknown. therefore, models rely on certain parameters that are used to infer ancestral states of intron presence or absence. we circumvent this problem here by using a set of nuclear genes that originated by endosymbiotic gene transfer. these genes did not contain spliceosomal introns when they were transferred to the host genome, so that the introns found in these genes must all have been gained after the integration of the gene. we exploit the circumstance that nuclear encoded genes with mitochondrial origin can be identified by their sequence similarity and phylogenetic proximity to their alpha-proteobacterial homologs  <cit> . in particular, we put our focus on genes with a clear-cut proto-mitochondrial origin, as reported by phylogenetic analyses of mitochondrial ribosomal proteins  <cit>  and protein complexes from the oxidative phosphorylation pathway   <cit> . our results reveal a highly dynamic species-specific intron evolution, which is able to shape relatively rapidly the intron-exon structure of a transferred gene. hence, intron density, exon symmetry and intron phase distribution of recently transferred genes is similar to other genes in the genome. we find several instances of independent parallel transfers of genes. comparing their ratio of shared intron positions to those of genes that vertically derive from a single transfer event, our results indicate that, for our set of genes, the proportion of shared intron positions between genes that were transferred independently on more than one occasion is similar to those that were transferred in a single event. finally, we provide an in-depth analysis of clear-cut case of an intron that was inserted at identical positions in the nad <dig> gene which was transferred twice independently in the plant and animal lineages.

RESULTS
proto-mitochondrial derived genes are not different from other genes in terms of their intron structure
we compiled a list of  <dig> nuclear-encoded human genes of proto-mitochondrial origin  <cit> . these include  <dig> genes that encode for proteins of the mitochondrial ribosome and  <dig> genes of the oxidative phosphorylation  pathway . the intron-exon structure of these genes and their homologs across a broad set of  <dig> eukaryotic organisms was determined by comparing each protein sequence with the respective genomic sequence . the set of eukaryotic genomes includes three plant/green alga genomes, five fungi, six metazoans and four protists . the distribution of intron densities, intron phases, and symmetric and asymmetric exons in proto-mitochondrial derived oxphos and ribosomal genes are shown in figure  <dig>  intron densities range from  <dig> to  <dig> introns/kb of coding sequence and always show ranges that are within the normal values of the species considered  <cit> . the same can be observed for other characteristics such as the prevalence of phase  <dig> introns and symmetrical exons. a bias of phase  <dig> introns is a frequent observation, which is often linked with the preference of newly gained introns  <cit> . a ratio of 5:3: <dig> of phase  <dig>  phase  <dig> and phase  <dig> introns as found in this study for the considered proto-mitochondrial genes is in accordance with results reported for genes of different origins  <cit> . finally, our finding that 0- <dig> exons account for the majority of symmetrical exons is also in line with general observations in eukaryotic genomes  <cit> . thus, according to their intron densities, exon symmetries and phase distributions, proto-mitochondrial derived oxphos and ribosomal genes are undistinguishable from other genes in eukaryotic genomes. in a similar study with chloroplast-derived genes in plant genomes, basu et. al.  <cit> , found significant, but only slightly lower intron densities in those genes transferred from the chloroplast than in ancestral eukaryotic genes. in contrast, in a study by roy et al.  <cit>  little intron gain was detected in genes acquired by lateral transfer from prokaryotic donors.

lack of correlation between time of endosymbiotic gene transfer and intron density
mapping the relative time of endosymbiotic gene transfer from the mitochondrion  onto the phylogenetic tree of eukaryotes  <cit> , and considering a parsimonious scenario, we can approximate the history of endosymbiotic gene transfers to the nuclear genome, and thereby establish a relative ordered timing of the events . it must be noted, that a parsimonious approach might be affected by incomplete taxonomic sampling and errors in the species tree. to limit such effects we used all available data on mitochondrial genomes available at ncbi database and left unresolved those transfers that could not be placed with confidence due to multifurcations in the tree of eukaryotes. this approach served to establish a relative timing of endosymbiotic gene transfer events for some genes and taxonomic groups that are in resolved parts of the tree for which mitochondrial genomes are well sampled. in particular, for genes transferred within the metazoan lineage, which is densely sampled in terms of mitochondrial genomes, we could classify genes into relatively more ancient and more recent transfers. in order to test the variation of intron gain over time, we compared the intron densities of early and late transfers in genomes of four metazoan species: the vertebrates homo sapiens and danio rerio, the insect drosophila melanogaster and the nematode caenorhabditis elegans . our results show no correlation between intron density and the time of the gene transfer. instead, differences between the densities of the corresponding genes in different species are generally larger than the differences observed between genes transferred at different evolutionary stages. this indicates that intron densities are governed by lineage-specific constraints and are independent of the time of the transfer event. this is consistent with previous findings. for instance, an extensive lineage-specific loss of introns in an intron-rich ancestor is suggested to happened in some chromalveolate lineages  <cit> . our results suggest that intron gain and not just reduced intron loss could be responsible for the current high densities found in plant and animal genomes. in fact, intron gain is the only process that can explain the current high intron densities in recently transferred genes. nevertheless, the existence of an intron-rich ancestor of eukaryotes is strongly supported by a high rate of shared intron positions between animals, fungi and plants  <cit> .

significant inter-kingdom conservation of plant-animal intron positions
to assess the extent of shared intron positions we aligned the protein sequences of transferred genes in the different lineages included in the study . consistent with previous results  <cit> , most intron positions are shared between the most divergent groups animals and plants . the distribution of the number of species-specific introns reflects the overall intron density in each species. comparing only those intron positions in highly-conserved alignment regions identified with block maker  <cit> , the numbers of shared intron positions are reduced but still show the same trend . only few introns are found at the same position across more than two groups of organisms. three intron positions are shared between animals, plants and fungi. also three introns at the same positions are shared between animals, fungi and dictyostelium discoideum. two shared intron positions are found in animals, plants and dictyostelium discoideum.

species specific intron positions are shown in the diagonal. shared intron positions between the different groups of species within the complete multiple protein alignments are shown above the diagonal, shared intron positions only within conserved regions of the alignments are shown below the diagonal. percentage of shared positions is indicated in brackets. 1homo sapiens, mus musculus, rattus norvegicus, danio rerio, caenorhabditis elegans, drosophila melanogaster, 2arabidopsis thaliana, chlamydomonas reinhardtii, oryza sativa, 3aspergillus fumigatus, schizosaccharomyces pombe, saccharomyces cerevisiae, candida glabrata, yarrowia lipolytica.

see legend of table  <dig> for indications

the timing of the transfer events reveals independent transfers in different species, mostly involving the green alga chlamydomonas reinhardtii and other groups . for instance, the genes nad <dig>  nad <dig> and atp <dig> of the oxidative phosphorylation, were transferred twice independently in animals, fungi and in chlamydomonas reinhardtii . the same observation is made within the timing of gene transfer events of the mitochondrial ribosomal proteins . five gene transfers took place independently in chlamydomonas reinhardtii, leishmania major, plasmodium falciparum, and before the split of animals and fungi . a list of putative independent transfers is provided in table  <dig> 

the first three genes  are genes of the oxidative phosphorylation pathway, the other nine genes  are genes of ribosomal mitochondrial proteins of the small and the large ribosomal subunit, respectively.

the large number of independently transferred genes in the green algal lineage allows us to compare the occurrence of shared intron positions between genes transferred independently and those derived from a common nuclear-encoded ancestor. the observation that most shared intron positions are found between distantly-related species can be explained either by conservation of intron positions from a common ancestor or by parallel intron gain. different evolutionary models infer different rates of parallel intron insertion. for qiu and colleagues most shared intron positions should be gained independently  <cit> , whereas most other models provide lower estimates  for the fraction of shared intron positions that result from independent insertions  <cit> .

shared positions between distant species such as animals and plants have been considered ancient positions  <cit> , considering that the probability for an independent gain of two introns at the same position is very small. our data, however, show that this is not necessarily the case. in both, the proto-mitochondrial genes nad <dig> and nad <dig> which were independently transferred in the eukaryotes under consideration  and the gene sdh <dig> which was transferred in the basal eukaryotic lineage  shared intron positions were identified between the green alga chlamydomonas reinhardtii and some of the animals . a comparison of the percentage of those shared intron positions between these groups reveals almost a double amount of positions in the genes that were transferred independently  in contrast to shared positions in the other genes . this means that at large evolutionary distances shared positions are not always indicative of the prevalence of ancestral intron positions. the percentage of shared positions between chlamydomonas and animals in these genes is remarkably lower than previous reports that set a ~23% of shared introns between human and arabidopsis genes  <cit> . however, it must be noted that the specific nature and reduced size of our dataset makes it difficult to extrapolate our findings to a general case. for the gene nad <dig>  the phylogenetic distribution in nuclear and mitochondrial genomes and its evolutionary history which includes a parallel intron gain was reconstructed in detail.

an unambiguous parallel intron gain at identical sites in two independently transferred nad <dig> genes
to gain a more detailed insight into the parallel insertion of introns at identical positions we present here in detail a particular example from our dataset, that of a parallel intron in the nad <dig> gene. the gene nad <dig> was transferred independently before the split of animals and fungi and in the green alga chlamydomonas reinhardtii and the only shared intron position was found between animals and the green alga. to gain a more detailed view of the evolution of the gene nad <dig>  we added to the phylogenetic analysis also the mitochondrial encoded homologs of the two protists dictyostelium discoideum, thalassiosira pseudonana, the plants arabidopsis thaliana, oryza sativa, the green algae pseudendoclonium akinetum, ostreococcus tauri and the moss physcomitrella patens, as well as the nuclear encoded nad <dig> gene of the green alga volvox carteri. the presence of the gene nad <dig> in the mitochondrial genome in all other plants, the moss and the two green algae pseudendoclonium akinetum  <cit>  and ostreococcus tauri  <cit>  supports the evolutionary scenario of independent transfer in the two green algae chlamydomonas reinhardtii, volvox carteri, and the animal/fungi split. these at least two independent transfer events are also supported by the reconstructed phylogenetic tree that contains both, nuclear and mitochondrial genes as well as alpha-proteobacterial nad <dig> homologs as the outgroup .

the nuclear encoded chlamydomonas reinhardtii nad <dig> gene possesses  <dig> introns. a single shared intron position is found in a conserved region of the alignment between the green alga chlamydomonas reinhardtii and the animals. the introns are all of phase  <dig> at exactly the same position of the gene as shown in figure  <dig>  in all sequences, the codon before the intron position codes for the amino acid glutamine. with one exception each, two different codons are used in the nuclear and the mitochondrial encoded genes for glutamine. there is a caa found in the mitochondrial genes and a cag in the nuclear genes, in agreement with a different average codon usage in mitochondrial and nuclear genes . the codon before the intron together with the first nucleotide g after the intron correspond to a classical proto-splice site ag -    <cit> .

interestingly, the shared intron position is surrounded by two group ii introns in the mitochondrial sequences of the moss physcomitrella patens and the plants arabidopsis thaliana and oryza sativa,  <dig> codons upstream and eight codons downstream, respectively . although it might be tempting to speculate on a possible role of these surrounding group-ii introns in the formation of the spliceosomal intron after the transfer, the fact that such introns are rare, if not completely absent in most mitochondrial genomes, implies that most introns in recently transferred genes have been formed by alternative mechanisms. altogether, our observations indicate that the gene nad <dig> was transferred twice independently and subsequently adapted its codon usage to that of nuclear genes. this originated the presence of a proto-splice site in the sequence of the nad <dig> gene, which, in turn, enabled the insertion of an intron at the same position in the different lineages.

CONCLUSIONS
arguments in favor of intron antiquity at identical intron positions are generally founded in weighing the relative probabilities of massive intron loss versus a few parallel intron gains  <cit> . although several clear-cut cases of parallel intron gains have been previously described  <cit> , this process is still considered a rarity. our results present several independent intron gains in homologous genes that were transferred independently from the mitochondrion to the nucleus, showing that independent acquisition of introns have been relatively frequent in this group of genes. in fact, for the cases we have examined in more detail, the number of parallel intron gains is similar to the fraction of conserved shared positions at the same evolutionary distance. these results, albeit based on a limited sample of a specific set of genes, indicate that shared intron positions can, in some instances, arise independently by parallel insertions in distantly-related lineages.

