BACKGROUND
dna-binding proteins play a key role in living organisms of many genetic activities such as transcription, recombination, dna replication and repair. one or more domains of these proteins interact with dna, and they offer the specificity for direct and indirect readout of dna  <cit> . to identify the dna-binding domains is very important for understanding the regulation mechanisms.

recently, rapidly increasing amount of protein-dna complexes from x-ray crystallography and nuclear magnetic resonance  have enabled the use of structural-based approaches for identifying dna-binding proteins. most of the structural dna-binding domains can be categorized into several classes according to their structures or binding types  <cit> . however, some dna-binding domains can not be well categorized, and for some dna-binding domains structural information is unavailable  <cit> . several studies used various computational approaches to predict potential dna-binding proteins by using protein-dna complexes structure features, such as the overall charges, electric moments, and shape of binding sites  <cit> . since the charge and conformational complementarities of binding sites are essential for protein-dna binding, these features provide a reasonable basis to identify dna-binding proteins. another trend is to consider the degree of conservation of residues  <cit> . luscombe and thornton  <cit>  have studied  <dig> families of dna-binding proteins and showed that those amino acids interacting with the dna are better conserved than those not interacting with dna. stawiski et al.  <cit>  found that electrostatic patches of dna-binding proteins have a higher percentage of aromatic and positive residues. according to the general properties of  <dig> amino acids, they also showed that residues of the patch are conserved at property levels.

in this paper, we propose a structure-based threading method by considering evolutionary conservation of dna-contact residues in dna-binding domains to identify dna-binding domains. we use blosum <dig>  <cit> , an evolutionary-based scoring matrix for amino acid substitutions, to measure the degree of conservation of binding residues. our method can achieve high precision and recall for  <dig> families of dna-binding domains, with a false positive rate less than 5% for  <dig> non-dna-binding proteins.

RESULTS
given a query domain, our method identified similar dna-binding structures or homologous protein sequences from the template library. to evaluate the performance of our method, for each dna-contact domain  in the template library we generated its corresponding positive and negative sets. the members in the positive set contain the domains similar to domain d based on scop, while domains in the negative set do not. by applying our method on these two sets, we found that the scores of the domains in the positive set are significantly higher than those of domains in the negative set. we further determined a threshold to achieve high precision and recall. combining with the threshold, we applied our method on  <dig> known scop families of dna-binding domains and  <dig> non-dna-binding proteins to examine the performance.

positive and negative set for each contact domain
we collected dna-binding contact domains from scop database, the detail is described in method. to remove redundant contact domains, domains with highly similar sequences  are grouped using the ncbi software blastclust. in each group, the one with the maximal number of contact residues is chosen as the representative domain of a group. for a representative domain r, these protein domains in the same scop family are considered as the member of r according to scop <dig> . each member of r was aligned to r using the ce. we define a residue of r as misaligned if it is aligned to a gap. a family member is discarded if more than 20% contact residues of r are misaligned between r and this member. family members that satisfy the above criteria are considered to be in the positive set. if there are less than five members in the positive set of r, the entire family of r is discarded. we finally yielded  <dig> representative domains with corresponding positive sets. for each r, we artificially generated  <dig> domains to be the negative set. to do this, for each artificial domain, we replicate its residues from r. then we randomly mutated the residue type of each contact residue of r.

determining the threshold of similar dna-binding function of a contact domain
for each representative domain r, each member in the positive and negative sets was scored by the method we developed. ideally, the scores of domains in the positive set should be on average significantly higher than those of the negative set. we used the kolmogorov-smirnov  test to examine the above criterion. the ks test is a nonparametric test to determine if two distributions differ significantly. according to our results, the scores are significantly different for the positive set and the negative set in most domains .

further, given a contact domain, we would like to determine a threshold for determining which domains have a similar dna-binding function. for the two sets  of a representative domain, we separately transform all members' scores to z-scores by

 z=s−μδ, 

where s is the score of a member, μ is the mean score of the these two sets, and δ is the standard deviation. figures 1a and 1b show the precision  and the recall  with various z-score thresholds, respectively. as shown in figure 1a, when we set the threshold greater than two, the precisions of using different thresholds are very similar . if we set the z-score threshold to one, only 60% of families are with high precision. the results imply that larger thresholds will yield higher precisions, but the benefit is limited when the threshold is larger than two. oppositely, as shown in figure 1b, larger thresholds will reduce the recall. according to these results, we take the z-score threshold as  <dig>  and the domains with a z-score higher than the threshold will be considered as putative dna-binding domains.

non-dna-binding proteins
we further apply our method to  <dig> non-nucleic-acid binding  proteins, which were initially studied by hobohm and sander  <cit>  and further specified by stawiski et al.  <cit> . we align all non-redundant contact domains to those non-dna-binding proteins using ce. alignments whose z-scores  are greater than  <dig>  with the misalign rate of contact residues less than 20% are chosen as non-dna-binding domains.  <dig> non-dna-binding domains pass the constraints among  <dig> proteins. we applied our method on these non-dna-binding domains and transformed their scores to z-scores. figure  <dig> shows the distribution of z-scores of non-dna-binding domains. the scores approximately follow a normal distribution and the peak of the density occurred at z = -1~ <dig>  given a z-score threshold, the false positive rate is the ratio of number of domains whose z-score are beyond the threshold to the total non-dna-binding domains. according to our previous analysis, we set the threshold to  <dig>  and the false positive rate is less than  <dig> . it shows that for non-dna-binding domains, our method can recognize their non-binding with high accuracy.

discussion
the z-score of dna-binding domains in the same scop family may be variable for several representative domains . the 1puf-a and 1o4x-a <dig>  are the members of the 1b8i-a representative domain. the z-scores are  <dig>   and  <dig>   when 1b8i-a was used as the query . the z-scores indicated that the contact residues between 1puf-a and 1b8i-a are more conserved than the ones between 1o4x-a <dig> and 1b8i-a on contact residues interacting to the bases of the core binding site in the dna.

to investigate variation of contact residues of dna-binding domain in the same scop family, we compared the bound dna sequences of two dna-binding domains by aligning the double-strand sequences to each other. 1b8i-a binds two dna sequences  and 1o4x-a <dig> binds another two dna sequences . first we generated four pairing alignments: 1b8i-c and 1o4x-c; 1b8i-c and 1o4x-d; 1b8i-d and 1o4x-c; and 1b8i-d and 1o4x-d. we do not allow any gap insertion when aligning a-pairing dna sequences. the alignments are obtained by sliding two sequences against each other until the best match is found. the alignment with the maximum number of identical aligned pairs is chosen, and as a result the alignment between 1b8i-c and 1o4x-c is the one chosen . then we adjust the alignment of the other dna strand pairs  according to this best alignment .

figures 4b and 4c show that the number of identical nucleotides between 1b8i-c and 1puf-e  as well as 1b8i-d and 1puf-d  is much higher than those of 1b8i-c and 1o4x-c  as well as 1b8i-d and 1o4x-d  for whole dna sequences. at the same time,  <dig> identical contact nucleotides are obtained from the alignments of 1b8i-c and 1puf-e as well as 1b8i-d and 1puf-d; but two identical contact nucleotides are yielded from the alignments of 1b8i-c and 1o4x-c as well as 1b8i-d and 1o4x-d . with respect to 1b8i-a, 1puf-a and 1o4x-a <dig> are different not only in the dna sequences they bind to but also in their dna-binding sites. these results show that the members in the same scop family may have different dna-binding models and that our method is able to detect the different protein-dna interactions based on the evolutionary conservation of dna-contact residues.

we produced multiple protein sequence alignments of  <dig> homeodomains  selected from scop  <dig>  using a multiple structure alignment tool, mustang  <cit> . these domains were ranked by z-scores calculated by using our scoring method and the sequence of 1b8i-a as the query. according to z-scores, these  <dig> domains can be roughly divided into two groups, including the ubx-like homeodomain colored in blue , 1ahd-p , and 1san ) and the oct- <dig> pou homeodomain colored in red , 1gt0-c <dig> , and 1o4x-a <dig> ). figure  <dig> shows that all ubx-like homeodomains are significantly more conserved than oct- <dig> pou homeodomains on contact residues . the ubx homeodomain binds together with the extradenticle homeodomain  to recognize four dna bases   <cit>  based on four residues that are ile <dig>  gln <dig>  asn <dig>  and met <dig>  locating at α <dig> helix in the ubx . the z-scores of the domains are higher if they are conserved on these four residues, such as three antennapedia homeodomains and two homeobox protein hox. these results show that contact residues interacting with bases in the dna sequences are often conserved. this result is consistent to previous results  <cit>  in which the homeodomain family was considered as a multi-specific family that consists of some subfamilies. this work concluded that members in the same subfamily bind dna specifically but the members in different subfamilies recognize different dna targets. in summary, we demonstrated the conservation of dna-contact residues in dna-binding domains.

CONCLUSIONS
the contact residues of dna-binding domains are useful in discriminating dna-binding domains from non-dna-binding domains in a novel protein sequence. our method, which considers evolutionary conservation of dna-binding residues, can achieve high precision and recall for  <dig> families of dna-binding domains, with a false positive rate less than 5% for  <dig> non-dna-binding proteins. in addition, our method is able to identify the different dna-binding behaviors of proteins in the same scop family based on the evolutionary conservation of dna-contact residues. we also discussed the mutation of contact residues of dna-binding domains can possibly change the bound dna sequences. it implies that the co-change of dna-contact residues and their dna-binding bases.

