BACKGROUND
in situ hybridization is the method of choice to characterize the spatial distribution of gene transcripts during embryonic development as well as in adult tissues. initial protocols used isotope-labeled nucleotide probes for detection of transcripts on tissue sections  <cit> . a major methodological advance was the introduction of non-radioactive digoxigenin-labeled probes that permitted for the first time to visualize global gene expression patterns in drosophila embryos  <cit> . this set the starting point for detection of global transcript distributions in complete tissues, organs and embryos of invertebrate and vertebrate model species. another milestone was the development of multicolor whole-mount in situ hybridization  procedures for differential color visualization of two or more mrnas in one and the same embryo  <cit> . in the original method for zebrafish embryos, digoxigenin- and fluorescein-labeled rna probes were together hybridized and sequentially visualized by two rounds of alkaline phosphatase  detection using fast red and bcip/nbt as differential colorimetric substrates  <cit> . this protocol has been used to compare numerous regulatory gene expression domains in the developing zebrafish brain  <cit> .

fast red forms a red precipitate, which can be fluorescently visualized using texas red or rhodamine filter sets  <cit> . fast red in combination with elf  substrate  <cit>  has been used for initial tries of two-color fluorescent in situ hybridization  based on ap detection in zebrafish and mouse  <cit> . however, the low sensitivity and speckled signal of the elf substrate did not produce satisfactory results, so that a second powerful fluorescent ap substrate for whole-mount fish was missing. therefore, current whole-mount fish protocols instead apply horseradish peroxidase  and fluorescent tyramide substrates for signal amplification  <cit> . the signal enhancement in combination with the availability of a number of different fluorescent tyramide substrates made multicolor whole-mount fish possible  <cit> . however, pod is inactivated by substrate excess, so that enzymatic activity is rather quickly quenched. consequently, the tyramide signal amplification  reaction can last productively only for less than  <dig> minutes. this is often not sufficient for detection of lower expressed transcripts. in contrast, ap-based substrate turn over can last over hours because of long-lasting enzymatic activity and high signal-to-noise ratio. furthermore, because of relatively high background autofluorescence of zebrafish embryos and substrate trapping in the hydrophobic yolk the introduction of the tsa system into multiplex fish applications for this model organism was problematic. as a consequence, a current protocol tried to compensate for the lowered sensitivity by using additional layers of antibody detection for signal amplification, which made the procedure even longer and more laborious  <cit> .

to make use of the benefits of both, long-lasting enzymatic activity of ap as well as tyramide signal amplification of pod, we aimed to combine the two detection systems for two-color whole-mount fish. we show here that aside fast red also fast blue  <cit>  produces chromogenic as well as fluorescent signals. to increase signal strength of fast dyes, we optimized embryo permeabilization properties and hybridization efficiency, respectively, by hydrogen peroxide treatment and addition of dextran sulfate to the hybridization reaction. the resulting increased signal intensities allowed us to combine ap-fast dye and pod-tsa detection for two-channel fluorescent visualization of different mrna probes. because of the different reporter systems applied only one antibody incubation step was necessary and an antibody-enzyme conjugate inactivation step could be omitted resulting in reduced working steps and time spent.

RESULTS
effect of dextran sulfate in ap-based chromogenic wish
an essential component of successfully performing a wish experiment is to achieve reasonably high signal sensitivities. since addition of viscosity-increasing polymers could improve pod-based fish signals  <cit> , we tested in a pilot experiment whether addition of dextran sulfate to the hybridization reaction would improve signal sensitivity in ap-based wish. 24-hpf zebrafish embryos were hybridized to a sim1a-specific digoxigenin probe with or without addition of 5% dextran sulfate to the hybridization mix and transcripts were visualized by ap-based bcip/nbt staining under identical conditions and staining times . expression of sim1a in the embryonic rostral brain was detected by both samples, but expression sites were much stronger visualized in dextran sulfate treated embryos . less pronounced expression sites in the basal brain and pronephric primordium could easily be missed in embryos hybridized without dextran sulfate addition  as compared to dextran-treated embryos . the positive effect of dextran sulfate is probably due to a molecular crowding effect that may lead to a local increase of probe concentration  <cit> .

optimization of fast dye signal strength
we previously showed that fast red and fast blue could be applied to chromogenic visualization of transcripts in wish experiments in drosophila and zebrafish embryos  <cit> . for two-color experiments it is essential to achieve high signal intensities and signal-to-noise ratios with both probes. however, fast dyes are less sensitive than standard bcip/nbt staining. we therefore tested whether presence of dextran sulfate in the hybridization mix would improve signal intensity when using fast red or fast blue as substrates. 24-hpf zebrafish embryos were hybridized to a dinitrophenol-labeled antisense rna probe specific for shha and visualized using fast red or fast blue as substrates . both, fast red and fast blue substrate deposition was dramatically increased in dextran sulfate treated  as compared to untreated embryos  under otherwise identical conditions and staining times.

to further improve signal sensitivities we aimed to improve accessibility of embryos for probes and antibody-enzyme conjugates. in previous experiments we made use of hydrogen peroxide to block endogenous peroxidase activity of embryos. we thereby noticed that this treatment lead to improved signal intensities. because hydrogen peroxide can disrupt cell membranes, we sought to explore the possibility whether hydrogen peroxide would be useful to improve embryo permeabilization properties. prior to standard proteinase k digestion, we treated the fixed embryos with 2% hydrogen peroxide. hydrogen peroxide treatment resulted in slightly improved signal detection  and when hydrogen peroxide permeabilized embryos were hybridized in the presence of dextran sulfate strongest signal intensities were obtained .

next, we applied fast blue in combination with fast red to chromogenic two-color detection of nkx <dig>  and pax6a . expression of nkx <dig>  was visualized by ap-fast blue staining. after inactivation of the first applied antibody-ap conjugate, pax6a expression was revealed by ap-fast red chromogenic reaction. in ap-based two-color experiments the second detection round is less sensitive than the first one, so that the positive effects of hydrogen peroxide for improved embryo permeabilization were even more obvious. chromogenic detection of pax6a transcripts by ap-fast red as second round staining revealed that an optimal signal was obtained within  <dig> hours staining time in hydrogen peroxide permeabilized embryos. in contrast, embryos that were not permeabilized with hydrogen peroxide developed barely detectable chromogenic signals within the same staining time. comparably strong signals were however obtained after prolonged fast red staining of  <dig> hours .

chromogenic and fluorescent wish using fast dyes as ap substrates
fast red forms a red precipitate that can be fluorescently visualized using rhodamine filter sets as exemplified here by chromogenic and fluorescent detection of pax6a transcript distribution in the forebrain and hindbrain at  <dig> hpf . to test whether fast blue is comparably useful for fluorescent mrna detection, we hybridized 24-hpf zebrafish embryos with an nkx <dig> -specific digoxigenin probe followed by ap-fast blue detection . expression of nkx <dig>  in the basal fore- and midbrain and along the ventral hindbrain and spinal cord could be clearly shown by fast blue precipitate deposition  as well as fluorescent visualization using far-red filter sets . fluorescent detection  revealed corresponding transcript distributions as those obtained with chromogenic substrate deposition  confirming the specificity of the fluorescent signal.

it is certainly possible to combine fast blue and fast red for chromogenic two-color wish  <cit>  and we revealed clearly abutting expression patterns of nkx <dig>  and pax6a in the experiment presented . however, two-color fluorescent visualization of transcripts cannot be recommended using both fast dyes together, since fast red and fast blue display overlapping red fluorescence emission, leading to significant bleed-through between channels . in addition, the two chromogenic precipitates formed during the ap-reaction can obscure each other's fluorescent signal. therefore, it may be more advantageous to combine ap-fast dye and pod-tsa fluorescent detection systems.

combination of ap and pod systems
we tested the versatility of combining ap and pod substrate reactions for fluorescent detection of different transcripts. a prerequisite of using fast dyes in two-color fish is to identify whether there is bleed-through  <cit>  between the chosen detection windows. since zebrafish embryos have significantly high cyan and uv, but rather low red and green autofluorescence  <cit> , we sought to best combine fast dye and green tsa-carboxyfluorescein  for two-channel fluorescence detection.

in single-color fish experiments, pax6a and nkx <dig>  were visualized by fast red and tsa-fam fluorescence detection, respectively, and each expression pattern was recorded in both detection channels . forebrain expression of pax6a was appropriately visualized in the fast red  and not in the tsa-fam detection channel . in contrast, nkx <dig>  expression in the fore- and midbrain was visualized in both, the tsa-fam  and the fast red  detection channel, although somewhat weaker in the latter one. this indicated significant bleed-through of tsa-fam fluorescence into the fast red channel. these results strongly suggested that caution had to be taken to exclude false-positive co-localization, when choosing these two substrates in a two-color fish experiment.

there was no bleed-through observed, however, between the fast blue and tsa-fam detection channels . detection of pax6a by fast blue revealed a specific signal in the appropriate  but not in the tsa-fam detection channel . despite a very strong nkx <dig>  tsa-fam signal was visualized , it could not be detected in the fast blue detection channel . these results demonstrated the versatility of combining fast blue and tsa-fam for two-color fish.

application of fast dyes in two-color fish
we combined pod-tsa-fam and ap-fast red  or ap-fast blue  detection systems to directly compare expression of nkx <dig>  and pax6a in the same embryo. as described previously  <cit> , expression of pax6a was confined to distinct domains in the telencephalon and diencephalon. in the alar diencephalon, expression of pax6a was confined to the prethalamus/prethalamic eminence, thalamus/epithalamus and pretectum  corresponding to alar parts of prosomeres  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> , respectively  <cit> . in addition, a separate pax6a cell group was found in the mantle layer of the pretectal basal plate. expression of nkx <dig>  extended in a longitudinal domain along the ventral brain . from the midbrain tegmentum nkx <dig>  expression extended rostrally into the diencephalic basal plate beneath the pretectal pax6a expression domain . interestingly, nkx <dig>  expression precisely spared out the basal pax6a stripe confined to b <dig>  and extended in a more ventral domain up to the b1/b <dig> boundary. in addition, few nkx <dig> -positive cells were located more rostrally beneath the pax6a-positive thalamus and anterior to the basal pax6a domain . these nkx <dig>  cells were thus localized to b <dig> . our results indicate that nkx <dig>  expression is consistent with prosomeric subdivisions of the basal zebrafish diencephalon  <cit> . furthermore, basal forebrain expression of zebrafish nkx <dig>  is very similar to that of orthologous genes. in amniotes, nkx <dig>  expression was reported to extend anteriorly into the region of basal p <dig> and p <dig>  <cit> . this suggests a conservation of nkx <dig>  gene expression in the basal diencephalon of anamniotes and amniotes. in conclusion, our results demonstrate the versatility of using fast dye fluorescent detection in combination with pod-tsa-fam in two-color fish in order to compare differently localized gene expression domains at high resolution .

when comparing fast red and fast blue fluorescence signals we noted a sharp localization of the fast blue signal that allowed cellular resolution of transcript visualization  while fast red sometimes produced a little less localized signal . this suggested that fast red was more prone to diffusion of reaction products away from the site of enzymatic activity before precipitation, which may affect target resolution. in addition, prolonged fast red staining times could result in formation of spurious crystals  and nonspecific background staining, while this was less of a problem with fast blue. in our hands, fast blue seemed slightly more sensitive than fast red as we obtained comparable signals within shorter staining times .

we showed that ap-based fast blue fluorescent detection in the far-red can be optimally combined with pod-based green fluorogenic tsa substrates excluding crosstalk and bleed-through in two-color experiments. since fast blue emission is in the far-red, it can easily be combined with green and blue fluorochromes in two-channel fluorescence detection experiments. fast red, which has an emission spectrum closer to the green fam resulting in potential bleed-through , may be combined with cyan fluorochromes . however, there is high uv and significant cyan autofluorescence in zebrafish embryos, which makes fluorescent signals in these channels more difficult to be resolved from background  <cit> .

current multiplex fish methods  <cit>  require serial rounds of enzymatic amplification and effective inactivation, potentially leading to progressive degradation of samples and reduced sensitivities of subsequent detection rounds. these difficulties may be circumvented by application of different enzymatic detection systems, as described here, allowing for one-step antibody detection. another recent multiplexed fish method used in situ hybridization chain reaction  for signal amplification  <cit> . hcr amplifiers operate independently in the same sample at the same time, allowing simultaneous detection of multiple target mrnas, so that sample degradation of sequential detection procedures can be elegantly avoided. another feature of this method is the use of short rna probes and hairpins that are supposed to easily penetrate sample tissues. in this study, we optimized embryo permeabilization properties by hydrogen peroxide treatment and hybridization conditions by application of the viscosity-increasing polymer dextran sulfate for increased signal intensities. these measurements may be similarly beneficial for sample penetration and hybridization of short rna probes and hairpins as described by  <cit>  as well as locked nucleic acid -modified dna probes used for detection of mirnas  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
one advantage of our protocol is that pod and ap coupled antibodies can be simultaneously applied, so that just one detection step is required and inactivation of antibody-reporter enzyme conjugates is omitted. therefore, hands-on time and duration of the complete procedure are considerably reduced and the problem of false-positive signals by insufficient reporter enzyme inactivation is eliminated. when dextran sulfate was included in the hybridization mixture and hydrogen peroxide permeabilized embryos were used the staining time to achieve a strong signal was significantly shortened, which was advantageous for minimizing upcoming background and improving signal-to-noise ratio.

since pod activity is rather quickly quenched by excess substrate, less abundant transcripts can often not be efficiently visualized despite tyramide signal amplification  <cit> . ap-fast blue fluorescent detection may provide a helpful alternative, as no enzyme inactivation is associated with the ap substrate reaction. therefore, signal development can be extended at a high signal-to-noise ratio resulting in stronger signal intensities. the applicability of fast blue in fluorescent rna visualization increases the number of possible substrate combinations to choose from. this may allow improved adjustment of detection systems and substrate combinations according to individual requirements of a specific two-color fish experiment . in addition, fast red and fast blue permit colorimetric as well as fluorescent transcript visualization, so that both types of data can be photographically documented and compared. this can be of advantage as fluorescence detection alone lacks histological context. thus, our protocol provides a useful alternative method to study expression patterns in relation to each other. we applied our method for comparison of expression domains of neural specific regulatory genes, but this protocol will also be useful for two-color detection of transcripts in other tissues or organs and may be adapted for use in various model organism aside zebrafish.

pod-tsa-
▪ combine fluorescence and dic optics, if histological context is required
▪ if the weaker probe cannot be detected by tsa-fam or fast red, prolonged fast blue staining may be helpful for visualization
▪ combine fluorescence and dic optics, if histological context is required
▪ for colorimetric detection of two mrnas
▪ overlap of two mrna distributions may be difficult to visualize at cellular resolution 
▪ combination of fluorescent and chromogenic detection is possible
