BACKGROUND
the aquaculture industry has confronted severe economic losses due to infectious diseases in recent years  <cit> . therefore, control methods against infections and a thorough comprehension of resistance mechanisms are needed. salmonid rickettsial septicaemia  is a bacterial disease that accounts for annual losses of over us$ <dig> million in the chilean salmon farming industry  <cit> . piscirickettsia salmonis, the causative agent of srs, was first identified as a pathogenic agent in disease outbreaks among farmed chilean coho salmon  in  <dig>  and since then, infectivity has been demonstrated in all cultured salmonid species, from the south of chile to the northern hemisphere . this pathogen has the ability to infect, replicate, and propagate in salmonid monocytes/macrophages  <cit> , and it produces a systemic infection characterized by the colonization of several organs, including the kidney, liver, spleen, intestine, brain, ovary, and gills  <cit> . to date, the mechanisms employed by p. salmonis to infect, survive, and proliferate within host cells remain unknown.

studies on the fish response to this pathogen have principally analysed changes in gene expression following bacterial infection  <cit> . rise et al.  <cit>  reported altered expression levels of transcripts encoding proteins with roles in the antioxidant response and innate immunity in atlantic salmon  macrophages  and head kidney cells  with p. salmonis infection  <cit> . likewise, tacchi et al.  <cit>  analysed the early response  to p. salmonis in the liver, head kidney cells, and muscle of atlantic salmon and found activated inflammatory and oxidative defence response mechanisms. thus, transcriptome analyses have provided evidence of cellular processes that may play a role in the host response to p. salmonis infection.

recent studies have reported significant genetic variation for resistance to p. salmonis infection in atlantic salmon families  <cit> , and heritability estimates range from  <dig>  to  <dig>  , indicating that this trait might be genetically improved. therefore it is of particular interest to examine the transcriptomic response of atlantic salmon to p. salmonis infection considering genetic background. this approach will provide insight on the biological mechanisms that lead to genetic differences in resistance. in other economically important fish species, variances in gene expression between resistant and susceptible genetic groups have identified genes and pathways underlying differences in infection resistance .

in the present study, we analysed the transcriptional response to p. salmonis in groups of atlantic salmon families with low or high susceptibility to infection. our study aims to contribute to the current understanding of resistance mechanisms to p. salmonis infection.

RESULTS
differential susceptibility of atlantic salmon families to p. salmonis infection
in this study, groups of approximately  <dig> fish from forty full-sibling atlantic salmon families were used in controlled experimental challenges. tagged fish were infected by intra-peritoneal injection  with p. salmonis  and randomly distributed among ten tanks in order to reduce the possibility of bias during fish culturing and handling. even though an ip challenge is not a natural form of infection, it is an effective method for presenting a naïve animal with a known and controlled amount of bacteria  <cit> . cumulative fish mortality was used as a measure of susceptibility to p. salmonis as survival reflects the cumulative effects of all host-pathogen interactions during infection and is therefore the best criteria to determine the level of susceptibility  <cit> . the cumulative mortalities of fish families injected with p. salmonis ranged from  <dig> to  <dig>  % at  <dig> dpi , with most families presenting cumulative mortalities between  <dig> and 16 % . in families with some degree of mortality, fish showed several clinical signs characteristic of infection: lethargy, anorexia, darkening of the skin, respiratory distress, and/or surface swimming  <cit> . to confirm the presence of p. salmonis in the challenged fish, the 16s rrna gene of p. salmonis was quantified using real-time pcr  in at least three fish from each family. results indicated that the bacterium was present in the head kidney and spleen of all challenged fish, whereas unchallenged control fish presented negative results . based on cumulative mortality data, two groups of families were defined . the low susceptibility  group was comprised of families with cumulative mortalities of 0 %, and the high susceptibility  group included families with a cumulative mortality greater than 30 %. in both groups, mortality caused by p. salmonis began  <dig> to  <dig> dpi , but variances in cumulative mortality were evidenced by the end of the first challenge. the results of the first challenge indicated a differential distribution of cumulative mortality among infected families, suggesting that the susceptibility of fish families to p. salmonis infection is a result of differences in the genetic backgrounds.fig.  <dig> cumulative mortality following p. salmonis infection. forty full-sibling atlantic salmon families were challenged for 40 days with an intra-peritoneal dose of p. salmonis . families were enumerated according to their cumulative percentages of mortality. the families with the highest mortality levels  were named families of high susceptibility , while the families with the lowest mortality levels  were named families of low susceptibility 



the influence of genetic factors on fish susceptibility to p. salmonis  <cit>  and other bacterial infections has been previously reported in other fish species  <cit> . for example, camp et al.  <cit>  challenged fifteen full-sibling families of juvenile channel catfish  with the bacterium edwardsiella ictaluri, the causative agent of enteric septicemia of catfish. cumulative mortalities among families ranged from  <dig> to 35 %. using the most resistant and sensitive families, they also detected differences between families in macrophage aggregations and in the amount of lymphocytes  in peripheral blood. in a different work, the expression of transcripts encoding for complement component  <dig>  and lysozyme c ii were induced to a greater extent in a resistant rainbow trout  line compared to a susceptible line in response to flavobacterium psychrophilum infection  <cit> . moreover, changes in the expression of transcripts encoding several toll-like receptors and innate immune components were observed in genetic groups of catfish  and japanese flounder  with different susceptibilities to edwardsiella spp infection  <cit> . thus, the results of these and other studies indicate an association between infection susceptibility levels in fish and changes in the relative abundances of transcripts involved in immune and stress responses, among other processes.

gene expression analysis of ls and hs families
for gene expression analysis, a second group of naïve fish belonging to the six most resistant and six most susceptible families  was ip injected with p. salmonis. fish from each family were divided into control  and treated  groups, and head kidney samples from each fish were collected at  <dig> dpi, before the onset of mortality, and analysed using microarrays. no differences in fish weight between ls  and hs  or between control and infected groups were observed. head kidney samples were also examined using qpcr assays to confirm the presence of p. salmonis in all ip-injected fish and its absence in control fish.

three ls and three hs families were selected for microarray assays. for each assay, head kidney rna from groups of five non-infected and five infected individuals were pooled, reverse transcribed, and hybridized to microarrays. in order to produce a general description of the transcriptional response to p. salmonis in fish families with different susceptibilities to the infection, each of the three ls families and each of the three hs families were regarded as biological replicates of the high and low susceptibility groups, respectively .

results indicated that  <dig> and  <dig> probes were differentially expressed  adjusted, p <  <dig> ) between infected and non-infected fish of the ls and hs groups, respectively . fold change  values of differentially expressed probes were well correlated  between the two groups of families , indicating that the response to p. salmonis infection was similar in terms of these indicators. a complete list of probes differentially expressed following bacterial infection is shown in additional file  <dig>  some of these probes contained different regions of the same genes or paralogs. a total of  <dig> probe sets  were differentially expressed between infected and non-infected fish of the ls group, of which  <dig> probe sets corresponded to genes with predicted functions. for the hs group, statistically significant gene expression differences between infected and non-infected fish were observed for a total of  <dig> probe sets , of which  <dig> corresponded to genes with predicted functions.fig.  <dig> global transcriptome response of fish head kidney to p. salmonis infection. a venn diagram of differentially expressed probes between infected and control fish from ls and hs families. b representation of fold change  of all common probes significantly modulated by p. salmonis infection in ls  and hs  families. parameters of the linear regression are indicated



to validate results from the microarrays, the relative transcript abundance of a random set of  <dig> genes was examined by qpcr. a microarray result was considered validated when the rna expression profile of a gene is statistically differential in response to infection and followed the same trend when tested by both microarray and qpcr in the six families. among the  <dig> genes that were subjected to validation,  <dig>  displayed the same trend observed in the microarray analysis of the six families . overall, a strong positive correlation of  <dig>   was determined between microarray and qpcr analyses for the combined data set  . thus, although qpcr showed a broader dynamic range than microarrays, these two platforms correlated well with each other.fig.  <dig> qpcr validation of microarray results. mean log <dig> ratios  of gene expression  calculated from microarrays were plotted against the mean log <dig> ratios derived from qpcr assays. each circle represents the mean of five technical replicate . correlation between microarrays and qpcr was calculated by pearson product moment correlation and a p <  <dig>  was considered statistically significant



common transcriptional response of ls and hs families to p. salmonis infection
we determined the number of common  probe sets that were significantly up-  or down-regulated  in the two groups of families following p. salmonis infection; a list of representative shared genes is shown in table  <dig> . of the genes that increased their expression in response to infection, we detected functional categories that were associated with the antibacterial response, such as the immune response, energy metabolism, and cytoskeleton rearrangement, among others  <cit> . in particular, among transcripts encoding proteins with predicted roles in the innate immune response we found lysozyme c ii , which has a hydrolytic activity against gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria in tissues and body fluids  <cit> . its increased transcript abundance and enzyme activity has been widely described in fish infected with different pathogens  <cit> , indicating a conserved and relevant function in antimicrobial defence. additionally, among the transcripts with functions involved in the adaptive immune response, one was found that encoded for a component of the major histocompatibility complex  class i . moreover, the expression of some components linked to the organization and regulation of the actin cytoskeleton, such as cytoplasmic actin, thymosin, tropomyosin, and myosin light chains, were also up-regulated. in this regard, dynamic rearrangements and the organization of the actin cytoskeleton are critical for lymphocyte migration, as well as for the formation and stabilization of the immunological synapse at the interface between antigen-presenting cells and t cells  <cit> .table  <dig> representative probe sets differentially expressed between infected and non-infected fish

genebank ida

agenbank accession numbers of probes


bfold change between infected and non-infected fish represented as log <dig> of expression ratio


ctentative annotation of the best match according to blastx or blastn against nr genbank database


dan adjusted p <  <dig>  indicated that gene expression level was significantly altered following bacterial infection. complete list of differentially expressed probes is available in additional file 2




on the other hand, genes that had a significantly lower expression in response to infection were associated with different cellular processes and provided some insights on how this pathogen modulates the host response. thus, transcripts that showed decreased relative abundance following bacterial infection were mainly involved in the processes of protein synthesis , transport of oxygen and selenium, and homeostasis of metals. twenty-four probe sets encoding 40s ribosomal subunit proteins and  <dig> encoding 60s ribosomal subunit proteins were down-regulated in response to infection, suggesting that the transcriptional repression of translation machinery might be an antibacterial response or part of a general reduction in host metabolic activity. it has been suggested that the shut-down of translation machinery is a bacterial and viral strategy to control the translation of pathogenic proteins  and to suppress innate host defences by inhibiting the capacity of infected cells to synthesize immune system proteins  <cit> . this strategy may be used by p. salmonis to control the host response in order to survive and replicate inside infected cells  <cit> . since large numbers of probe sets represent the same protein or processes, these results suggest a coordinated gene expression response to p. salmonis infection.

the relative abundance of transcripts encoding for hemoglobin subunits and selenoprotein p was also significantly decreased in response to infection, suggesting that p. salmonis might impact the plasma transport of oxygen/iron and selenium. the down-regulation of hemoglobin subunits may be part of a host defence mechanism to limit the availability of hemic-iron, an important source of iron for intracellular bacteria . moreover, decreased relative abundance of transcripts encoding for proteins involved in intracellular non-hemic iron binding  and in hemic binding  suggest that p. salmonis infection induces changes in iron metabolism in atlantic salmon. these changes may affect the expression of genes directly involved in the synthesis of hemoglobin, as has been reported for other pathogens  <cit> . finally, selenoprotein p, an extracellular protein that transports most plasma selenium  <cit> , was consistently down-regulated following infection. selenoprotein p has been associated with oxidative  <cit>  and immune defence  <cit>  mechanisms, and it has been proposed as a viable candidate molecular marker for responses to p. salmonis  <cit>  and anaemia virus   <cit>  infections. thus, the down-regulation of selenoprotein p transcripts seems to be a conserved response to different types of pathogens infecting atlantic salmon.

since knowing the processes in which differentially expressed genes are involved helps to understand the host-pathogen interaction, a functional analysis was used to identify biological processes  and metabolic pathways  in all probe sets, including those that were mutually or distinctly up- or down-regulated in the family groups . functional annotation of genes with increased expression highlighted the central place of immune processes, such as toll-like receptor signalling, bacterial infection , and phagosome/lysosome pathways, which are crucial for innate immune responses involved in the recognition, phagocytosis, and degradation of pathogens  <cit> . genes with decreased expression in both ls and hs families were mainly annotated to functional categories associated with protein complex assembly and translation. this result was consistent with that obtained with the functional analysis of shared down-regulated genes, and it strengthens the idea that p. salmonis hijacks the translation machinery of the host cell. in addition to this, hemopoiesis was another common functional term among down-regulated probes, and this might reflect the fish response to anaemia induced by p. salmonis infection .table  <dig> functional annotation of common probes significantly up- or down-regulated in ls and hs groups of families




aontology accession numbers 


bontology source, biological process , kegg and reactome


contology term and


dontology level associated


enumber of genes found in a given ontology category within the analysed list of target probes



gene expression differences in ls and hs families following the p. salmonis infection
we hierarchically clustered the complete list of probes differentially expressed between infected and non-infected fish from the ls and hs families , and a correlation analysis was applied to measure the degree of association among the gene expression patterns of the six families. a pearson correlation  and euclidian distance  were used as metrics, and an average linkage clustering described the data. both clustering analyses clearly separated the three ls families from the three hs families in two distinct branches and showed a close proximity among families with similar levels of susceptibility to infection. these results suggest that salmon families with different levels of susceptibility to the infection differentially modulate transcript abundance in response to the pathogen.

to further examine the varied responses to p. salmonis infection between ls and hs families, and to identify potential mechanisms of natural resistance, we analysed the biological processes and metabolic pathways in two groups of probe sets differentially expressed between infected and non-infected fish . the first group included  <dig> probe sets that were significantly modulated  in the ls but not the hs group. the second group included  <dig> probe sets that were up-regulated in ls families but down-regulated in hs families. analysis of these underlined the central place occupied by both innate and adaptive immune systems, as represented by transcripts encoding for complement proteins , myeloperoxidase , cxc and cc chemokines and receptors, interleukin 18b, and immunoglobulins . interestingly, whereas the alpha polypeptide of mhc class i was up-regulated in both ls and hs families, β2-microglobulin, another polypeptide of mhc class i, was consistently down-regulated only in hs families.table  <dig> functional annotation of genes differentially expressed between ls and hs in response to p. salmonis infection





aontology accession numbers 


bontology source, biological process , kegg and reactome


contology term and


dontology level associated


enumber of genes found in a given ontology category within the analysed list of target probes



it is worth mentioning that the characterization of host transcriptional changes at a late stage of p. salmonis infection  included genes directly involved in fighting infection, as well as genes involved in general physiological processes. among these were genes with predicted functions in histone modification, protein folding, and carbohydrate and fatty acid metabolism . this observation suggests that potential infection biomarkers could be involved in more general cellular processes and may not be limited to genes directly involved in the immune response.

differential activation of the iron-depletion system in ls and hs families after p. salmonis infection
the functional classification of genes differentially expressed between infected and non-infected fish revealed that part of the core response to p. salmonis infection included the down-regulation of several probes representing transcripts that encode for heme-proteins , heme-binding proteins , and non-hemic iron binding proteins . moreover, transferrin, the iron-binding glycoprotein that transports iron in the plasma  <cit> , was up-regulated in ls but down-regulated in hs families. however, hepcidin, the principal regulator of iron efflux in vertebrates, which controls access of iron into circulation  <cit> , was significantly up-regulated in hs families but not in ls families . these results suggest that the regulation of iron homeostasis could be crucial for the natural resistance of atlantic salmon to p. salmonis infection.

based on the central role that iron plays in both pathogen virulence and host anti-microbial resistance  <cit> , we further examined whether differences in iron content and metabolism could be detected between ls and hs families in response to p. salmonis infection. to do this, the total iron content in non-infected and infected fish head kidneys was measured. head kidney iron content ranged between  <dig>  and  <dig>  μg fe/mg dry weights in non-infected fish from all families regardless of susceptibility . however, at  <dig> dpi with p. salmonis, a significantly lower level of iron content was detected in infected fish from all ls families and in only one of the hs families  . since there is evidence for a metabolic interaction between trace metals such as fe and zn  <cit> , zn content was also assessed in infected fish families. the zn content was similar in control fish of the ls and hs families, and levels were unaffected by infection . in view of the importance that iron availability has for bacterial proliferation  <cit> , bacterial load was measured in infected tissues . the results showed that the bacterial load was significantly lower in ls compared to hs families, indicating a positive correlation between the bacterial load and the iron content in kidneys after infection. this is a relevant aspect because it has been demonstrated that iron depletion limits intracellular bacterial growth in murine macrophage models  <cit> .fig.  <dig> cellular iron and zinc content in infected and non-infected fish from ls and hs families. a cellular content of iron  in dry weight  head kidneys  from non-infected  and infected tissues . b cellular content of zinc  in dry weight  head kidneys  from non-infected  and infected tissues . in all case, bars represent the mean of five biological replicate determinations ; *, p <  <dig>  

the bacterial load  was measured by qpcr in infected head kidneys from fish from ls and hs families. results were normalized relative to the abundance of elongation factor  <dig> alpha  transcript



as iron content between ls and hs families was similar without infection, the correlation between decreased metal content, reduced bacterial load, and pathogen resistance might be explained by an ability of ls families to reduce iron content in the head kidney in response to infection, and not by the iron status preceding infection. this suggests that decreased cellular iron content is a physiological response to infection.

to begin to understand the molecular mechanisms by which fish are able to reduce iron content in response to the infection, we first measured the relative abundance of transcripts with potential functions in iron transport and metabolism in both infected and non-infected fish kidneys from every ls and hs family. the data revealed that following infection, the ls <dig> family decreased the abundance of transcripts encoding iron uptake transporters , whereas families ls <dig> and ls <dig> increased the abundance of transcripts encoding for the efflux transporter  . this might account for the reduced cellular iron measured after infection, as has been reported for salmonella infection in murine macrophages  <cit> .fig.  <dig> expression analysis of iron metabolism genes in head kidneys from infected and non-infected fish. relative changes in the expression of genes were determined using qpcr in non-infected  and infected fish  from ls and hs families. for each gene the relative abundance of mrna was normalized towards the elongation factor  <dig> alpha  mrna. bars represent the mean of five replicate determinations ; *, p <  <dig>  



although hs families were also able to modify the abundance of transcripts encoding iron transporters after infection, in some cases, modulation was opposite to that observed in ls families. for example, the hs <dig> family  showed a significant increase in the abundance of dmt <dig> transcripts and a decrease in the abundance of transcripts encoding for ireg <dig>  the hs <dig> family, the only hs family that showed a significant decrease in iron content, displayed increased ireg <dig> while no changes were detected for uptake transporters. on the other hand, the hs <dig> family had a decreased abundance of uptake transporters without alterations in the abundance of ireg <dig>  since the hs <dig> family was not able to reduce cellular iron content in response to infection, this suggests that ireg1activity may be pivotal to reduce iron availability in infected fish. interestingly, the transcript encoding for the peptide hepcidin, which causes ferroportin internalization and degradation  <cit> , was up-regulated only in those families that did not reduce iron abundance following infection, thus supporting the idea that the regulation of iron efflux is fundamental for reducing the intracellular content of this metal.

finally, the effect of p. salmonis infection on the abundance of transferrin  and ferritin light chain  transcripts was evaluated. these encode for ubiquitous proteins that bind and store extracellular and intracellular iron, respectively  <cit> . results showed a significant increase in the abundance of trf and ferl in all ls families and a reduction of trf in two hs families, suggesting that infected fish were able to trigger strategies to limit the access of p. salmonis to cellular iron with different efficiencies between ls and hs families. in view of this, our results support that the iron-deprivation mechanism of nutritional immunity  <cit>  could be an important defence mechanism against p. salmonis infection.

genome sequence of p. salmonis reveals the presence of iron-acquisition genes
to cope with iron-deprivation mechanisms, pathogens have evolved mechanisms for iron acquisition that are tightly controlled by the availability of iron in the environment  <cit> . herein, we sought to identify p. salmonis iron acquisition genes that could act as potential virulence factors. to do this, we sequenced and annotated the genome of p. salmonis and identified a set of orthologous genes with reported roles in the synthesis and uptake of siderophores and heme, ferric iron active transport , ferrous iron acquisition, and transcriptional regulation . some features of these genes are shown in table  <dig> table  <dig> iron acquisition systems of p. salmonis




agenbank accession numbers


bopen reading frame


clength of gen 


dclosest annoted homolog in genbank by blastx against nr database


e e value and


fprotein identity 



from the genome sequence, three orthologous genes were predicted encoding for synthetases of vibrioferrin, an unusual marine carboxylate siderophore ; its membrane-spanning exporter ; and its tonb-dependent siderophore receptor   <cit> . all classic components of the exbb − exbd − tonb energy system were found, supporting the tonb-dependent active transport of iron siderophores across the outer bacterial membrane  <cit> . furthermore, components of both fhu and feo operons, required for the acquisition of hydroxamate siderophores   <cit>  and ferrous iron  <cit>  respectively, were predicted from the p. salmonis genome. finally, an orthologue of fur was also identified. fur controls the intracellular concentration of iron in bacteria, thus in the presence of intracellular iron, fur binds dna and represses the transcription of genes involved in siderophore biosynthesis and iron acquisition  <cit> .

a schematic representation of p. salmonis iron acquisition genes in a genetic context  shows that except for fur and fhua/hemer, genes were distributed into three separate iron gene clusters. the presence of these components suggests that p. salmonis can acquire iron through multiples mechanisms, including those for the transport of ferric and ferrous iron, heme iron, and both endogenous and exogenous siderophores. this allows us to presume that iron is a crucial element for the survival and virulence of p. salmonis. the capacity of pathogenic bacteria to acquire iron in an animal host is important for establishing infection  <cit> . since animal hosts have essentially no free iron but do have different heme sources, it is probable that mechanisms for heme capture are relevant during infection. moreover, orthologous genes that encode for hemolysin and its related secretion components  were also identified  <cit> . hemolysins are cytolytic toxins to erythrocytes and other cell types that are produced by some heme-acquiring bacteria and are considered to be virulence factors  <cit> . the presence of these genes in the p. salmonis genome is consistent with the haemorrhagic and anaemic response previously described in fish during p. salmonis infection  <cit> .fig.  <dig> putative siderophore biosynthesis and iron transport gene clusters of p. salmonis and fur binding-site prediction. a siderophore biosynthetic genes are indicated by black arrows. the congate siderophore/heme outer membrane receptor/exporter genes are depicted in white and the component of tonb-dependent active transport across the bacterial outer membrane system is in grey. green arrows denote components involved in the ferrous uptake system and blue arrows indicate ferric hydroxamate/heme uptake genes. a single homolog of the ferric uptake regulator  was predicted in p. salmonis genome. the blue box represents fur-binding sites. b sequence logo for predicted fur-binding sites in p. salmonis




to explore whether the predicted iron gene clusters were regulated by fur, we sought putative fur-binding sites in the whole genome of p. salmonis. for this purpose, the fur-binding site motif of γ-proteobacteria was reconstructed from  <dig> manually curated intergenic sequences, and this information was used to search for this motif in the entire p. salmonis genome. the sequence logo for the predicted fur-binding sites in p. salmonis is shown in fig. 6b.

the results indicated that two hundred open-reading frames  had at least one putative fur-binding site in the intergenic region upstream of the respective start codon . more importantly, a putative fur-binding site was found upstream of the three iron gene clusters described above , suggesting that these gene clusters might be regulated by fur and become activated during iron deficiency.

to address this, the bacterium was cultured for twelve days in a free-blood standard liquid media supplemented by  <dig>  mm of ferric iron  , which permitted optimum bacteria growth  <cit> . two other experimental conditions were also used; one without ferric iron  and another with  <dig>  mm of ferric iron supplementation, representing deficit and excess iron availability, respectively. data showed that carrying capacity  was significantly lower in both experimental conditions than in the reference condition, however no significant differences in growth rates  were observed under the different supplementation conditions . on the other hand, the intracellular bacterial contents of iron, measured by atomic absorption spectroscopy  during the exponential growth phase, showed that in the absence of iron supplementation there was a significant decrease in the intracellular concentration of iron when compared to the reference condition. however, no significant differences in iron contents were detected among bacteria grown in iron supplemented conditions . these results indicate that p. salmonis senses iron fluctuations in the environment and adaptively responds to both iron deficiency or excess, and since both conditions are deleterious for the bacteria, expression of acquisition and detoxification systems are finely regulated  <cit> .fig.  <dig> effect of iron availability on p. salmonis growth and expression of iron-acquisition genes. a growth curves of p. salmonis treated with three concentrations of iron supplementation  during twelve days. each point represents the mean of nine determinations ; *, p <  <dig>  . b iron content of p. salmonis treated with three concentrations of iron supplementation  during five days. columns represent the mean of five determinations ; *, p <  <dig>  . iron content was normalized towards mg of total proteins. c relative expression of iron acquisition genes was determined using qpcr. these genes were significantly modulated  in response to iron deficit in comparison with the iron supplemented conditions. the relative abundance of each mrna was normalized towards the recombinase a  mrna of p. salmonis. bars and numbers represent the mean value of five determinations . different colors represent different iron cluster genes



the expression of predicted iron acquisition genes under supplemented and non-supplemented iron conditions was also measured. a significant increase in the relative abundance of all predicted transcripts occurred in response to iron deficiency  as compared to both supplemented conditions . this behaviour was supported through a putative fur-binding site found present upstream of the three iron gene clusters described.

although fhua/hemer was not predicted as part of an iron gene cluster, and a fur box was not identified in its upstream region as has been described in other bacterial species  <cit> , the transcriptional behaviour of fhua/hemer indicates that it might be part of a still un-annotated polycistronic operon regulated by fur. however, future assays are necessary to confirm this hypothesis.

interestingly, the abundance of transcripts that encoded a putative fur transcription factor was significantly reduced in the iron-restricted condition. the absence of a predicted fur-binding site, and the role of furas a repressor of iron acquisition genes, support its transcriptional behaviour, which has also been reported in other bacterial species  <cit> . finally, from previously published information and the present results, we formulated a model for the possible spatial organization of the predicted proteins involved in iron acquisition in p. salmonis . in light of the severity of p. salmonis infection and the risk of acquiring antibiotic-resistant bacterial strains, fully describing iron acquisition systems and the roles of these in p. salmonis pathogenesis is a crucial step towards developing therapeutic agents.

to the best of our knowledge, this is the first study that compares the transcriptional response to p. salmonis infection among atlantic salmon families with different levels of susceptibility. nevertheless, this study has some limitations, for instance, fish were infected by intra-peritoneal injection, a method that does not represent the natural form of p. salmonis infection. moreover, for gene expression analysis, a single tissue  was sampled and only at one time-point, so we could have missed other differentially expressed transcripts that appear in other tissues affected by the infection and before and after  <dig> dpi. such issues can be addressed by using different infection protocols, multiple tissues and time-point measurements, and in future studies, by using rna sequencing in order to identify potential splicing variants and polymorphisms among salmon families, information that could be relevant to understand fish resistance to infection. another limitation of our study is that the complexity of p. salmonis genome only permitted us the assembly of a draft genome . thus, in order to identify the complete set of genes involved in iron metabolism and acquisition and their genetic contexts, further studies are necessary to assembly the complete p. salmonis genome.

CONCLUSIONS
we carried out experimental infection challenges against p. salmonis in atlantic salmon families. results revealed a heterogeneous distribution of cumulative mortality among families that may be explained by the genotype of the challenged families. to further explore these differences, we compared the transcriptional response between groups of families with different susceptibilities to p. salmonis infection. our results revealed distinctive gene expression profiles between ls and hs groups of families, and this led to the identification of biological processes possibly involved in natural resistance. in particular, the ability of fish from ls families to limit iron availability to the bacterium suggests that iron-deprivation represents a mechanism of innate immunity and resistance against p. salmonis. these data were complemented with predictions of iron acquisition systems in the p. salmonis genome. identification of putative fur boxes and the expression of these genes under iron-depleted conditions revealed that most form part of the fur regulon of p. salmonis. this information contributes to current understands on the varied responses of fish with different levels of susceptibility to p. salmonis infection and supports the development of future treatment strategies.

