BACKGROUND
the green algae are divided into the phyla streptophyta and chlorophyta. the streptophyta  encompasses the algae from the class charophyceae and all land plants, whereas the chlorophyta  contains algae from the classes prasinophyceae, ulvophyceae, trebouxiophyceae and chlorophyceae  <cit> . the basal position of the prasinophyceae in the chlorophyta is generally well established, but the branching order of the ulvophyceae, trebouxiophyceae and chlorophyceae  remains a matter of debate  <cit> . it has been proposed that a third lineage at the base of the streptophyta and chlorophyta is represented by mesostigma viride  <cit> , an alga traditionally classified within the prasinophytes. this green plant lineage, however, is debated, as some studies suggest that mesostigma is an early offshoot of the phylum streptophyta  <cit> .

investigations of chloroplast dna  from green algae representing each of the five recognized classes have revealed that the genomes of the charophyte chaetosphaeridium globosum  <cit>  and the prasinophytes mesostigma  <cit>  and nephroselmis olivacea  <cit>  are highly similar to those of land plants. like most land plants cpdnas, these green algal genomes are partitioned into a quadripartite architecture by two copies of a large inverted repeat  separating small  and large  single copy regions. most notably, the great majority of the genes occupying a given single copy region in prasinophyte genomes map to the same single copy region in chaetosphaeridium and land plant cpdnas. the increased structural stability of the chloroplast genome conferred by the ir sequence has been hypothesized to limit gene exchanges between the ssc and lsc regions  <cit> . the ir region readily expands or contracts and thus can easily gain or lose genes from the neighbouring single copy regions through a process known as the ebb and flow  <cit> . despite its variable gene content, the ir always features the ribosomal rna  operon -a-rrl-rrf) and this operon is always transcribed toward the ssc region. in addition to their characteristic pattern of gene partitioning, prasinophyte and streptophyte chloroplast genomes share a number of features that were most probably inherited from the progenitor of all green plant cpdnas. first, they have retained several gene clusters that date back to the cyanobacterial ancestor of all chloroplasts. second, their genes are densely packed and their intergenic regions virtually lack short dispersed repeats . finally, with  <dig> to  <dig> genes, their gene repertoire is one of the largest among green plant cpdnas.

in contrast, the chloroplast genome has been substantially reorganized in the utc. the quadripartite architecture has been lost from the genome of the trebouxiophyte chlorella vulgaris  <cit>  following the disappearance of one copy of the ir sequence. although the quadripartite architecture has been retained in the genome of the ulvophyte pseudendoclonium akinetum  <cit> , the ir sequence is atypical in featuring a rrna operon transcribed towards the lsc region  <cit> . in addition, the pattern of gene partitioning within the ssc/lsc regions of pseudendoclonium cpdna deviates significantly from those found in its prasinophyte and land plant counterparts; the small single copy region of this ulvophyte genome includes  <dig> genes that are usually located within the lsc region. in the chlorophycean alga chlamydomonas reinhardtii  <cit> , the two single copy regions are similar in size and the genes are so thoroughly scrambled that no distinction is possible between the ssc and lsc regions. the chlorella, pseudendoclonium and chlamydomonas chloroplast genomes have lost many of the ancestral gene clusters that are shared between mesostigma and nephroselmis cpdnas, feature a reduced gene content  compared to prasinophyte and streptophyte genomes, and contain sdrs in their intergenic regions. the low density of coding sequences in these genomes is explained not only by the smaller number of genes but also by the expansion of intergenic regions. moreover, unlike mesostigma and nephroselmis cpdnas, the chloroplast genomes of the three utc algae have acquired group i introns  and group ii introns .

to gain insights into the nature of the events that led to the reorganization of the chloroplast genome in the ulvophyceae, we have determined the complete cpdna sequence of oltmannsiellopsis viridis. this marine unicellular green alga exhibits a counterclockwise arrangement of basal bodies  <cit>  and a single cup-shaped chloroplast  <cit> . previously classified in the chlorophyceae  <cit> , oltmannsiellopsis is currently considered to be the type species of the order oltmannsiellopsidales   <cit> . the oltmannsiellopsidales have been shown to branch at the base of the ulvophyceae  <cit>  and have been used as outgroup for phylogenetic analyses of the ulvophyceae  <cit> . considering that pseudendoclonium represents a distinct, early diverging lineage of the ulvophyceae , identification of the set of features common to oltmannsiellopsis and pseudendoclonium cpdnas should throw light into the chloroplast genome architecture of the earliest diverging ulvophytes and, accordingly, into the cpdna changes that occurred in the separate lineages leading to oltmannsiellopsis and pseudendoclonium. we found that the ir-containing genome of oltmannsiellopsis differs considerably from its pseudendoclonium and other chlorophyte counterparts in intron content and gene order, but shares closer similarities with pseudendoclonium cpdna in terms of quadripartite architecture, gene content and gene density. in the context of the debate concerning the branching order of the utc lineages, the predicted architecture of the chloroplast genome of the earliest members of the ulvophyceae strengthens the notion that this lineage is sister to the chlorophyceae  <cit> .

RESULTS
general features
gene and intron contents
the gene content of oltmannsiellopsis cpdna is intermediate between those of chlorella and chlamydomonas cpdnas . although oltmannsiellopsis and pseudendoclonium cpdnas encode the same number of genes, these genomes differ slightly in their gene repertoire . oltmannsiellopsis cpdna has retained all three chl genes that are missing from pseudendoclonium cpdna but has lost ycf <dig>  trnl and trnr. relative to chlorella cpdna, the genomes of oltmannsiellopsis, pseudendoclonium and chlamydomonas are missing a set of five genes, i.e. cysa, cyst, and three trna genes , trns and trnt) . the absence of three genes  and trnr) is uniquely shared by oltmannsiellopsis and chlamydomonas cpdnas, whereas no specific gene loss is shared by pseudendoclonium and chlamydomonas cpdnas. both oltmannsiellopsis and pseudendoclonium cpdnas have retained the trnr gene, which is absent from all other completely sequenced chlorophyte cpdnas.

as in the utc chloroplast genomes previously investigated, the coding regions of several genes in oltmannsiellopsis cpdna are expanded relative to their mesostigma counterparts  <cit>  . however, most of the gene expansions in oltmannsiellopsis are less extensive than those in pseudendoclonium; only cema displays a longer coding sequence than its pseudendoclonium homologue.

our finding of five group i introns in oltmannsiellopsis cpdna contrasts sharply with the  <dig> group i introns found in pseudendoclonium cpdna  <cit>  . the lower abundance of introns in oltmannsiellopsis cpdna mainly accounts for the smaller size of this genome relative to pseudendoclonium cpdna. the oltmannsiellopsis introns interrupt three genes  found in the ir . the petb and psba genes each contain one intron, whereas three introns are present in rrl. all five introns, with the exception of the petb intron, are positionally and structurally homologous to previously reported introns in green plant cpdnas . while homologues of the oltmannsiellopsis psba intron are present in pseudendoclonium and chlamydomonas, homologues of the three rrl introns are found in a larger diversity of green plants. considering that these homologous introns have been identified in utc lineages, they could have been inherited by vertical inheritance from the last common ancestor of utc algae; however, the finding that they potentially code for homing endonucleases of the laglidadg or giy-yig families  does not allow us to exclude the possibility that they were acquired by horizontal transfer. although most of the  <dig> group i introns in pseudendoclonium cpdna have no homologues at identical cognate sites in other chloroplast genomes, their close structural and sequence similarities together with their absence from oltmannsiellopsis cpdna suggest that they arose from intragenomic proliferation in the lineage leading to pseudendoclonium  <cit> . note that blast searches of the oltmannsiellopsis petb intron sequence against the genbank database failed to detect any homologous intron in other organisms.

genome structure and gene partitioning
the pattern of gene partitioning within the single copy regions of oltmannsiellopsis cpdna differs substantially from the ancestral partitioning pattern observed for mesostigma, nephroselmis and streptophyte cpdnas . the great majority of the  <dig> genes found in the sc <dig> region of oltmannsiellopsis are typically found in the ancestral lsc region, whereas the sc <dig> region contains  <dig> genes characteristic of the ancestral lsc region in addition to ten genes characteristic of the ancestral ssc region. interestingly, sc <dig> includes  <dig> of the  <dig> lsc genes that have been transferred to the ssc region in pseudendoclonium cpdna. the two exceptional pseudendoclonium genes that have no homologues in oltmannsiellopsis sc <dig> are trnh and trnl; the trnh gene resides in the sc <dig> region of oltmannsiellopsis, whereas trnl has been lost from oltmannsiellopsis cpdna. considering the gene contents of the oltmannsiellopsis single copy regions, it appears inappropriate to label these regions according to their sizes. although sc <dig> is smaller than sc <dig>  it likely corresponds to the ancestral lsc region, and sc <dig> is apparently derived from the ancestral ssc region.

the ir sequence in oltmannsiellopsis cpdna is about  <dig> kb larger than that in pseudendoclonium cpdna and contains five genes in addition to those found in the rrna operon . at  <dig>  bp, the ir sequence of oltmannsiellopsis is similar in size to that of chlamydomonas . both ir junctions in oltmannsiellopsis cpdna encompass genes  of which the coding sequences expand into the single copy regions. as in the pseudendoclonium ir, the oltmannsiellopsis rrna genes are transcribed towards the single copy region carrying the genes that map to the lsc in prasinophyte and streptophyte cpdnas. in contrast, the rrna operon is transcribed toward the ssc region in nephroselmis and streptophyte cpdnas. the orientation of the rrna operon cannot be established in chlamydomonas cpdna owing to the extensively scrambled single copy regions, and this orientation remains unknown in chlorella cpdna because of the ir loss.

considering that oltmannsiellopsis and pseudendoclonium represent distinct, early diverging lineages of the ulvophyceae, the striking similarities between the quadripartite architectures of oltmannsiellopsis and pseudendoclonium cpdnas suggest that both the atypical gene partitioning pattern and unusual orientation of the ir were characteristic of the chloroplast genome of earliest-diverging ulvophytes. our data predict that the ssc region of the last common ancestor of oltmannsiellopsis and pseudendoclonium cpdnas featured  <dig> of the genes usually found in the lsc region in nephroselmis and streptophyte cpdnas, whereas the lsc region contained exclusively genes characteristic of the ancestral lsc region. consequently, in the lineage leading to pseudendoclonium, two extra genes were transferred to the ssc region, whereas  <dig> additional genes migrated to this region in the oltmannsiellopsis lineage. although the mechanisms underlying these gene migrations between single copy regions remain unknown, they probably involved intramolecular or intermolecular recombination events. the analysis of conserved gene clusters reported below clearly indicates that several genes were transferred together in the course of these migrations.

genes have been more extensively shuffled between the two single copy regions in chlamydomonas cpdna . it can be envisioned that during the evolution of ulvophytes and chlorophycean green algae, the ancestral pattern of gene partitioning was disrupted in successive steps, with a pseudendoclonium-like organization evolving into an oltmannsiellopsis-like organization, leading ultimately to the extensive scrambling of genes observed in chlamydomonas. given the absence of the ir from the chlorella genome, it is very difficult to ascertain whether the transcription direction of the rrna operon changed and whether genes were relocated from one genomic region to another during the evolution of trebouxiophytes. loss of the ir is usually associated with many gene rearrangements  <cit> ; in the case of chlorella cpdna, however, all the genes usually found in the ancestral ssc region have remained clustered, with the exception of three genes ) . investigations of ir-containing chloroplast genomes from distinct trebouxiophyte lineages will be required to test whether some of the gene relocations identified here in both oltmannsiellopsis and pseudendoclonium cpdnas originated from the common ancestor of utc algae.

gene clustering
the overall gene organization of oltmannsiellopsis cpdna differs extensively from that of its pseudendoclonium homologue and, surprisingly, more closely resembles that of chlorella cpdna . oltmannsiellopsis and chlorella cpdnas share  <dig> blocks of colinear sequences that contain a total of  <dig> genes, whereas oltmannsiellopsis and pseudendoclonium cpdnas have in common  <dig> blocks containing  <dig> genes. only eight blocks containing  <dig> genes are conserved in the oltmannsiellopsis and chlamydomonas genomes.

many of the  <dig> ancestral gene clusters shared by mesostigma and nephroselmis cpdnas have been disrupted during the evolution of the utc green algae. in this study, we have analyzed  <dig> ancestral clusters; the five remaining ones could not be investigated because the genes they contain have been lost from utc cpdnas . all  <dig> clusters have been broken at least in one occasion during the evolution of the utc algae. with only  <dig> breakpoints, chlorella cpdna displays the strongest conservation of ancestral clusters. with  <dig> breakpoints, oltmannsiellopsis cpdna occupies a median position between chlorella and pseudendoclonium  cpdnas, whereas chlamydomonas cpdna reveals twice as many breakpoints . the chlamydomonas, oltmannsiellopsis and pseudendoclonium genomes share five breakpoints that are missing in chlorella cpdna. aside from these breakpoints, pseudendoclonium and chlamydomonas cpdnas share six breakpoints that are absent from oltmannsiellopsis and chlorella cpdnas. there is no breakpoint exclusive to the oltmannsiellopsis and chlamydomonas genomes.

two ancestral clusters display breakpoints that are unique to the ulvophyceae. the almost universally conserved psbb-psbt-psbn-psbh cluster was fragmented at the 5' end of psbn, creating two separate pieces, each encoding a pair of genes, in oltmannsiellopsis cpdna. in the pseudendoclonium lineage, the introduction of an additional breakpoint on the opposite side of psbn led to the relocation of this gene on the dna strand encoding psbb, psbt and psbh, without any change in gene order. in the oltmannsiellopsis lineage, three breakpoints occurred in the ancestral rrna operon to generate a new transcription unit in which the order of the trna and trni genes has been reversed. rearranged rrna operons have been reported for the cpdnas of the trebouxiophyte chlorella ellipsoidea  <cit>  and the ulvophyte codium fragile  <cit> ; however, in these cases, the ancestral rrna operon was split into separate fragments that are transcribed from different promoters.

in terms of derived gene clusters, oltmannsiellopsis cpdna is most similar to chlorella cpdna . a derived cluster is defined here as a group of genes with the same relative polarities in two or more utc genomes, but absent from mesostigma and nephroselmis cpdnas. oltmannsiellopsis cpdna shares five derived clusters with its chlorella homologue, whereas pseudendoclonium cpdna shares three clusters, one of which is missing from oltmannsiellopsis. of the four derived clusters common to oltmannsiellopsis and pseudendoclonium cpdnas, none is found in chlamydomonas cpdna.

we estimated that a minimum of  <dig> inversions would be required to transform the gene organization of oltmannsiellopsis cpdna into that of any other chlorophyte genome . comparative analyses of cpdnas from land plants  <cit>  and from closely related chlamydomonads  <cit>  suggest that inversions represent the predominant mechanism of chloroplast genome rearrangements in green plants. however, inversions might be not the only mutational events causing gene order changes in chlorophytes cpdnas, as transpositions have been proposed to account for some of the rearrangements observed in campanulaceae  <cit>  and in subclover  <cit>  cpdnas.

repeated elements
a large number of sdr elements are found in oltmannsiellopsis cpdna . although these elements reside predominantly within intergenic spacers and introns, a few copies populate the coding regions of cema, chlb, chll, chln, ftsh, rpob, rpoc <dig> and rpoc <dig>  the most abundant elements can be classified into five groups of non-overlapping repeat units  on the basis of their primary sequences . their sizes range from 7– <dig> bp and their copy numbers vary from  <dig> to more than  <dig>  the sequence of repeat unit a or b is most often linked to the reverse complement of the same sequence, thus forming perfect palindromes or putative stem-loop structures with a loop of two a or two t . in some instances, the palindromes or stem portions of the stem-loop structures are extended by the addition of less frequent repeats. furthermore, a few copies of repeat units a and b occur as solitary sequences, representing probably degenerated versions of the more common arrangements featuring palindromes or stem-loop structures. repeat unit c can form stem-loop structures, with a loop of variable size. although repeat units d and e are not associated with stem-loop structures, they reside in the vicinity of other repeated elements.

the sdrs in oltmannsiellopsis cpdna do not closely resemble those present in other utc cpdnas. the oltmannsiellopsis repeats are biased in g+c, whereas the chlorella repeats show a bias in a+t. the pseudendoclonium and chlamydomonas sdrs are also rich in g+c, but their sequences share no obvious similarities with the oltmannsiellopsis repeats. this lack of sequence similarities between sdrs derived from distinct utc genomes suggests that sdrs have been acquired independently in utc lineages. however, the alternative hypothesis that sdrs were transmitted vertically cannot be excluded if we assume that these elements evolve at a very fast pace. studies of cpdnas from closely related utc taxa will be required to distinguish between these two hypotheses.

sdrs have most probably played a major role in remodelling the chloroplast genome in utc lineages. a correlation has been previously observed between the abundance of sdrs and the extent of gene rearrangements in utc algal genomes  <cit> . this correlation still holds with the addition of oltmannsiellopsis chloroplast genome sequence. the abundance of sdr elements in oltmannsiellopsis cpdna is comparable to that observed in pseudendoclonium cpdna  and genes have been rearranged to a similar extent in both genomes . sdrs in green plant cpdnas could serve as hot spots for nonhomologous recombinational events and lead to inversions and transpositions  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
although the oltmannsiellopsis chloroplast genome differs considerably from its pseudendoclonium counterpart at the levels of intron content and gene order, the two ulvophyte genomes share similarities in gene content and quadripartite architecture. we conclude that the chloroplast genome of the last common ancestor of oltmannsiellopsis and pseudendoclonium contained a minimum of  <dig> genes, was loosely packed with coding sequences, carried only a few group i introns, and featured a quadripartite architecture that deviates from the ancestral type displayed by mesostigma and nephroselmis cpdnas with regard to the transcription direction of the rrna genes and the gene contents of the single copy regions. given the phylogenetic positions of oltmannsiellopsis and pseudendoclonium, these genomic characters were undoubtedly present in the earliest-diverging members of the ulvophyceae. numerous changes were experienced by the chloroplast genome in the lineages leading to oltmannsiellopsis and pseudendoclonium; these include contraction/expansion of the ir, migration of genes from the ancestral lsc region toward the single copy region corresponding to the ssc, gene losses, intron gains/losses, and gene rearrangements within the ir and each of the single copy regions. considering that the chloroplast genome of codium fragile  is greatly reduced in size  and lacks an ir  <cit> , many additional chloroplast gene losses and rearrangements probably occurred in some lineages of the ulvophyceae.

our comparative analysis of the oltmannsiellopsis chloroplast genome with its chlorophyte counterparts strengthens the idea that the chloroplast genomes of early-diverging ulvophytes occupy an intermediate position between those of the trebouxiophyte chlorella and the chlorophycean green alga chlamydomonas with respect to the retention of ancestral features  <cit> . in the context of the debate on the branching order of utc lineages  <cit> , this analysis provides further support for the published phylogenetic analysis of mitochondrial gene sequences identifying the trebouxiophyceae as a basal lineage relative to the ulvophyceae and chlorophyceae  <cit> .

