BACKGROUND
songbirds, including zebra finches , are well-established model organisms for a variety of biological functions and are notable for their complex natural behaviours such as vocal communication, learning and social living structures  <cit> . of particular interest in songbird neurobiology is the set of telencephalic nuclei, referred to collectively as the song control system. this brain circuit is required for vocal learning and song production in male zebra finches and in other songbirds and is also connected to the auditory forebrain lobule that provides the system with auditory information  <cit> .

neuropeptides, a complex group of cell-to-cell signalling molecules, can act as neurotransmitters, neuromodulators, or peptide hormones  <cit> . a few neuropeptides have been previously examined in songbirds  <cit> ; those studies demonstrated that neuropeptides could act within brain regions relevant to song and other behaviours. given the potential for these signalling molecules to impact a wide range of behaviorally-relevant neural functions, the present study aimed to identify a large number of neuropeptides.

neuropeptide research is complicated by several different factors. typically, the biosynthesis of neuropeptides starts with the production of a large protein prohormone, which undergoes a variety of processing events before the final products-bioactive peptides-are generated. the gene that codes for a neuropeptide may also contain sequences encoding several other peptides. peptides can be predicted from prohormone sequences based on common proteolytic cleavage sites  <cit>  and directly measured in their bioactive forms from brain samples  <cit> . the processing of a single prohormone can vary depending on the tissues and/or the developmental stages and, therefore, neuropeptide localization is not always consistent with transcript localization. consequently, the comprehensive identification, measurement and localization of neuropeptides in any species require a multi-faceted approach.

taking advantage of the newly-released zebra finch genome sequence  <cit> , we predict, measure and localize the expression of a large complement of neuropeptides in the zebra finch brain using a variety of techniques. a survey of the zebra finch prohormone complement was undertaken using bioinformatic tools. these results were then used to annotate prohormone probes on a widely used zebra finch microarray platform  <cit> . neuropeptidomic analyses using previously described mass spectrometry  approaches  <cit>  were independently conducted to identify the signalling peptides created from these genes in the zebra finch brain and pituitary. in situ hybridization  was performed for a subset of prohormone genes. both ish and ms profiling were employed to localize the potential for neuropeptide function in individual song control nuclei. the integration of these different methodologies results in a more comprehensive suite of neuropeptide data that will accelerate investigation into their function in songbirds.

RESULTS
genomic annotation of neuropeptide prohormone genes
there were  <dig> matches to known chicken and mammalian neuropeptide prohormone genes in the zebra finch genome resources, resulting in the identification of  <dig> prohormones with complete sequences. table  <dig> provides the predicted zebra finch prohormones and homologous chicken prohormones. limited homology and genome coverage or assembly errors prevented recovery of the full sequences for some matches. the genbank zebra finch expressed sequence tag  database was used to confirm the identification and recover sequences. for instance, somastatin  was identified using the est  because of insufficient genome coverage and sequencing errors. in other cases, the lack of genome and est sequences prevented complete recovery of the prohormone. as an example, only a  <dig> amino acid prediction was obtained for appetite-regulating hormone  compared to the  <dig> amino acid chicken ghrl protein sequence.

the list of  <dig> prohormone and signalling genes predicted from the survey of the zebra finch genome; information on gene name and identification are provided. in the mass spectrometry  column, a check mark  indicates confirmation via ms, an asterisk  indicates their homologues are identified in other species and a dash  indicates no confirmation. peptides from  <dig> predicted genes were detected by ms. the protein sequences of the discovered prohormone and signaling genes are provided in fasta format .

slight differences in assembly releases resulted in the incomplete presence of nociceptin  and pancreatic polypeptide  prohormones. an est  was matched to the chicken pnoc and translation of the est recovered the first  <dig> amino acids. this est was not present in the genomic data as only  <dig> bases were matched in the trace archives.

a match for ppy was identified in the pre-release assembly but not in the release assembly. however, there was no supporting est data. the complete chicken ppy prohormone was reported in uniprot but was not present in the available chicken genome. peptide sequences have also been reported in uniprot for the gull, turkey and ostrich, implying that the zebra finch version may be present.

using the est database and chicken data, possible alternative splicing was detected for six genes.

three prohormones - pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating polypeptide , glucagon  and vasoactive intestinal peptide  - have been reported with alternative isoforms in chicken. tachykinin  <dig>  has multiple mammalian isoforms and two zebra finch isoforms were identified and subsequently confirmed by ests. however, although no chicken tac <dig> isoforms have been reported, four tac <dig> chicken isoforms are predicted in the corresponding national center for biotechnology information gene entry. two prohormones, augurin or chromosome  <dig> open reading frame  <dig>  and urotensin  <dig> domain containing , had a single isoform that was supported by est data. in both cases, an alternative sequence was predicted using the chicken sequence with wise <dig>  <cit> .

the zebra finch prohormone complement is similar to the chicken and to mammals, with evidence for  <dig> prohormone homologues in either or both the avian and mammalian genomes. this included six prohormones that matched the chicken genome reported by delfino et al.  <cit> . urocortin  <dig> , identified in the zebra finch by est , was not identified in the chicken genome. however, ucn still may be present because there were gaps in the chicken genome between the flanking genes. a proenkephalin-b prohormone  similar to mammals was found in the zebra finch genome but no match was found in the chicken genome or related resources  <cit> .

there was no evidence for three chicken prohormones in the zebra finch genome: apelin , renal natriuretic peptide  and gonadoliberin ii . apel has been reported in mammals and identified in chicken by delfino et al.  <cit> . there were no suitable matches to chicken rnp, a member of the natriuretic family, in either the zebra finch or mammals, indicating that this duplication may have occurred after songbirds  diverged from chickens . there was no match to mammalian gnrh <dig> and the chicken gnrh <dig> was only reported as a protein sequence with no corresponding location on the chicken genome.

two prohormones, c-type natriuretic peptide  <dig>  and corticotrophin-releasing factor  amide peptide , were only found in avian genomes. cnp <dig> appears to be an avian-specific duplication, occurring after the divergence from mammals. an rf-amide similar to prolactin-releasing peptide prohormone, crfamide was also identified in chicken and mammalian genomes; it had a high conservation of the  <dig> amino acid prolactin-releasing peptide found in the mammalian prolactin-releasing hormone prohormone.

twenty-three known prohormones were not found in the chicken or zebra finch genomes;  <dig> of the  <dig> appear to belong to gene families where at least one member is present in both mammalian and avian genomes. these may result from a duplication in mammals that occurred after the avian and mammalian species diverged. for at least the natriuretic family, there are both avian-specific and mammalian-specific duplications. one of these, the gene-regulated endocrine-specific protein  <dig> , is known to be in eutherian mammals. the lack of matches to the remaining prohormones may be explained by limited homology with confounding factors caused by incomplete genome sequencing coverage which thereby prevented a reliable prediction. for example, no evidence for proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type  <dig> inhibitor  was identified in the avian genome although kudo et al.  <cit>  reported low homology between mammalian sequences and xenopus and zebrafish  sequences.

identification of other signaling genes
other signalling prohormones, including prolactin  prolactin b  and insulin growth factor- <dig> , were also identified. in addition, secretogranin v or 7b <dig> protein  was identified, which is essential for prohormone convertase  <dig>  function  <cit> . our genomic survey also confirmed duplication of somatotropin or growth hormone  on chromosomes  <dig> and  <dig>  which was also supported by est data  <cit> .

ms-based detection and identification of neuropeptides in brain and pituitary
ms can directly measure peptides without prior knowledge of the sequences of the prohormone or the expected peptides. we implemented two complementary ms platforms because this combined approach has been shown to provide a more complete list of peptides  <cit> . a total of  <dig> peptides were characterized from the zebra finch brain and pituitary and 95% of these peptide sequences were confirmed by tandem ms  . we assigned the ms/ms spectral information from the peptides characterized via ms to our database of prohormones. this allowed us to annotate our ms-confirmed peptide sequence information as peptide products of  <dig> unique prohormones and other signaling proteins . every individually detected and sequenced peptide was counted in the present study.

the peptides we detected represent peptides processed from the prohormones; most were produced by cleavage at basic sites. however, because some peptides require processing at unconventional cleavage sites, they may not be predicted from the primary structures of the prohormones using bioinformatics tools such as neuropred  <cit> . for example, five chromogranin a  peptides-wnkmdel, wnkmdela, wnkmdelakql, wnkmdelakqlt and wnkmdelakqlts-were all sequenced by ms/ms independently and, thus, were considered as five peptides in our total count. similar examples of truncated peptides were detected for neurotensin , cholecystokinin , proenkephalin a , secretogranin-1/chromogranin b , secretogranin ii/chromogranin c , scg <dig>  thymosin-beta and cerebellin , either from the c-terminus or from the n-terminus. each of these was counted as a distinct peptide because similar truncated peptides in other species have been reported to have biological activity. for example, several different cbln <dig> peptides have been described in other animals. two of these, the cerebellin hexadecamer and a truncated des-ser <dig> pentadecamer peptide, are both endogenous peptides with biological relevance in rodent studies  <cit> . in addition, two more cerebellin-related peptides have been recently described that lack one residue at the c-terminus of cerebellin and des-ser1-cerebellin, respectively  <cit> .

although several of the detected peptides may represent extracellular degradation that can occur during acid extraction or postmortem decay, rather than naturally processed bioactive peptides, our rapid dissection technique and use of chilled acetone minimizes the potential for post-dissection proteolysis. furthermore, the truncated peptides usually eluted from the liquid chromatography column at different retention times, indicating they were formed prior to the ms procedure. given our prior experience with peptide isolation, we surmise that most of the peptides detected were derived from endogenous proteolytic processing.

sequenced peptides directly detected in the brain assisted in the identification and confirmation of the correct sequence in the zebra finch genome. many neuropeptides are well conserved across species, especially between avian species. for example, the nts peptide in chicken is qlhvnkarrpyil; the predicted zebra finch peptide sequence based on the genomic assembly is qlhvnksrrpyil, which has an a to s substitution at the seventh amino acid residue. however, our ms analysis found that the peptide sequence in zebra finch was the same as that in chicken. comparison to published zebra finch ests, and other genomic databases, indicates that this is most likely an assembly error rather than a single nucleotide polymorphism in the zebra finch genome. the trace archive files also support the ms sequence.

when searching the ms data against the zebra finch resources and the prohormone databases of other species, additional peptides were identified in the zebra finch. these include: skagrvklpp from mitochondrial ribosomal protein s <dig> , lpeccrqktcscriydllhgmgnhaagiltl-amide from orexin , sgsakvafsairstnh and sgsakvafsairstn from cbln <dig> and pvdlakwdgpsls from phosphatidylethanolamine binding protein  <dig> .

peptides from non-prohormone proteins were also detected with ms. several thymosin-beta peptides, including ac-sdkpdmaeiekfdksklkktetqeknplpsketieqekqages, ac-sdkpdmaeiekfdk, ac-sdkpdmaeiekfd and ac-sdkpdmaeiekf, were identified in the zebra finch brain. thymosin-beta is commonly observed in the brain  <cit>  and is observed with neuropeptides during stimulated neuropeptide release  <cit> . three peptides, tvgdvnterpgmldf, kqatvgdvnterpgmldf and ac-seaafqkaaeevkql from carboxypeptidase n, polypeptide  <dig> , were also identified in the zebra finch. cpn <dig> is the regulatory subunit of a secreted tetrameric protein expressed in the nervous system of other animals  <cit> ; its identification here illustrates the power of ms to detect other unusual protein processing products in the brain.

discovery of novel peptides
using ms approaches, we directly detected several novel vip and adcyap <dig> peptides in addition to the previously described peptides. specifically, the ms data showed strong evidence for the vip peptide hsdavftdnysrf  and the adcyap <dig> peptides, vggasgglgddaeplt, hidgiftdsysry and qmavkkylaavlamide in the zebra finch brain. these novel peptides overlap with the well-characterized longer vip and adcyap <dig> peptides, but are processed at basic sites that appear not to have been reported previously for vip and adcyap <dig> in most other species. the zebra finch peptides were shorter than the vip, pacap- <dig> and pacap- <dig> peptides described in rat and mouse  <cit> , suggesting that vip and pacap prohormones may be subject to different processing pathways in the zebra finch. the vip, pacap- <dig>  pacap- <dig> peptides are neurotransmitters of the inhibitory nonadrenergic, noncholinergic nervous system involved in a number of physiological conditions, mediated through common vip/adcyap <dig>  receptors and specific adcyap <dig>  receptors  <cit> . the newly-discovered short vip and adcyap <dig> peptides may also interact with these receptors or have their own mechanisms of action to be revealed in future experiments.

characterization of posttranslationally-modified peptides
posttranslational modifications  can alter the biological activity of peptides. they can be detected using ms because each ptm has a characteristic mass shift. these ptms can provide more resistance to enzymatic degradation and regulate the binding affinity to receptors and, thus, directly impact the bioactivity of peptides. some common ptms, including c-terminal amidation, disulfide bonds, n-terminal pyroglutamate formation, and n-terminal acetylation, were identified in the zebra finch peptides . for example, the c-terminal amidation of the lpxrf-amide  motif of npvf peptides and the disulfide bond of the cyiqncpxg-amide  motif of arg-vasopressin  were detected in this study. these evolutionarily conserved ptms may be essential for the interaction of peptides with their cognate receptors across metazoan.

distribution of prohormone gene expression in adult brains
in addition to understanding the peptide complements, the locations of expression also impact biological function. to identify brain regions that express prohormone-related genes, ish was conducted for  <dig> genes in adult zebra finch brains- <dig> prohormone genes and cbln <dig>  phosphatidylethanolamine binding protein  <dig>  and, lastly, cpn <dig>  which was used as a control because it was detected in the ms experiments . the ests used as ish riboprobe templates covered at least 50% of the mrnas as predicted by the ensembl gene models . each est showed a homology of at least 79% to the corresponding chicken mrna sequence. sense negative control hybridizations showed no specific label, demonstrating the high stringency of the hybridization conditions and suggesting high specificity of the riboprobes to the zebra finch transcripts. with the exception of the sexually dimorphic song nuclei, no sex differences in distribution were detected.

the distributions of  <dig> genes have been determined via in situ hybridization , with the distribution of expression being highlighted in four major song nuclei  and other behaviorally-relevant brain areas. for each specific brain region, a check mark  indicates detected by ish and a dash  indicates no expression as characterized by ish. in the mass spectrometry  column, a check mark  indicates confirmation via ms and an asterisk  indicates their homologues are identified in other species. abbreviations used for non-song control brain areas: me/pit-median eminence or pituitary; poa-preoptic area; hp-principle cells of the hippocampus; s-septal nuclei; tn-nucleus taeniae; mhyp-ventromedial hypothalamic nucleus or paraventricular nucleus.

forty-one unique ests that represent  <dig> prohormone genes were identified on the zebra finch brain 20k song microarray. some ests were spotted twice on the array, and in some cases more than one est are from a single prohormone; all ests are included. listed are the raw p-values from an experiment that compared expression profiles in the adult male auditory forebrain after birds were exposed to three auditory stimuli: , novel song  or silence   <cit> ; a false discovery rate  significant cutoff of fdr <  <dig>  was used to select genes for ish analysis. comparisons are: birds that heard either familiar song versus those that heard silence , birds that heard novel song versus those that heard silence , or birds that heard familiar song versus those that heard novel song . six ests that were reported to show a significant change in the familiar group  <cit>  were used as riboprobes for ish analysis. of these six, three ests showed a significant change in the number of cells with modulated expression levels related to song experience. significant p-values  are in bold. a dash  indicates that the est was not investigated using ish.

expression of the  <dig> genes was examined in the four major telencephalic song nuclei: area x, the lateral magnocellular nucleus of the anterior nidopallium , hvc  and the robust nucleus of the arcopallium . three genes, cpn <dig>  mst and scg <dig>  were expressed in all four nuclei , but pomc and npvf mrnas were not detectable in the song nuclei. the remaining  <dig> genes were expressed in a subset of the song control nuclei .

neuropeptides also modulate physiological processes and behaviours other than song. ish demonstrated that prohormone genes were expressed in brain areas involved in controlling a variety of processes . for example, we found hybridization for  <dig> of the  <dig> genes within the paraventricular nucleus, ventromedial nucleus and the preoptic area of the hypothalamus, brain areas that are involved in regulating reproduction. several of these genes were also expressed within the pituitary or the hypothalamic gateway to the pituitary, the median eminence. these structures are essential for reproductive control and other basic physiology such as stress responses and regulation of thyroid function. the septal nuclei and nucleus taeniae, implicated in affiliative and aggressive behaviours, showed some low levels of prohormone labelling. in addition, the principal cells of the hippocampus, a structure required for spatial learning, showed hybridization with several prohormone riboprobes and cpn <dig>  images of sections throughout the entire adult male brain processed with ish can be found at http://neuroproteomics.scs.illinois.edu/songbird/neuroanatomy.html.

analysis of song-regulated prohormone genes
from the genome-wide survey of zebra finch prohormones, the most commonly used zebra finch microarray platform  was annotated for its prohormone content  <cit> . there were  <dig> probes corresponding to  <dig> prohormone genes, including three probes corresponding to the duplicated gh genes and sst <dig> identified on the array . we then reexamined data from an experiment where this microarray was used to characterize changes in gene expression in the adult zebra finch auditory forebrain during the phenomenon of song response habituation  <cit> . in this data set, we identified six prohormones that showed a significant decrease in expression levels after song habituation   <cit> .

we therefore performed ish using ests for these six genes on brains from birds that experienced either silence , playback of a novel song or playback of a familiar  song . two of these genes, cck and gh , showed significant changes  in the number of cells above the intensity threshold in the auditory forebrain of birds that heard familiar song compared to those that heard novel song or no song. gh showed the decrease in expression expected from the microarray results. however, cck actually showed an increase. nts showed a strong trend towards a lower number of labelled cells in the auditory forebrain lobule after hearing familiar song . insulin-like growth factor  <dig> , adrenomedullin , and neuropeptide y  did not show a significant difference in the number of labelled cells in the auditory forebrain lobule across song exposure conditions

peptide profiling in the song nuclei
in order to directly measure a subset of the peptides that exist within the major telencephalic song nuclei, we conducted ms analysis on brain punches of area x, lman, hvc and ra. the quantity of peptides in these areas was not adequate for ms/ms analysis to determine the amino acid sequences. thus, we used matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight  ms to generate the peptide profile of each nuclei homogenate. we then assigned the peaks in the spectra based on mass matches to the peptide list generated in the peptidomic study of the whole brain. figure  <dig> shows the spectra from four different song nuclei, demonstrating that each nucleus is characterized by slightly different peptide profiles. thirteen peptides were putatively identified in hvc by mass match, and a subset of those was also detected in other song nuclei .

the mass listed is the observed mass + from the maldi tof mass spectrometry of the hvc samples. the peptide identities of  <dig> peaks in the mass spectrum of the hvc homogenate were assigned based on mass matches to the previously identified peptides. three peaks  were assigned to two putative peptides each. a check mark  indicates the song nucleus where the masses were observed. a dash  indicates it was not detected.

both ms analysis and ish of individual song nuclei demonstrated that the peptides may have complex distributions across the song system, sometimes present in all nuclei but usually in a subset. not all peptides were measured by both techniques; but for those that were, several complexities inherent to neuropeptide characterizations were observed. first, we again saw multiple peptides from the same prohormone but not all of the peptides were detected in the same brain areas. for example, some scg <dig> peptides were detected within hvc only, while others were measured within both hvc and ra. this may indicate specific processing of individual peptides that get targeted to each brain area. second, the distribution of the mrna did not always predict where the peptides were detected, demonstrating that cell bodies that express prohormone genes may be in different neuroanatomical locations than the cellular projections in which the peptides reside  <cit> . again, for scg <dig>  ish showed expression in all four song nuclei but a more restricted peptide distribution was demonstrated using ms. this may reflect a mechanism of controlled peptide transport and release or a mechanism by which prohormone gene transcription is regulated independently from the translation and cleavage of active peptides. it is theoretically possible that peptides and mrnas were not co-localized due to sensitivity limitations of one of the techniques, but the proposed biological interpretations are consistent with known peptide functions/processes. in addition, the neuroanatomical distribution of prohormone gene expression is consistent with previous gene expression findings in hvc  <cit>  and largely with previous immunohistochemical analysis of peptide distribution in song nuclei  <cit> . the distribution of peptides and genes did not neatly separate according to brain region  and pallial ) or function . the song system is, however, clearly a circuit in which specific neuropeptide signaling could modulate behaviour.

general summary
neuropeptides are important signalling molecules that modulate a variety of physiological and behavioural processes. in songbirds such as the zebra finch, neuropeptides have the potential to influence a complex behaviour of particular interest-song. as few neuropeptides had been previously investigated in songbirds, we endeavored to identify as many potential neuropeptides as possible, using the newly released zebra finch genome to annotate our efforts. because multiple neuropeptides can be produced from a single prohormone and can be transported distally to the location of the cell body, we employed several complementary techniques. specifically, we combined a bioinformatics approach to whole-genome prohormone gene prediction, direct measurement of neuropeptides within the whole brain and within specific brain areas specialized for song, and neuroanatomical gene expression mapping for a subset of prohormone genes. employing this multi-faceted approach, we identified  <dig> peptides, including several novel neuropeptides, directly from the whole brain and described the potential for different peptide profiles to exist in various brain regions such as the song control nuclei.

furthermore, we identified  <dig> putative prohormones in the zebra finch. most prohormone genes have brain est support. we also identified several new prohormones that were not assigned by official gene models through the ensembl pipeline or described in other species  <cit> . several prohormone genes showed the potential for alternative splicing, indicating that neuropeptide signaling may be quite complex. although some genes, typically a subset of genes that belong to a multi-gene family, are absent in the zebra finch, the complement of zebra finch prohormone genes is similar to that in the chicken and mammals  <cit> . given that only a small number of neuropeptides have been investigated in songbirds to date  <cit> , this genomic analysis greatly expands the opportunity to investigate how the regulation of prohormone genes contributes to neural function.

several peptides can be produced from one prohormone gene and, using our whole-genome prohormone gene predictions, we often annotated multiple peptides as belonging to the same gene. we considered each of these peptides to be distinct, even if they were a series of truncated forms from one peptide, because even these seemingly small changes may have biologically relevant consequences. we also detected several novel peptides from the zebra finch brain that showed sequence homology to vip and adcyap <dig> prohormones, which may have novel mechanisms of action.

due to the impact neuropeptides have on animal physiology and many complex natural behaviours  <cit> , we were particularly interested in characterizing the peptide profiles in the four major song control nuclei in the zebra finch: area x, lman, hvc and ra. we also identified prohormone expression in several brain areas important for regulation of essential physiological processes - learning and memory, reproduction and other social behaviours. it is possible that neuropeptides processed from these genes act at cell terminals located in a brain area other than where the cell bodies measured with ish reside. for example, npy fibers were described in the songbird hippocampus  <cit> , but we did not detect labelling there with ish. several of our findings are, however, consistent with previous reports. for example, vip and mesotocin levels in septal nuclei, where these mrna were localized, are regulated by social behaviours in songbirds and are generally correlated with levels of sociality in the zebra finch and related species  <cit> . many of the prohormones investigated here have not been functionally tested in the songbird; thus, neuroanatomical localization of prohormone expression is a useful guide for further examination of the function of neuropeptides in songbird biology.

in order to further delve into the potential for neuropeptides to play a functional role in zebra finch behaviour, we used our genome-wide prohormone gene annotation to identify prohormone ests  on the zebra finch brain song microarray  <cit> . previously published experiments that compared gene expression patterns across brain regions, sex and age, or experience reported differences in some of these ests, including a change in proenkephalin in hvc after birds sang  <cit> . here, we focused on genes that showed changes during song response habituation in the auditory forebrain lobule, an area crucial for processing and learning complex, salient sounds  <cit> . in our annotations, at least six prohormone genes showed a significant decrease in expression levels  <dig> h after a zebra finch was entrained by song repetition and our ish experiments confirm half of these changes  <cit> . these results provide an example of how prohormone gene expression can be affected by behavioural paradigms relevant to song learning  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
the most obvious outcome from this study is that the zebra finch peptidome and prohormone complement is now well characterized; this will become an important resource for a number of follow-up studies. the combination of bioinformatic prediction of prohormone genes, direct measurement of peptides and neuroanatomical localization of prohormone gene expression provides comprehensive and compelling insights into the influence of neuropeptides on songbird brain function and behaviour.

