BACKGROUND
it has long been recognised that cell regulatory molecules, such as growth factors and cytokines, exert powerful influences on the behaviour of eukaryotic cells at the interface of tissues. indeed the immobilized activity of these signalling mediators in combination with the extracellular matrix  underpins many fundamental biological processes including embryo-, morpho- and tumorogenesis and wound healing  <cit> . numerous studies have established the principle that tethered ligands regulate cell behavior quite distinctly from their freely diffusible counterpart. for example, extracellular matrix proteins like fibronectin promote adhesion  <cit>  and migration  <cit>  on a surface but when added exogenously to cells can have adhesion-independent effects, for example activating intracellular signalling cascades  <cit> . furthermore, soluble growth factors, like fibroblast growth factor - <dig>  vascular endothelial growth factor  and interleukin - <dig> exhibit elevated activity when presented within the context of matrix such as fibrin  <cit> . whilst these and many other studies have provided fundamental insight into the underlying biology, the experimental approaches have meant that immobilised ligands are often presented in orientations and conformations that are not well controlled, at densities that are poorly characterised and under conditions in which the durability and stability of the ligand is undefined.

our approach has been to design and fabricate protein scaffolds that can display protein ligands on self-assembled monolayers  in a controlled and reproducible way  <cit> . this work uses a tolaiii-fusion expression system to provide the engineered protein at high yields and solubility  <cit> . a cysteine residue engineered into the c-terminal end of the protein ensures durable chemisorption onto gold surfaces whilst a  <dig> amino acid stretch termed the switch-tag  can switch from a water soluble coil to a hydrophobic helix that co-assembles with the alkane thiols of the sam  <cit> . therefore formation of a sam containing both the scaffold protein and an amphiphile produces a surface where the orientation of the protein is controlled and non-specific interactions are low. these surfaces provide the opportunity to address how immobilised ligands can both provide insights into cell function and contribute to tissue engineering.

we demonstrate here the ability of this system to influence the long term function of cells in vitro via the incorporation of two distinct ligand motifs. the first is derived from the extracellular matrix protein, osteopontin , and was identified as supporting cell adhesion through the α9β <dig> integrin  <cit>  and subsequently shown to promote adhesion and migration of endothelial cells leading to enhanced angiogenesis  <cit> . the second is the knuckle epitope from bone morphogenetic protein - <dig>  a member of the transforming growth factor β superfamily, which has been widely shown to support commitment of cells to the osteoblastic lineage, their differentiation and functional ability to make bone  <cit> .

here we show that tol-opn-st dose-dependently supported the adhesion and spreading through vinculin adhesion sites of primary rat osteoblasts. biological activity of the bmp motif within the scaffold protein was verified by adding the recombinant protein to cells transfected with a sma- and mad-related protein  responsive-reporter construct and demonstrating smad <dig> activation. tol-bmp2-st reproduced bmp signalling and produced bone-like nodules on patterned surfaces.

this technology effectively immobilises bioactive protein motifs on a surface for analysis of cell behaviour in vitro and may provide the basis for future tissue engineering approaches.

RESULTS
incorporating osteopontin or bmp <dig> motifs in the tol scaffold protein does not influence its binding to gold
the motifs from osteopontin and bmp <dig> were inserted between tol and the switch tag to create tol-op-st and tol-bmp-st respectively . this design ensured that the c-terminal cysteine was available to bind gold surfaces and that the biological activity of the inserted motifs is not compromised. biacore analysis  shows that tol-op-st and tol-bmp-st specifically interact with the gold surface and, interestingly, binding of tol-opn-st and tol-bmp-st was slightly higher than tol-st alone. the vector includes a protease cleavage site which can remove the tol protein leaving just opn-st or bmp-st. however since the larger construct is more stable and easier to handle in solution, the initial studies used the complete fusion protein

the proteins were added at a concentration of  <dig> mm in a total volume of  <dig> μl over a period of  <dig> minutes.

cells specifically interact with immobilised tol-opn-st
having demonstrated that the proteins chemisorb to the gold surface irrespective of the active motif inserted in the scaffold, the ability of the cells to interact with these immobilised proteins under serum-free conditions was determined . after  <dig> hours of culture tol-opn-st promoted the attachment of significant  numbers of cells compared to all other surfaces . analysis of cell morphology revealed that on tol-opn-st, area  was significantly  enhanced compared to bare gold/11-mercapto-1-triethyleneglycolundecane  whilst circularity  was significantly  different from all of the other surfaces that were studied. in addition, around the periphery of the cells there were focal contacts, characterised by the identification of the protein vinculin by immunofluorescence. these contacts are important since this is where the cell interacts with the extracellular matrix  with significantly  increased abundance of vinculin in cells on tol-opn-st compared to all of the other surfaces . cells on the tol-opn-st surface also exhibited a more spread out morphology that correlates with a more robust cytoskeleton consisting of numerous actin filaments . relatively few cells were observed to adhere to the surfaces displaying immobilised tol-bmp2-st  or tol-green fluorescent protein  , indeed these surfaces were little different to surfaces composed solely of the anti-adherent teg-thiol . furthermore those cells that grew on tol-bmp, tol-gfp and control teg alone formed fewer focal contact structures and were less well spread on the surfaces .

next we investigated cell adhesion on surfaces with varying densities of immobilised scaffold . scaffold was immobilised at different densities by adjusting the coating concentration of protein. the number of cells binding to the osteopontin surface was dependent on the surface density of tol-op-st  and this correlated closely with both cell area  and the abundance of vinculin-containing focal contact structures . analysis of cell morphology on these surfaces demonstrates the influence of tol-opn-st density on cell behaviour. at relatively low density  tol-opn-st surfaces promote poor cell adhesion and limited cell spreading. while at a high density , tol-opn-st supports significant cell adhesion , extensive cell spreading  and the formation of significantly more abundant and complex cytoskeletal elements . at an intermediate surface density  , cell adhesion is more weakly promoted with cellular processes extended but not sufficiently strengthened to facilitate cell spreading. to further illustrate the biological specificity of our approach we investigated the cellular response to soluble recombinant bmp <dig>  when cultured on surfaces displaying different densities of tol-opn-st. it is widely appreciated that integrin-mediated adhesion influences the regulation of growth factor induced signalling cascades and indeed this phenomenon is believed to underpin numerous biological events such as morphogenesis and wound healing  <cit> . for this study, osteoblasts were transfected with a luciferase reporter construct driven by smad-binding elements and cultured on different densities of immobilised tol-op-st for eight hours under serum-free conditions. the cells were then treated with soluble recombinant bmp <dig> and the response assessed through analysis of luciferase activity . cells that were more extensively spread on higher densities of tol-op-st exhibited significantly  higher levels of bmp-induced signalling compared to cells that were poorly spread and showing fewer adhesion complexes on low density tol-op-st. this confirms that bmp receptor activation is influenced by the density of ecm ligands.

osteoblasts respond specifically to both soluble and immobilised tol-bmp-st
to test the ability of tol-bmp-st to activate bmp-dependent intracellular signalling, it was added exogenously to cells growing on conventional tissue culture plasticware. analysis reveals that cells transfected with smad-binding promoter construct were dose-dependently responsive to both soluble recombinant bmp <dig> and tol-bmp-st  with the highest doses significantly different from tol-st alone . the cells exhibited no response above background to the tol protein vector alone. next, cells transfected with the same reporter construct were plated onto specific tol-x-st surfaces . only those cells grown on the tol-bmp-st surface demonstrated activation of the smad signalling pathway that was comparable to the effect of soluble recombinant bmp. levels of smad signalling observed on both tol-bmp-st surfaces and in those cells treated with recombinant bmp <dig> were significantly different  compared to all other surfaces.

immobilised tol-bmp-st induces enhanced osteogenesis in vitro
tol-bmp-st, tol-opn-st and tol-st were then compared for their ability to influence the long term behaviour of cells in vitro. primary rat osteoblasts can be cultured in media supplemented with β-glycerophosphate, l-ascorbic acid and dexamethasone to promote osteogenic differentiation over a period of weeks  <cit> . in the absence of this chemical cocktail the cells retain a more primitive fibroblastic phenotype. in our experiments, cells were maintained in culture without these soluble supplements so that the only potential osteogenic signal was from the engineered surfaces. in this environment cells proliferated and achieved confluence on all surfaces after three days. after two weeks of culture there was clear evidence of cells on tol-bmp-st surfaces beginning to form multilayers and discrete cellular aggregates. this behaviour was not repeated on tol-opn-st, tol-st or other control surfaces. after four weeks, in the absence of further osteogenic factors, extensive bone-like nodule formation was observed on tol-bmp-st  which was significantly  more extensive than on the other surfaces investigated. there was some evidence of mineralised matrix production on tol-op-st  whilst on tol-st alone  and bare gold there very few bone-like nodules .

surface patterns of tol-bmp-st induce spatially restricted osteoblast differentiation
whilst osteoblasts displayed enhanced differentiation when cultured on surfaces displaying tol-bmp-st it was not clear if tol-bmp-st was acting after desorption from the surface. to address this, patterned surfaces were created using a microcontact printing approach  <cit> . a polydimethylsiloxane  stamp displaying microscale features was inked with tol-bmp-st and used to transfer a protein pattern to the gold surface. the gaps between the protein and between patterns were backfilled by incubation of the whole surface with teg-thiol. osteoblasts were cultured on these surfaces for two weeks and differentiation assessed by staining for alkaline phosphatase activity . during two weeks cells grew all over the surface both in regions that were stamped with the tol-bmp-st pattern and those that were not . the marker of osteoblast differentiation, alkaline phosphatase was principally localised to the regions where tol-bmp was immobilised . these experiments demonstrated that bioactive signalling was restricted to the patterned areas suggesting that surface tethered ligand was predominantly responsible for the regulation of cell activity and not tol-bmp-st released from the surface.

discussion
signalling by interfacial motifs is a fundamental biological mechanism that underpins numerous aspects of morphogenesis and wound healing  <cit> . tools that enable further insight into how immobilized ligands regulate cell behaviour will not only provide mechanistic understanding but also the basis for therapeutic approaches such as tissue engineering  <cit> . our results show that a generic immobilisation system with a variable motif sandwiched between expression enhancing and self assembly domains  can present the motifs in a functional state at the surface of a sam. the fusion protein is easily produced in large amounts in e coli and is easy to convert from a highly water soluble state to a sam inserted form on gold  <cit> . analysis by spr of the tol-st proteins on a gold surface interestingly provided evidence that tol-opn-st and tol-bmp-st pack at higher surface densities than tol-st alone. this may arise from flexibility introduced into the protein by the inclusion of the short op and bmp motifs. the highest flexibility is expected from the op domain as there are three linker sequences found in this sequence whilst the bmp motif is shorter. in addition analysis of tol-gfp  assembly by spr shows this rigid construct to be similar to tol alone, supporting the possibility that protein flexibility plays a role in its packing on the surface. thus retention of the n terminal tol domain does not inhibit self assembly and likely serves to solubilise and protect the flexible peptides from degradation, presenting the biologically active motifs in a more constrained structure.

the biological activity of the tol-st surfaces was first determined in simple cell adhesion assays performed in the absence of serum. the abundant cell adhesion on tol-opn-st, in contrast to the other surfaces, is most likely mediated by α9β <dig> integrin as described for endothelial cells  <cit> . calvarial derived osteoblasts have not been previously shown to express α9β <dig> integrins but they can be found on periodontal ligament cells  <cit>  and cells of the osteoclast lineage  <cit> . the adhesion and spreading of cells described here is a possible demonstration of α9β <dig> integrins activity in these cells but an alternative mechanism cannot be discounted.

surface assembly techniques provide the ability to control surface density of cell interaction motifs. reducing the apparent density of tol-op-st had significant effects on cell shape, morphology and numbers of vinculin-positive focal contacts. this revealed a threshold level of tol-op-st below which cytoskeletal tensioning and remodelling cannot be supported , and above which the cells can interact with the surface initiating morphological change and regulation of cell behaviour. the estimated density measured here compares with other approaches that have attempted to address this issue where cells of fibroblastic origin exhibited increased cell adhesion and spreading on integrin ligands of the order  <dig> molecules/mm <dig>  <cit> 

the way in which cells adhere and interact with the surrounding matrix is known to not only influence cell shape but also to control cell response and gene expression  <cit> . indeed this has been shown to be a mechanism that is important in the regulation of osteoblast differentiation  <cit>  and response to bmps  <cit> . to demonstrate that tol-st surfaces could be used to probe this phenomenon, different densities of tol-opn-st were characterised for their ability to support bmp dependent signalling. a smad-responsive reporter construct showed significantly greater activation in response to srbmp- <dig> when cells were cultured on tol-opn-st at  <dig>  × 109- <dig>  ×  <dig> molecule/mm <dig> compared to  <dig>  ×  <dig> molecules/mm <dig> and lower. it is particularly noteworthy that the apparent threshold for formation of abundant cell adhesion plaques  is higher than that for bmp receptor activation and signal transduction . this suggests that the mechanisms regulating bmp receptor signalling may well be independent of cytoskeletal organisation controlled by integrin adhesion to tol-opn-st. on other substrates, αvβ integrins  <cit>  and focal adhesion kinase   <cit>  have both been implicated in the osteoblastic response to bmp. our results support general matrix-dependent bmp signalling in terms of fak activity since weakly adherent cells demonstrated poor bmp responses whilst well adhered and spread cells exhibited elevated bmp effects. nevertheless this does not exclude a role for integrin subunit specific responses with bmpri and bmprii directly associating with αv and β <dig> integrins  <cit> , on appropriate external ecm ligands, to give altered responses.

tol-bmp-st maintained bmp-like activity and like srbmp- <dig> was able to activate the smad signalling cascade. this is in agreement with the work of saito et al  who showed that a synthetic bmp <dig> knuckle peptide was able to induce alkaline phosphatase activity in c2c <dig> cells but less effectively than srbmp <dig>  <cit> . previous work  <cit>  has shown that immobilised bmp <dig> more effectively activates differentiation of osteoblasts than soluble bmp <dig>  tol-bmp-st was immobilised on gold surfaces, back-filled with teg-thiol and then compared with soluble recombinant bmp- <dig> for the ability to regulate osteoblast activity and bone formation. immobilized tol-bmp-st showed activation of smad responsive elements driving luciferase expression in transfected cells. interestingly the level of activation of signalling by the immobilised ligand was comparable to soluble recombinant bmp <dig>  demonstrating its enhanced activity compared to soluble tol-bmp-st. the activity of this bmp <dig> knuckle peptide is postulated to be mediated through its interaction with bmp receptors i and ii   <cit> . activation of preformed or induced bmpr complexes by soluble bmp results in initiation of intracellular signalling cascades that include the smad pathway. in addition, bmpr complexes are believed to be internalised by the cell in processes which both alter the signalling dynamic and lead to loss of or attenuation of activation  <cit> . it is therefore likely that tol-bmp-st surfaces facilitate prolonged activation of bmp signalling since the receptor complex would be retained at the cell surface by the immobilised ligand and prevented from trafficking into the cell for example via lipid rafts. this is supported by the work of others which shows that immobilised recombinant bmp <dig> causes prolonged activation of osteogenic gene expression and enhanced osteoblast differentiation  <cit> .

when cells were plated on tol-bmp-st under routine culture conditions, cell differentiation occurred during long term experiments with evidence of the formation of abundant bone-like nodules. in contrast, few mineralised matrix deposits were observed on tol-opn-st and bare gold. immobilised bmp has previously been shown to support osteogenic differentiation in vitro  <cit>  using mc3t3-e <dig> cells and bmp <dig> that was immobilized by a heat treatment process. data presented here use primary cells that are a heterogeneous population that retain the potential to differentiate to several different lineages but this is the first time that a tethered ligand alone and in the complete absence of other agents like dexamethasone not only induces ostegenic differentiation but also extensive deposition of a mineralized bone-like matrix. this illustrates the enhanced and sustained signalling provided by the tol-bmp-st surface reinforced cell regulator cues that drive the temporal control of cell phenotype. furthermore tol-bmp-st on gold reproduces the asymmetric directional control of bone formation observed in vivo, a process that is believed to be guided by immobilised ligands. the formation of bone-like nodules in vitro requires extensive cell motility with the formation of three-dimensional cell aggregates and therefore the immobilised signal derived from tol-bmp-st is likely to be relayed to cells away from the surface by cell:cell interactions and paracrine signalling.

spatial control of osteoblast differentiation was demonstrated by using microcontact printing of tol-bmp-st. this approach has been used widely in cell culture studies  <cit>  with predominantly ecm motifs but this is the first time that cell differentiation motifs have been presented in this way. this showed that it is immobilised tol-bmp-sp and not ligand lost from the surface that is directing cell behaviour. work using an inkjet approach has recently reported similar findings with recombinant bmp <dig> spotted on a fibrin layer  <cit>  illustrating the potential for patterns of immobilised biological ligands to control cell behaviour in a way that is spatially restricted.

CONCLUSIONS
understanding the molecular mechanisms of cell interactions and their regulation by surrounding matrix cues has important implications for biotechnology  and medicine . for example, it provides the basis for fabrication of scaffolds bearing biomimetics and/or therapeutics to facilitate tight control of cell phenotype in a target tissue. the technology described here, which immobilises recombinant proteins, is a highly controlled, adaptable and reproducible approach that allows the creation and screening of surfaces displaying bioactive cell interaction motifs. we have shown that this approach can provide an insight into the role of immobilised ligands in regulating cell behaviour, the interplay with soluble factors and the influence of spatially controlled signalling. furthermore, this approach presents a durable surface that allows both short  and long term  effects on cell activity to be assessed. therefore this technology will considerably enhance current approaches that utilise cell-scaffold technology and also undoubtedly provide significant new data and therapeutic applications.

