BACKGROUND
recent high oil prices, concerns over energy security, and environmental goals have reawakened interest in producing alternative fuels via large-scale industrial fermentations. the potential and challenges involved in supplanting a substantial amount of petroleum derived transportation fuels with fuels derived from renewable resources such as ethanol from lignocellulosic materials has been the focus of several studies and reviews  <cit> . the development and deployment of ethanologenic microorganisms will be one critical component in the successful production of fuel ethanol in industrial-scale quantities.

essential traits for an industrial microorganism include high ethanol yield, tolerance, and productivity ; robust growth with simple, inexpensive growth requirements in conditions that retard contaminants ; and inhibitor tolerance, as reviewed previously  <cit> . higher tolerance, productivity values and other positive industrial attributes have been reported for z. mobilis, as reviewed previously  <cit> . ethanol tolerance comparable up to  <dig> g l- <dig> have been reported for z. mobilis continuous culture and up to  <dig> g l- <dig>  in batch culture and productivities of 120– <dig> gl- <dig> h- <dig> in continuous processes with cell recycle  <cit> . saccharomyces yeasts have been the preferred industrial biocatalyst for fuel ethanol production, although genetically engineered bacterial species such as gram-negative bacteria escherichia coli, zymomonas mobilis, and klebsiella oxytoca as well as gram-positive bacteria bacillus subtilis and corynebacterium glutamicum are in development to address commercially important inoculum requirements  <cit> . indeed, a newly formed partnership between the dupont and broin companies will utilize recombinant strains of z. mobilis for bio-ethanol fermentation from the lignocellulosic residues such as corn stover  <cit> .

z. mobilis ferments glucose, fructose, and sucrose producing ethanol and carbon dioxide via the entner-doudoroff  pathway, utilizing pyruvate decarboxylase and alcohol dehydrogenase enzymes . z. mobilis is not a classic facultative organism, rather it is aerotolerant, negating oxygen requirements in fermentations and the need for expensive oxygen transfer. the unusual physiology of z. mobilis generates only one mole of atp per mole of glucose, which results in low biomass production and greater carbon being available for fermentation products under anaerobic conditions. its desirable ethanologenic attributes also include: high sugar uptake rates, near theoretical ethanol yields, high ethanol tolerance and generally regarded as safe  status. wild-type z. mobilis can only utilize a limited range of substrates; however, it is amenable to genetic manipulation and recombinant strains have been developed to ferment pentose sugars such as xylose and arabinose  <cit> . seo et al  reported the first genome sequence for z. mobilis zm <dig>  <cit>  and the u. s. department of energy's joint genome institute   has announced plans to sequence the genomes of additional z. mobilis strains in the near future. the zm <dig> genome sequence provides new opportunities for fundamental insight into the physiology and gene function and regulation of this unique microorganism and likely improvements in strain development  <cit> . the presence of oxygen during z. mobilis fermentations has been observed to negatively affect cell and ethanol yields with acetic acid and acetaldehyde accumulating in the medium  <cit> . however, there are also reports that respiration inhibition by cyanide stimulates z. mobilis growth aerobically  <cit> . many aspects of end-product inhibition and basic aspects of z. mobilis physiology remain unexplored  <cit> .

in this study, we combined transcriptomic profiling with metabolomic measurements of aerobic and anaerobic z. mobilis fermentations to elucidate the molecular mechanisms of zm4s growth with and without oxygen. metabolomics is the study of the low molecular weight metabolites present in and around a biological organism at a given time  <cit> . to date, there are few reports of bacterial mrna expression-profiling using whole genome microarray analysis conducted in conjunction with metabolomics  <cit> . we confirmed maintenance of anaerobiosis was important for maximizing ethanol yields since acetaldehyde, acetate, lactate and acetoin accumulated and ethanol was present in lower concentrations under controlled aerobic conditions. our data revealed alterations in mrna expression profiles, differences in intra- and extracellular metabolites, as well as identification of differential expression for coding sequences predicted by tigr  and not predicted in the primary annotation. these data provide global insight into potential molecular mechanisms of z. mobilis aerobic and end-product stress responses.

RESULTS
zm <dig> grows and consumes glucose faster under anaerobic conditions
the presence of oxygen negatively affected glucose consumption and growth in z. mobilis zm <dig> fermentations . anaerobic fermentation led to a maximal culture density of  <dig>  od <dig> units approximately  <dig> h post-inoculation, while z. mobilis did not reach its highest culture density of  <dig>  od <dig> units until  <dig> h post-inoculation under aerobic conditions despite initial inocula concentrations being slightly greater than the former condition. z. mobilis also consumed glucose more slowly under aerobic conditions, with more than half of the initial aerobic glucose concentration  remaining  <dig> h post-inoculation. under anaerobic conditions  <dig> % of the glucose had been utilized at this time point. when z. mobilis growth reached its peak after  <dig> h under aerobic conditions 14% of the glucose remained with the remainder consumed without cell growth . despite these differences and differences in extracellular metabolite production , the maximum specific growth rates were not dramatically different, which were estimated to be  <dig>  h- <dig> and  <dig>  h- <dig> between aerobic and anaerobic conditions, respectively. fermentor ph, dissolved o <dig> tension , and agitation speed were well-controlled, which was indicated by the mean fermentor ph, dot, and agitation values for each condition , and dot trend data for each condition .

z. mobilis extracellular metabolite production
previous reports have indicated that ethanol production was decreased and other end-products such as acetaldehyde, acetate and acetoin were increased under aerobic conditions  <cit> . gc and hplc were used to quantify and compare the kinetics of ethanol, acetate, acetaldehyde, lactate and acetoin production during aerobic and anaerobic fermentation processes and extracellular metabolites were often measured by more than one approach, which confirmed the observed trends. the more rapid production of ethanol under anaerobic conditions also corresponded with increased glucose uptake and growth under these conditions . the ethanol concentration remained relatively stable post-peak production in anaerobic fermentations. in contrast, at  <dig> h the ethanol concentration dropped sharply from  <dig>  mm to  <dig>  mm at the end of the  <dig> h fermentation during aerobic fermentation. the decrease in ethanol concentration during this time was matched in nearly stoichiometric increases of acetate production, which went from  <dig>  mm at  <dig> h to  <dig>  mm at  <dig> h . gc data also showed several other minor unidentified metabolites were being produced during aerobic fermentations relative to anaerobic conditions . the concentration of acetaldehyde increased during the exponential growth and dropped appreciably during stationary phase, while acetoin was detected during stationary phase . lactate trended similarly to ethanol and acetoin profiles for respective conditions. the anaerobic ethanol yield at  <dig> h was  <dig>  g/g of glucose or 97% theoretical and less than 1% of the yield went to solvent products other than ethanol or co <dig> . in contrast, under aerobic conditions at  <dig> h  <dig>  g/g of glucose or 27% theoretical yield was obtained for ethanol and by  <dig> h around  <dig>  mm ethanol remained . the total measured solvents produced aerobically was  <dig> g/l, which was approximately 50% of theoretical total solvent yield at  <dig> h and at  <dig> h these figures had dropped to  <dig> g/l or approximately 37% of theoretical total solvent yield. as cell biomass  was approximately equivalent under the two conditions more carbon went to maintenance energy under aerobic conditions.

z. mobilis intracellular metabolomic profiles
the physiological status of zm <dig> was investigated further by gc-ms analysis of stationary phase intracellular metabolomic profiles for each respective condition. gc-ms identified a large number of metabolites, however, we present those that showed differences in relative abundance and showed some statistical significance. we observed differences in relative abundance profiles for metabolites related to central carbon metabolism, although only several were considered significantly different during the stationary phase time point we examined. we present a relative comparison of the metabolite difference from two conditions in keeping with current practices, while recognizing accessing metabolites like atp will require modified procedures  <cit> . metabolite identification and analysis gave  <dig> metabolites that were different between anaerobic and aerobic cultures, with five out of the  <dig> less abundant in anaerobic z. mobilis. twelve metabolites were considered significantly different with a p-value less than  <dig>  . the inclusion of a greater number of replicates would have increased analysis power and possibly increased the number of metabolites considered significantly different between anaerobic cells and those exposed to oxygen.

glucose-6-phosphate and 2-phosphoglycerate were  <dig>  and  <dig>  fold more abundant under anaerobic conditions , while others in the ed pathway may have been at greater levels under aerobic conditions. the ability to detect labile phosphorylated intermediates such as these, in the absence of accumulation phosphate was indicative of adequate sample preparation for gc-ms analysis of the metabolites analyzed in the present study. aerobic z. mobilis contained more of the glucose substrate, as well as glycerate, and gluconate as compared to the anaerobic cells, while other intermediate sugar metabolites that included glucose-6-phosphate, 2-phosphoglycerate and mannose-6-phosphate were more abundant within the anaerobic fermenting z. mobilis . the transcriptomic profiles of entner-dondoroff and pyruvate metabolic pathways showed higher expression values for these genes under anaerobic conditions even though extracellular glucose had been consumed by  <dig> h . all of the differentially detected amino acids were at lower concentrations within anaerobic fermenting z. mobilis . the other metabolites showing differences included lactate, 4-hydroxybutanoate, ribitol, trehalose and unknown metabolites. trehalose was  <dig> -fold more abundant within aerobic z. mobilis compared to anaerobic cultures, and 4-hydroxybutanoate was the most abundant metabolite detected within anaerobic condition at  <dig> -fold higher levels compared to aerobic conditions .

transcriptome comparison of z. mobilis aerobic and anaerobic fermentations
the global transcriptional response of z. mobilis zm <dig> to aerobic stress was examined in a time series dna microarray experiment for early exponential phase  and stationary phase  under aerobic and anaerobic conditions with whole-genome microarrays. in this study, we have presented experimental data of  <dig> differentially expressed genes at statistically significant values  =  <dig> ) with a number of  <dig> putative protein-coding sequences in strain zm <dig>  that were not originally described in the primary genome annotation . we have deposited the entire microarray dataset including exponential and stationary phase at gene expression omnibus  database with the accession number of gse <dig> so interested parties can conduct their analyses.

gene expression during the early exponential phase was surprisingly similar between anaerobic and aerobic conditions used in the present study . eight genes were discovered that were considered differentially expressed at a significant level utilizing the anova model using the false discovery rate . of these, only one gene  showed a greater than a two-fold difference in relative expression levels. to confirm the microarray results, seventeen genes involving in ed and pyruvate pathways and different cellular functions were chosen for the qpcr analysis . the data showed that qpcr was more sensitive and showed greater fold change differences compared to the microarray analysis, which was in keeping with previous reports  <cit> . we describe here only a rigorous analysis of stationary phase genes in this study and allow interested parties to conduct their own analyses on the entire dataset, which is available publicly through the geo database. in the stationary phase  <dig> genes were significantly differentially expressed between anaerobic and aerobic conditions . this time point also showed the largest differences in extracellular metabolite profiles . fifty-five genes were up-regulated at  <dig> h post-inoculation under aerobic conditions and  <dig> genes were down-regulated . approximately two thirds of the genes down-regulated in the presence of oxygen for this time point were related to metabolism . in the presence of oxygen, genes related to regulation, cell processes, transport, and unknown function showed greater expression as compared to anaerobic conditions. nearly half of the genes showing greater expression aerobically remain uncharacterized .

in the stationary phase, ed pathway mrnas such as glk, zwf, pgl, pgk, and eno as well as ethanol fermentation gene transcripts like pdc and adhb were shown to be more abundant  under anaerobic conditions by microarray analysis . in this study we observed that one arginyl-trna synthetase involved in ribosome-mediated polypeptide synthesis, eight genes related to ribosomal protein synthesis and amino acid and co-factor biosynthetic genes such as leuc, trpb, argc, ilvi, ilvc, thrc, thic, and ribc showed greater expression under anaerobic conditions . metabolomics data showed that a number of detected amino acids were generally less abundant in anaerobic fermenting cells compared to aerobic cells .

our microarray data identified a cysteine desulfurase , thiosulfate sulfurtransferase  and a  binding domain family protein  as being up-regulated under aerobic conditions  and suggested the metabolism of sulfur compounds was impacted by aerobic conditions. however, we did not observe any trends related to sulfur-containing metabolites in our metabolomics dataset. genes related to sensing and responding to environmental signals including three chemotaxis genes chex , motd  and flid , six transcriptional regulators including a two-component signal transduction  histidine kinase  and response regulator  were up-regulated during aerobic fermentation . we also observed that several atp synthase subunit genes  were expressed less under aerobic conditions. the expression of nad synthetase gene , involved in nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide de novo biosynthesis and salvage pathways was approximately 9-fold greater in the presence of oxygen . several flavoprotein transcripts, nitroreductase  and flavodoxin , were approximately 9-fold more abundant under aerobic conditions.

expression of a number of stress response genes was found to be greater in the presence of oxygen or by-products in the stationary phase. under aerobic conditions zmo <dig> encoding a thioredoxin was induced approximately four-fold, zmo <dig>  encoding a ferredoxin showed six-fold induction, zmo <dig>  encoding an alkyl hydroperoxide reductase showed 18-fold greater expression, zmo <dig> encoding a cold-shock protein was induced two-fold, and a glutathione s-transferase family protein encoded by zmo <dig> was induced eight-fold. the e. coli alternative sigma factor rpoh plays an important role in overcoming oxidative stress responses  <cit>  and rpoh  was induced approximately 32-fold under aerobic conditions via q-pcr in our study . other regulators with greater expression levels under aerobic condition include zmo <dig> encoding a merr family regulator, zmo <dig> encoding a two-component signal transduction histidine kinase, zmo <dig> encoding a two-component response regulator, and zmo <dig>  encoding a sigma 54-dependent transcription suppressor . a number of these microarray expression values were confirmed by qpcr .

the microarray data also indicated that a number of cds predicted by tigr but not present in the primary annotation  <cit>  were differentially expressed between the two conditions. transcripts for nt01zm <dig> encoding a fe-s binding domain family protein and nine other orfs with unknown functions were more abundant under aerobic conditions representing approximately 9% of all the genes up-regulated under these conditions . the only example of an up-regulated gene  without primary locus identification during anaerobic fermentation was nt01zm <dig>  which encodes a putative arginyl-trna synthetase .

discussion
z. mobilis has a number of positive attributes as an ethanogen and is a leading current generation candidate microorganism for use in commercial scale fermentations to produce fuel ethanol  <cit> . in the present study, we confirmed oxygen levels were important in z. mobilis growth rates, ethanol production and altered metabolite pools . anaerobic z. mobilis fermentations utilized glucose more rapidly and grew more quickly with concomitant increases in ethanol productivity and yield as compared to aerobic z. mobilis cultures . both intra- and extracellular lactate was identified as being more abundant in aerobic stationary phase z. mobilis . our data were also consistent with previous reports  <cit>  showing metabolites such as lactate, acetate, and acetoin were more abundant during aerobic fermentation . ishikawa et al.  <cit>  proposed a model to explain the effect of oxygen on the nadh reducing power pool for the conversion of glucose into ethanol as the major end-product. they suggest that under aerobic conditions nadh is limiting due to it being oxidized by the nadh oxidase and therefore unavailable for reduction of acetaldehyde to ethanol. these data combined with lower intracellular glucose and ed pathway intermediates  would agree with such a model and previous reports  <cit> . while we did not obtain the data for nad+, nadh, atp metabolites, altered redox balance with concomitant increases in other metabolites produced such as acetate, lactate, acetoin, and acetaldehyde in the presence of oxygen may account for lower ethanol production . we were able to observe differences in gene expression between exponential phase conditions by microarray, but not at levels considered significant using the bonferroni multiple testing method . quantitative pcr assays showed greater sensitivity than array analyses but the majority of genes showed little difference in expression levels between aerobic and anaerobic conditions in early exponential phase. each culture had more than doubled by the early exponential growth phase sampling point and this time point should have mitigated any potential inocula effects. the observation that there was an absence of a lag phase indirectly supports the idea that there was neither a large perturbation nor large regulatory response by the microbe upon inoculation into the fermentors . the large differences in exponential and stationary phase transcriptomic profiles imply zm <dig> is aerotolerant and oxygen affected the physiology of the cells leading to the buildup of metabolic byproducts, which ultimately led to greater expression differences in stationary phase.

seo et al  describe the z. mobilis zm <dig>  genome as consisting of a single chromosome  <cit> , which we utilized for probe design and microarray fabrication. the same z. mobilis zm <dig>  strain utilized in this study contained plasmid dna, which was in keeping with an earlier report describing the nomenclature and derivation of z. mobilis strains  <cit> . therefore, the array data in the present study may not fully represent the differences between aerobic and anaerobic conditions since these plasmid dna sequences were unavailable. we used a multiplex array format with an average probe length of  <dig> nucleotides and were able to detect significantly differentially expressed genes. however, the use of shorter probes likely affected the sensitivity of the microarray analyses  <cit> . the proper identification of putative coding sequences and the use of systems biology tools will be important in identifying genome features that can be altered for improved ethanol production. the jgi's plans to sequence the genomes for additional zymomonas mobilis strains, including strain zm <dig> will likely improve gene prediction models and elucidate potential coding sequences present on plasmid dna.

the effects of oxygen on z. mobilis fermentation performance parameters and physiology have been examined in a number of previous studies  <cit> . however, this is the first report we are aware of that examines its effects on whole genome transcriptomic and metabolomic profiles of the bacterium under rigorously controlled conditions. the z. mobilis strain cp <dig> glf, zwf, edd and glk genes for glucose uptake and utilization form an operon and coordinate gene expression appears to result from a complex pattern of mrna degradation  <cit> . the zm <dig> glf, zwf, edd and glk genes are similarly organized and all showed greater expression in stationary phase under anaerobic conditions, which was about  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  and 10-fold respectively more than that of aerobic condition, respectively. however edd differential expression did not meet our stringent significance criterion with a -log <dig> =  <dig> . the glf gene encodes a glucose-facilitated diffusion transporter protein, which showed greater expression  under anaerobic conditions even in the absence of detectable amounts of glucose in the medium at  <dig> h . zmo <dig> showed 5-fold greater expression in the absence of oxygen. zmo <dig> is a putative oprb family carbohydrate-selective porin containing a pfam <dig>  conserved domain with an e-value score of 5e- <dig> and 27% identity to pseudomonas aeruginosa outer membrane protein oprb  <cit> . p. aeruginosa oprb transports glucose, mannitol, glycerol, and fructose. the e. coli expression of pathways for hexose uptake and metabolism has been shown to be up-regulated in the response to oxygen deprivation  <cit> . a number of ed and pyruvate biosynthetic pathway genes  were showed higher expression levels under anaerobic conditions at  <dig> h when compared to the equivalent aerobic time point, but at levels not considered significant . previous physiological studies have indicated that enzymatic activities for glucokinase, glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase, glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase, atpase, pyruvate kinase and alcohol dehydrogenase are decreased when oxygen partial pressure increases  <cit> . the intracellular metabolomic data suggests glucose present in anaerobic cells rapidly becomes phosphorylated, providing substrate for further glucose utilization . expression of the pdc and adhb genes involved in z. mobilis ethanol production was increased at least two-fold during anaerobic fermentation and was consistent with fermentation product and growth data .

these data suggest oxygen affects how carbon is utilized and partitioned in z. mobilis under highly aerobic fermentations leading to the buildup of inhibitors such as acetaldehyde and acetate and to the accumulation of non-reducing sugars like trehalose that contribute to overall lower ethanol yields. the accumulation of acetate at the end of the aerobic fermentation was much more pronounced than seen in a number of previous studies, although the highly aerated fermentors with dot measurement used in this study likely meant the culture conditions were quite different from previous batch fermentations without dot measurement. in this study, we used an agitation rate of  <dig> rpm in conjunction with sparging air at  <dig>  l/min to maintain fully aerobic conditions as previous experiments had demonstrated a lower agitation rate and this airflow rate was insufficient to maintain fully aerobic conditions as cell density increased . putative aldehyde dehydrogenase genes such as ssda  did not show differential expression in our study, but may potentially play a role in conversion of acetaldehyde to acetate in conjunction with possible reverse alcohol dehydrogenase reactions. however, much more detailed studies are required to understand the large accumulation of acetate under highly aerobic conditions.

kalnenieks  <cit>  reviewed the physiology of z. mobilis, identified a number of unanswered questions about its energy metabolism, and determined that the structure and physiological role of the z. mobilis respiratory chain remains to be fully elucidated. kalnenieks et al  <cit>  concluded that z. mobilis contains a single nadh dehydrogenase encoded by ndh gene, and that its inhibition results in decreased respiration and improved aerobic growth. while we were not able to measure nad, we did observe that ndh  encoding nadh dehydrogenase was down-regulated in aerobic stationary phase cultures . a number of other respiratory genes were also down-regulated under these conditions. these included zmo <dig>  zmo <dig>  zmo <dig> and zmo <dig> encoding a putative fe-s oxidoreductase, nadh dehydrogenase, cytochrome bd-type quinol oxidase subunits  <dig> and  <dig>  and oxidoreductase genes, respectively . the stimulation of aerobic growth is proposed to be due to redirection of the nadh flux from respiration to ethanol synthesis resulting in less accumulation of toxic intermediates  <cit> . several models have been proposed to account for the distribution of reducing equivalents between putative respiratory gene products and alcohol dehydrogenase reactions  <cit> . in one model both alcohol dehydrogenase isozymes catalyze ethanol synthesis and oxidation back to acetaldehyde and in another, the two isozymes operate in opposite directions. under aerobic conditions, ethanol yield peaked around  <dig> h followed by net ethanol and acetaldehyde oxidation with concomitant increases in acetate and acetoin concentrations while approximately  <dig>  mm of glucose remained in the medium at  <dig> h . we observed that expression of adhb  in anaerobically cultured cells was approximately three-fold greater than when compared to aerobic cells at  <dig> h . adha  showed approximately  <dig> -fold higher expression aerobically when compared to anaerobic cells, but did not meet our stringent criterion of a -log <dig> of  <dig> . z. mobilis contains two alcohol dehydrogenases, adhb, an iron-containing alcohol dehydrogenase inactivated by oxygen and adha, a zinc-containing alcohol dehydrogenase that is resistant to oxidation  <cit> . our adhb expression data were consistent with potential iron limitation and/or differential inactivation of adhb under aerobic conditions.

we identified, for the first time to our knowledge, transcripts for the putative respiratory gene zmo <dig> , encoding a putative nadh:ubiquinone oxidoreductase subunit that were expressed more greatly  under aerobic conditions. the rhodobacter capsulatus rnf gene products form a membrane complex involved in electron transfer to nitrogenase, however no physiological information is available for the rnf gene products of z. mobilis, which does not fix nitrogen  <cit> . although sootsuwan et al.  <cit>  demonstrate z. mobilis has a cyanide-resistant terminal oxidase and could detect little difference between aerobic and anaerobic exponential phase ubiquinol oxidase activities, they documented significantly more ubiquinol oxidase activity in stationary phase cell membrane prepared anaerobically. we observed that expression of the z. mobilis cytochrome bd-type quinol oxidase subunits genes  was slightly greater in stationary phase under anaerobic conditions. trace amounts of oxygen, below detection limits, might have been present in anaerobic fermentors during stationary phase . however, e. coli cydab genes show greater expression under anaerobic conditions due to the change in negative supercoiling status and it has been suggested this may provide a mechanism for increasing cytochrome bd levels in response to environmental stress  <cit> . sootsuwan et al.  <cit>  proposed a number of possible physiological roles for a z. mobilis respiratory chain including: controlling nadh levels to control ethanol production, reducing intracellular oxygen concentration and maintenance of nadh levels inside cells. the present study identified a number of putative genes involved in respiration as being expressed differentially depending upon conditions. however, it is clear much remains to be done to fully elucidate their function in redox balance and overall regulation. the contribution of individual genes in electron transfer and metabolic processes need to be followed up with targeted deletion mutant studies. the most surprising finding was the minimal impact of oxygen on the transcriptomic profiles in early exponential. mutant studies would also be useful in assessing the physiology of early exponential growth phase aerobic z. mobilis cells.

ribitol was the most abundant differentially detected intracellular metabolite by gc-ms, at approximately 17-fold greater levels within aerobic cells compared to anaerobic cells . the addition of various straight-chain alditols including ribitol has been reported to lead to the formation of novel e. coli phospholipids  <cit> . however, we did not conduct detailed phospholipid fatty acid  analysis, nor target intact membranes. ribitol and adenosine  are also both flavin adenine dinucleotide  components, which may reflect differences in redox potential and electron transfer between the two different conditions. further studies are required to elucidate the role of ribitol and other metabolites like 4-hydroxybutanoate in z. mobilis physiology and identify the unknown metabolites we detected. gc-ms based metabolomics provides a useful platform to examine a broad range of metabolites such as sugars, sugar alcohols, sugar acids, organic acids, amino acids, fatty acids, sterols, secondary metabolites, phenolic glycosides, alkaloids, purines, pyrimidines, and nucleosides  <cit> . however, a number of classes of metabolites cannot be detected by gc-ms and ribitol may not be the largest metabolite difference between these states. the differences of intracellular lactate indicated this metabolite was more abundant under aerobic conditions , which was consistent with levels detected in the medium supernatant .

several zm <dig> genes related to oxidative stress responses were up-regulated under aerobic, stationary phase conditions, including ahpc encoding alkyl hydroperoxide reductase, zmo <dig> encoding thioredoxin, and zmo <dig> encoding a glutathione s-transferase family protein . however, many systems involved in oxygen detoxification and redox homeostasis were not differentially expressed. there were no significant gene expression differences for classical oxidative stress response genes such as peroxidase , catalase , and iron-dependent superoxide dismutase  when aerobic cultures were compared to anaerobic cultures. the glutathione system related genes such as gor , gshb  and zmo <dig> were also not affected significantly . pyrococcus furiosus exposed to gamma irradiation, which generates hydroxyl radicals and oxidative stress showed many systems involved in oxygen detoxification and redox homeostasis appeared to be constitutively expressed  <cit> . furthermore, genes encoding superoxide dismutase, catalase, nonspecific peroxidases or thioredoxin reductase were not significantly expressed in response to air exposure in the obligate anaerobe methanosarcina barkeri  <cit> . the z. mobilis transcriptome analyses also suggested a relationship between aerobic conditions  and cellular iron requirement  as indicated by higher levels of expression of genes involved in iron sequestration and uptake. transcripts for z. mobilis iron-uptake and scavenging genes including pbua , feob , zmo <dig>  and zmo <dig>  were all more abundant under aerobic conditions in stationary phase. a number of other studies such as those described by brown et al  <cit>  and williams et al  <cit>  have shown linkages between oxidative stress and expression of genes related to iron-uptake and storage.

the z. mobilis zmo <dig> and zmo <dig> genes were up-regulated under anaerobic conditions  and are annotated as transcriptional regulator and hypothetical proteins, respectively  <cit> . blastp analyses indicated that zmo <dig> is similar to the e. coli global regulator leucine-responsive regulatory protein  and zmo <dig> is similar to the e. coli global regulator hfq, sharing about 40% and 60% identity to the e. coli lrp and hfq proteins, respectively. e. coli lrp regulates transcription of many lrp regulon genes with leucine as a co-regulator and also acts as a determinant of chromosome structure to coordinate cellular metabolism with the environmental nutritional state  <cit> . we observed different levels of intracellular leucine in the present study, but not at highly significant levels . the best-studied lrp family regulator is the e. coli lrp, which affects the expression of at least 10% of all e. coli genes. microarray analysis of gene expression profiles for e. coli lrp+ and lrp- strains indicates more than  <dig> genes are significantly lrp-responsive with expression for  <dig> genes lower in lrp+ compared to lrp- cells  <cit> . in addition, lrp has been suggested to play an important role in e. coli stationary phase regulation. out of the  <dig> genes induced upon entrance into stationary phase, lrp affects nearly three-quarters of them in e. coli  <cit> . it is well known that e. coli rpos alternative sigma factor controls stationary phase gene expression  <cit> . the genome sequence shows that z. mobilis has rpoh , rpoe , rpon , and flia  genes but no identifiable rpos gene  <cit> . zmo <dig> may play a role in stationary phase and stress regulation in z. mobilis, but further studies are required to determine what functional overlap, if any, this protein has with rpos-like functions in this bacterium.

a putative z. mobilis hfq global regulator was induced during anaerobic fermentation . hfq is a bacterial member of the sm family of rna-binding proteins, which acts by base-pairing with target mrnas and functions as a chaperone for non-coding small rna  in e. coli  <cit> . hfq is involved in regulating various processes and deletion of hfq has pleiotropic phenotypes, including slow growth, osmosensitivity, increased oxidation of carbon sources, and altered patterns of protein synthesis in e. coli  <cit> . e. coli hfq has also been reported to affect genes involved in amino acid biosynthesis, sugar uptake, metabolism and energetics  <cit> . the expression of thirteen ribosomal genes was down-regulated in hfq mutant background in e. coli  <cit> . hfq also up-regulated sugar uptake transporters and enzymes involved in glycolysis and fermentation such as pgk and pyka, and adhe  <cit> . hfq is also involved in regulation of general stress responses that are mediated by alternative sigma factors such as rpos, rpoe and rpoh. an hfq null mutant of e. coli exhibits strongly reduced rpos levels by impairing rpos translation  <cit> . cells lacking hfq induce the rpoe-mediated envelope stress response and rpoh is also induced in cells lacking hfq in e. coli  <cit> . in our study, hfq was less abundant in aerobic fermentation condition in zm <dig> at  <dig> h post-inoculation  with eight ribosomal protein genes including rplf, rply, and rpme down-regulated . meanwhile, glucose uptake genes such as glf and oprb, ed pathway genes such as glk, zwf, pgl, eno, and ethanol fermentation genes pdc and adhb were less abundant under aerobic condition in z. mobilis . in addition, our microarray and qpcr data indicate that rpoh is also induced in aerobic condition  with low abundance of hfq transcripts . the association of hfq with the expression of alternative sigma factor rpoh, ribosomal proteins and glycolytic enzyme in z. mobilis is similar to that of e. coli as discussed above, which may indicate a similar conserved role of hfq in both e. coli and z. mobilis. however, further studies such as mutagenesis are required to elucidate the z. mobilis hfq regulon.

1pcr primer pair nomenclature. f: forward primer, r: reverse primer for each respective gene.

CONCLUSIONS
our study has provided insights into transcriptomic and metabolic profiles of the model ethanogenic bacterium z. mobilis during aerobic and anaerobic fermentation under controlled fermentation conditions for the first time. it is unlikely the oxygen levels we used in the present study would be as high in an industrial setting, even in a major perturbation to the fermentation. however, our study showed oxygen affects maintenance energy, how carbon is utilized and partitioned in z. mobilis fermentations and can lead to the buildup of inhibitors such as acetaldehyde and acetate under highly aerobic conditions, which contributed to lower ethanol yields. the most surprising finding was that while high oxygen concentrations resulted in slower growth, there seemed to be minimal impact on early exponential growth phase transcriptomic profiles. however, differences in energy-spilling pathways due to oxygen and uncoupled growth later led to large differences in ethanol yield and transcriptomic profiles between anaerobic and aerobic stationary phase cultures. our study also identified a range of genes such as cyda/b, rpoh or zmo <dig> that could be targeted for deletion to better understand z. mobilis physiology and coordinate regulation. future studies examining the transcriptomic profiles for aerobic, microoxic and anaerobic steady states, the dynamics of transition between steady states and the use of mutant strains are warranted to provide greater insights into z. mobilis physiology and gene regulation. finally, our microarray based on the tigr annotation has identified a number of genes that were not originally annotated as coding sequences in  <dig> when the first z. mobilis genome sequence was published  <cit> , which included about 9% of the aerobic up-regulated genes . the rapid accumulation of genome sequence information and sequencing technology advances make improving gene coding models and annotations even more important.

