BACKGROUND
the efficiency and integrity of the societies of ants, bees, and wasps relies on a well-controlled division of reproduction  <cit> . workers rarely lay eggs in the presence of a fertile queen  <cit> . this is surprising, as workers are more closely related to their own sons  than to the sons of the queen  and in queenless conditions are usually capable of producing male offspring from their own, unfertilized eggs  <cit> .

complete worker sterility benefits the queen, which should be selected to inhibit worker reproduction. however, overt aggression by the queen is very rare and appears restricted to very small colonies  <cit> . instead, reproduction appears to be controlled chemically by glandular or cuticular pheromones  <cit> . in honeybees, secretions from the mandibular glands and other sources are thought to regulate egg laying in the hive . in contrast, the chemical composition of cuticular waxes is correlated with fecundity in a wide and diverse range of species of ants. this suggests the involvement of cuticular hydrocarbons in the regulation of reproduction  <cit> , and indeed, 3-methyl-hentriacontane has recently been shown to regulate worker sterility in the ant lasius niger  <cit> .

the question why workers respond to queen pheromones by foregoing their own reproduction is a special case of the more general, fundamental problem of whether intraspecific communication is honest or manipulative. queen-specific chemicals might act as primer pheromones that actively suppress the ovaries of workers  <cit> . however, it has been argued that such inhibitive queen control were instable in evolution if acting against the fitness interests of the workers  <cit> . mutations rendering workers insensitive to queen inhibition would spread in the population, again changing the selection pressures on queens and favoring queen mutations that qualitatively or quantitatively changed their manipulative agents. the resulting arms race between queens and workers would eventually lead to more and more complex pheromone mixtures. as an alternative, pheromones produced by the queens might honestly signal their level of fertility. workers might respond in their own interest, e.g., to avoid being attacked  by the queen or other workers  <cit> . worker altruism might therefore be "enforced"  <cit> .

honest signaling requires that the quantity or quality of queen pheromones is strictly associated with their level of fertility and mating status  <cit> . this, however, is often not the case. for example, unmated reproductives may produce similar pheromonal bouquets as mated reproductives  <cit> . furthermore, the hypothesis of manipulative regulation of reproduction appears to gain renewed support from the observation that, at least in honeybees, the regulation of reproduction is based on a very large number of substances from multiple glands  <cit> .

distinguishing between queen control and honest signaling is difficult without detailed knowledge about the molecular and cellular mechanisms involved. however, both mechanisms might leave different traces in evolution  <cit> . the series of manipulation and counter-manipulation associated with the scenario of queen control results in a rapid evolution of queen compounds. queen pheromones therefore likely differ even between related species. in contrast, honest signals are expected to be more stable in evolution and to evolve more slowly. unfortunately, little is known about the variation of fertility-associated chemical compounds among related species. in this study, we compared the composition of worker and queen cuticular hydrocarbons among different species of the ant genus temnothorax. in addition, we investigated whether workers begin laying eggs in the presence of a queen from another, closely or distantly related species. we hypothesized that with queen control and rapid evolution, queens should be less efficient in suppressing ovary development by workers from another species. furthermore, we expected the chemical bouquet of queens to differ more between species than those of workers. in contrast, in the case of honest signaling, workers would react to fertility signals by queens from another species, and the bouquets of queens from different species would be not more different than those of workers.

RESULTS
worker ovary activation and male-production by workers
experimental colonies, in which queens and workers either belonged to the same species or to different species, were created by exchanging worker pupae among colonies. ovary dissection showed that all queens had elongated ovaries with numerous yellow bodies and maturing eggs, i.e., they were fully fertile. none of the workers in the control colonies had activated ovaries . though we had observed sporadic worker egg-laying in queenright colonies of t. recedens in a previous study , dissection data did not corroborate this result for the presently studied colonies.

in all queenless colonies, the ovaries of several workers were activated . this indicates that workers are capable of activating their ovaries within six weeks after removal of the queen. fertile workers were also found in some of the mixed-species colonies, such as rc , cu , nr and cr .

colonies were set up in the years  <dig> and  <dig>  the number of colonies randomly chosen for the assessment of ovary activation and for the assessment of worker male-production is given. the first letter in colony denominations indicates the species of the queen , the second the species of the workers.

in  <dig>  a total of  <dig> males were collected from  <dig> colonies . five colonies, in which the queen or most of the workers had died, were excluded from further analyses. in all colonies, except rc <dig>  queens had fully developed and activated ovaries with yellow bodies and maturing eggs.

*in colony rc <dig> the ovaries of the queen were not fully developed.

numbers of males produced per colony by the queen or by workers are shown, respectively. colony composition and colony names are explained in table  <dig>  explanation of allozyme electromorphs are given in the text.

allozyme analyses revealed that males in mixed-species colonies were produced by the queen , by the workers  or both . queens of colonies uc <dig> and uc <dig> were homozygous for the s allele, and m-males were therefore offspring of t. crassispinus workers, while the one s-male was son of a t. unifasciatus queen. all queens of colonies nu <dig> to nu <dig> were homozygous ff, and the s- and m-males were therefore offspring of t. unifasciatus workers.

in the cu colonies, s-males were presumably produced by t. unifasciatus workers, but m-males could in principle be sons of a t. crassispinus queen or t. unifasciatus workers. mitochondrial dna analysis revealed that the eight males in colony cu <dig> were offspring of t. unifasciatus workers, while the  <dig> males from the colony cu <dig> were produced by the t. crassispinus queen.

cuticular hydrocarbons of queens and workers from different species of temnothorax ants
the cuticular profiles of queens and workers of the six temnothorax species consisted of a total of  <dig> peaks .  <dig> peaks consistently appeared in all six species and  <dig> peaks could be identified by gc-ms . the profiles of queens and workers were predominantly characterized by the linear alkane n-c <dig> , while individuals of t. recedens were characterized by several longer chained hydrocarbons. due to their very low abundance, peaks  <dig> to  <dig> and a few other peaks marked in table s <dig>  with an asterisk could not be identified. however, the latter peaks had exactly the same retention time as peaks in other species, which could be identified and are therefore assumed to be chemically identical to these compounds.

percentages of correct classifications of individuals from predefined groups are given in the right column.

the chemical distances between t. nylanderi and t. crassispinus queens are lower compared to the other pair-wise comparisons among queens . the groups of t. recedens queens and workers are chemically most distant from the groups of the other three temnothorax species . interestingly, distances among queens are higher than among workers in four of six pair-wise comparisons .

euclidean resemblance matrix based on cuticular hydrocarbon profiles of queens  and workers  from the four species of temnothorax ants involved in the mixed-species experiment . figures in bold indicate a close euclidean distance between a pair of groups in contrast to the other compared pairs of groups.

within each species, chemical distances between groups of queens and workers are statistically significant and their cuticular profiles are classified correctly in a discriminant analysis .

discussion and 
CONCLUSIONS
our study about the cross-specificity of the chemical compounds used in the regulation of reproduction in colonies of temnothorax ants reveals a promising new approach to answering the question of whether queen pheromones are manipulative or honest signals. queen pheromones appear to be less active across species-borders than within species. no worker reproduction was observed in single-species colonies. in contrast, queens were not able to fully prevent ovary development and male-production by workers from non-related species, which indicates that queen pheromones are not fully conserved in evolution in this group of species. furthermore, the rate of worker reproduction and ovary development of workers in mixed-species was lower than in queenless colonies, which speaks against the rapid evolution of queen pheromones expected from the queen control hypothesis.

these behavioral results are reflected in the chemical profiles of queens and workers, which in most pair-wise comparisons differed more between queens than between workers from different species but not tremendously so. this might suggest that queen bouquets diverge slightly more quickly than those of workers, but not at an extremely rapid speed. a faster divergence of queen- than worker-specific substances is in agreement with the hypothesis of a queen-worker arms race with manipulation and counter-manipulation. however, it might also reflect other forces of selection. for example, if queen-specific cuticular compounds were involved in attracting mates, avoidance of hybridization would quickly lead to species-specific queen bouquets. more information about the contexts in which cuticular substances are used in communication is therefore needed.

studies on the paper wasp polistes dominulus suggested a relatively high speed of evolution. here, the cuticular hydrocarbons that differed between egg layers and non-reproductives varied even between different populations  <cit> . the observation that the chemical profiles of t. crassispinus and t. nylanderi queens are more similar compared to the other temnothorax species, even though the two taxa diverged more than  <dig> million years ago  <cit> , makes similar intraspecific variation unlikely, but this remains to be investigated.

our data do not reveal a clear trend in the chemistry of those hydrocarbons that differentiate queens and workers among the six investigated species. this matches the heterogeneous picture found in other, less closely related ants, where reproductives are characterized by particular long-chained hydrocarbons in some species but shorter or branched hydrocarbons in others  <cit> . however, it needs to be pointed out that it is usually not known, which of the large number of substances that differ between queens and workers are biologically active and which are mere side-products of the hydrocarbon metabolism without a function in communication  <cit> .

our study reveals a number of species idiosyncrasies that do not match phylogenetic relationships and are difficult to explain in the light of hypotheses about the nature of queen pheromones. for example, t. nylanderi and t. crassispinus workers seem to respond to the presence of a t. unifasciatus queen, while t. unifasciatus workers readily develop their ovaries in the presence of a t. nylanderi or t. crassispinus queen. this resembles the situation in honeybees, in which the presence of a heterospecific queen increases the rate of worker ovary activation strongly in apis cerana but only slightly in apis mellifera  <cit> . in contrast, workers of the bumblebee bombus terrestris develop their ovaries in queenright colonies of the phylogenetically related b. lapidarius at a similar rate as under queenless conditions, but not in queenright homospecific colonies  <cit> . the results in these studies might have been affected by the presence of workers belonging to the species of the queen, as they might have an interest in preventing heterospecific workers from reproducing through aggression or egg eating. worker nepotism might explain the common absence of reproduction by host workers in socially parasitic ants. temnothorax workers are often parasitized by queens of slave-making species, such as chalepoxenus, myrmoxenus or protomognathus. though these genera are less closely related to temnothorax than the pairs of species used in our study , enslaved workers rarely produce males . either slave-making queens have evolved particularly manipulative queen pheromones, which are active across large phylogenetic distances, or their reproductive monopoly is additionally enforced by aggression. indeed, both queens and workers of slave-making ants have been observed to attack host workers in a way resembling the dominance interactions among the slave-makers themselves  <cit> .

though our results do not allow drawing final conclusions about the speed of queen pheromone evolution, comparisons of their cross-species activity might help to learn more about the nature of such pheromones and how quickly they diverge among species. the heterogeneity of queen substances might reflect an ongoing arms race between queens and workers  <cit> . however, it might also be a consequence of species-specific queen-bouquets serving to avoid hybridization. the fact that workers in mixed-species colonies did not behave like workers in queenless colonies strongly suggests that workers recognize queens belonging to another species and that queen pheromones regulating worker reproduction are partly conserved in evolution. this would be in agreement with the honest signal hypothesis.

