BACKGROUND
it is estimated that insects account for 18 % of global crop production losses  <cit> . an increase in average global temperature will likely intensify the damage caused by insect pests, as higher average temperature is predicted to increase insect populations through greater overwintering survival, higher reproductive rates, and an increased number of generations  <cit> . in particular, invasive species may have an advantage over indigenous species in such conditions . therefore, it is imperative to understand how invasive species can successfully invade and compromise ecosystems, sometimes in a very short timeframe. it has been hypothesized that high levels of phenotypic plasticity play an important role in the success of invasive species in changing conditions, such as those caused by global climate change  <cit> .

one such invasive species, drosophila suzukii matsumura  was first discovered in the continental usa  in  <dig>  <cit>  and has rapidly spread to become an established pest of fruit crops all over the world, including north and south america and much of europe, . commonly known as the spotted wing drosophila, this vinegar fly has an enlarged, serrated ovipositor, allowing adult females to penetrate the skin of soft-skinned, ripening fruit and lay eggs inside, where the larvae feed and destroy the fruit  <cit> . drosophila suzukii most commonly infests cherries, blackberries, raspberries, and strawberries, but has also been found to oviposit into grapes, plums, peaches, and other fruits  <cit> . in the u.s. alone, d. suzukii invasions have caused significant crop losses, and costs directly related to management practices are estimated to vary between $ <dig> and  <dig> million  annually  <cit> .

drosophila suzukii has a wide climatic presence, causing economic losses of affected fruits in areas ranging from mild subtropical production regions to severe continental climates  <cit> . in asia, where this species is native, d. suzukii are preferentially found at higher altitudes and higher latitudes when compared to other closely related species  <cit> . previous studies conducted on d. suzukii cold tolerance predict that this species will likely not survive extended periods of cold such as those found in production regions in canada, eastern oregon, washington, and michigan  <cit> . despite these predictions, d. suzukii is now an established pest in those regions  <cit> , and in fact has proven successful in a wide range of environments ranging from southern california to british columbia, canada  <cit> , raising the question of how this species can adapt to the harsh climates in more northern locations.

insects exhibit a wide variety of strategies to increase cold tolerance and overwinter. there are two main classes of cold-hardening:  seasonal cold-hardening, which is induced over a timescale of days to weeks, and  rapid cold-hardening, which can occur in minutes or hours, and is induced by a sudden drop in temperature like a cold snap  <cit> . both seasonal and rapid cold-hardening mechanisms include adjustments to ion transport and membrane restructuring to increase membrane fluidity at low temperatures. the synthesis of cryoprotectants, typically polyols such as glycerol, sorbitol, or inositol, is an important mechanism in seasonal cold-hardening, but it is unclear whether it is associated with rapid cold-hardening. up-regulation of antifreeze proteins and ice nucleating agents are mechanisms that increase cold tolerance in seasonally cold-hardened insects, but are not associated with rapid cold-hardening. inhibition of apoptotic cell death, map kinase signaling, and calcium signaling have all been found to be important mechanisms of the rapid cold-hardening response, but have not been found to occur in seasonal cold-hardening  <cit> .

seasonal cold-hardening is often an essential component of winter diapause, a process characterized by developmental arrest, decreased metabolic activity, and a general state of dormancy . reproductive diapause is an adaptation that allows an organism to temporarily cease reproduction in order to conserve resources to survive unfavorable conditions, continuing reproduction when more favorable conditions arise  <cit> . in fact, evolution of diapause has been linked to enabling range expansion in other invasive species  <cit> . diapause is found to occur in many drosophila species, including d. melanogaster, yet can vary significantly among clinally distributed natural populations . in d. suzukii, high rates of reproductively immature adult females have been observed in the months leading up to winter in hokkaido, japan, suggesting that a reproductive diapause may occur in this species  <cit> . additionally, d. suzukii has a relatively low nucleotide substitution rate when compared to other drosophilids  <cit> . this is consistent with presence of a reproductive diapause in this species, as a low substitution rate may be caused by fewer generations per year. diapause incidence has also been assessed via ovary dissection . wallingford et al. found that at a photoperiod of 12: <dig> l:d and 10 °c, there were almost no reproductively mature females in laboratory conditions, and no reproductively mature females in december at field collection sites in oregon and new york.

in addition to undergoing reproductive diapause, drosophilids are known to exhibit multiple strategies to survive suboptimal cold temperatures and low humidity. these strategies include accumulation of cryprotectants such as maltose, trehalose, proline, and myo-inositol , altered composition of membrane phospholipids  <cit> , and increased expression of stress-induced genes such as heat shock proteins . darker cuticle pigmentation has been hypothesized to be involved in thermoregulation of ectotherms in cold environments, resulting in increased ultraviolet absorption and increased ability to warm up  <cit> . however, increased melanization has also been implicated in immunity and increased desiccation resistance . a larger body size in colder environments may also be advantageous in colder temperatures, as it may be involved in thermoregulation  or cost-benefits of altered membrane fluidity  <cit> , but the relationship between body size and temperature is not well understood  <cit> . latitudinal clines of adult body size are known to exist for many ectotherms, including several drosophila species  <cit> , with smaller flies observed in warmer places, but this phenomenon is not well conserved in insects and other ectotherms  <cit> . in addition to the inverse relationship of temperature and body size observed in natural environments, most ectotherms, including d. melanogaster, grow to be smaller sizes when raised in warmer temperatures in the laboratory  <cit> .

phenotypic plasticity is a phenomenon by which one genotype can lead to multiple phenotypes in different environmental conditions  <cit> . phenotypic plasticity often occurs in response to seasonal changes in order for the insect to display traits that best suit seasonal conditions, producing a seasonal morph  <cit> . in some cases, seasonal morphs are tightly linked to diapause  <cit> . a recent study reported on d. suzukii seasonal morphs  <cit> , in which they found that d. suzukii winter morphs are able to survive lower temperatures than d. suzukii summer morphs, helping to explain the wide climatic presence of this invasive pest. in this study, we characterized seasonal phenotypic plasticity in d. suzukii in both field-collected populations and flies placed under simulated seasonal conditions in the laboratory. we quantified phenotypic characters and measured differences in low-temperature survival rates between the summer and winter morphs of d. suzukii. finally, we used rna sequencing to examine transcriptomic differences that underlie the observed phenotypic divergence between the adult stages of the two seasonal morphs. knowledge of d. suzukii survival strategies in the winter is essential and of great economic importance, as it will direct the development of more effective management strategies.

RESULTS
d. suzukii exhibit seasonal variations in phenological traits in the field
female d. suzukii collected seasonally from traps located in hood river, or, usa displayed large variation in individual body size throughout the  <dig> and  <dig> samples . to determine the possible factors underlying seasonal variation in body size, we monitored two abiotic factors: temperature of development and day-length. as proxy for developmental temperature, we used the average temperature for the 12-day period preceding the collection date. to ascertain whether there is a significant relationship between these factors and wing length, we then performed, for each sex, linear regressions of wing length  over temperature and day-length. the 12-day mean temperature explained 68 %  of the observed variation in wing length for females where it explained 77 %  of the observed variation for male wing size . the mean wing length was also negatively correlated to day-length  day-length explained 40 %  of the observed variation in female wing length, and 47 %  of the observed variation in males’ wing length . moreover, the seasonal composition of both male and female d. suzukii winter morph increased from levels of 0 % of both sexes to  <dig> and 95 % respectively when examining dates starting on  <dig> august to  <dig> december,  <dig> .fig.  <dig> 
drosophila suzukii exhibit phenotypic plasticity in size and melanization in the field. a seasonal changes in wing length of female d. suzukii collected from the field  in apple cider vinegar baited traps. both wing length   and temperature   are represented on the y-axes, and chronological time  is represented on the x-axis. male wing length is plotted in blue and female wing length is plotted in red. temperature is plotted in gray. mean daily air temperatures are plotted from the hood river, oregon agrimet weather station   <cit> . b seasonal change in photoperiod from august  <dig> to february  <dig>  the day-length  is shown on the y-axis and date is shown on the x-axis. day-length values were plotted for hood river, oregon  <cit> . c percent summer morph  and winter morph  of female  and male  d. suzukii from august to december in hood river, or during  <dig>  summer and winter morphs are represented by black and gray respectively



simulated summer and winter conditions in the laboratory induce differences in phenological traits
to investigate the impact of environmental factors in influencing seasonal variations in d. suzukii morphology and physiology, we tested effects of simulated summer and winter laboratory conditions by varying photoperiod and temperature. differences in adult d. suzukii body color and wing length reared at 16: <dig> light:dark  in hours and 20 °c as compared to 12: <dig> l:d and 10 °c were visually apparent , and closely resemble summer and winter morphs that we observed in the field. abdominal melanization ratings were significantly higher for fourth abdominal segments of female flies subjected to 12: <dig> l:d and 10 °c compared to female flies that were reared at 16: <dig> l:d and 20 °c  . similarly, abdominal melanization ratings were significantly higher for the third abdominal segments for male flies that were reared in 12: <dig> l:d and 10 °c when compared to male flies that were housed in 16: <dig> l:d and 20 °c  .fig.  <dig> phenotypic variation of laboratory-reared d. suzukii expressed by different photoperiod and temperature regimes. summer morph adults are reared at 20 °c and 16: <dig> l:d photoperiod ; winter morph adults are reared at 10 °c and 12: <dig> l:d photoperiod 

table  <dig> average melanization rating of dorsal abdominal bands of female and male drosophila suzukii seasonal morphs

seasonal morph and sexb
n =  <dig> for winter male and female; n =  <dig> for summer male and female


amelanization rating based on visual rating of the thickness of the transverse dark line of each dorsal abdominal segment :  <dig> thin dark line,  <dig> completely dark


bsummer morphs were reared at 16: <dig> l:d and 20 °c; winter morphs were reared at 12: <dig> l:d and 10 °c


cmeans followed by an asterisk are significantly different within a sex 



we then conducted a series of experiments to examine intergeneration effects of photoperiod and temperature on wing length. we first examined the effect of photoperiod alone on wing length . holding temperature constant at 20 °c, we either kept parent flies , which were reared in 16: <dig> l:d photoperiod, in the same photoperiod  or transferred the adult parent flies  to 12: <dig> l:d and examine the resulting offsprings . not surprisingly, there was no difference in wing length for female offsprings when parents were maintained in a photoperiod of 16: <dig> l:d as compared to their female parents . however, when the parents were transferred to 12: <dig> l:d, their female offsprings displayed significantly increased wing length compared to female offsprings with parents reared under 16: <dig> l:d  .table  <dig> effect of photoperiod on female drosophila suzukii wing length over two generations


amean values of wing length followed by the same letter are not significantly different, anova, tukey. n =  <dig> for each mean



we next examined the effect of both photoperiod and temperature on wing length . in a photoperiod of 16: <dig> l:d, if parents  were transferred from  <dig> to 10 °c, their female offsprings had significantly increased wing length when compared to their parents, which were originally raised in 20 °c  . however, compounding the change in temperature  with a shortening of day-length  did not further affect wing length of female offsprings .table  <dig> effect of photoperiod and temperature on female drosophila suzukii wing length over two generations


amean values of wing length followed by the same letter are not significantly different, anova, tukey. n =  <dig> for each mean



we further investigated the effect of shortening day-length and decrease in temperature on female d. suzukii wing length and melanization . when parent flies , which were originally reared in 16: <dig> l:d and 20 °c, were transferred to a photoperiod of 12: <dig> l:d either at  <dig> or 20 °c, the average wing length of their offsprings were significantly longer as compared to their parents. offsprings produced under 12: <dig> l:d and 10 °c had the largest wings . the melanization rating of the fourth abdominal segment was greater for female offsprings produced at 10 °c and 12: <dig> l:d than at 20 °c and 12: <dig> l:d, while the width of the bands of their female parents, which were originally produced at 16: <dig> l:d and 20 °c, were intermediate compared with band width of their offspring .table  <dig> effect of shortening day-length and decrease in temperature on female drosophila suzukii wing length and abdominal melanization over two generations


amean values within a column followed by the same letter are not significantly different, anova: wing length: f =  <dig> ; df =  <dig>  38; p <  <dig> . melanization rating: f =  <dig> ; df =  <dig>  42; p <  <dig> . tukey. n =  <dig> for each mean



our results point to a complex interaction between photoperiod and temperature in affecting wing length and abdominal melanization. although either shorter day-length or lower temperature can independently induce increase in wing length , transition from long to short day-length did not appear to provide added positive effect on increased wing length if it is accompanied by a decrease in temperature . interestingly, transition from summer-like  to winter-like  temperature showed an additive effect if accompanied by a decrease in day-length . unlike wing length, which increases in response to changes that signal winter , abdominal melanization appeared to be differentially regulated by these two cues that signal winter: shorter day-length decreased the melanization while lower temperature greatly increased abdominal melanization .

survival of summer and winter morphs at different temperatures
to examine whether a transition to winter morphs provided a survival advantage in winter conditions, specifically low temperature, we subjected summer and winter morphs of d. suzukii to various temperature conditions  and measured their survival rates . paired t tests performed on estimated lt <dig> values  for each sex at each temperature revealed that adult female winter morph d. suzukii lived significantly longer than adult female summer morph  at 1 °c  . no other statistical differences in lt <dig> survival between female morphs were observed at the four other temperature regimes . male winter morph d. suzukii had a higher lt <dig> value than male summer morph d. suzukii  at 1 °c  . conversely, male summer morph d. suzukii survived longer at 28 °c than male winter morph  . no other statistical differences in survival time between male morphs were observed at the other three temperature regimes .fig.  <dig> mortality curves for summer and winter morphs of d. suzukii at five controlled temperatures. summer and winter morphs of d. suzukii  were maintained at  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  and 28 °c, and their survival were assessed

fig.  <dig> length of time  for female and male morphs to reach 50 % mortality  at various constant temperatures. lt <dig> was calculated for the summer and winter morphs of  female d. suzukii, and  male d. suzukii when maintained at  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  and 28 °c. paired t tests were performed on estimated lt <dig> values  for each sex between summer and winter morph at each temperature. significant differences were indicated by asterisks. 



we also tested for sex-specific differences in survival at 1 °c. there was a significant difference in the lt <dig> values for male  and female  winter morphs held at 1 °c . in this instance, the lt <dig> for females was approximately 20 days longer than for males.

gene expression differences in summer and winter morph
to determine global gene expression differences that result in the morphological and physiological differences between summer and winter morphs of d. suzukii, we performed differential expression analysis using rna sequencing between summer and winter morphs. examination of gene expression in heads and bodies separately revealed a higher number of genes that are differentially expressed  in bodies relative to heads  , even though the head and body transcriptomes contain similar number of genes that could be mapped to the reference genome . a scatter plot of fpkm values clearly illustrates that there are more differentially expressed genes  between the two morphs in the body  than in heads .fig.  <dig> correlation of gene expression between summer and winter morphs of d. suzukii. the fpkm values for all transcripts were plotted for summer and winter morphs by averaging across the biological replicates. pairwise fpkm comparisons were generated using the csscatter() function from cummerbund in  heads and  bodies. pearson’s correlation coefficient were calculated using the cor() function in r. dotted line represents r =  <dig>  solid line represents deduced “r” value as calculated using the data

fig.  <dig> summary of differentially expressed genes between summer and winter morphs of d. suzukii. a venn diagram showing the number of up- and down-regulated genes in heads and bodies of winter morphs relative to summer morphs. b histograms showing the distribution of fold changes of differentially expressed genes in summer and winter morphs. fold changes represent the ratio of expression levels of winter to summer morphs. genes are binned into groups based on log <dig> . up- and down-regulated genes have positive and negative log <dig>  values respectively. left and right panels show the histograms for head and body transcriptome data respectively. histograms were generated using r. cutoff q value  <  <dig> 



moreover, the extent  of differential expression appeared much higher in bodies . it is possible that since the bodies contain some of the most metabolically active organs and tissues, e.g. fat body and muscles, many of the highly differentially expressed genes  could be involved in the regulation of cellular metabolism, and possibly altered in winter morphs to enable winter survival. to systematically identify enriched categories of genes and molecular pathways that are differentially regulated between the summer and winter morphs, we performed gene ontology  enrichment analysis using two independent methods, bingo  <dig> . <dig>  <cit>  and david  <cit> , which provided us with similar results. the output for bingo is presented in figs.  <dig>   <dig>  and the results from david is presented in additional files  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and 6: tables s <dig>  s <dig>  s <dig>  and s <dig> fig.  <dig> cytoscape bingo visualization of overrepresented gene ontology  categories in differentially expressed genes between summer and winter bodies of d. suzukii in the context of the go hierarchy. enriched go terms that are  up-regulated and  down-regulated in winter bodies relative to summer bodies are classified by biological process  and molecular function . the size of each circle represents the number of genes that are included in each go term and the color of the circle indicates the enrichment p value for the labeled go term. as indicated in the enrichment scale, orange represents the highest enrichment and yellow represents the minimum enrichment above the cutoff . white circles represent nodes that are not enriched; they are shown in the figure to illustrate the go term hierarchy and are only present if their “leaf nodes” are enriched. the hierarchical layout in cytoscape was used to arrange the networks with manual adjustment of the nodes to allow for visualization of the text labels

fig.  <dig> cytoscape bingo visualization of overrepresented gene ontology  categories in differentially expressed genes between summer and winter heads of d. suzukii in the context of the go hierarchy. enriched go terms that are  up-regulated and  down-regulated in winter heads relative to summer heads are classified by biological process  and molecular function . the size of each circle represents the number of genes that are included in each go term and the color of the circle indicates the enrichment p value for the labeled go term. as indicated in the enrichment scale, orange represents the highest enrichment and yellow represents the minimum enrichment above the cutoff . white circles represent nodes that are not enriched; they are shown in the figure to illustrate the go term hierarchy and are only present if their “leaf nodes” are enriched. the hierarchical layout in cytoscape was used to arrange the networks with manual adjustment of the nodes to allow for visualization of the text labels



up-regulated genes in bodies of winter morphs
the most significantly enriched terms in the winter bodies were those involved in glycolysis, the tricarboxylic acid  cycle, the electron transport chain, and atp synthase . based on the david output, go terms involved with oxidative phosphorylation and the electron transport chain had the highest enrichment score, followed by glucose metabolism, tca cycle, and terms involved with glycogen metabolism. other notable enriched categories of genes that are up-regulated are involved in morphogenesis, development, and pigmentation, which is consistent with the enlarged, more melanized winter morph phenotype. finally, genes involved in circadian rhythm and rhythmic behavior  were also up-regulated in the bodies. there has been previous evidence suggesting that these genes are up-regulated in diapausing insects  <cit> . although not listed as one of the enriched go category, some of the most highly up-regulated genes in the winter bodies are genes involved in chitin biosynthesis and metabolism . the genes cg <dig>  zye, kkv, cpr76bd, verm, cpr47ec, cpr49ae, obst-b, and gasp are all involved in chitin binding, structure, or metabolism and have a log <dig> greater than  <dig>  in the winter bodies.

down-regulated genes in bodies of winter morphs
the most significantly depleted terms in winter bodies were associated with the chromosome, chromatin organization, mitotic cell cycle, dna replication, and dna repair . the enrichment score for most of these categories are very high, with many genes within these go categories being down-regulated simultaneously. in addition, terms associated with the chorion, eggshell formation, oogenesis, and female meiosis were all enriched in down-regulated genes in the winter bodies. these results suggest a high likelihood that these female winter morphs are overwintering in reproductive diapause.

up-regulated genes in heads of winter morphs
based on david output, the most significantly enriched go terms were associated with immunoglobulin, plasma membrane, transmembrane, neuron development, ion transport, and muscle development . this is consistent with the bingo output, in which go terms involved in ion channel activity, transporter activity, and multicellular organismal development are most enriched . in addition to being up-regulated in the body, genes involved in circadian rhythm were also up-regulated in the heads of winter morphs.

down-regulated genes in heads of winter morphs
some of the most significantly depleted terms in winter heads were those associated with the ribosome , dehydrogenase, and organic acid biosynthesis . bingo also shows genes involved in carbohydrate metabolism, protein metabolic process, lipid catabolism, and translation being significantly down-regulated .

discussion
d. suzukii can tolerate colder climates by transitioning into a winter morph
we first characterized seasonal morphs of d. suzukii in the field, and observed that wing length increased as winter approached and average temperature decreased. the proportion of flies with the winter morph phenotype also increased as the seasons progressed . we then determined the abiotic factors needed to induce the winter morph phenotype that is observed in field-collected flies in the month leading up to winter. a laboratory-simulated winter-like photoperiod  and temperature  was sufficient to induce higher levels of melanization and larger wing size. these changes in physiological characters are associated with an increase in cold hardiness as measured by longevity at 1 °c. while larger and darker forms of d. suzukii have been documented to occur in the fall  <cit> , this is the first report characterizing intergeneration transition of d. suzukii seasonal morphs in field-collected populations resulting from environmental cues.

an increase in body size, using wing length as a proxy, in d. suzukii may be advantageous in colder environments, as it may aid in thermoregulation  <cit> . a larger body size may also allow for increased storage of sugars and fats, as overwintering insects often have an enlarged fat body  <cit> . however, a larger wing size may also be involved in increased dispersion capabilities. interestingly, photoperiod and temperature appear to affect melanization in opposite ways. we found that shortening the photoperiod to a “winter” photoperiod, while keeping the temperature constant at 20 °c actually led to a decrease in melanization. this may be due to uv radiation protection; with a longer photoperiod, the flies are exposed to more light and therefore may need more melanin to protect from uv radiation  <cit> . indeed, melanization of flies in sub-saharan africa most strongly correlate with uv radiation intensity when compared with other environmental factors, implicating a role for melanin in uv photoprotection  <cit> . rearing the flies at a lower temperature of 10 °c significantly increases their melanization rating compared to flies reared at 20 °c. this suggests that melanization may play a role in cold tolerance in addition to its potential role in uv protection. an increase in melanization at low temperatures may increase uv absorption, increasing the ability to warm up. further experiments are necessary to precisely identify the role of melanization in overwintering capability.

past studies conducted on d. suzukii cold tolerance suggest that they have relatively low levels of cold tolerance  <cit> . however, low levels of cold tolerance may represent a cost to improved plasticity  <cit> . in the experiments by dalton et al.  <cit>  and jakobs et al.  <cit> , flies were reared under summer conditions  and then subjected to rapid or long-term cold-hardening. these conditions did not allow for developmental or intergeneration cold-hardening to occur, which is the focus of this current study. one recent study found that d. suzukii raised in simulated winter conditions has increased survival when briefly exposed to subzero temperatures, but this study did not investigate survival rates at prolonged periods of low temperature  <cit> . in our study, d. suzukii flies displaying the winter morph phenotype have low-temperature survival rates higher than those reported previously  <cit> . in dalton et al.  <cit> , the lt <dig> period at 1 °c was 3 days within intra-generational acclimated adult flies, as opposed to the current study where the same level of mortality was reached at 115 days. these previous studies suggest that d. suzukii cannot survive winter conditions, but results presented in our study demonstrate that intergenerational and/or developmental plasticity in cold-tolerance may explain the presence of d. suzukii in cold northern locations. our results support previous studies suggesting that d. suzukii overwinter in the adult stage  <cit> , and show that d. suzukii is more likely to successfully survive extended periods of cold in an adapted physiological state. additionally, we show that male and female d. suzukii flies display differences in survival rates as measured by lt <dig>  stephens et al.  <cit>  did not find any differences between sexes in supercooling points or lower lethal temperatures. given our data, males may be more susceptible to cold, while females may preferentially survive the winter to reproduce in the spring. this is in agreement with the observation from ometto et al.  <cit> , suggesting a male bottleneck in d. suzukii population.

one aspect of current population modeling for d. suzukii that is significantly lacking is overwintering parameters. our findings may be incorporated as seasonal parameters  in order to more accurately predict population levels and refine current management decisions. it is clear from phenological and physiological studies on d. suzukii  <cit>  that winter is the bottleneck period for d. suzukii survival, as is the case for most insects. knowledge of d. suzukii overwintering strategies and mechanisms is therefore of major importance when conducting risk assessment for the crop season immediately following the winter period.

it is known that d. suzukii is established in regions where temperatures frequently fall below freezing  <cit> . although we did not test winter morph survival at subzero temperatures, stephens et al.  <cit>  predict that 50 % of d. suzukii adult summer and winter morphs die when exposed to approximately − <dig>  and − <dig>  °c, respectively. these basic physiological findings are not the only factors contributing to winter survival of d. suzukii. behavior, suitable winter refuge sites, and suitable food sources will likely contribute to increased winter survival  <cit> . in addition, changes in humidity, which was not tested in our experiments but can be investigated in future experiments, may also be an environmental factor that trigger the transitions between summer to winter morphs and/or affect survival of seasonal morphs.  <cit> . nevertheless, our findings greatly contribute to the understanding of d. suzukii overwintering mechanisms.

gene expression differences between summer and winter morphs of d. suzukii suggest altered metabolism and reproductive diapause in winter morphs
to begin to identify the molecular pathways that underlie the morphological and physiological differences observed in summer and winter morphs of d. suzukii, we performed global gene expression analysis using rna sequencing. among the many categories of degs, the biological processes that appear to be significantly altered in winter morphs of d. suzukii relative to the summer morphs include cellular metabolism, protein synthesis and translation, cell cycle and dna replication, and chitin and cuticular protein synthesis.

cellular respiration and metabolism
we found that genes involved in cellular respiration  and glycogen metabolism were the most significantly enriched groups in genes that were up-regulated in winter morphs. this is somewhat surprising, as suppressed metabolism is a hallmark of diapausing insects  <cit> . however, up-regulation of glycolysis has previously been associated with an increase in polyol synthesis to yield increased level of cryoprotectants, and higher rates of anaerobic respiration in response to hypoxic conditions  <cit> . these studies also found a decrease in tca cycle enzymes, supporting the idea that anaerobic respiration dominates in some diapausing insects. however, many of these studies investigated insects that diapause in the pupal stage, which are more likely to overwinter in hypoxic conditions such as in soil. since d. suzukii likely overwinter as adults, they may not be exposed to hypoxic conditions and therefore may be able to maintain a high rate of aerobic respiration as long as food resources are available. indeed, in d. melanogaster, adult diapausing females had increased levels of glycolytic transcripts but also some increase in the tca cycle transcripts  <cit> .

up-regulation of genes involved in cellular respiration may reflect the need for increased glycogen and fat stores. genes involved with glycogen metabolism were highly enriched in bodies of winter morphs. interestingly, both glycogen phosphorylase, which catalyzes glycogen breakdown, and glycogen synthase, which catalyzes glycogen synthesis, are both significantly up-regulated. the fact that both catabolic and anabolic enzymes are up-regulated may suggest a high rate of glycogen turnover. futile cycling is a process by which two opposing pathways are active simultaneously where the only net effects are to hydrolyze atp and to produce heat. glycogen futile cycling has been observed in bacteria  <cit>  and futile cycling has been found to produce significant amounts of heat in bumblebees  <cit> . high metabolic rates may be advantageous for ectotherms at low temperatures, as it may produce heat to raise body temperature. alternatively, metabolic genes may also need to be up-regulated to compensate for lowered enzyme efficiency at lower temperatures. since we are sequencing mrna transcripts from entire bodies, the large transcript abundance of genes involved in cellular respiration may also arise from differences in tissue size. a highly enlarged fat body, as often seen in diapausing insects  <cit> , may explain the enrichment of metabolic terms. for these reasons, physiological metabolic rate  should be measured to further investigate overall metabolic differences between the summer and winter morphs.

although our study focused on photoperiod and temperature as environmental cues to induce d. suzukii winter morph phenotype, other cues, such as food availability are likely important in regulating metabolism. because our study did not address food scarcity issues that likely occur in the wild, further research is needed to determine metabolic gene expression differences in conditions that are more ecologically relevant.

cell cycle, dna replication, and protein synthesis
genes involved in dna replication, female meiosis, and egg production were highly down-regulated in the bodies of winter morphs, suggesting that they may be in reproductive diapause. our gene expression data is consistent with studies in diapausing vs. nondiapausing d. melanogaster  <cit> , showing down-regulation of similar gene classes in diapausing females. suppression of dna replication, growth, and decreased metabolic activity are hallmarks of diapause  <cit> . increased metabolic rates, discussed earlier, may allow for accumulation of glycogen and/or lipid reserves that is associated with diapause.

additionally, protein translation and ribosome biogenesis appeared to be substantially down-regulated in winter morphs of d. suzukii. this may be an adaptive mechanism that allows an insect to allocate energy and metabolites to more important processes such as increasing cold tolerance  <cit> .

chitin and cuticular protein synthesis
among the over  <dig> genes that were up-regulated in bodies of winter morphs, genes involved in chitin metabolism were the most highly up-regulated transcripts in terms of fold change. increased chitin synthesis has been implicated in desiccation resistance  <cit> . these cuticular proteins may also be involved in repairing damage caused by desiccation  <cit> . an increase in cuticular lipids has been associated with decreased water loss and an increase in freeze-tolerance  <cit> . finally, the increased expression of these genes may also be necessary for the large size of the winter morphs of d. suzukii. the fact that this class of genes are among the most up-regulated genes further warrant future investigation of humidity as a factor to trigger transition between summer to winter morphs and a variable that regulates survival of the seasonal morphs.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study, we examined seasonal variations in morphology and physiology in d. suzukii and investigated the role of phenotypic plasticity in facilitating its rapidly expanding range. we investigated the role of temperature and photoperiod in the induction of seasonal phenotypic plasticity in this invasive species. our study is a first step to better understand mechanisms employed by d. suzukii to survive harsh winter conditions and successfully expand its global range. future work is necessary to determine the complex interaction of photoperiod, temperature, and other environmental cues, and the mechanisms by which they affect physiological responses and adaptation. in addition, experiments will be necessary to determine the developmental stage at which the cues need to be received and the mechanisms that enable transition between different phenotypic morphs.

our gene expression analysis identified candidates that are important for the observed differences between the seasonal morphs and set the stage for functional characterization. in particular, many unannotated genes are highly expressed in the winter morph and have no known function. these genes may be involved in cold tolerance and/or diapause and could be of broad interest to the investigation of organismal physiology and adaptation. moreover, transcript abundance is only one piece of the puzzle. post-transcriptional and post-translational regulation of molecular pathways can certainly play additional roles in modulating the overall biochemical makeup of the organisms in response to environmental cues. metabolomic profiling of d. suzukii summer and winter morphs can therefore provide further insight into biochemical mechanisms of increased cold tolerance and desiccation resistance.

drosophila suzukii is emerging as a powerful model for ecological genetics due to its close phylogenetic relationship with the model organism d. melanogaster, its recently sequenced genome, and the expanding worldwide population monitoring and sampling network because of its economic importance as an agricultural pest. drosophila suzukii is ideal for bridging the gap between laboratory model organisms for which molecular tools are readily available and ecological models used to study adaptations in natural environments.

