BACKGROUND
cone snails are venomous predators that rapidly immobilize their prey using a complex cocktail of short peptides  collectively known as conotoxins. most of these peptides, are targeted with exquisite specificity to receptors, ion channels, and transporters in the nervous system  <cit> . conotoxins are important pharmacological reagents and potential drug leads  <cit> . each snail is believed to synthesize 50– <dig> such compounds  <cit> , and with approximately  <dig> species  <cit> , the venoms of the genus conus constitute an exceptionally rich pharmacological resource.

we have analyzed the venom-duct of conus geographus using a transcriptomics approach. this species, widely known as the geography cone, is well known as the deadliest of all cone snail species, responsible for most of the human fatalities recorded in the medical literature. in the absence of medical intervention, 70% of human stinging cases are fatal  <cit> . the venom of this cone snail species was the first that was comprehensively analyzed; it was the characterization of conus geographus venom peptides which established that most of the biologically-active components of conus venoms, were small, disulfide rich peptides  <cit> .

in addition to being the deadliest of all cone snails, conus geographus has an unusual strategy for catching fish: it is believed to prey primarily on schools of small fish hiding in reef crevices at night. it approaches potential prey with its false mouth highly distended, which is used as a net. it is believed to engulf multiple fish, and once the fish are enclosed within the gargantuan false mouth, it harpoons each fish, simultaneously injecting venom. the paralyzed prey are predigested within the false mouth, with the scales and bones of the fish regurgitated after 1– <dig> hours; the predigested soft parts of the fish are then moved further into the gut for complete digestion and absorption  <cit> .

several peptides from conus geographus venom have become widely used in neuroscience research. there are several thousand citations in the scientific literature describing studies using ω-conotoxin gvia, a specific inhibitor of cav  <dig> , a voltage-gated ca channel subtype present at presynaptic terminus of many synapses . this peptide is widely used to study synaptic transmission. in addition, some venom peptides have therapeutic potential; one of them, conantokin g, a subtype specific nmda receptor antagonist, selective for the nr2b subunit has reached human clinical trials as a potential drug for intractable epilepsy  <cit> . thus, conus geographus peptides are among the best characterized from any animal venom.

although conus venoms contain 100– <dig> different peptides, these are encoded by relatively few gene superfamilies . previous transcript-based and proteomic studies have suggested that the conus venom duct is a highly differentiated tissue, with anatomical and functional specialization along its length  <cit> . garrett and coworkers  <cit> , for example, investigated gene expression in the venom duct of conus textile. to do so, they divided the venom duct into four sections, and used rt-pcr to profile the expression of toxins belonging to the a, o, m, t and p superfamilies using transcript-specific primers. garrett et al. found that while all the superfamilies were abundantly represented in the proximal  segment, the expression of m, t, and p superfamilies declined progressively towards the distal end of the duct. in contrast, members of the o superfamily were highly expressed in distal portions of the duct.

liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry and n-terminal sequencing analyses  <cit>  have also suggested that conotoxin synthesis varies along the length of the duct. tayo and coworkers  <cit> , carried out a proteomic analysis of the regional distribution of conotoxins along the conus textile venom duct using a tandem mass spectrometer to identify  <dig> conotoxin sequences and  <dig> posttranslational modifications. the abundance of most of these conotoxins varied among the different segments, with some toxins restricted to a single segment. an important observation from this study is that varying degrees of posttranslational modification of toxin molecules result in an overall variation of composition of the venom along the length of the duct. the cleavage site of the mature toxin from the propeptide was also found to vary along the length of the duct.

in order to more systemically investigate transcription within the venom duct, we have carried out large-scale rna sequencing   <cit>  in the same four regions  used by garrett et al. in their pcr-based  <cit>  and tayo et al.  <cit>  in their proteomics-based investigations of the venom duct of conus textile. our analyses complement and greatly extend their earlier work, providing a global and comprehensive overview of transcription along the length of the duct. because the species of cone snail analyzed was conus geographus, with well characterized toxins  <cit> , some inferences about the frequency distribution of the transcripts can be made. we show that there exists clear transcriptional compartmentalization of the venom duct, with marked region-specific synthesis not only of conotoxins, but also for many other types of genes as well, such as insulin-like growth factors, which are highly expressed. the results suggest a potential role for these non-conotoxin genes in duct differentiation, physiology of venom delivery, or perhaps even as unrecognized components of the cone snail venom.

a unique aspect of the tissue being analyzed is that the venom duct of conus geographus has arguably yielded more species-specific gene products than any other tissues in prior biochemical/functional analyses. the present transcriptome results, when correlated with this already substantial database, have provided surprising new insights into the physiology of envenomation by this remarkable snail that hunts fish and kills people.

RESULTS
transcriptome sequence datasets
following dissection, the four segments of the venom duct of conus geographus were prepared and sequenced independently. using the roche genome sequencer flx titanium platform, we generated  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig>  high-quality reads for the proximal, proximal-central, distal-central and distal segments, respectively. the average read length was  <dig>  bp with an n <dig> read length of 580 bp.

transcriptome assembly
to generate a reference transcriptome for conus geographus, we pooled the reads and then assembled them with mira <dig>  <cit> . this generated  <dig>  contigs totaling 34mbp in length. we used cd-hit-est  <cit>  to prune redundant contigs from the assembly arising from sequencing errors. see methods for details. this produced a reference transcriptome assembly consisting of  <dig>  contigs totaling  <dig>  mb with an n <dig> of 576 bp. the median depth of coverage is  <dig> x and the average depth is  <dig> x. by aligning the raw reads in each segment back to the reference assembly with bwa  <cit> ,  <dig> %,  <dig> %,  <dig> % and  <dig> % of reads for the four segments aligned.

annotation
we annotated our reference transcriptome using blastx  <cit>  and interproscan  <cit> . a total of  <dig>  contigs have a significant homology  to proteins in the uniprot protein database  <cit>  and/or the conoserver conotoxin collection  <cit> . among these  <dig>  geographus contigs,  <dig> %  are significantly homologous to known conotoxins.

interproscan  <cit>  search identified  <dig>  contigs with protein domains,  <dig>  of which  are annotated as conotoxins. among non-conotoxin contigs with interproscan hits, the most abundant gene ontology  <cit>  category is translation  accounting for  <dig> % of the total transcriptome assembly, followed by cellular iron ion hemostasis , cell redox homeostasis , electron transport chain  and proteolysis . the high level of transcripts related to translation and metabolism is consistent with venom duct physiology, as it is an organ engaged in intensive protein synthesis and processing  <cit> . this is also true for the go terms related to redox homeostasis and proteolysis, as extensive post-translational modification of conotoxins as has been reported previously <cit> . current models of venom-duct physiology less easily explain the high level of iron ion hemostasis related go-terms. most of the transcripts falling into this go category have significant homology to ferritin, which stores and regulates the release of iron. further investigation will be required to explain the purpose underlying the high level of ferritin transcription in the duct.

functional overview of transcriptome assembly
we used ipath explorer  <cit>  to produce a high-level overview of the contents of our venom duct transcriptome ; see methods for details. these provide a high-level summary of the metabolic, regulatory and secondary-metabolites biosynthesis pathways present within the transcriptome assembly . we also generated the metabolic pathway map for aplysia californica <cit>  , using available all ests for this organism. as expected, we observed most components of the energy metabolism pathways in both maps, including the citrate cycle pathways, fatty acid metabolism pathways, carbohydrate metabolism pathways. however, by comparison to a. californica, the c. geographus venom duct transcriptome is less comprehensive, missing for example, 1) fatty acid synthesis pathways; 2) amino sugar metabolism pathways; 3) galactose metabolism pathways; 4) vitamin metabolism pathways and etc. these findings suggest that the above pathways are either absent from venom duct or at least being too inactive to be detected by rna-seq approach, consistent with the duct having a highly streamlined metabolism geared at toxin secretion.

conotoxins are the most abundant class of transcript
conotoxins comprised  <dig> % of total annotated transcripts in the reference transcriptome or 88% of total aligned reads within annotated transcripts, suggesting that venom duct is a very high-throughput factory for the manufacture of conotoxins. to better understand the repertory of conotoxins present in the venom duct, we used a blast-based pipeline  <cit>  to assign transcriptome contigs with homology to conotoxins to conotoxin superfamilies. in previous analyses  <cit>  of the transcriptome in conus bullatus this process is  <dig> % accurate. in total, we were able to assign  <dig> out of  <dig>  putative conotoxins a superfamily.

duct segments synthesize different spectra of conotoxins
among the  <dig>  contigs in our reference assembly,  <dig>  are differentially expressed among the four segments . however, among conotoxin contigs, a much higher proportion are differentially expressed along the length of the duct:  <dig> out of  <dig> contigs or  <dig> %. if we further restrict this analysis to conotoxin contigs composed of no fewer than  <dig> reads, thus giving us better statistical power to detect differential expression, the proportion increases to  <dig> % . these results make it very clear that different segments of the duct may synthesize very different spectra of conotoxins.

to get a better understanding of the differences in expression profiles between the four duct segments, we first examined the pearson correlation coefficient  between every pair-wise combination of duct segments using expression levels of homologous-protein-groups . these data are presented in table  <dig>  the best correlation is observed between the p and pc segments ; the worst are between p and d  and pc and d . all these correlations are statistically significant , demonstrating that the general expression profiles between any two segments are correlated. in contrast, if we limit these comparisons to conotoxins alone, the profile of distal segment  is no longer significantly correlated with p and pc segment and only weakly correlated to dc , indicating that as regards conotoxin expression, the distal segment expresses a distinct spectrum of conotoxins compared to the two proximal segments.

to further investigate the functional implications of these differences in segment expression profiles, we also examined the differential expression of interpro protein families. among  <dig> protein families,  <dig> are differentially expressed, after bonferroni correction  . translation-related proteins tend to be upregulated in pc. for example, the expression level of ribosomal proteins is 200% higher in pc compared to the other segments; in contrast, the expression levels of ribosomal proteins differ by less than 15% among the other three segments. likewise, the level of translation initiation factor is 40% higher in the pc segment than the average of other three segments; and the level of translational elongation factors are 110% times higher in the pc segment compared to the others. these facts suggest that the pc is characterized by higher translational activity compared to the other three segments, and hence is capable of secreting greater volumes of venom. consistent with these findings, we observed the highest expression of conotoxin transcripts in pc, 62% greater than the average of other three segments, as calculated by normalized read count.

we also discovered that a family of insulin-like factors  comprises an abundant class of duct transcripts. these transcripts are almost exclusively expressed in distal  segment . moreover, insulin-like factors are the most abundant non-toxin ipr cluster in the distal segment. a closer examination of these transcripts reveals that they contain igf insulin-like domains and at least some of them contain signal peptides . the presence of insulin-like factors in the venom duct has not been reported previously.

analyses of the expression profiles of subclasses and individual conotoxins  reveal additional patterns of differential expression. for example, a mu-conotoxins , which are the most abundant conotoxin in the duct overall and accounting for  <dig> % of all venom duct transcriptome reads, are predominantly expressed in the p and pc segments, with the dc segment accounting for only  <dig> % of this  <dig> %, and the d segment still less, containing  <dig> % of all mu-conotoxin reads. in contrast,  <dig> % of conantoking-l  reads are found in the two distal segments. this same pattern is also observed for conantoking-v. we also observed that for some conotoxin classes, the expression of different transcripts belonging to the same pharmacological family  are highly correlated  with one another from segment to segment. this finding may indicate that their expression is co-regulated.

discussion
we have used rna-seq  <cit>  to systematically investigate gene expression along the length of the venom duct of conus geographus. previous transcriptome studies of conus species, including our own  <cit> , have focused on conotoxins or post-translational modification enzymes. the rna-seq analyses reported here are the first for c. geographus, and the first to investigate transcriptional gradients along the length of a conus venom duct. these analyses have allowed us to assay the expression profiles of a wide spectrum of non-toxin as well as toxin transcripts. gene ontology analyses  <cit>  of transcript abundance underscore the fact that the venom duct is a very metabolically active tissue expressing many genes associated with translation, as would be expected for a tissue manufacturing large numbers of conotoxins. go analyses also identified high-levels of ferritin and other transcripts involved in control of iron and redox potential, indicating these facets of metabolism may be important for venom-duct metabolism.

we have also generated a metabolic pathway map for the venom duct by combining the rna-seq datasets for each duct segment. although likely incomplete, several interesting facts can be gleaned from it. for example, the venom duct possesses a complete complement of fatty acid metabolism pathways, suggesting it may use fatty acids as one of its main energy sources; going forward it will also be interesting to determine whether the absence of several vitamin and cofactor metabolism pathways is specific to venom duct, the whole animal, or merely an artifact of depth of coverage limitations in our rna-seq datasets.

our finding that there exist gradients of conotoxin gene expression along the length of the venom duct is consistent with previous reports. studies by garrett et al.  <cit>  and tayo et al.  <cit>  on the venom duct of the mulluscivore conus texile have shown that while a and o superfamilies and uniformly expressed, m and t superfamilies are mostly present in proximal and proximal central segments. despite the fact that conus geographus is a piscivorous cone snail, and is expected to synthesize a different combination of conotoxins, we do observe a few shared transcriptional profiles between these two species; for example, a and o superfamilies are expressed in all four venom duct segments in conus geographus, and t superfamilies are mostly expressed in the two distal segments. our rna-seq approach, however, has allowed us to identify a far greater number of toxins families  and to characterize their patterns of differential expression  with much greater resolution.

peptide toxins from conus geographus venom have been more comprehensively characterized than for any other venom, but the transcriptomic analysis reported above provides significant new insights into the mechanism of prey capture by the snail. shown in table  <dig> are the major pharmacological sites targeted by highly-expressed conopeptides, as defined by the transcriptome analysis of conus geographus venom. in several instances, multiple homologs were identified, probably allelic variants, almost certainly targeted to the same pharmacological site. the table shows the eight most frequent transcript classes targeted to specific sites, with all allelic homologs grouped together.

the targets of the mature toxins, the total number of reads and their differential expression  in the four segments are shown. * indicates allelic variants.

not surprisingly, within the eight most highly ranked groups in table  <dig> are components of conus geographus venom that were the very first conus peptides to be elucidated <cit>  . two of these are known to cause neuromuscular paralysis in all vertebrates, and are probably the venom components responsible for the high rate of human fatality resulting from conus geographus stings. the first group are antagonists of the muscle na channel  and the second group are competitive nicotinic antagonists ; both groups are very highly represented . these two groups of peptides undoubtedly play a major role in disrupting neuromuscular transmission in the fish prey of conus geographus. somewhat surprisingly, the third type of conotoxin that disrupts neuromuscular transmission, the well-characterized presynaptic ca channel inhibitor- ω-conotoxin gvia , is represented in the transcriptome by a significantly lower level of mrna , although still one of the top eight in terms of rank of molecular targets. the other group of ca channel targeted toxins, , which has not been quite as highly characterized, is known to also paralyze fish. these were present at a higher frequency than the ω-conotoxin gvia, suggesting that they play a major role in inhibiting neuromuscular transmission.

the list of targeted pharmacological sites in table  <dig> suggests that the nicotinic pharmacology of prey capture may be more complex than previously thought. one component, α-conotoxin gid is targeted to neuronal nicotinic receptors  <cit> , but the precise endogenous physiological role for this peptide has not been elucidated. the fourth ranked molecular target in table  <dig> is postulated to be the fetal form of the muscle nicotinic acetylcholine receptor  <cit> ; none of the three peptides in this group have been isolated from conus geographus venom. however, based on their predicted sequence they show high similarity to a peptide reported from conus obscurus <cit>  , a small conus species that is related to conus geographus. by homology, we suggest that these three peptides  are nicotinic antagonists specific for the fetal form of the receptor. although the fetal muscle nicotinic receptor is expressed only very early in development in mammals, as was discussed previously, there is evidence that in fish it is expressed in adults  <cit> . within the list of the top  <dig> molecular targets, another peptide g <dig> has never been isolated from conus geographus venom either. it is highly likely, on the basis of its homology to ω-conotoxins gvia and gviia, that this peptide is also targeted to voltage-gated ca channels.

thus, the transcriptome data have rounded the picture of the most frequent transcripts of this particular piscivorous cone snail species. the results of table  <dig> suggest that the prey capture strategy of conus geographus involves a more complex ca channel pharmacology and targeting to a wider range of nicotinic receptors than was previously known.

the most unexpected facet of the results in table  <dig> is that the most highly expressed group of transcripts encode two allelic variants of conantokin g, which is an n-methyl-d-asparate  receptor antagonist. it has been postulated that when conus geographus approaches its fish prey, it releases some venom components to make the school of fish easier to capture, and that nmda receptors in the lateral line circuitry of fish inhibited by conantokin g are a component of this strategy. these venom components, called the “nirvana cabal,” comprise a group of peptides that cause hypoactivity and disorientation in the fish even before they are stung . the very high frequency of these transcripts suggests that this is an important component in the prey capture strategy of conus geographus. all of the peptides above were purified from venom in the initial characterization of conus geographus venom peptides  <cit> .

our results make it clear the venom duct is a high-throughput factory for the manufacture of conotoxins—over 48% of the annotated transcripts in our reference transcriptome are homologous to conotoxins, and these account for 88% of reads aligning to annotated transcripts. we have also discovered that different portions of the duct have different toxin-expression profiles. among the  <dig> conotoxin transcripts listed in additional file 2: table s <dig>   <dig> are uniquely expressed in d . moreover, while the other segments predominantly express conotoxins belonging to the a, m and o <dig> superfamilies, the d segment expresses a significant proportion of t, j, o <dig>  s, o <dig> and i <dig> superfamily conotoxins. these conotoxin families, for example, contribute to only  <dig> % of total conotoxin reads in the p and pc segments, but comprise  <dig> % of the distal d segment’s transcripts. these facts, combined with the observation that the normalized average expression level of conotoxin transcripts is lower than any other segment , raised the possibility that the d segment may be a specialized production site for a wide spectrum of the less abundant peptide toxins.

we also discovered that insulin-like growth factors are highly expressed in the distal  segment, comprising the most abundant non-toxin transcript in this segment. as regards the function of these igf-like transcripts, two hypotheses suggest themselves. first, the proteins encoded by these transcripts might serve as growth factors to stimulate cell proliferation. given the unique expression profile of the d segment, and the fact that these igf-like transcripts were not detected in the proximal portions of the duct, these proteins may well play a region specific role in differentiation of the distal portions of the duct. also intriguing is the possibility that igf proteins might play a function in venoms. high concentrations of igf-like proteins have been shown to activate the insulin receptor and to mimic the effects of insulin  <cit> . given that conus geographus is a fish-hunting snail, these igf-like proteins might be used as part of the strategy to disorient prey. further functional analyses of course will be required before either hypothesis can be afforded a status beyond mere speculation. in any case, the differential expression of these transcripts along the length of the duct provides further support for our central conclusion, namely that the venom duct contains specialized compartments along its length, each synthesizing a distinctive spectrum of venom components.

CONCLUSIONS
we manufactured rna-seq libraries for four different regions along the length the conus geographus venom duct. we have identified in these datasets,  <dig> novel conotoxins belonging to seven different superfamilies . these are potentially new reagents for neurobiological research and pharmaceuticals. our analyses also demonstrate the existence of region-specific differences in gene-expression along the length of the duct, with clear proximal-distal differences both as regards general gene-expression profiles as well as venom genes. moreover gene expression profiles in the distal portion of the duct differ dramatically from other regions. while the other segments predominantly express conotoxins belonging to the a, m and o <dig> superfamilies conotoxins, the distal segment expresses high levels of conotoxins belonging to the t, j, o <dig>  s, o <dig> and i <dig> superfamilies. these differences suggest the existence of still further sub-compartmentalization along the length of the duct. we also discovered high levels of insulin-like growth factors in the duct, again expressed almost exclusively in distal central section of the duct.

the results shed new light on the prey capture strategy of c. geographus. the very high expression of conantokins, nmda receptor antagonists which cause sluggishness and disorientation, underscores their role in prey capture. as expected the toxins involved in neuromuscular paralysis, the na channel  and nicotinic acetylcholine receptor antagonists are highly expressed in the venom duct. however, the high expression of ω-gviia and ω-gviib suggest their hitherto unrecognized importance as ca channel antagonists in prey capture. in addition, the high expression levels of α-conotoxin gid, novel αa conotoxins g <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig> , and the ω-contoxin g <dig> imply their involvement in prey capture, and make the need to identify their specific targets more urgent.

