BACKGROUND
early ontogeny is associated with dramatic gene expression changes that underlie and determine the developmental processes. transcription terminates by the end of oogenesis when the maturing oocyte is arrested in the metaphase of its second meiotic division  <cit> . the oocyte is loaded with maternal mrnas and proteins that control the cell maintenance and fate and the formation of the body plan prior to the onset of zygotic genome expression  <cit> . important transcripts can be also contributed by sperm cell, as was recently shown in drosophila and mammals  <cit> . today, it is generally thought that the combination of determinants deposited by the mother during oogenesis and the inductive signals between different cells trigger the specification of different cell lineages during development of the embryo  <cit> . maternal to zygotic transition  is the key event during embryogenesis marked by the switch of control from the maternal and possibly paternal transcripts to the newly synthesized embryonic gene products . degradation of maternal transcripts and zygotic genome activation is characterized by striking changes in the transcriptome profiles. mzt timing is species-specific according to the extent and form of maternal contributions and generally occurs earlier in mammals  compared to fish, drosophila and xenopus
. in a number of animal species, mzt roughly coincides with the mid-blastula transition   <cit>  when cells become motile and divide asynchronously. the three germ layers and the body plan of the mature organism are established during gastrulation, and the period is characterized by extensive cell movements and intracellular communications  <cit> . during the following segmentation stage major events in the formation of tissues and organs take place.

knowledge of the genetic networks controlling embryogenesis has been obtained principally by mutagenesis screens in model species. multiple mutations affecting embryonic development have been induced by chemical and insertional mutagenesis resulting in the identification of genes with important roles in development in drosophila
. similarly, large-scale genetic screens in zebrafish have enhanced the overall understanding of critical steps and pathways during embryogenesis, and forward genetics revealed a number of developmentally regulated genes . despite high power, this research strategy encounters limitations because only indispensable genes whose loss cannot be compensated by functionally related genes are found, leaving many important actors undetected. a complementary approach is transcriptome profiling that reveals genes with characteristic temporal expression patterns. the completion of the atlantic cod whole-genome sequencing project  <cit>  enabled the development of novel tools for gene expression profiling of this ecologically and commercially important marine species sustaining wild fisheries and aquaculture. dna microarrays are used for analyses of polyadenylated mrna and a transcriptome study of atlantic cod embryogenesis using a cdna microarray was recently reported  <cit> . we present herein the use of the atlantic cod genome-wide oligonucleotide microarray for investigation of transcriptome changes associated with the key events of early development from unfertilized oocytes to late somitogenesis with focus on changes during mzt. contribution of transcripts with different temporal profiles in diverse processes associated with maintenance and development was assessed and compared.

RESULTS
an overview of oocyte and embryo transcriptome
the microarray analyses of polyadenylated mrna included four developmental stages: unfertilized oocytes , oocytes collected at  <dig> hours post fertilization , the midblastula transition  and segmentation . the features that showed over 2-fold difference in comparison with reference  in at least one of the analysed stages were selected. these genes were categorized as prezygotic  and zygotic , and further divided in seven subgroups based on the decreased or increased abundance at the specific stages . most prezygotic transcripts maintained relatively stable levels either within the whole period examined or until sgm. a small number of transcripts decreased or increased abundance shortly after fertilization. the origin of the transcripts detected at the  <dig> hpf is uncertain, but the zygote formation in atlantic cod occurs approximately at  <dig> hpf  <cit> . therefore, most if not all these transcripts identified at  <dig> hpf most likely should be ascribed to the sperm cell. genes activated at mbt and sgm comprised respectively  <dig> % and  <dig> % of all zygotic genes.figure  <dig> 
developmental profiles of polyadenylated mrna. transcripts were categorized as prezygotic  or zygotic  and divided into subgroups as explained in methods. data are mean log2-expression ratio, the numbers of features are in parentheses.


division of genes in groups by temporal expression profiles



prezygotic

zygotic
metabolism, cell maintenance, proliferation and protection
genes with metabolic roles comprised a large part of the developmentally regulated genes. functional groups involved in degradation of proteins and rna were represented almost exclusively by prezygotic transcripts that suggested a profound reconstruction of the cellular machinery . this was in line with zygotic activation of multiple genes encoding components of the key cellular organelles and structures: cell surface, ribosomes and microsomes with the greatest changes observed in the endoplasmic reticulum. proteins of cytoskeleton, mitochondria and lysosomes were predominantly dependent on maternal transcripts, as well as signalling pathways controlling metabolic processes. the greatest developmental regulation was seen in the pathways of lipid and cholesterol metabolism and ppar signalling; a sharp induction at sgm was shown by a suite of apolipoproteins . proteins involved in cell cycle and apoptosis were encoded predominantly by the maternal transcripts. cdc25b, which induces mitosis by promoting g2/m phase progression, was abundant during the early stages followed by gradual decreasing levels towards the sgm. consistently, the elimination of cdc25b transcripts occurs by the end of the mzt in vertebrate and invertebrate species  <cit> . other maternal mitotic regulators included cyclins and retinoblastoma-associated protein, one of the key factors that controls the entry into cell cycle. genes encoding the mitotic checkpoint serine/threonine kinase bub <dig> ensuring correct chromosomal segregation during the cell division and the wee1-like protein kinase regulating dna replication prior to mitosis were expressed until mbt and are likely to be involved in securing the integrity of the genome prior to cell division  <cit> . several cell cycle related genes were found at 2hpf, including centromere protein j, which participates in centriole duplication  <cit> , and the positive cell cycle regulator smad nuclear interacting protein
 <cit> . the negative regulator, cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 1c was induced at mbt in concordance with reduction of cell proliferation.figure  <dig> 
metabolism, cell maintenance, proliferation and protection. a: numbers of genes by functional classes of go and pathways of kegg. b: expression of genes involved in lipid and steroid metabolism and cell cycle regulation. c: expression of genes involved in defense against pathogens. data are fold ratios to reference  in this and the following heat maps.



early fish embryos possess a multifaceted defence system. a suite of immune genes was expressed at high levels already in ufo. this group included complement components, cytokines, chemokines and their receptors, ifn and tnf-related genes, together with three negative regulators of immunity from the socs family. several immune genes including myeloperoxidase were activated during sgm. while protection from dna damage was driven mainly by the maternal transcripts, responses to oxidative stress were switched on later, and seven of eight genes involved in regulation of redox homeostasis were induced during sgm . marked developmental regulation was shown by glutathione peroxidases and oxidation resistance protein coding genes.

cell-to-cell and cell-to-extracellular matrix  interactions
the maternal transcripts were predominant among cell adhesion molecules and their input was high in other functional groups and pathways implicated in cell contacts and interactions . abundance of transcripts for cadherins , claudins- <dig> and  <dig>  and gap junction proteins was high in ufo and decreased sharply at sgm . this stage was also marked with massive rearrangement of the extracellular space. expression of two genes encoding the extracellular proteins, lens intrinsic membrane protein  <dig>  and collagen xxv, was highly specific for oocytes, and the latter showed 227-fold greater abundance in comparison with adult tissues and remained highly abundant until sgm . these proteins are scarcely explored and it is unknown whether they are required for the oocyte maturation or embryonic development. late activation of decorin, laminin beta  <dig> and collagen type iv witnessed increased complexity and mechanical strength of the extracellular structures . up-regulation of collagen degrading matrix metalloproteinase  <dig> was probably required for remodeling of extracellular matrix. high induction was shown by four genes for keratin  <dig> that is commonly located in epithelium being involved in interactions between cells and ecm.figure  <dig> 
cell-to-cell interactions and ecm. a: numbers of genes by functional groups and pathways involved in regulation of communication and contacts between cells. b: expression patterns of genes coding for proteins involved in cell adhesion and cell-to-ecm interactions.



transcriptional repression/activation and chromosomal remodeling
the ufo transcriptome encoded proteins involved in mrna processing, some of which showed highly specific expression in oocytes. for example u <dig> small nuclear ribonucleoprotein b displayed 69-fold higher levels compared to adult tissues . the maternal transcripts of rna helicase ddx <dig> encode a protein taking part in spliceosome assembly suggesting that the regulation of mrna splicing and processing continues even after arrest of transcription in oocytes and early embryos. transcription repressors and activators seemed to be associated with male and female gametes. ufo included several histone-lysine n-methyltransferases h <dig>  which have been implicated in transcriptional gene silencing, heterochromatin assembly and dna methylation  <cit> . ufo transcripts also encoded components of the polycomb repressive complex contributing to the formation of silent chromatin. sex-comb on midleg-like proteins are required to maintain the transcriptionally repressive state of homeotic genes throughout the development  <cit> . further, the transcriptional repressors remodeling and spacing factor  <dig>  and mbt domain containing 1
 <cit>  were present in unfertilized and fertilized oocytes, respectively. a maternally supplied co-activator bromodomain containing  <dig>   <cit>  can be important for the early embryo cell cycle control. fertilized oocytes contained transcripts for a protein involved in dna methylation . though a number of genes related to chromosome maintenance and remodeling were present among prezygotic transcripts, major changes took place at mbt and a large fraction of the activated genes encoded histones  . histone modifications and changes of chromatin architecture enable the formation of transcriptionally active euchromatin in order for zygotic gene expression to take place  <cit> . although some of the transcripts coding for histones h <dig>  h2a, h2b, h <dig> and h <dig> were present at relatively high levels already in oocytes, most of them markedly increased abundance at mbt and many had biphasic profiles . several genes involved in nucleosome and chromatin remodeling, including chromodomain helicase dna binding protein  <dig>  histone deacetylase  <dig> and high mobility group protein b <dig> showed highest expression at sgm .figure  <dig> 
transcriptional regulation and chromosomal remodeling. a: expression of genes with known functions in rna processing, transcriptional regulation, chromosome maintenance and remodeling. b: number of activated genes from different histone classes. c: expression of transcripts coding for different histones.



regulation of early cellular differentiation and signaling
many developmentally regulated genes belong to pathways with crucial roles in embryonic development . a large part of these genes are transcription factors with different temporal expression profiles . transcripts for jun-b that controls differentiation of diverse cell lineages  <cit> , pair box protein  <dig> and ap- <dig> involved in formation of eye, limb, neural and cardiac development  <cit>  were highly abundant in oocytes. ufo also included transcripts for proteins that play important parts in development of heart , cartilage and bone  and erythroid lineage . four transcription factors detected at 2hpf contained zinc finger domains. greatest induction in sgm  was shown by hes- <dig>  a component of notch pathway  <cit>  and several homeodomain genes. many identified transcription factors are unknown but include functional domains present in multiple regulators of development and interestingly, ratios between regulators with domains changed by stages . while the majority of zinc finger proteins were found among prezygotic transcripts, 73% of transcription factors with homeodomain were activated during sgm, while forkhead proteins occupied an intermediate position.figure  <dig> 
regulation of embryonic development. a: numbers of genes by pathways with important roles in embryogenesis. b: expression patterns of various transcription factors controlling embryogenesis. c: developmental expression of transcription factors with different domains. abbreviations are as follows: pzgt- prezygotic, zgt-zygotic.



in addition to transcription factors, the developmentally regulated genes included transcripts for receptors and extracellular proteins assigned to notch, tgf beta and wnt signaling pathway . major part of them were present in oocytes and only two genes were each activated at mbt and sgm. greatest differences from adult tissues  were observed in frizzled 8a, a receptor for wnt proteins, and dorsal-ventral patterning tolloid-like protein. dorsoventral patterning is also regulated by two genes from tgf pathway: follistatin and noggin
 <cit> . maternal transcripts encoded three proteins from smad family, which transmit signals from tgf. notch are transmembrane proteins that bind jagged ligands controlling differentiation by receiving signals through cell to cell contacts, while deltex is a regulator of notch signaling. sub encodes the suppressor of hairless, a key transcriptional regulator of notch pathway. of note is oocyte expression of genes that regulated differentiation of complex structures, such as connective tissue growth factor  and angio-associated migratory cell protein.figure  <dig> 
expression of genes involved in regulation of embryonic development. a: receptors and extracellular proteins. b: regulators of neural system development.



a suite of genes known for their roles in neurogenesis was detected already in ufo . greatest difference with adult tissues  was shown by neural cell adhesion molecule l1-like protein  implicated in cell migration and neuronal positioning, neuropilin and contactin-1a, a neuronal cell adhesion molecule important for the formation of axon connections during the nervous system development  <cit> . maternally provided transcripts also included neurogenic differentiation factors , which are involved in neuroepithelial stem cell differentiation and neurogenesis, the synaptic protein and receptor of neurotransmitters neuronal pentraxin- <dig> precursor  and two ephrins and ephrin type-b receptors , that play a crucial part in migration of axons. interestingly, switch of ephrin and ephrin receptor isoforms took place at sgm. maternal transcripts also encoded receptors of the dopamine and acetylcholine neurotransmitters.

master regulators of embryogenesis
the microarray analyses revealed several genes that control stem cell fates and organ development, which were active at different stages . while transcript for pumilio- <dig>  was present in oocytes, snail homolog sna , rna-binding protein musashi homolog  <dig>  were activated at mbt and sgm, respectively. similar to zebrafish  <cit> , mbt was marked with an onset of nanor transcription. digeorge syndrome critical region gene  <dig> may be involved in the degradation of maternal transcripts via biogenesis of micrornas  <cit> . a role of micrornas, such as mir <dig>  in the clearance of maternal transcripts during the maternal to zygotic transition has been well documented  <cit> . sox- <dig>  is a key regulator of embryonic stem cell pluripotency  <cit> .figure  <dig> 
expression of selected master regulators of development.




validation of microarray data
to validate microarray data, real-time qpcr was performed on eight genes: nanor, heat shock protein  <dig> kda protein  <dig> , heat shock  <dig> kda protein  <dig> beta isoform a , stress-induced phosphoprotein  <dig> , follistatin , formin-binding protein  <dig> , keratin- <dig>  and ikaros  at the embryonic stages of ufo, 2hpf, mbt, 12- and 52-somites. overall, microarrays and qpcr produced similar results .figure  <dig> 
quantitative real-time pcr validation of the selected eight genes identified in the microarray analysis. data are presented as –ΔΔct ± se for qpcr and log <dig> expression ratio  for microarray. six pools of ten oocytes/embryos were used for the analyses . significant difference detected by qpcr is marked with *, p <  <dig> .



discussion
genome sequencing enabled construction of oligonucleotide microarrays that may provide complete coverage of the polyadenylated fraction of transcriptomes; microarray analyses evaluate abundance of mature mrna, which is capable for translation. while a genome-wide platform was used for evaluating the abundance of mature mrna during zebrafish development  <cit> , we report the first study performed with an aquaculture fish species. the main issue was the presentation of pathways and functional groups among the transcripts displayinh different temporal profiles. high complexity of the transcriptome in unfertilized cod oocytes is consistent with similar studies in both invertebrates and vertebrates  <cit> . maternally provided mrna comprised the major part of prezygotic transcripts while the putative paternal contribution was small, but sperm transcripts might play important roles of in the establishing of early embryonic gene expression profiles  <cit> . fertilized cod eggs contained a suite of transcripts for proteins involved in chromatin remodeling and regulation of transcription, cell cycle control and cellular transport. however, it is unknown whether these genes have any developmental roles. in general, maternal transcripts support basic requirements of the embryo prior to the onset of zygotic expression. interestingly, we got evidence that processing of mrna continues even in absence of transcription that is in line with recent report on large-scale maturation of maternal transcripts in zebrafish embryos  <cit> . in addition to maintenance of metabolism, cell structure and proliferation, transcripts of oocytes provide immune protection against pathogens and a suite of genes is expressed at higher level in comparison with adult tissues. maternal transfer of complement factors and their protective roles was reported in wolffish, rainbow trout and zebrafish . the female fish also provide offspring with immunoglobulins, lysozymes, protease inhibitors and different types of lectins  <cit> . the observed prevalence of immune genes involved in signaling suggests that embryos are capable to regulate responses to pathogens. presentation of multiple signal transduction pathways points to active perception of external cues and complex interactions between early embryos and environment.

differentiation presumes acquisition of specific properties by cells and increase of their heterogeneity. a large number of transcripts for proteins involved in cell contacts were abundant in ufo being eliminated at sgm. cadherins are transmembrane cell adhesion proteins that mediate various processes during development including cellular migration and tissue organization  <cit> . interestingly, this study identified a large number of cadherin paralogs that are likely involved in cell sorting and tissue morphogenesis  <cit> . ufo included many transcripts that can be involved in the control of processes taking place long after fertilization, such as components of wnt, notch, hedgehog, erbb, tgf beta and vegf signaling pathways and markers of specialized cell lines  <cit> . we also identified multiple transcripts that may regulate neurogenesis or encode proteins known as highly specific for neural tissue, in agreement with a few studies reporting maternal deposition of transcripts later expressed in the cns . this finding can partly be accounted for by the bias in annotation, since a number of genes with pleiotropic functions have been studied mainly in the context of nervous system. furthermore, some genes could change functions in course of the vertebrate evolution as demonstrated by the identification several genes known as neural specific in mammals were primarily involved in innate antiviral responses in fish  <cit> .

transcriptome analyses suggested that the onset of zygotic expression is preceded by large scale modification of chromosomes. histones comprise a major fraction of genes activated during mbt while the number of transcription factors in this group was small. the pre-mbt transcripts encoded several proteins that modify histones and dna and are known as positive and negative regulators . transcripts coding for histone methyltransferases and members of the polycomb repressors were highly abundant in unfertilized and fertilized oocytes, but showed a decrease in expression after mbt and coincided with the chromatin remodeling prior to the activation of transcription. preparation of transcriptional machinery to the large-scale activation of gene expression appears a major developmental event that takes place during mbt. in most studied vertebrates this period coincides with the degradation of maternal transcripts and activation of the zygotic genome which takes over the genetic control of embryogenesis  <cit> . furthermore, accumulated studies reveal the dynamic nature of chromatin regulation and the importance of its modifications during transitions from maternal to zygotic control of development  <cit> . our data are consistent with recent studies reporting the activation of zygotic transcription at mbt in atlantic cod  <cit> . as large fraction of genome is transcriptionally inactive, rearrangement of chromatin is essential to provide an access of transcription factors to the cis-regulatory elements  <cit> . microarray analyses are insufficient for accurate timing of the onset of transcription. part of transcripts appear in the polyadenylated fraction due to maturation of maternal rna  <cit> . however, given modification of chromosomes during mbt and the size of the the sgm group, it is likely that a large part of mrna denoted as zygotic was indeed transcribed from the zygotic genome. the sgm group was complex by composition and contained numerous developmental regulators. massive upregulation of homeobox genes at sgm is consistent with their involvement in the establishment of body plan and formation of anterior-posterior axis of the embryo  <cit> . homeobox transcription factors and cell signaling pathways cooperate to pattern tissues and organs and to specify the fate of a variety of cell types. however, none of the functional groups and pathways was restricted to the post-mbt period and all were largely represented among ufo.

CONCLUSIONS
transcriptome profiling of the oocytes and embryos of atlantic cod with an aid of genome-wide microarray provided an insight in events taking place in early development and the roles of parental and zygotic transcripts. maternal transcripts are involved in cellular metabolism, signal perception and transduction, defence, communication and contacts between cells. high representation of pathways and genes that control development suggest early cell fate specification and patterning of tissues and organs, especially of the neuronal lineage. the key event of zygotic genome activation at mbt was extensive chromatin rearrangements followed by expression of multiple developmental regulators.

