BACKGROUND
the number of introduced and invasive species is rising  <cit> , rapidly altering ecosystems around the world, often by out-competing and displacing native species  <cit> . beyond their direct impacts on native species, these invasive species can indirectly lead to cascading effects within a community  <cit> , thereby threatening ecosystem functions. studies concerning successful introduced and invasive species are key to exploring the mechanisms by which these species adapt to and alter their new environment. however, determining whether a species is native or introduced is first necessary, and this is not always an easy task.table  <dig> analysis of molecular variance performed for all populations


source of variation
% variation
f-value
p-value
<< <dig> 
<< <dig> 
groups = western north atlantic populations and mediterranean populations. significant p-values are in bold.
analysis of molecular variance performed for mediterranean populations only



source of variation
% variation
f-value
p-value
groups = west  and east .
evidence ratios and ranks of all possible isolation with migration models



model
k
log 
aic
Δi
model likelihoods
wi
evidence ratio 
evidence ratios and ranks calculated using model-based selection. for each model, the first three letters represent the three population parameters , and the last two letters represent the two migration parameters , in that order. the best model is the first model listed  followed by the next best models in descending order.
museum records of fossil specimens of
oculina
spp. from the eastern atlantic



museum
record number
species
location
epoch or age
oculina crassoramosa
oculina crassoramosa
oculina solanderi
oculina raristella
oculina gemmata
oculina neustriaca
oculina crassoramosa
oculina crassoramosa
oculina raristella
oculina crassoramosa
oculina crassoramosa
oculina explanata


introduced species can be mislabeled as native due to taxonomic misidentification  <cit> . native species can also be misidentified as introduced. zenetos et al.  <cit>  reports that 23% of the  <dig> reportedly introduced species in the mediterranean have been misidentified and therefore misclassified. of the remaining  <dig> species, 13% remain questionable due to insufficient information and unresolved taxonomic status and many others maintain a “cryptogenic” status, as they cannot be reliably assigned to either “native” or “introduced”  <cit> . in other cases, species are mislabeled as introductions due to a lack of historical records of an obvious presence  <cit> . these misidentifications can have profound effects on the assessment of species status  <cit> .

invasive species are often assumed to have been introduced  <cit> , however species can become invasive within their native range, usually due to human-mediated disturbances  <cit> . effective policies, management, and scientific research programs depend on the correct identification of invasive species as being either native or introduced. whereas the management of introduced invasives is more concerned with the introduction scenario and conditions enabling subsequent expansion, management of native invasives should ideally be more focused on the changes in environmental conditions that facilitate their invasive characteristics in their native habitat  <cit> . therefore, to implement more effective research and management programs for invasive species, an invasive species must first be identified as either introduced or native.

an introduced invasive population can be distinguished from native invasive populations in several ways. an expanding introduced population is expected to be genetically similar to an external source population where it originated  <cit> . in contrast, a native invasive population will often be genetically distinct from populations outside its range  <cit> . inferring the divergence time between populations from different ranges can also establish whether or not an invasive population coincides with a recent introduction , or whether it predates anthropological times   <cit> . finally, the presence of a fossil record for an invasive species or its progenitors can indicate that the species has a long presence in a particular region  <cit> .

corals of the genus oculina were originally described from the southeastern coast of north america  <cit> . although several nominal species exist in this region, eytan et al.  <cit>  found no genetic differences among shallow water populations of four named taxa , suggesting that these designations do not represent genetically distinct species. we will refer to these taxa collectively as “western atlantic  oculina spp”.

an additional extant species, oculina patagonica, occurs in the waters of the mediterranean sea  <cit> . o. patagonica was originally described from fossils from the southeastern coast of south america  <cit>  , however reports of live specimens from south america are lacking and a recent survey of fouling communities in argentinian ports failed to find any evidence of this species  <cit> . o. patagonica has been thought to have been introduced in anthropogenic times from the western south atlantic to the western mediterranean via shipping. o. patagonica was first reported from the harbor of savona , italy in  <dig>  <cit>  and soon after from the harbor of alicante, spain  <cit> , 1000 km away. from the western mediterranean, it is thought to have spread easterly, and while today reports of this coral in many locations reflect populations limited in number and range, populations in spain, greece, and israel are well-established and expanding  <cit> .

alternatively to being recently introduced, o. patagonica may be a native species that has only recently been detected due to a recent expansion. the original description and identification of o. patagonica is based on fossil remains, not living counterparts  <cit> . this is problematic, as morphology is a poor delineation of coral species in general  <cit>  and oculina species in particular  <cit>  . given that no known populations of o. patagonica presently exist outside the mediterranean, populations of wa oculina spp. are currently the most likely source for a recent introduction.

here, we ask whether o. patagonica has been recently introduced into the mediterranean from the western north atlantic, or whether it is an eastern atlantic native only newly become invasive. first, we use multilocus genetic data to determine whether o. patagonica is genetically similar to or distinct from wa oculina spp. if o. patagonica has been recently introduced from the western north atlantic, we expect these populations to be genetically similar. second, we estimate divergence time between o. patagonica populations and wa oculina sp. populations and evaluate whether the estimate is consistent with an anthropogenic introduction. we also search museum collections for evidence of a fossil record of oculina spp. in the eastern atlantic, which would suggest that oculina has a long history in this region. finally, we explore whether patterns of genetic diversity in o. patagonica are consistent with a west to east expansion across the mediterranean from a single point of introduction.

RESULTS
genetic diversity and population subdivision
we genotyped  <dig> samples of oculina spp. from the western north atlantic  and mediterranean  for the mitochondrial coi gene and five nuclear genes. western north atlantic populations included north carolina, daytona beach, fl, cape florida, fl, panama city, fl, and bermuda. mediterranean populations of o. patagonica included spain, italy, greece, lebanon, and israel . a total of  <dig> individuals from spain, greece, and israel were removed from the dataset because they shared a multilocus genotype with another individual in the same population, so the final nuclear data set contained  <dig> individuals . all o. patagonica samples shared the same coi haplotype common to 98% of wa oculina spp. . because coi was nearly invariant, as expected due to the conservation of anthozoan mitochondrial dna  <cit> , we used only the five nuclear genes in all analyses. gard did not detect recombination within any of these five gene regions.

haplotype networks revealed that, while populations in the western north atlantic and the mediterranean share many alleles at all five loci, all markers possess several private alleles unique to just one region . specifically, for three genes , over half of the total alleles for each of those genes are unique to the atlantic. in contrast, the mediterranean harbors fewer private alleles for all genes . t-tests revealed that allelic richness was greater in the western north atlantic than in the mediterranean , although this difference is not large , and therefore likely not biologically significant. observed heterozygosity did not differ between the western atlantic and mediterranean , nor did allelic richness or observed heterozygosity between western mediterranean  and eastern mediterranean  populations .

amova revealed significant subdivision among all populations, as well as between western north atlantic and mediterranean populations . however, amova conducted on mediterranean populations alone revealed no significant subdivision, either among populations or between the west and east . instead, variation within populations accounted for 98% of observed variation. these findings suggest that while the western north atlantic populations are genetically distinct from those in the mediterranean, populations within the mediterranean are genetically similar to each other.

to further test for more subtle genetic differentiation, we used structure  <dig> . <dig>  <cit>  and the evanno method  <cit>  implemented in structure harvestor  <cit>  to detect differentiated populations . when all populations were analyzed according to the evanno method  <cit> , the most likely k was two. the visual representation of these two genetic clusters  shows that the western north atlantic, including bermuda, and mediterranean form distinct genetic clusters. at k = <dig>  structure recovered the two main genetic clusters previously found in the western north atlantic  <cit>  in addition to the mediterranean cluster . when analyzing the mediterranean populations alone, the evanno method  <cit>  determined that the mostly likely k = <dig>  although the Δk’s for the range of k tested were very low and similar, suggesting a lack of biologically meaningful clusters. indeed, the visual representation fails to show any clear individual assignments and geographic association of these clusters, consistent with the mediterranean populations being genetically similar across the region . structurama runs corroborated these structure results.

divergence time
we estimated the time of divergence between western north atlantic and mediterranean populations using ima  <cit> . we found that the populations diverged  <dig>  ±  <dig>  million years ago, long before recent times . the best supported im model  had two parameters for population size and two for migration, suggesting that migration has played a role in the history of wa oculina spp. populations and o. patagonica in the mediterranean. models of strict isolation were thousands of times less likely than the best model. migration from the western north atlantic to the mediterranean was greater  than the reverse migration  . in fact, the next best model was one in which migration from the mediterranean to the western north atlantic was equal to  <dig> 

the fossil record
we explored online databases of museum collections for a fossil record of oculina spp. in the eastern atlantic and/or the mediterranean. we found  <dig> fossil specimens of oculina spp. in two independent museum collections: the smithsonian national museum of natural history’s department of invertebrate zoology , and the muséum national d’histoire naturelle paléontologie. all specimens originated from north-northwestern france. the estimated ages of the specimens range broadly, with most from the eocene  to the miocene  .

population expansion within the mediterranean
to test for a past population expansion within the mediterranean sea, we used lamarc  <dig>   <cit> . the overall population growth rate across all genes and replicates was − <dig>  indicating that the population has not been expanding. we treated the mediterranean as a single population, since we did not detect significantly differentiated populations within the mediterranean . we also performed analyses on the three mediterranean populations with the largest sampling sizes  separately, and found similar results.

discussion
oculina patagonica has not been recently introduced into the mediterranean
our data show that mediterranean populations of o. patagonica are genetically distinct from wa oculina spp. populations . while oculina spp. populations from either side of the atlantic share many alleles for all markers, there were notable private alleles for both regions . contrary to expectations for a recently introduced and expanding species, mediterranean o. patagonica harbors genetic diversity on par with long-established wa oculina spp. populations . our ima results reveal that o. patagonica and wa oculina spp. populations diverged millions of years ago . taken together, our results suggest that while o. patagonica populations from the mediterranean are closely related to wa oculina spp. populations, they are genetically differentiated from them and have not been introduced into the mediterranean from the western north atlantic in anthropogenic times. although we did not include oculina spp. samples from the caribbean, bermuda likely represents the caribbean given that in other broadcast spawning corals little genetic variation has been found between the caribbean and the western atlantic  <cit> .

while there are many similar examples of misidentified native species  <cit> , and see below, contrary to our findings for o. patagonica, many species have been introduced into the mediterranean. a well-known example is the green alga, caulerpa taxifolia  <cit> . using nuclear sequence data, jousson et al.  <cit>  determined that this species was introduced into the mediterranean from an aquarium in monaco, which maintained an algal strain of unknown geographical origin cultivated in western european aquaria. mitochondrial sequence data was used to determine that a mediterranean clade of sea squirts, clavelina lepadiformis, was recently introduced from eastern atlantic populations  <cit> . the mediterranean sea has experienced an influx of introduced species in recent decades  <cit> , which has been attributed to increased sea temperatures, along with coincident range expansions of introduced species and range shifts of native ones  <cit> .

where did o. patagonica originate?
the original hypothesis for the origin of mediterranean o. patagonica suggested that, based on its identification, it must have been introduced from south america, where the only evidence  of this species existing outside the mediterranean resides  <cit> . however, reports of live specimens of o. patagonica in south america are lacking, and a recent survey of fouling communities in argentinian ports failed to find any evidence of this species  <cit> . if living o. patagonica are not present in the western south atlantic, they could not have been recently introduced into the mediterranean from this region. although it is possible that o. patagonica still resides in the western south atlantic in low undetected numbers or habitats, there are no grounds to suggest o. patagonica recently originated from south america until  those specimens are found.

if o. patagonica has not recently travelled east across the atlantic to the mediterranean, then where did it originate? we found records for  <dig> fossil specimens of oculina spp. from france . along with these multiple records from two museums, oculina spp. fossils have also been reported from the danish basin during the middle danian   <cit>  and south aquitaine, france, during the late oligocene   <cit> . although all of these fossils originated from outside of the mediterranean, they suggest that the genus oculina has long been present in the eastern north atlantic.

a long presence in the eastern atlantic is consistent with our genetic data, which suggest that the western north atlantic and mediterranean populations diverged  <dig>  ±  <dig>  million years ago . this coincides with the late miocene messinian salinity crisis , when sea levels in the mediterranean basin dropped, separating it from the atlantic and killing off many marine species  <cit> . the asymmetric migration in the history of oculina spp. , with a greater inferred migration from the western north atlantic to the mediterranean, may reflect the repopulation of the mediterranean with atlantic aquatic fauna following the messinian salinity crisis  <cit> . however, an ancient introduction would likely leave behind a fossil record, and we found no oculina spp. fossils from within the mediterranean. this may be due to undiscovered or undocumented fossils, but could also indicate that o. patagonica was more recently introduced from elsewhere, likely the eastern north atlantic  <cit> . our finding of no genetic structure within the mediterranean also suggests that it may not have an ancient presence there. further survey efforts are needed to determine whether extant oculina spp. populations exist in the eastern north atlantic, and whether they are the source of o. patagonica.

another hypothesis for the origin of o. patagonica lies along the western coast of africa. schizoculina africana has both a fossil and living presence in cape verde  <cit> . originally known as oculina africana, this species was split to form a new genus  due largely to a unique way in which polyps bud  <cit> . however, dual modes of budding have been reported within a single coral species  <cit>  and may therefore not be a good diagnostic trait to differentiate species. future genetic work is needed to investigate whether schizoculina africana and oculina patagonica are in fact conspecific, and whether o. patagonica originated from the northwestern coast of africa.

oculinidae is a taxonomically confused family  <cit>  in need of a more in depth genetic study to better understand the relationships between and within the genera and species in this family. as indicated by mitochondrial and nuclear genes, oculinidae is paraphyletic, and oculina is more closely related to some members of different families  than to some members of its own family. thus, representatives from some extra-familial genera with which oculina has sometimes been allied   <cit>  should also be included in future efforts to trace the origins and taxonomic classification of oculina patagonica.

the geographical expansion of o. patagonica in the mediterranean
direct observations testify to o. patagonica’s increase in abundance at shallow depths at many localities in the mediterranean over the past 20 years  <cit> . along the catalan coast, the species spread from just one location in  <dig> to  <dig> by  <dig>  a rate of northward expansion of 22 km per year  <cit> . in  <dig>  a few colonies of o. patagonica were first reported from a single site in the saronikos gulf of the aegean sea  <cit> . by  <dig>  o. patagonica could be found in  <dig> of  <dig> surveyed sites in this region  <cit> .

fine et al.  <cit>  proposed that o. patagonica has been expanding west to east, just as first reports of its presence have. our tests, however, did not detect a genetic signal of expansion across the mediterranean. while this may result from low power, the proposed west to east spread is also opposite to most other range expansions in the mediterranean, which have occurred in a north-westward direction in response to increasing sea temperature  <cit> . because in the mediterranean temperature increases from east to northwest, and rising temperatures have been proposed to be promoting the range expansion of o. patagonica  <cit> , a west to east expansion would be contrary to expectation, unless it was introduced into the western mediterranean sea, which our tests failed to support. furthermore, some recent first reports have come from the western mediterranean  <cit> , and o. patagonica was first reported from the levant prior to greece  <cit> . finally, if o. patagonica was first established in the western mediterranean and only more recently in the east, then the western populations would likely harbor more genetic diversity; however, we found similar levels of genetic diversity across the mediterranean. alternatively, o. patagonica could be moving into the mediterranean from elsewhere in the eastern north atlantic, but in sufficient numbers to not leave a genetic signature of expansion.

despite lack of evidence for a demographic expansion from west to east, it appears that o. patagonica’s invasive behavior may have “expanded” west to east. serrano et al.  <cit>  report an expansion along the spanish coast from 1992– <dig>  salomidi et al.  <cit>  reported a later spread along the coast of greece from 2005– <dig>  while this eastward trend may owe to chance, it could also be due to human-mediated modifications of shallow coastal habitats occurring earlier in the west, or limiting conditions in the east  <cit>  that populations have adapted or acclimated to overtime  <cit> .

o. patagonica is native species recently turned invasive
it seems most likely that o. patagonica has always existed somewhere in the eastern atlantic and has recently become invasive in the mediterranean, expanding in local regions in response to environmental change  <cit> , likely mediated by human-modifications of coastal habitats  <cit> . in a similar way, the snowflake octocoral, identified in hawai'i as carijoa riisei, was believed to have been recently introduced from its native range in the caribbean. however, concepcion et al.  <cit>  used mitochondrial and nuclear sequence data to compare the hawaiian populations to worldwide populations of carijoa and found that the hawaiian populations were not genetically similar to the caribbean and therefore did not originate from there. the originally misidentified native diatom didymosphenia geminata remained undetected in its native range for decades before blooms were documented in the 1990s  <cit> . today, this native invasive alga is rapidly expanding locally in response to environmental changes  <cit> . the gastropod, littorina littorea, has long been thought to have been recently introduced to north american from europe. however, both mitochondrial and nuclear sequence data indicated that the north american and european populations diverged thousands of years ago. this native gastropod is also believed to have begun expanding along the coast of new england as a result of environmental changes  <cit> .

identifying additional mechanisms that facilitate invasiveness in o. patagonica will require work aimed at better identifying and characterizing the source populations and population dynamics of well documented locally expanding o. patagoncia populations within the mediterranean, such as along the coasts of spain  <cit>  and greece  <cit> . the conditions at these invasion localities can then be compared to conditions where o. patagonica exits but is not to date invasive to better understand the mechanisms driving its expansion. such studies may also aid in assessing the future of the newly discovered coral species, oulastrea crispate, in the mediterranean as it too is expected to rapidly expand its range  <cit> .

additional studies are also needed to better understand the ecological consequences of the expansion of oculina patagonica. while marine range shifts may occur at a slower rate than marine introductions, their potential effects on the community are likely to be just as significant  <cit> . o. patagonica has been shown to successfully compete with bryozoan watersipora sp.  <cit> . serrano et al.  <cit>  have reported a shift from macroalgal to o. patagonica dominance in the mediterranean. given that macroalgae are important primary producers, this shift may result in significant changes in ecosystem functioning.

corals are currently facing worldwide declines as a result of stresses, including increasing sea temperatures, disease, and other anthropogenic disturbances  <cit> . understanding the factors and characteristics that promote resilience in o. patagonica in the midst of environmental change may shed light into assessing and managing the long-term success of corals that are currently at risk.

CONCLUSIONS
despite years of maintaining that oculina patagonica is a recently introduced coral species in the mediterranean, we found no genetic or historical demographic evidence to support that claim. our results suggest that mediterranean populations of o. patagonica have long been isolated from wa oculina spp., and have only recently become invasive in the mediterranean, most likely due to environmental changes. we advise against hastily identifying a previously unknown species as being introduced without detailed genetic analyses and comparisons to potential source populations. accurate identification of species’ invasive statuses will enable more effective research programs aimed at better understanding the mechanisms promoting the invasive nature of species, which can then lead to the implementation of efficient management plans.

