BACKGROUND
tobler's first law of geography, 'everything is related to everything else, but near things are more related than distant things'  <cit>  , was first applied to urban growth systems, but it also applies to biological systems as illustrated by a general occurrence of distance decays in ecological community similarity  <cit> . its applicability to ecology is closely related to key theoretical issues such as what determines species diversity  <cit>  and the distribution and abundance of species  <cit> , as well as central to the way analyses in ecology are performed  <cit> . a negative relationship between community similarity and geographic distance is often attributed to environmental gradients  <cit> . however, the 300-years old observation that environmentally similar, but non-contiguous regions harbour distinct assemblages of vertebrates and plants  suggests that other factors play a role, too. traditional explanations have emphasized dispersal limitation due to geographic barriers  <cit> , but spatially limited dispersal can generate distance decays in community similarity even in the absence of barriers  <cit> . a negative relationship is therefore expected between community similarity and geographic distance not only as a consequence of environmental gradients, but also due to dispersal limitation  <cit> . the latter notion is strongly contrasted by the view that 'everything is everywhere, but the environment selects' , which suggests that dispersal limitation is unimportant  <cit> . at a global scale, this view clearly does not apply to larger organisms, as epitomized in buffon's law. nevertheless, it has often been argued that species distributions are largely in equilibrium with environmental conditions within continents or smaller regions  <cit> . the issue is controversial, however  <cit> , and other authors have emphasized the role of non-environmental range constraints  <cit> , notably dispersal limitation  <cit> .

when applied to ecological communities, tobler's law has been used to refer to community similarity in terms of species composition, but communities are characterized by many other features, e.g., species richness. large-scale variability in species richness is often argued to largely depend on climate  <cit> , but many competing explanations exist  <cit> . therefore, it becomes relevant to ask whether tobler's law can be extended to also cover other macroecological features such as community similarity in terms of species richness and to understand the underlying drivers as well.

here, we use american palms to test the applicability of tobler's law to macroecology. palms are common in warm parts of the new world  <cit> , and are particularly species-rich close to the equator  <cit> . climatic water-related factors appear to be a major control of palm species richness patterns in the americas, but nonetheless there are also historical and unexplained broad-scale spatial patterns  <cit> . previous studies of distance decays in palm species composition have focused on local to regional scales  <cit> . in this study, we use distribution data on palm species richness and composition across the americas to investigate the general applicability of tobler's law to palm macroecology. specifically, to obtain a deeper understanding of the mechanisms controlling distance decays in similarity of species composition and richness, we assess the following three key hypotheses:  if species composition is more strongly influenced by dispersal limitation than species richness, a stronger, more regular distance decay is expected for similarity in species composition.  as a further corollary, geographic distance will have a stronger impact than environmental distance on the distance decay in similarity in species composition, whereas the opposite will be true for species richness.  comparing different regions within the americas , the strength of the distance decay in community similarity will be positively correlated with the heterogeneity and complexity of the region, i.e., strongest in environmentally complex  or geographically fragmented regions . the former may reflect either the direct effect of the environmental gradients or the many barriers to dispersal in environmentally complex regions, while the latter more unambiguously reflect limited dispersal.

RESULTS
distance decay in palm species richness and composition
the distance decay for palm species richness is weaker and less consistent than the decay for palm species composition across the americas. the similarity of species richness declines over the first  <dig> kilometers, but then increases again , reflecting that species richness is high in the central, equatorial part of the americas and low towards the northern and southern limits of our study area . in contrast, similarity in species composition decreases approximately exponentially with geographic distance over the entire study area . the decrease is very steep over the first  <dig> km, where after the similarity slowly approaches zero.

within the four subregions , both aspects of community similarity exhibited distance decay , but it was less regular for species richness than for species composition in the andes, caribbean and central american subregions . at small distances, the distance decay was always strongest for similarity in species composition, as shown by the lower initial similarity values . the same was true at larger distances, as indicated by lower quartile distances, with the exception of the amazon subregion . the geographically and environmentally least complex amazon subregion  had the highest initial similarity and greatest quartile distance for species composition indicating a low beta diversity and a low species turnover even at large distances . the amazon subregion also had the lowest initial similarity for species richness, but, in contrast, also the lowest quartile distance for this measure , possibly reflecting greater regularity of the distance decay for similarity in species richness .

* mat, mean annual temperature .

** map, mean annual precipitation .

† initial similarity = the similarity at a distance of  <dig> km. †† quartile distance =  <dig>  * initial similarity.

¤ analyses were done for grid-pairs with a geographic distance of ≤  <dig>  km.

• geographical distance was ln-transformed.

* p <  <dig> .

environmental and geographic distance as controls of community similarity
which model that best described the variation of palm community similarity varied among community measures and areas . across the americas and in the subregions, similarity in species richness depended more on environmental distance than on geographic distance, whereas similarity in species composition depends more on geographical distance than on environmental distance. this is clear from both the partial regression coefficients of the best regression models  and from the variation partitioning . there were two exceptions to this pattern: geographic distance was more strongly related to richness similarity and explains more of its variation in the amazon subregion . conversely, environmental distance had the strongest relationship to similarity in species composition and explained more of its variation in the andes subregion .

the standardized regression coefficients  for the best models are given. significance levels were tested using  <dig> permutations.  due to the large sample size). the distance matrix on species richness has been calculated using euclidean distance and the distance matrix on species composition has been calculated using d = 1- sørensen index. four combinations of environmental and geographical matrices have been used and the combination for each dataset giving the best model is shown here. the letters refer to:

a) all environmental variables including precipitation , number of wetdays , mean annual temperature , number of vegetation types, topographic range, ph, sand , ca2+, and cec; linear geographic distance measured in kilometres.

c) climatic related variables including precipitation , number of wetdays , and mean annual temperature ; linear geographic distance.

d) climatic related variables; ln-transformed geographic distance.

per 1° grid cell. the partition results in the four fractions: mixed spatial-environmental , pure spatial , pure environmental , and unexplained . the variation partitioning was based on regressions against the combinations of distance matrices giving the best model for each data set .

discussion
applicability of tobler's first law of geography to macroecology
species richness and species composition constitute two fundamental aspects of community structure  <cit> . with respect to species composition, we found a strong geographic distance decay at the bi-continental scale  and though more variable, within the four smaller regions . several previous studies of similarity in species composition have shown variation with geographic distance, e.g., for palms and other tropical plants at local to landscape-scales  <cit>  and large regional scales  <cit> , boreal and temperate plants at regional to continental scales  <cit> , terrestrial and stream invertebrates at landscape-scales  <cit> , parasites on vertebrate hosts at continental scales  <cit> , and terrestrial microbial eukaryotes from local to continental scale  <cit>  . hence, it can be argued that geographic distance decay does not really exist for species richness at the bi-continental scale, and that, consequently, this aspect of community structure does not conform to tobler's first law of geography. a phenomenological explanation for this result is found in the well-known latitudinal diversity gradient  <cit> , which is also conspicuous in the american palm flora  <cit> .

the greater applicability of tobler's law to species composition than to species richness was further confirmed by the weaker and less regular distance decays for similarity in species richness than for species composition in three of the four subregions. a potential explanation may be that dispersal is the dominant control of similarity in species composition, while environmental conditions  provide the main control of species richness. distant regions can contain similar environmental conditions, e.g., on the northern and southern hemispheres. as a consequence, there need not be any distance decay for similarity in species richness. in contrast, given a single place of origin for each species and limited subsequent dispersal, a consistent distance decay for similarity in species composition is expected. had species composition also been primarily determined by the environment, following baas-becking's law, patterns similar to those for richness would have been expected, i.e., generally less consistent and weaker or even absent distance decays. we note that consistent distance decays for similarity in species composition are also expected from the phenomenological perspective that species-range size frequency distributions are generally right-skewed, i.e., most species ranges are small  <cit> .

stronger distance decays in environmentally complex or geographically fragmented regions
differences in distance decays of similarity may be caused by several environmental factors, taxa related characteristics such as dispersal properties of the species, spatial configuration, extent, and grain size  <cit> . these are not mutually exclusive, but likely to interact  <cit> . in spatially heterogeneous environments, the frequent occurrence of highly unsuitable environmental conditions  may act as barriers to dispersal and generate particularly strong distance decays in community composition. in geographically fragmented regions such as archipelagos, sea areas constitute strong barriers to dispersal for many terrestrial organisms, again resulting in strong distance decays in community composition. the hypothesis that the distance decay in community similarity would be strongest in environmentally complex or geographically fragmented regions was confirmed by our results  supporting the view that dispersal can be limited by geographic barriers, and hence that community similarity is not alone 'selected by the environment'  <cit> .

the importance of environmental and geographic distance
the relative importance of dispersal limitation and environmental determination is a key issue in studies of species distributions and beta diversity  <cit> . a similar discussion is also a key focal point in studies of large-scale gradients in species richness although, in this case, the alternative to environmental control is considered to be historical factors in general  <cit> . time effects  are prominent among historical explanations of species richness patterns, and clearly involve dispersal limitation at the species or above-species levels  <cit> . nevertheless, as stated in our third study hypothesis and discussed earlier, dispersal is expected to pose a stronger constraint on species composition than on species richness, while the opposite is true with respect to environmental conditions. our results for new world palms generally provide support for this hypothesis. hereby, additional evidence is provided for the greater importance for dispersal as a control of species composition and a greater importance of the environment as a control of species richness.

environmental distance was always the dominant control for similarity in species richness , except in the amazon region. in contrast, the relative importance of geographical and environmental distance for similarity in species composition seems to depend on scale. we found geographical distance to be a stronger control of similarity in species composition at the bi-continental scale than in the smaller regions , except in the geographically fragmented caribbean regions, where dispersal limitation would expected to especially strong. the weak role played by geographic distance in the andes can be expected by the close juxtaposition of highly divergent environments and strong longitudinal barriers in this region. in a previous study of palm communities in a small subregion of amazonia, the relative importance of geographic and environmental distance was also scale-dependent, with geographic distance dominating at the regional scale, while environmental distance dominated within single localities  <cit> . including somewhat larger distances, a study on palm communities in the western amazon basin reported that geographic distance was more important than environmental distance as a control of similarity in species composition  <cit> , while environmental distance predominated in a local-scale  study of amazon palm species composition  <cit> . similarly, harrison et al.  <cit>  found that in  <dig> taxa  beta diversity was determined by the spatial structure of the environment, and argued that the influence of distance would only be important at larger distances. our results corroborate this idea, suggesting the distance, and by inference dispersal, becomes more important as the spatial extent increases.

CONCLUSIONS
we conclude that the applicability of tobler's first law of geography differs among different aspects of community structure, i.e., it is strongly applicable to species composition and only partially applicable to species richness. it appears that tobler's law is most applicable when dispersal limitation is a strong determinant of community structure and less applicable when environmental control predominates. corroborating this interpretation, the applicability of tobler's law to species composition appears to increase with increasing spatial extent, i.e., with increasing likelihood of dispersal limitation. as a general hypothesis, we propose that tobler's law is highly applicable to aspects of macroecology that depend on the single place of origin of each species and the limited dispersal abilities of most macroscopic organisms. in contrast, we expect tobler's law to be much less applicable to aspects of macroecology that are largely driven by the abiotic environment, as abiotic conditions are often similar in highly distant locations.

