BACKGROUND
basic functions of the eukaryotic nucleus, like transcription and replication, are regulated in a hierarchic fashion and it is assumed that epigenetic factors influence the precision and efficiency of these processes  <cit> . epigenetic regulators operate at many levels such as post-translational modifications of histone proteins that define a histone code  <cit> , the 3d architecture and dynamic properties of chromatin domains and chromosome territories  <cit> , and the interaction of chromatin with nuclear compartments that form dedicated sites of nuclear function  <cit> . the regulatory potential that results from the combination of these features is clearly complex, and as a result it is extremely challenging to define how each feature might influence chromatin function. one approach to address this problem is to locally uncouple the different epigenetic features.

here we describe how this can be achieved using the autonomously replicating vector pepi , which has been developed as an extra-chromosomal model system to study chromatin function  <cit> . in this system, episome function depends on a transcription unit linked to an efficient s/mar  element  <cit> . this vector can be established in proliferating cells, maintained at low copy number  in all cell lines tested to date, including primary cells and animal systems  <cit> . it replicates once per cell cycle during early s-phase and is mitotically stable in the absence of selection over hundreds of generations  <cit> . the episome pepi interacts with the prominent 'nuclear matrix' protein saf-a  <cit>  and an association of the vector with metaphase chromosomes has been noted  <cit> .

one limitation of episomally replicating vectors, including those based on viral genomes, is that their establishment is inefficient, with only 1–5% of transiently transfected cells giving rise to clones that establish stable expression and propagation of the extra-chromosomal replicon  <cit> . studies with pepi have shown that once the vector has established in a cell line the extra-chromosomal dna circles are maintained with high efficiency in the absence of selection  <cit> . remarkably, these replicons have a mitotic stability similar to that observed for mammalian artificial chromosomes  <cit> , even though centromeric elements are not present. the molecular mechanisms responsible for stable maintenance and propagation of pepi in established clones is clearly based on epigenetic factors, which evolve stochastically at some low, but predictable frequency in transfected cells. intuitively, the key phenotype must be related to mechanisms that determine the interaction of the extra-chromosomal dna molecules with functional nuclear compartments, specifically sites of rna and dna synthesis.

as dna synthesis occurs during only part of the cell cycle it is likely that key features involved in stable maintenance and propagation of extra-chromosomal replicons will be linked to rna synthesis. during transient expression, plasmid borne genes are known to interact with active transcription factories at the nucleoskeleton, and detailed studies of the anatomy of the interactions have shown that contacts between the transcription sites and ectopic dna are transient and dynamic – both within promoters and transcribed regions  <cit> . the dynamic properties of transcription-based interactions give rise to a concept of a transcript cycle, which has also been described for endogenous genes  <cit> . crucially, this predicts that genes must be dynamic in order to interact with active transcription sites, suggesting that when the spatial organization of a gene is not constrained by its chromosomal context, as in an episome, it may diffuse away from the active site and become silenced. the resulting defects in gene expression would compromise the efficiency of dna synthesis  <cit> , with a resulting decrease in copy number of the extra-chromosomal replicons.

the molecular mechanisms that underlie the establishment of autonomous replicons in long-term mammalian cell culture are unknown, despite the potential importance of ectopic gene expression in biomedicine  <cit> . towards understanding this mechanism, we have performed a detailed study of the interaction of an extra-chromosomal replicon, pepi, with the major nuclear compartments of cho cells. we also show that once the extra-chromosomal dna is stably established in cell lines the ectopic dna is efficiently maintained in the active chromatin and associates uniquely with the most active nuclear domains and early replicating chromosomal sequences. the extra-chromosomal dna molecules are attached to chromosomes during mitosis and crucially demonstrate a high frequency of association of vector dna molecules to equivalent positions on sister chromatids. these observations provide the first insight into a molecular mechanism that defines efficient segregation of a low copy number autonomous replicon to daughter cells during long-term cell culture.

RESULTS
in this study we followed the establishment and nuclear fate of the autonomous replicon pepi- <dig> and its integrating counterpart. it has been shown before that vectors in which either the s/mar or the transcription unit were deleted or in which transcription terminates upstream of the s/mar integrate. in addition, any linearized pepi molecule is prone to integration. the copy number of all these integrated vector molecules was estimated to be between  <dig> and  <dig>  <cit> . in contrast, integration of the supercoiled pepi molecule is a rare event not detectable by southern or pcr analysis of genomic dna  <cit> . to analyze vector behavior after various time intervals after selection cho cells were either transfected with pepi in its supercoiled form or after linearization with bglii.

cells were then selected for  <dig> days with g <dig> and grown for an additional two weeks in the absence of selection. after this time, all cells  transfected with the supercoiled vector that survived selection showed stable expression of the gfp reporter gene. in contrast, in cells transfected with the linearized plasmid and cultured under identical conditions gfp expression was undetected in 99% of cells. during vector integration, the loss of reporter gene expression correlates with epigenetic silencing by promoter methylation  <cit> . in a very simplistic way, these observations provide a means of comparing the behavior of identical genetic elements under conditions where gene expression is either maintained or suppressed.

following transfection, fluorescence in situ hybridization  was used at different time points to follow the uptake and establishment of the vector dna . at  <dig> h post-transfection, using fugene <dig>  most of the vector dna was found in the cytoplasm . after  <dig> h, the intensity of fish signals was reduced and surviving vector sequences were present within the nucleus . however, despite the efficient transfection in this experiment, during selection, only  <dig> – <dig> % of cells transfected with the linearized vector and 1–5% of cells transfected with the supercoiled construct were able to survive to generate established cell clones. in the majority of cases, cells transfected with the linearized vectors displayed fish signals consistent with integration of the vector at a single chromosomal locus . cells transfected with the supercoiled plasmid, in contrast, displayed multiple – between  <dig> and  <dig> in this experiment – dispersed fish signals of similar intensity . integration is a rare event in mammalian cells, so the low efficiency with which clones can be established with integrating constructs can be easily explained. however, the process that leads only a small percentage of cells transfected with the supercoiled vector to generate established clones, in which extra-chromosomal vectors are efficiently maintained, is more difficult to understand.

the nuclear distribution of extra-chromosomal replicons
to find a rational explanation for this phenomenon a mixed population of g <dig> resistant cells transfected with supercoiled pepi was propagated for another two weeks in the absence of selection and the distribution of the vector molecules compared to well-characterized nuclear structures. the fate of the vector in cells transfected with the supercoiled vector was verified by southern analysis and rescue experiments . strikingly, fish experiments and subsequent bioinformatical co-localization analyses on interphase nuclei showed that over 99%  of the episomal vector molecules were localized in the interchromatin compartment  or in perichromatin regions adjacent to condensed chromatin domains  <cit>  . the ic is defined as a three-dimensionally expanding nuclear domain devoid of chromatin and carrying nuclear bodies and nuclear speckles  <cit> . the protein sc <dig> is a characteristic protein of nuclear speckles. these structures were therefore visualized by immunofluorescence using an anti-sc <dig> antibody and co-localization analyses were performed as described above. a 3d reconstruction is shown in figure 3f. notably, at the light microscopic level almost all episomes localized to the borders or in very close proximity to nuclear speckles  and the same localization and distribution was seen throughout g1-, s- and g2-phase of the cell cycle. in contrast, fish analyses on cells transfected with the linearized vector, and in which transgene expression was silenced in the majority of cells, showed hybridization signals in dense chromatin regions. out of  <dig> cells analyzed, no examples of association with the interchromatin compartment were seen . this demonstrates that the transcriptionally active extra-chromosomal genes maintain a close association with the nuclear compartments that contains the most highly expressed endogenous genes  <cit> , while integrated genes, which tend to be silenced, are excluded from this compartment.

post-translation modifications in chromatin, such as n-terminal acetylation of histone h <dig>  also correlate with transcriptional status  <cit> . it is known that an active transcription unit linked to a s/mar are required to maintain the episomal status of the pepi vector  <cit> . we therefore analyzed the localization of the vector in relation to the nuclear distribution of histone <dig> acetylated at lysines <dig> and  <dig> . for comparison, we also analyzed the vector localization and the nuclear distribution of histone <dig> trimethylated at lysine <dig> , which is a marker for genes that are not transcribed  <cit> . in almost all cases, pepi was at least partly co-localized with nuclear domains containing h <dig> acetyl-k9/k <dig>  whereas no association with h <dig> trimethyl-k9-rich domains was seen .

the observation that an established pepi molecule is associated and organized in an active chromatin conformation was further supported by chromatin immunoprecipitation  experiments. chromatin was isolated from a mixed cell population containing the vectors either in its episomal status or integrated into the genome. antibodies directed against various histone variants were added and the amount of vector molecules present in the precipitate was quantified by real time pcr using primers to amplify various regions  of the vector. as in our microscopic analyses h <dig> trimethy-k <dig> was used as a marker for inactive chromatin. unfortunately the antibody directed against h <dig> acetyl-k9/k <dig> used in our microscopic analyses as a marker for active chromatin was not suitable for chip analyses. therefore an antibody directed against h <dig> trimethyl-k <dig> which is also a marker for transcriptionally active chromatin  <cit>  was used. figure  <dig> shows the results of these chip analyses using primers directed against egfp, a similar picture was obtained using primers directed against the s/mar. when chromatin concentration of the two cell population was adjusted to the same number of vector molecules present and precipitated with an antibody directed against h <dig> trimethyl-k <dig>  <dig> times more vector molecules were found in a precipitate from cells containing the integrated vector compared to cells containing the vector in its episomal form. when the same chromatin preparations were precipitated with an antibody directed against h <dig> trimethyl-k <dig> over  <dig> times more vector molecules were obtained from cells containing the episome compared to cells containing the integrated vector. this clearly demonstrates that the episome co-precipitates with an active chromatin conformation while the majority of integrated vector molecules are found to be associated with inactive chromatin.

extra-chromosomal dna molecules associate with chromosomes to ensure efficient mitotic segregation
random distribution of a low copy number  vector would imply that during each division a significant percentage of cells should lose the replicon – stochastically about one third of the daughter cells would have lost the vector molecules after two generations. instead, a mitotic stability of over  <dig>  has been observed with the vector system used in this study  <cit> . the possibility that vector molecules might associate preferentially with a limited number of specific sites on host chromosomes could provide a mechanistic explanation for both the low and stable copy number and high mitotic stability in established clones. to test this individual clones were isolated and the location of vector molecules bound to host chromosomes analyzed in over  <dig> metaphase plates . a typical fish analysis on a cho metaphase spread is shown in figure 5a. in all spreads, vector molecules were mostly associated with chromatids, though the association appears to be weak as some vector molecules associated with metaphase plates were detached, presumably as a result of shear forces generated during spreading . we estimate that ~50% of episomes are lost during spreading – a typical metaphase plate  had on average  <dig>  vector molecules  while, in the same clone, nuclei in very early g <dig>  had  <dig>  pepi molecules  .

notably, in the individual cells of established clones vector molecules were not associated with specific chromosomal positions . instead, the episomes appeared to be randomly associated with dapi/to-pro-3-light staining regions, with the frequency of vector binding to a particular chromosome being proportional to the size of the chromosome. despite the apparently random nature of these interactions, it was immediately obvious that in those spreads where single chromosomes had two associated episomes an unexpectedly high proportion had the two epsiomes associated with identical positions on the sister chromatids . in the clone analyzed in table s- <dig> , 35%  of fish signals were from chromosomes with two episomes. of these, 53%  had the two signals associated with identical positions on the sister chromatids. if such paired episomes are normally preserved throughout mitosis – remember 50% of episomes are lost during spreading – this provides a clear mechanism to account for the efficiency with which episomes are maintained in established cell clones.

to extend this observation we next analyzed the distribution of vector molecules in daughter cell pairs, following mitosis . remarkably, when  <dig> early g1-phase nuclei were analyzed – as  <dig> daughter pairs – we found that the number of episomes in the sisters was identical, or differed by only  <dig>  in 84%  of cases. an example of the distribution of vector molecules in two early g <dig> sister nuclei is shown in figure 5b; in this example, each of the two nuclei contains  <dig> copies. interestingly, as in this case, the vector molecules were usually arrayed with striking mirror symmetry, which is consistent with what would be expected if the episomes remained attached to sister chromatids throughout mitosis.

extra-chromosomal replicons maintain stable associations with early replicating dna foci
as stable maintenance of the episome in established clones requires both efficient replication and segregation, we also attempted to define the extent of interaction between episomes and early replicating dna foci, which contain the most highly expressed chromosomal genes  <cit> . when cells were pulse-labeled with brdu the episomal replicons, identified by fish, were shown to co-localize with dna foci that displayed the classical size, shape and distribution of those that are labeled during early s-phase replication . as the vector dna is known to replicate once per cell cycle during early s-phase  <cit> , this observation suggests that the efficiency of replication is linked to the association of the vector with early replicating host cell sequences. moreover, a clear association with the early replicating dna foci is maintained throughout the cell cycle, and can even be seen following mitosis, when the majority of the vector molecules still co-localized with brdu-labeled foci . this demonstrates that vector molecules are able to associate with high efficiency to early replicating dna and raises the possibility that the episomes can engage in stable interactions with the active chromatin domains throughout the cell cycle.

discussion
in previous studies, we have described the structure of an extra-chromosomal gene delivery system, which is able to establish stable cell clones and provide prolonged gene expression over at least  <dig> cell division cycles and in the absence of selection pressure  <cit> . established cell clones have a stable and low vector copy number. however, the efficiency of vector establishment in the cells is low, and the molecular mechanisms that support efficient episome maintenance are unknown.

extra-chromosomal replicons form stable associations with active nuclear domains throughout the cell cycle
in this study, we set out to develop a model to explain how mammalian cells could maintain extra-chromosomal episomes with high efficiency. the key to our approach was to define in detail how the extra-chromosomal replicons interact with major nuclear compartments. we have shown that episomes within established clones are associated with the most highly transcribed nuclear domains  and early replicating chromatin . these associations are clearly stable over time, and crucially appear to persist throughout mitosis, where episomes remain attached to peripheral domains of condensed chromosomes .

following mitosis, extra-chromosomal dna molecules were shown to be segregated to sister nuclei with remarkable efficiency and uniformity .

to determine whether the vectors associate with specific chromosomal sites we analyzed their localization on metaphase spreads. in these analyses no vector binding to specific chromosomal regions could be found. the interaction of the vector molecules with the chromatids seemed to be weak and it could be estimated that about 50% of the molecules are lost during spreading. moreover in these experiments it is not absolutely possible to discriminate between a specific association of plasmids to chromosomes in vivo and a non-specific trapping of vector molecules during the spreading procedure. however, the frequency of observed pair-wise association and the observed association of all vector molecules with dapi/to-pro- <dig> light staining regions of the chromatids argues against non-specific vector trapping.

these observation suggests that the dna molecules maintain a stable association with early replicating dna foci, and that replicating in synchrony with these foci provides a mechanism that allows the sister episomes to be segregated with their associated sister chromatids. this idea is also supported by the pseudo-symmetrical distribution of episomes in daughter nuclei following mitosis , which is similar to the distribution of chromosomes in daughter cells  <cit> . these observations provide the first mechanistic insight into how an episome might achieve stable establishment and propagation in proliferating cells.

epigenetic changes drive establishment of cell clones with stably maintained extra-chromosomal replicons
the key genetic elements required to develop cell clones that propagate extra-chromosomal dna molecules are an efficient gene expression cassette linked to a strong s/mar element  <cit> . however, as these elements drive the establishment of stable clones in <5% of cells that contain the basic replicon it is clear that the structure of the genetic components is not the only critical feature. the obvious corollary of this is that during the establishment phase epigenetic changes evolve to yield an extra-chromosomal replicon, with a specific chromatin status, which ensures efficient gene expression and early replication. crucially, this epigenetic programming must also ensure that the ectopic replicon maintains a stable association with the active nuclear domains. the mechanism that defines this behavior is unknown. however, as episomes can be recovered from established clones and shown to be genetically unaltered we can be sure that the critical events result from epigenetic changes that arise stochastically in transfected cells  <cit> . strong support for this idea comes from recent experiments in which pepi was used to genetically modify pigs. when the vector was introduced by sperm-mediated gene transfer into the egg, which is known to be an efficient environment for epigenetic re-programming, the vector was found to be maintained in an extra-chromosomal form and actively expressed in a range of tissues in ~70% of fetuses  <cit> . clearly, in this model system, the extra-chromosomal replicons were maintained with very high efficiency during all division cycles.

CONCLUSIONS
for all the reasons discussed above the behavior of a minimal replicon described in the present study provides a new model system for the analyses of the epigenetic regulation of nuclear function in higher eukaryotes. the results of this study support the idea that the precision of these functions is strongly influenced by higher nuclear architecture. furthermore our findings have relevance for the rational design of episomal vectors to be used for genetic modification of cells: in order to improve such constructs with respect to efficiency elements have to be identified which ensure that such constructs reach regions of the nucleus favorable for replication and transcription.

