BACKGROUND
biclustering
microarray experiments determine the transcript abundance of an organism's genes under different conditions. microarray analysis tries to identify groups of genes that exhibit similar behavior under certain conditions.

one of the main methods to analyze microarray data is biclustering, a non-supervised technique very widespread in the recent years . biclustering outperforms traditional clustering because of its two main characteristics: simultaneous grouping of genes and conditions, and overlapping. simultaneous grouping means that biclusters  group genes with similar behavior under a certain number of conditions , while traditional clustering techniques only group genes with similar behavior across all the conditions . this characteristic makes biclusters better fitted to biological behavior in several circumstances, for example, when an interesting cellular process is active only in a subset of the conditions. although it is unusual that the subsets of genes grouped by two different clusters intersect, overlapping is an intrinsic characteristic of biclusters. if two biclusters b <dig> and b <dig> that group genes g <dig> and g <dig> and conditions c <dig> and c <dig>  respectively, have g <dig> ∩ g2≠ ∅ and/or c <dig> ∩ c2≠ ∅ it is said that b <dig> and b <dig> overlap. overlapping gives biclusters the flexibility to represent biological circumstances such as genes that participate in multiple pathways active under a subset of conditions.

visualization of single biclusters
the most widespread visualization technique to represent a single bicluster are heatmaps, which are used in several popular tools  <cit> . in a heatmap  genes are displayed as the rows, and conditions as the columns, of a matrix a, where element aij is the transcript abundance of gene i under condition j. each element aij is then represented as a square colored upon its transcript abundance. to draw a bicluster bk that groups a subset of genes gk and conditions ck, the heatmap is reordered so gk rows and ck columns appear together, usually in the upper left section of the matrix .

heatmaps usually satisfy the purpose of inspecting a single bicluster. unfortunately, they have geometrical limitations when representing several biclusters simultaneously, especially if they overlap . bivoc  <cit>  addresses this problem by repeating rows and columns to properly represent overlapped biclusters. although it is a useful tool and implements a method that minimizes the number of repeated rows and columns, this replication could lead to ambiguities and misinterpretations.

parallel coordinates  <cit>  have also been used to represent biclusters, but they are less widespread than heatmaps. in this technique, the gene gi is an m-dimensional point pi =  where aik is the transcript abundance of gi under condition ck. conditions are visualized as vertical axes and genes as lines joining the corresponding transcript abundances .

in this case, a bicluster with n' genes and m' conditions is represented by n' lines corresponding to the genes, and by rearranging or somehow highlighting the axes corresponding to the m' conditions. when we try to represent several biclusters with this method, again geometrical problems arise because of the large number of lines and the overlapping of several different ones. bicat  <cit>  and bivisu  <cit>  use parallel coordinates to display single biclusters. however, their representations are limited. bicat does not rearrange bicluster conditions, as it simply marks their corresponding axes with vertical lines . on the other hand, bivisu only visualizes gene profiles under the conditions in the bicluster, losing context information for other conditions, which could be related but not grouped by the bicluster. none of these methods provide interactive thresholds to manipulate the display.

visualization of multiple clusters
as in the case of single biclusters, the most widespread technique used to visualize multiple clusters from a single clustering are heatmaps. usually heatmaps are used together with dendrograms, as introduced by treeview  <cit> . this way, the hierarchical clustering is represented in a tree and the heatmap rows are rearranged to fit with the clusters found. sometimes the attached dendrogram can also be used to visually vary the clustering threshold to check the robustness of clusters . usually, clustering is applied to rows  and to columns , so both dimensions are rearranged and two dendrograms are displayed. treeview has been enhanced  <cit> , adding a scatterplot visualization for one-by-one condition comparison of transcription levels and a "karyoscope" visualization that represents the transcription levels of the genes under one condition, ordered as they are located in the chromosomes.

gcluto  <cit>  uses a variation of this heatmap visualization to represent clusters from hierarchical clustering, including the representation of clustering averages for rows and/or columns. in addition, it introduces mountain maps, a 3d visualization technique  that displays clusters simultaneously by means of projections onto a 2d space, while the third dimension is used to represent geometrical properties of the mountains  that are used to represent properties of the clusters . however, clusters only group genes  with similar transcription levels under all the conditions, and therefore its adaptation to biclusters is not satisfactory.

hibbs et al.  <cit>  take advantage of a linked-views approach, so two visualizations, heatmaps and cluster projections, are displayed simultaneously, boosting the visual analysis. the projection used is similar to that of gcluto but now in a 3d space. it improves heatmap representation by assigning colors by rank and by visualizing cluster averages. as in gcluto, projections are useful, but because of the reduction of dimensionality that they require, some information is lost. although this is not so important when representing clusters, it becomes an issue with biclusters, where overlapping is a main characteristic and projections usually fail to convey actual overlap between biclusters.

related biological knowledge
besides the input  and the outcome of the analysis , additional information is available from previous biological studies. this information is usually structured in ontologies, for example, in the case of genes and proteins from eukaryotes, there is the gene ontology  <cit> , a dynamic, controlled vocabulary that describes all known biological processes, molecular functions and cellular components associated to them. on the other hand, transcription regulation networks  represent transcription relationships between genes. in these networks, nodes correspond to genes, and an edge from node a to b means that gene a transcriptionally regulates  gene b.

this information can be used to partially guide the bicluster search, or to validate the biclusters found. note that although this information may be helpful for finding or validating groups, it is rarely complete and grows everyday with new biological discoveries . also, its use may bias the search of biclusters to already known groups, limiting the knowledge discovery capability of the methods.

some of the visualization tools discussed above make use of ontologies to complement their displays, either embedded in the visualization  <cit>  or from a web navigator  <cit> . there are also several tools that visualize trns  and link them with other biological knowledge, but it's more difficult to find tools that link trn networks with clustering or biclustering results.

motivation
as described above, the display of several clusters and single biclusters is well known, but the visualization of several biclusters is an almost entirely new area of study. the ability of visualizing several biclusters in the same display speeds up the understanding of relationships among the different biological groups represented by biclusters, specifically it permits:

• to find genes with similar biological functions or conditions that affect similarly to a particular group of genes. this is given by each bicluster alone, but the relevance of these relationships grows if several biclusters coincide in them .

• to trace third-party relationships among biclusters, helping to find, for example, two groups of genes related under different groups of conditions, but also with some conditions in common. the finding of these common genes or conditions  is key to infer relationships or bridges among different functional groups.

• to quickly characterize the biclustering algorithm search through its results: is it exhaustive?, does it find several groups?, of which size?, how much are they connected?, are there unconnected groups?

currently, during an analysis biclusters must be individually inspected and/or filtered using statistical methods or a priori biological knowledge. due to the heterogeneity of biclustering approaches and the novelty of most of the biclustering algorithms , few theoretical statistical methods to analyze or filter them are available. most of them are based on significance tests over biological knowledge as transcription regulatory networks  <cit>  or gene ontology  <cit> . these tests are not perfect since biological knowledge is still incomplete. because of this lack of statistical or biological filters, it is usually difficult to reduce the number of biclusters and even if reduced, to be able to draw conclusions quickly, one way of putting all the biclusters together on a single graphical representation is an urgent need.

since there are no fault-free standards to determine which is the best biclustering method for each case, problems are usually approached from different points of view, often by using different methods, or different configurations of the same method, in order to identify the most robust results .

due to overlap, in the case of the outcome of a single biclustering method with a single configuration, an interesting fact is that a kind of robustness can still be found in genes or conditions that are grouped together by several biclusters . this can be extended to the use of different methods or configurations of parameters. the robust groups of genes and/or conditions formed by the intersection of different biclusters are a kind of super-biclusters, usually not directly grouped by any method  but grouped together by several biclusters.

visual analytics is the science of analytical reasoning supported by highly interactive visual interfaces  <cit> . this is our approach, which focuses on the representation of biclusters in several ways that enhance the analysis of biclustering results. thus, while the center of the analysis is based on a representation of biclusters that is capable of visualizing several biclusters simultaneously, this visualization technique has been implemented as part of a framework that includes other traditional bicluster representations such as heatmaps or parallel coordinates, so the user can inspect biclustering results from different points of view. all the visualizations are highly interactive and are linked together. as a result, the detection of super-biclusters and hub nodes is easy and useful. the framework helps in the comprehension of the differences and similarities among biclusters from different biclustering methods and quickens the task of analyzing biclustering results.

RESULTS
group data: movie relations analogy
the main difficulty when it comes to assessing a visualization for biclustering results is the need for a very well known data set that permits the validation of the conclusions reached using the tool. taking this into account, before using our visualization technique to represent biclustering results from microarray data sets, it has been validated using a database of more than  <dig>  movies and over  <dig>  persons, extracted from imdb  <cit> . each movie is treated as a 'bicluster', so each person involved in the movie is a node in it. of course these are fictional biclusters because they do not come from a biclustering algorithm, nor do they refer to two dimensions, but they have the most interesting property of overlapping. the characteristics that our tool helps to discover in the movie relationships usually have a direct analogy in a biological context, for example:

• working groups involved in more than one movie. these groups are of special interest if the movies in which the people worked together are prize-winning movies or movies that earned lots of money, because one can identify which are the most successful collaborations. for example, in fig.  <dig> both successful sagas  and couples working in prize-winning films  are easily distinguished. analogously, groups of genes present in several similar biclusters that are expected to have similar behaviors can be identified, for instance.

• hub nodes  joining two larger, otherwise separated, groups. in the case of movie relationships, these groups are quite interesting because they connect working groups of different nationalities, movie genres or degrees of success. for example, if you are a producer, the hub nodes that join blockbusters with prize-winning movies will lead you to the people that is capable of making quality movies that earn money . in biology hub genes related to two groups of biclusters, each one grouping different biological processes, can be interesting as they may participate in the regulation of both processes.

• indirect relationships. each single group gives information of direct relationships among movie people. however, the inspection of several groups, by means of the navigation through the graph , helps to discover third party relationships . biologically, this can lead to the discovery of side-effects of the activation  of genes.

the familiarity with the movie ontology makes it easy to test the capability of analysis of the presented technique, much more than to use gene or biological ontologies , applied to results of  biclustering algorithms. focused in this field, the framework in which the visualization technique is embedded was also validated by entering two contests, one centered on visual analytics and the other one on graph drawing . our entry was selected as finalist of the former  <cit>  and was awarded the first place in the latter  <cit> .

microarray data and biclustering algorithms
to test the power of our bicluster visualization method, now applied to biological information, the budding yeast saccharomyces cerevisiae microarray data  <cit>  has been used. this data set has been broadly studied and images of heatmap clustering are available. this organism genome is fully sequenced, and the conditions of the microarray are understandable even by non-specialists, presenting clear groups such as sporulation time series, cell division or changes in temperature.

the yeast microarray data forms a  <dig> ×  <dig> matrix that has been analyzed using three different biclustering methods: bimax  <cit> , iterative search algorithm   <cit>  and ben-dor et al.  <cit>  approach to find order-preserving submatrix biclusters  using bicat analysis toolbox  <cit> .

these three algorithms have been chosen because they look for different concepts of biclusters using different strategies. bimax searches for constant up-regulated biclusters , isa searches for biclusters that highly deviate from the mean  and opsm searches for biclusters which preserve certain order . bimax uses a divide-and-conquer strategy while isa uses z-score statistics and opsm performs a greedy iterative search. this way, we can present the results of the visualization under different biclustering conditions and discuss how those differences affect results by comparing their different layouts.

bimax results analysis
bimax is an exhaustive divide-and-conquer method that preprocesses the data matrix to convert it into a binary matrix by fixing a threshold, so transcription levels above this threshold become ones and transcription levels below become zeros . then, it searches for all possible biclusters that contain only ones, so up or down-regulated constant biclusters are found.

bimax was executed with a discretisation threshold of 1%, so only that percentage of transcription levels  were considered. the minimum size of biclusters was set to  <dig> ×  <dig>  finding  <dig> biclusters, most of them of small size .

fig.  <dig> shows the  <dig> biggest biclusters found. with a simple glance at the representation, two clear groups of biclusters appear, one at the top of the graph and another one at the bottom. the display of a higher number of biclusters, up to  <dig>  did not reveal additional information, other than making the two groups tighter.

high connectivity of the nodes demonstrates the exhaustiveness of bimax, since some of the biclusters are very similar, although no one is completely included in another bicluster. the top group mainly contains conditions related to sporulation , revealing that this process provokes up-regulation on a high number of genes. we have compared fig.  <dig> with the genes related to sporulation that have been identified by eisen et al.  <cit>  by means of clustering. the top group contains all the genes related to sporulation in that previous work, as expected. the bottom group, less connected, contains biclusters that group other conditions, especially heat shock conditions such as heat. <dig> and heat. <dig>  some genes highly active under heat shock and sporulation conditions such as those with orfs ygr088w, ynr034w or ykl096w are present in biclusters of both groups; and can be seen at the center of the representation. these hub genes are of special biological interest because they act as a bridge between sporulation conditions and heat shock conditions. for example, orf ykl096w corresponds to gene cwp <dig>  involved in cell wall organization  <cit>  and known to be related to sporulation  <cit> , but it has not been related with heat shock conditions, triggering a new research question in order to clarify these findings.

opsm results analysis
opsm defines a bicluster as a group of rows whose values are monotonically increased under a certain column ordering, enabling us to find coherent evolution biclusters, i.e. genes and conditions that significatively increase or decrease at the same time regardless of the amount of the change. this is the broadest bicluster definition, yielding sometimes very large groups of genes.

opsm was run using  <dig> models for each iteration, which yielded  <dig> biclusters. four of the biclusters found were ignored due to their high number of genes .

the visualization  reveals one of the characteristics of opsm biclusters: when an opsm bicluster contains few genes, it usually has more conditions, and vice versa . however the most interesting result that the visualization helps to quickly detect for this dataset is that opsm biclusters are mainly connected by sporulation conditions. these detected conditions are biologically interesting because they are able to maintain an order in transcription levels over a large number of genes.

this feature could also be discovered by means of the visualization of single biclusters, but it requires much more effort. also, third party relationships cannot be discovered unless all the elements in each bicluster are tracked one by one, while in this visualization they are quickly identified. for example, we can see that genes with locus tags ygl147c, yer102w and ygl076c are grouped together in two biclusters , and are not related to genes in bicluster  <dig>  except for some nodes  at the center. these three genes, along with several others, such as yhr203c or ylr075w , are protein components of the ribosomal subunits 40s and 60s. this explains why they are grouped together in biclusters by opsm. in this case, they serve as validation of the method because there are biological evidence of the relation among genes , but in other cases  these identifications could lead to new knowledge. it is also remarkable that most of the genes grouped along with sporulation conditions at opsm is not grouped by bimax for the same conditions, suggesting that genes related to ribosomal subunits present order in transcription levels during sporulation, but they are not highly expressed.

isa results analysis
iterative search algorithm  aims at finding genes and conditions that deviate from the mean, so only highly up- or down-regulated genes and conditions are biclustered. the method starts with two normalized copies of the data matrix, one for genes and another one for conditions. then, different thresholds are imposed for genes and conditions, and biclusters are searched using z-score statistics. in the end, biclusters with both up- and down-regulated transcription levels are obtained.

this algorithm found  <dig> biclusters with both gene and condition thresholds set to  <dig>  and taking  <dig> starting points. isa's bicluster structure is more entangled than the ones of bimax or opsm . while hull overlapping helps to draw conclusions regarding bicluster relationships , when clusters grow in number and heterogeneity as in this case, abstraction to a higher level of grouping is also interesting. this way, highly intersected zones, such as nodes in biclusters  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig>  acquire relevance not through the individual biclusters they pertain to, but through the frequency by which the biclustering method groups them together . when complexity increases, it is also interesting to know exactly what nodes are connected, which is achieved by highlighting all related nodes when hovering one of them.

since isa searches for both up and down-regulated biclusters, relevant nodes differ from bimax. for example, some conditions arise as important for this method, such as heat shock conditions heat. <dig>  heat. <dig>  heat. <dig> or diauxic shift conditions diau.e, diau.f , while sporulation conditions, very relevant in bimax, are secondary .

CONCLUSIONS
the present article analyzes and compares results from three prominent biclustering methods when applied to a real microarray experiment using a visual analytics framework that allows whole representation and interaction for all biclusters. the main conclusions are the following:

• the proposed visualization allows to display large number of biclusters in a single representation, enhancing the detection of overlap among biclusters.

• as a consequence of conveying overlapping groups, actual biological features can be extracted by the detection of super-biclusters and hub nodes.

• the combination of different representations  with the interaction and navigation through the graph helps in the analysis, allowing to simplify the visualization of complex results.

• this visualization also helps to determine biclustering algorithms characteristics, and differences and similarities between biclustering algorithms.

• the integration of the presented visualization into a visual framework that provides standard representations helps experts to follow the results more easily. furthermore, the linkage of novel and traditional visualizations permits a deeper analysis of results, from overview to details, thus gaining insight into the problem at hand.

following these promising results, our future line of work will be based on the research and optimization of the layout when different biclustering algorithm's results are compared with each other, and on the integration of additional biological knowledge from gene and condition databases.

