BACKGROUND
new mutations continually arise and are the source of genetic diversity. they provide the material on which selection acts; in large, sexual populations, beneficial mutations will reach fixation, and most deleterious mutations will be lost. however, in the case of deleterious mutations, a compensatory mutation may occur that renders the two mutations neutral or beneficial as a pair and causes them to be preserved by selection. in protein-coding sequences, coevolution of residues can occur as compensation of changes in e.g. volume or charge, or because of the simultaneous involvement of residues in e.g. ligand binding. this implies that residues which show such correlated mutations are expected to be located close to each other in the  <dig> d structure of a protein. an early observation of this kind was obtained in a set of virus sequences, where the positions in the sequence that showed an identical pattern of variation were in most cases close together in the  <dig> d structure  <cit> . several studies have reported similar observations and have made use of such information e.g. to engineer artificial domains  <cit> , to predict interhelical contacts in transmembrane proteins  <cit> , to analyze functional dependencies observed within hiv genes  <cit> , to predict functionally important residues  <cit>  or to distinguish between correct and incorrect models for the  <dig> d structure of proteins  <cit> .

a number of methods have been developed to search for correlated mutations, and their results are mostly validated by comparing with distances between residues in crystal structures. a distinction can be made between pairwise correlation methods   <cit>  and information-theory based methods  <cit> . the former seem to outperform the latter when using enrichment of residue pairs at short distances as a criterion  <cit> . although several correlated mutation measurements yield reasonable accuracy for intramolecular contact map prediction, the accuracy level drops in intermolecular contact prediction  <cit> .

on a higher level, similarity between phylogenetic trees is related to protein interactions in large sets of interacting families  <cit> . however, it has been heavily debated whether this signal is due to true coevolution, i.e. compensatory mutations between residues in the binding partners  <cit> . a number of factors affecting sets of proteins, such as similar expression patterns or functioning in a given biochemical pathway, can generate similarity in evolutionary rates  <cit> . families with similar evolutionary rates in different organisms will present similar trees, without the need for co-adaptation between the corresponding proteins. although this confounding effect takes place at the level of phylogeny, residue-level correlated mutations also contain noise caused by evolutionary processes related to common ancestry, such as changes in codon usage or amino acid frequencies  <cit> . hence, misleading signal can be caused by phylogenetic correlations between homologous sequences and from correlation due to factors other than spatial proximity. this highlights the need to distinguish between observed "covariation", and true "coevolution", which is what we would like to infer based on those observed signals which do however contain noise.

plant mads domain transcription factors  are involved in regulation of a variety of developmental processes such as floral transition and flower development  <cit> . they "do it together"  <cit>  in the sense that they are engaged in protein interactions and form protein complexes that are required for binding dna. an analysis of the interaction capacity of all members of the family in arabidopsis revealed the ability to form  <dig> different dimers  <cit>  among  <dig> members of the subfamily of mikc-type  mads domain proteins. these tfs have in addition to the mads  domain an i, k and c-domain  <cit> .

a couple of structures are available for dimers of mads domains   <cit> , but structural information for the other domains is lacking. the structures show that two mads domains extensively contact each other, but mutagenesis data indicate that also other parts of the mikc proteins contact each other. in particular, the i-domain is involved in determining interaction specificity  <cit>  and the k-domain is important for dimerization  <cit> . a few computational studies previously analyzed plant mads domain protein sequences in order to find functionally important regions, albeit without explicit reference to their role in interaction specificity  <cit> . other computational studies focused on the evolution of the interaction network via duplications  <cit>  or on simulating models for gene- and/or protein-interactions  <cit> . recently, we developed a method aimed at predicting interaction sites using experimental interaction data and applied it to the mads domain protein family  <cit>  followed by experimental testing of sites governing interaction specificity  <cit> .

here, we present a novel approach to analyzing correlated mutations and testing their validity. we analyze correlated mutations in a family of interacting proteins. this provides a convenient way to compare correlated mutations between those proteins and assess whether correlated mutations are 'conserved' between them. secondly, it allows comparison of correlated mutations observed between pairs of interacting proteins with those observed between pairs of non-interacting proteins, where the latter provide a unique background-model for assessment of significance of the observed intermolecular correlated mutations. hence, our results contribute to the interpretation of correlated evolution signals.

we integrate our results with available structural, bioinformatics and experimental data for the plant mads domain proteins and in this way we obtain clues about the structural organization of these proteins and their complexes.

RESULTS
we will first discuss sequence retrieval, followed by correlated mutation analysis and validation of the results using various types of independent data. next, conservation of correlated mutations between homologous positions in various proteins will be analyzed, which provides a novel way to assess the amount of information correlated mutations contain. finally, our results will be applied in prediction of protein interactions and scrutinized to obtain structural insight into the mads proteins.

sequence data
the workflow followed to obtain sequences and perform further analysis is illustrated in figure  <dig>  in total,  <dig> sequences were obtained using interpro,  <dig> using blast and  <dig> from sequenced plant genomes; after clustering and filtering with a minimum of 25% sequence identity to one of the arabidopsis mads proteins,  <dig> sequences were retained. as explained in the methods section, we do not strictly define 1-to- <dig> orthology, but for the sake of clarity we will refer in the sequel to these sequences as  orthologs. for the following  <dig> mads proteins there were at least  <dig> sequences of putative orthologs available: ag , agl <dig> , ap <dig> , ap <dig> , ful , pi , sep <dig> , sep <dig> , shp <dig> , soc <dig> , stk  and svp . these proteins were analyzed for intramolecular correlated mutations .

combining the sequences with existing interaction data  <cit>  allowed in total  <dig> different pairs of interacting arabidopsis proteins to be analyzed, with a minimum of  <dig> ortholog pair sequences . as background model,  <dig> pairs of non-interacting mads pairs were used for which a minimum of  <dig> ortholog pairs were available. because of the way we deal with co-orthologs , there are cases of mads domain proteins that pass the threshold of  <dig> sequences only in the intermolecular analysis and not in the intramolecular analysis.

validation of correlated mutation analysis
correlated mutations were obtained for intra- and inter-molecular sequence alignments using caps . additional files  <dig> and  <dig> contain lists of these results. to validate the observed correlated mutation pairs, we compared them with available structural data , previously predicted interaction motifs and single nucleotide polymorphisms .

validation: structure data
residues which show correlated mutations are expected to be located close to each other in tertiary and quaternary structure. comparison of the distribution of distances for intramolecular correlated mutation residue pairs in the crystal structure of the mads domain shows that there is indeed a clear enrichment at low distances, compared to all residue pairs in the crystal structure . the enrichment for the analysis with time correction  is similar to the enrichment for the analysis without time correction; for the former, 74% of the correlated mutation residue pairs are within 15Å, whereas for the latter this is 77%. these numbers should be compared with the percentage of all residue pairs within 15Å in the crystal structure, which is 51%. comparison with randomly selected subsets of residue pairs in the crystal structure indicates that this enrichment is statistically significant .

for the intermolecular correlated mutation analysis, the analysis of interacting protein pairs using time correction  shows an enrichment in residues within 15Å, compared to all residue pairs . such enrichment is not found for interacting protein pairs analyzed without time correction, nor for non-interacting pairs analyzed either with or without time correction . hence, these two background models strongly support the significance of the distance enrichment for the resulting residue pairs in the correlated mutation analysis of the interacting mads domain proteins. note that the correlated mutation analysis of non-interacting pairs results in a strikingly lower percentage of pairs of residues with small distance , an observation for which we miss a clear interpretation.

the enrichment of residues which are in contact  across the interface is reasonably strong , but less so than what is seen for the intramolecular correlated mutation analysis. this is in line with what has been observed previously for intermolecular correlated mutation analysis . one reason could be that the correlated mutation analysis will inherently focus on residues which are not conserved . for a large part, residues at the interface will be conserved, meaning that a lot of residue-pairs will not show up in the correlated mutation analysis. another factor obviously is the assumption  that orthologs will have similar interaction partners, a hypothesis for which evidence exists  <cit>  but that also has been challenged  <cit> . the clear difference between the interacting and non-interacting protein pairs does however strongly argue for the importance of the correlated residue pairs that we recover. the results presented here are for using a cutoff for the correlation coefficient of  <dig> , but qualitatively they are similar for higher cutoffs . because enrichment of residue pairs at small distances was only observed for the analysis with time correction, in the sequel we use results from that analysis only. to further analyze the significance of the observed short distance enrichment for the intermolecular correlated mutations, a resampling analysis was performed. this is described in detail in additional file 5; it clearly confirmed the significance of our results.

validation: comparison with predicted interaction motifs
for the intermolecular correlated mutation results, a comparison was made with motif pairs which were previously predicted to determine mads interaction specificity  <cit> . the rationale behind this comparison is that both motifs and correlated mutations should contain information about interaction residues. overall, there are large differences between different interacting protein pairs with respect to the number of correlated mutation positions and motifs that coincide. the lowest coincidence was found for the agl12-agl <dig> interaction for which only 10% of the residues involved in correlated mutation were overlapped by predicted interaction motifs. in contrast, three interacting protein pairs  showed over 70% of their correlated mutation positions overlapped by predicted interaction motifs. however, there was a clear difference between the results for the interacting pairs and non-interacting pairs. for the interacting pairs, 55% of the motif positions was overlapped by at least one correlated mutation position, and 39% of the correlated mutation positions was covered by a motif, whereas for the non-interacting pairs, 42% of the motif positions was overlapped by at least one correlated mutation position, and 32% of the correlated mutation positions was covered by a motif. comparison with randomly generated position pairs  showed that the f-score  was significantly different from random for the interacting protein pairs , but not for the non-interacting protein pairs .

both the previously predicted motif pairs and the correlated mutation position pairs predict connections between regions in pairs of interacting sequences. in the comparison above, this was not taken into account, but we would expect that overlap between motif pairs and correlated mutation pairs would be 'consistent' in the sense that the two motifs that constitute a motif pair each overlap with one of the two positions of a given correlated mutation pair. analysis of the number of ortholog pairs in which a given motif pair had such consistent overlap with correlated mutation positions indicates that this is higher for the interacting pairs than for the non-interacting pairs . there is one motif pair which overlaps consistently with a correlated mutation pair in four different interacting protein pairs, and one which overlaps consistently in three different interacting pairs. the former connects two parts of the k-domain , whereas the latter connects two parts of the i-domain. the various correlated mutations which show consistent overlap with motif pairs are shown in additional file  <dig>  these positions are strong candidates for further investigation as important residues for protein-protein interactions of the mads domain proteins.

validation: comparison with snp data
finally, we compared the intermolecular correlated mutation positions with available arabidopsis snp data  <cit> . for the interacting pairs, we found  <dig> non-synonymous snps without overlap with a correlated mutation position, and  <dig> with overlap with a correlated mutation position. for the non-interacting pairs, these values are  <dig> and  <dig>  respectively. this means that the fraction of non-synonymous snps covering a correlated mutation site is smaller for the interacting pairs  than for the non-interacting pairs . of course at longer evolutionary distances one would expect a correlated mutation position to be variable , but if these sites are functional  then at short evolutionary distances it is reasonable to expect that they are conserved, and the fact that they are more conserved for the interacting compared to the non-interacting protein pairs is additional validation of our results. these results are reinforced by the fact that for the synonymous snps, no such difference between interacting and non-interacting pairs is observed .

validation: general trends
overall, the comparison of correlated mutation positions with structural data, interaction motifs and snps show the same trend: correlated mutations from interacting pairs have enrichment in signals compared to non-interacting pairs. in addition, the intramolecular correlated mutations show clear distance enrichment. hence, all observed trends, although sometimes weak, are consistent and point towards biological significance of the observed signals.

conserved correlated mutations
an intriguing question is whether positions with correlated mutations in various protein subfamily members are conserved for being correlated or not, because this would give further insight into the mechanism behind correlated mutations. note that the use of the term "conservation" here is somewhat different from its most common use to describe sequence conservation, but was chosen because it best describes the phenomenon of observing a feature  in multiple instances of a sequence alignment . to answer this question for the mads proteins, we investigated for all intramolecular correlated mutation pairs in a given protein whether they were detected in other mads proteins as well, in which case they were called "conserved" in these other proteins. we first analyzed whether there is more conservation of correlated mutations for pairs of proteins with higher sequence identity, but this was not the case. overall, 63% of the correlated mutation pairs are conserved in at least one other mads protein, and 37% are not . for the non-conserved cases, there are two possibilities: either a correlated mutation is not conserved because the residues themselves at these positions are conserved, i.e. not varying, in other mads domain proteins  or there is variation at the positions in other mads domain proteins but it is not correlated. to distinguish between these two possibilities, sequence entropy was calculated for each column in the multiple sequence alignments . next, homologous positions in various mads domain protein alignments were divided into two groups, one with correlated mutation occurring at that position, and one without. sequence entropy was compared between those groups. this showed that correlated mutation positions which were conserved in at least one other protein had on average a higher sequence entropy  than the homologous positions where the correlated mutations were not conserved . indeed, in 74% of the cases conserved correlated mutation positions had a higher entropy than the homologous positions where no correlated mutation was detected. this means that no correlated mutation was observed in those homologous positions because they were less variable. correlated mutation positions that were not conserved in any other protein did not show such difference in sequence entropy. hence, for correlated mutations that are not conserved at all, the homologous positions in other proteins are as variable as the position where the correlated mutation occurs, but in these other proteins no compensatory correlated mutation occurs. these results fit within the framework of correlated mutations occurring when a second mutation compensates for an earlier deleterious one and indicate that this is most likely the case for correlated mutations which are conserved in at least one other protein. for those correlated mutations that are not conserved at all this interpretation is less likely because these positions show as much variation in other proteins as in the protein where the correlated mutation occurs.

for the intermolecular correlated mutations, several correlated residue pairs are found in the mads domain for two interacting pairs of arabidopsis mads proteins which can be compared with structure data as presented above. these conserved correlated mutation pairs show similar enrichment for short distances as observed for all correlated mutation pairs:  <dig> out of  <dig>  of these pairs are located in each others neigbourhood in the  <dig> d structure . one example is the residue pair  <dig> -  <dig>  which is found as a correlated residue pair in agl <dig> - soc <dig> and sep  <dig> - soc <dig>  the residues involved are located within a predicted distance of  <dig> Å . among the correlated mutation pairs resulting from the non-interacting mads pairs, only one pair is found in two different protein pairs; these two residues are not located in each others neighbourhood. for the domains outside the mads domain, comparison with protein structure data is not possible; however, again the resulting correlated mutation positions are more conserved among the interacting pairs than among the non-interacting pairs. there are in total  <dig> conserved groups of correlated mutation positions in the interacting protein pairs , whereas there are only  <dig> such groups in the non-interacting protein pairs. compared tot the total number of correlated mutation pairs, for the interacting proteins this is ~ <dig> % and for the non-interacting protein pairs this is ~ <dig> %. in addition, each group for the non-interacting protein pairs consists of only two different protein pairs, whereas for the interacting protein pairs there are two larger groups. the conserved intermolecular correlated mutations are shown in additional file  <dig> 

analysis of mads domain protein and complex structure
based on the analyses described above we conclude that the correlated mutation analysis results clearly contain biological signal. we now describe application of these results in order to obtain insight into the structural organization of mads domain proteins and their complexes. in particular, we focus on the k-domain, because structure information is already available for the mads and i domain , and the c-terminal domain is predicted to be unstructured.

intramolecular organization of k-domain helices
although structure information is only available for the mads and i domain, it is generally assumed that the k-domain consists of coiled coils. our correlated mutation analysis can be used to validate this assumption. we predicted coiled coils in this domain  and compared the correlated mutation positions with these predictions. the predicted helices are listed in additional file  <dig>  based on the intra-helical organization of residues, one would expect a periodic pattern of connections between residues within predicted helices. this is indeed the case: on top of the expected decay with longer distance, there is a clear preference for residues i-i+ <dig>  i-i+ <dig> and especially i-i+ <dig> to be connected to each other, and for residues i-i+ <dig> to be not connected. note that, for example, the notation i-i+ <dig> refers to pairs of residues which are separated in the amino acid sequence by two intervening residues. this pattern is not found when instead of the predicted helices, random stretches of equal length are defined and compared with the correlated mutation positions ; the difference in preference for i-i+ <dig> vs i-i+ <dig> is  <dig> %  for the predicted helices, whereas only  <dig> out of  <dig> randomizations  have a similar or higher difference .

next, we analyzed whether correlations were observed between helices, in order to infer their orientation with respect to each other. because only a few intramolecular correlated mutation positions occur between predicted k-domain helices , our results suggest that these helices do not directly contact each other intramolecularly in most mads domain proteins. this is in line with suggestions in the literature that these helices would be involved in intermolecular contact  <cit> . this suggestion is reinforced by the fact that we do observe intramolecular correlated mutations between the k-domain helices and the mads/i domain:  <dig> pairs of positions in  <dig> different proteins . these predicted connections mainly involve the first k-domain helix, which is indeed expected to contact the mads/i domain as it is directly connected via the primary sequence. of these pairs, only  <dig> are showing conservation, which is quite low compared to the overall conservation for correlated mutation pairs ; however, one reason might be that the i domain is more variable and less well alignable than the mads or k-domain. these cases of conserved correlated mutations are shown in additional file  <dig>  two examples of such conserved predicted contacts are between val <dig> resp. ser <dig> and two residues in the first predicted k-domain helix of sep <dig>  and the same positions in ap <dig>  an interesting aspect here is that val <dig> and ser <dig> are located close to each other  in a structure model of sep <dig> based on the available crystal structure of the mads domain, and the residues in the k-domain helix which show correlated mutation with these two residues have a sequential distance of  <dig> residues, corresponding with almost two turns of a helix, which corresponds to ~ <dig> Å. taking into account that contacts will be made via side chains, which bridge several Å, these distances show a nice match .

analysis of intermolecular interactions
we also analyzed whether patterns of correlated mutations could provide insight into the intermolecular structural organization of the k-domain helices. one possible organization would be that the two or three k-domain helices from one protein form one extended "superhelix", which contacts an equivalent "superhelix" of the other protein. in this case, one would expect mainly intermolecular contacts between homologous helices. some suggestive drawings have appeared in literature  <cit> , but the correlated mutation analysis might give some more clear-cut insight here. the correlated mutation pairs that we observed indicated that out of all possible helix-helix contacts, there was not a specific preference for certain helix-helix contacts to be present . this could indicate a more compact organization of those helices . note that the "superhelix" organization would also not be consistent with evidence that the last part of the k-domain is involved in formation of higher order complexes  <cit> .

in a recent analysis of mads interaction specificity  <cit>  we in particular focused on one part of the i domain where we found a 'motif hotspot': experimental investigation with yeast-two-hybrid validated the importance of this region, and using available structural information we hypothesized that there would be an interaction between this region and a complementary region in the k-domain. as the motif in this region was specifically validated for the soc <dig> protein, we analyzed correlated mutation pairs for soc <dig> with interaction partners where the position in soc <dig> overlapped with this 'hotspot' region. several of the complementary correlated mutation pairs fall specifically in the first predicted helix in the k-region, providing additional validation for our original hypothesis .

discussion
our analysis of correlated mutations in the mads domain protein family provides a unique way to investigate the amount of signal that such mutations leave in protein sequences. we studied correlated mutations in various family members in terms of their conservation, and were able to compare correlated mutations between interacting pairs of proteins and non-interacting pairs of proteins. the intramolecular correlated mutation results show a clear enrichment of residue pairs located close to each other in the mads domain. there are some variations between proteins in the number of correlated mutation pairs and the percentage located close to each other. we did not observe a clear correlation between the number of sequences available for each protein and the number of correlated mutation pairs or the short distance enrichment. we also tested whether the number of predicted correlated mutation positions or the distance enrichment depended on quality measures of the alignments that were used  but found no such correlation.

the majority of the intramolecular correlated mutations were observed in at least two mads proteins, i.e. they showed conservation. we found that when such conserved correlated mutations were not observed in other mads proteins, this is mostly because these positions are more conserved and not because of uncorrelated variability in these other proteins. this analysis gives additional support to the interpretation of correlated mutations as "one mutation followed by a compensatory mutation". such support is important because of the need to infer "coevolution" based on observed "covariation", a process in which noise can be present, as discussed in the introduction.

a possible confounding factor for intermolecular correlated mutation analysis is that we cannot be sure that the predicted orthologs in all the various species that we analyze do indeed interact. to get some further insight into this issue, we assembled a set of interacting mads domain proteins from various species from literature  <cit> . using sequence identity with arabidopsis proteins as criterium, orthology relationships were predicted, and next we assessed whether the interaction would have been correctly predicted based on the arabidopsis interaction data. this was the case in over 60% of the interactions . a random prediction would have much lower success rate because there are much more non-interacting than interacting pairs of arabidopsis mads domain proteins. still, this number clearly illustrates a problem with which all intermolecular correlated mutation approaches have to deal, i.e. that many interactions will be missed and/or incorrectly assigned. indeed, validation by for example structure information shows that the fraction of residue pairs in close contact is lower for the intermolecular correlated mutations than for the intramolecular correlated mutations.

our approach is unique in using a set of interacting protein pairs and a set of related non-interacting protein pairs as a reference. as the latter would be expected not to have correlations with each other, they serve as negative controls. using these, we found i) that the overrepresentation of intermolecular residues at short distances is higher for interacting protein pairs than for non-interacting pairs; ii) that there is more consistency between results from different interacting pairs than between results from different non-interacting pairs; iii) that there is a better overlap between correlated mutation results from interacting protein pairs and our previously predicted interaction motifs than between correlated mutation results from non-interacting protein pairs and those motifs; and iv) that they have less overlap with snps. although some trends are weak on their own, they are all consistent.

our results here are complementary to our previous analysis of sequence determinants of mads protein interaction specificity  <cit> . in particular, that analysis focused on using sequences from arabidopsis mads domain proteins in order to find motifs that are responsible for interaction specificity. in our current study, we use the large amount of sequence data that is available, in order to find correlated mutation pairs. there is no reason why these pairs should specifically contain information about interaction specificity, but rather one would expect that they contain information about interaction sites in general. as such, the predicted interaction motifs would be expected to form a subset of the correlated mutation sites, and in line with that, indeed the coverage of predicted interaction motifs by correlated mutation positions is higher than the coverage of correlated mutation positions by predicted interaction motifs. an important point is also that correlated mutation positions per definition are sites which are not conserved evolutionarily, whereas the motif positions are relatively conserved; this again limits the possible amount of overlap between these two analyses. still, the fact that we do find significant overlap indicates that a combination of these two approaches might be particularly powerful.

CONCLUSIONS
our results provide understanding of structural properties of the important plant mads proteins. in particular, our correlated mutation analysis confirms predicted helices in the k-domain, and supports a specific organization of these helices in the mads dimers. also, we obtain further support for an interaction region in the i domain. hence, in addition to obtaining general insight into coevolution signals at the protein level, we also demonstrate the use of these signals to test specific hypothesis about structural properties of proteins.

