BACKGROUND
males and females of the same species typically differ in many traits, so much so that the most striking differences among individuals of the same species are usually those between sexes. a given species may have differences in gametes, primary and secondary sexual characters, quality and quantity of hormones, but also differences in behavior, somatic structures, immune response and gene expression  <cit> . these differences can make males and females distinct types of hosts, offering different challenges and opportunities to their parasites. thus, similar to parasite adaptation to the most common host type  <cit> , parasites may adapt specifically to the characteristics of the host sex they encounter most often  <cit> . biased sex-ratios are common and can be an intrinsic characteristic of certain species. for example, there is an abundance of females in cyclically parthenogenetic species , in sequential hermaphrodite species and in many haplodiploid species, such as ants, bees, wasps and mites. the parasite has a skewed likelihood of encountering male versus female hosts in populations with strongly biased sex-ratios and sex-specific adaptations are likely to occur. this study characterizes the host sex-specific effects of parasites in sexually dimorphic hosts with biased sex-ratios to explore this hypothesis.

we use the cyclically parthenogenetic crustacean daphnia magna and its natural bacterial parasite, pasteuria ramosa, as a model system for host-parasite interactions. in this system, infection success depends on the combination of host and parasite genotypes  <cit> . host susceptibility correlates with the ability of the parasite to attach to the host's esophagus, a process that does not depend on host sex  <cit> . even though females and males are genetically identical , there is clear sexual dimorphism  <cit>  and, as is typical for cyclic parthenogenetic animals, natural populations of d. magna are strongly female biased. as such, parasites of d. magna will typically encounter females considerably more often than males and might be adapted to exploit that particular host type.

most published studies of host-parasite interactions using daphnia focus exclusively on female hosts . those studies include detailed descriptions of parasite-driven changes to their female hosts, such as the p. ramosa-induced castration of d. magna. when proliferating within females, p. ramosa induces the reallocation of resources usually spent in egg production to the production of somatic tissue. this results in female gigantism and, consequently, in increased carrying capacity for parasite proliferation inside infected females. this link between parasite fitness and host gigantism is observed for many species  <cit>  and has specifically been seen in our p. ramosa-daphnia model  <cit> . however, p. ramosa is rarely exposed to this "host type" in natural populations and whether infection of males with p. ramosa results in castration, gigantism and subsequent increase parasitic capacitance is unknown.

the first aim of this study was to investigate if the two host sexes represented different environments for the parasite. for several genetically distinct host clones, we recorded the differences between host sexes of the same host clone  in parasite infectivity, virulence, proliferation and fitness. the second aim of our study was to test if parasite-induced castration and gigantism, described for infected female d. magna, are also observed in infected males. if these symptoms are not seen in males, it is consistent with our hypothesis that the parasite adapted to exploit female hosts.

RESULTS
in a series of experiments  using the crustacean host d. magna and p. ramosa, its bacterial parasite, we investigated if parasites exposed to male versus female host individuals differ in the likelihood of successful infection , in parasite fitness, in the rate of proliferation within the host , and in induced disease symptoms .

infection rate and parasite proliferation in male versus female host individuals
p. ramosa had higher infection rates in females when three-day-old individuals were exposed to parasite spores for  <dig> days . the infection rate increased with the dose of parasite spores  but the sex difference did not vary with dose . however, when we exposed one-day-old hosts, before the sexual dimorphism becomes apparent, for a short period , we did not observe a difference in the proportion of infected females versus males .

spore counts  and spore densities  at day  <dig> of the experiment were higher in females than in males . this suggests that the rate of spore production in females was higher than in males in the first  <dig> days of the experiment. as animals were exposed to the parasite before sex differentiation, the differences in spore counts and densities are unlikely to be caused by differences in the number of spores ingested . between days  <dig> and  <dig> of the experiment, the rate of spore production  no longer differs significantly between the sexes ): n = 142; factor "sex" df =  <dig>  f =  <dig> , p <  <dig> ; factor "day" df =  <dig>  f =  <dig> , p <  <dig> ; interaction "sex × day" df =  <dig>  f =  <dig> , p =  <dig> ). parasite density increased in males during the later phase of parasite proliferation , but did not in females .

at parasite induced host death, females harbored many more spores than males .

effects of parasites on males versus female hosts
over all the experiments, we found no significant difference in mortality before day  <dig>  between male and female hosts, and between host clones ): "host clone", df =  <dig>  f =  <dig> , p =  <dig> , "sex", df =  <dig>  f =  <dig> , p =  <dig> ). individuals dead before day  <dig> were excluded from further analysis.

we monitored lifespan of infected versus control male and female hosts  and showed that control daphnia of both sexes lived longer than their infected counterparts . we did not detect a significant difference in cost of infection on survival between male and female hosts  =  <dig> , z =  <dig> , p <  <dig> , factor "sex", exp =  <dig> , z =  <dig> , p <  <dig> , factor "infection status × sex", exp =  <dig> , z =  <dig> , p =  <dig> ). the median lifespan was reduced by about 50% in both sexes .

we tested whether p. ramosa induces gigantism in its hosts in two experiments . we found that infected females were larger than uninfected females , while body size of infected males was not significantly different from uninfected males .

based on t-test comparisons, the parasite-induced gigantism only in female hosts. the results for females remain significant  when corrected for multiple testing. the means of body length are represented in figure  <dig>  * result obtained with a "welch's t-test" to control for unequal variances.

as seen previously during infection with p. ramosa, infected female hosts in our experiments did not produce eggs. we tested whether infected males showed signs of castration  by looking for and counting spermatozoa. all adult males had spermatozoa, but infected males had significantly lower counts . spermatozoa counts increased with age for uninfected individuals ^ <dig>  df =  <dig>  f =  <dig> , p =  <dig>  and factor "age" df =  <dig>  f =  <dig> , p =  <dig> , figure  <dig>  left panel), but not for infected individuals .

discussion
we used a host whose populations are typically strongly female-biased and investigated infection-associated characteristics to look for sex-specific differences. our results show that male and female daphnia differ in the likelihood of becoming infected upon exposure to p. ramosa parasite spores, but only when they already show a sexual size dimorphism, about three days after birth . we also showed that parasites infecting females proliferate at a higher rate, reach a higher density  and have a higher fitness . however, longevity is unaffected by host sex . finally, we showed that both sexes suffer from a reduction in fecundity  when infected , but only females experience an associated increase in body size  . together, these data are consistent with the hypothesis that this parasite is adapted to specifically exploit the considerably more common female hosts.

male and female hosts represent different environments for parasites
as in many organisms, differences in morphology and physiology between male and female daphnia are minimal in very young individuals  with sexual size dimorphism developing from the third instar onwards. the developmental timing of the size sexual dimorphism may explain why females were infected at a higher rate than male hosts when encountering the parasite at adult stage, while infection rates were equal for exposures at an early juvenile stage. daphnia passively capture p. ramosa spores from the water by filter feeding, and larger animals have higher filtration rates. thus, as females grow faster and to a larger size, they may take up more spores with their food than males. a bias in parasite exposure due to sex size dimorphism has been proposed to explain part of the sex bias in infection rates in other animals  <cit>  and between species of daphnia  <cit> . however, further investigation on the relative roles of body size or sex in isolation on the likelihood of infection remains to be done. a sex difference in likelihood of infection means that parasites will experience the female host environment more often, even if the sex ratios were not biased.

infected female d. magna lived about  <dig>  times longer  than infected males, but the cost of the parasite on host lifespan was approximately the same in both host sexes . the longer lifespan of female hosts means that parasites infecting females have the opportunity for more cell divisions within the host and, consequently, more opportunity to adapt to this host's characteristics  <cit> . the biased sex-ratio, the higher infection rate and the higher number of parasite cell divisions within female hosts in this system suggest that selection on p. ramosa is stronger on traits favoring the exploitation of female host characteristics than on those favoring the exploitation of male characteristics . while these results are not direct evidence for adaptation, the observed conditions theoretically favor parasite adaptation to the female host environment  <cit> .

the higher parasite fitness  recorded in female hosts may be explained by a combination of female daphnia's longer lifespan , larger body size  and higher spore production rate in the first  <dig> days of infection . larger body size itself increases the total capacity for spore production in an infected host  <cit> . this is supported by a gradual increase of parasite density in males  while density in female hosts  stabilizes . our result suggests that d. magna females are weaker than males in facing p. ramosa infection and/or that this parasite is better adapted to exploit female hosts. since males and females have the same genotype, the difference cannot be due to differences in host genetic composition. the relative contributions of host and parasite life history traits to the higher fitness of p. ramosa in female d. magna cannot be disentangled. however, the finding discussed below does suggest that this parasite has some traitsthat maximize its fitness, specifically in the female host environment.

host sex-specific symptoms
female daphnia have been repeatedly reported to exhibit parasite-induced gigantism, that is, enhanced body growth, and castration upon infection with p. ramosa . parasites adapted to manipulate energy budget allocation towards growth have been observed in diverse taxa, including molluscs, crustaceans, vertebrates and plant hosts, and for bacterial, fungal and helminth parasites  <cit> . in the daphnia-pasteuria system, gigantism has been proposed as a parasite adaptation, and not as a host response, to increase the parasite's lifetime reproductive success, that is, the number of spores produced until host death  <cit> . by inducing host gigantism, p. ramosa increases the host carrying capacity, which allows parasites to reach higher spore counts. a higher carrying capacity may also decrease the parasite density temporarily , which may expand host lifespan  <cit> . this effect, documented for female d. magna hosts, had never been investigated for male hosts, the host environment less often experienced by this parasite. our results show that host body size increases in infected females, but not in males . this suggests that natural selection has favored parasite traits that induce gigantism specifically in d. magna females. in females, castration is completed soon after the infection  <cit> . males, on the other hand, appear to produce their sperm early in daphnia development  <cit> . this would mean they already have most of their spermatozoa during initiation of infection, before the parasite gains control over the host. uninfected male daphnia continue production of spermatozoa at a low rate; infected male daphnia, however, have the number of their spermatozoa plateaued . this suggests that spermatozoa production was stopped or reduced after the parasite gained control over the host. since castration occurs after most of the resources allocated to sperm production have already been spent, there is likely little benefit for the parasite .

how the parasite induces host castration and gigantism is still unknown. previous studies in our and other systems have proposed that gigantism of female hosts is a consequence of castration  <cit> . the idea is that preventing investment in reproductive tissues results in more energy allocated to somatic growth. the castration itself may result from a chemical secretion from the parasite that modifies host hormonal regulation, returning mature adult females to an immature hormonal stage  <cit> . while the castration of female hosts allows re-allocation of significant amounts of resources to somatic tissues, and thus leads to gigantism, that of males has apparently no effect on body size. the same chemical secretion may induce male castration, but due to the small amount of resources reallocated there is no resulting gigantism. there are two potential reasons for minimal resource allocation. it is possible that males allocate the resources in sperm production only early in their development, as suggested by the relatively slow increase of sperm cell counts during adulthood, or males simply have reduced resource investment in spermatozoa production relative to a female's investment in egg production. while female fitness depends largely on the quality and the quantity of eggs, male fitness depends on a trade-off between expenditure on ejaculate and expenditure on obtaining matings . male d. magna are more likely to invest more in obtaining mates because each mating fertilizes a maximum of two eggs. the relevant resource allocation trade-off in males may be between body size and mate searching activity, and a parasite capable of decreasing male activity might be able to induce male growth. we propose that the parasite ability to induce host castration is an adaptation selected to exploit female hosts and it does not lead to an increased capacity for parasite spore production in males.

CONCLUSIONS
in the same way that parasites are expected to be better adapted to the most common host types  <cit> , we propose that parasites can adapt to the characteristics of the host sex they encounter more often. this is expected to be the case when hosts are sexually dimorphic and represent distinct environments for their parasites. we have recently proposed that host sex differences might be important for parasite evolution and can lead to parasite populations specifically adapting to the characteristics of the common host sex  <cit> . we discussed different scenarios where such sex specific adaptations can occur  <cit> , including the case of sexually dimorphic host populations with strongly biased sex-ratios.

it is yet to be explored how parasite adaptation to host sex depends on the degree of sex ratio bias and of sexual dimorphism in the host population. here, using a parasite evolving naturally in strongly female-biased host populations, we show a key difference in the symptoms induced by p. ramosa parasites in female versus male d. magna hosts, and proposed that this reveals a parasite trait selected for its effect in females. to our knowledge, this would be the first documented example of a parasite trait evolved as a specific adaptation to the more common host sex in nature. revisiting other cases of parasite-induced host symptoms in light of our findings might identify more examples of parasite adaptations specific to one host sex. for instance, we suggest investigating if other examples of parasite-induced host gigantism are also limited to one host sex and if this occurs in host populations with biased sex-ratios.

