BACKGROUND
large-scale transcriptome analysis of genes that are differently expressed in tumor tissues compared to their normal counterparts is an important route to the identification of candidates that could play a role in human malignancies. a number of techniques, ranging from differential display and nucleic acid subtraction to serial analysis of gene expression, expression microarrays and gene chips, have been used to the discovery of such aberrantly expressed cancer-related genes  <cit> . the well-established differential screening technology, that allows for the simultaneous comparison of multiple gene expression levels between two samples differing in tissue type and pathological state, has been the more extensively applied. this simple and powerful method could be performed either experimentally or, since late  <dig>  digitally using expression databases. the computer-based differential display methodology, also referred to as 'in silico subtraction' or 'electronic northern'  <cit> , could identify transcripts preferentially expressed or repressed in the tumor context by comparing cancerous libraries  against the remaining libraries. strikingly, only few attempts were made to apply in silico transcriptomics to genome-wide and multi-tissue screening of cancer genes  <cit> . thus, given the continuous expansion of the est databases, both in terms of sequence and source diversity, updated and independent transcriptomic analyses are permanently needed.

in this study, we mined est libraries for genes differentially expressed in normal and tumor tissues by using a novel computational approach, with the assumption that both the up- and down-regulated pools might contain genes involved in tumorigenesis. this strategy identified differential expression profiles and cancer candidate genes which may be useful in future cancer research. higher expression of the anti-apoptotic protein bcl-xl in liver cancer specimens compared to normal liver was confirmed by immunoblot analysis. strikingly, we found that most cancer-associated changes in gene expression corresponded to genes that were actually downregulated or repressed. the chromosomes and chromosomal regions most frequently associated with aberrant expression changes in tumor versus normal cells were also determined. this analysis suggests that, although genes differentially expressed in cancerous libraries are distributed throughout the genome, chromosomal 'hot spots' of candidate genes could be identified.

RESULTS
identification of differentially expressed genes between normal and cancer tissues
genes differentially expressed in tumor libraries compared to their normal counterparts are likely to play important roles in cancer etiology or could constitute relevant genetic markers for cancer diagnosis. here, we have performed in silico differential display to identify novel and known cancer-associated genes by comparing all the libraries representing tumors to the corresponding normal libraries for each tissue type. details about the data mining procedures are presented in table  <dig>  in order to be able to compare expression levels between normal and tumor state, we compared est counts from non-normalized, non-subtracted cdna libraries. to overcorrect for the false positive rate, we decided to perform the highly conservative bonferroni correction. using this procedure, a total of  <dig> genes showed differential expression in tumor versus normal libraries by a factor of  <dig> or higher , with about one third being up-regulated  and the remaining being down-regulated . the in silico subtraction also resulted in the identification of  <dig> and  <dig> genes predicted to be present or absent in the tumor types compared to normal tissues, respectively. because these est clusters were identified either in normal or tumor libraries, it was not possible to derive their expression ratio, so we decided to present them as separated tables . however, these two groups of genes have been fused to the 'up-regulated' and 'down-regulated' pools in the subsequent analyses. all in all, a sum of  <dig> novel transcripts was also found . noteworthy, in silico subtraction identified  <dig>  %  previously studied genes involved in oncogenesis, based on a list of ~  <dig> genes compiled as previously described  <cit> . since the fraction of such reference genes in our initial data set was  <dig>  % , our data mining protocol expectedly lead to a significant enrichment in cancer genes . these previously characterized and well-studied genes include the p57kip <dig> and p19ink4d cyclin inhibitors, and the ras-gap, c-fos, ret and myc oncogenes. last, in order to independently verify the validity of the est-based tissue profiles, sage data were used to give an indication of the tissue distribution of our transcripts in normal tissues. while sage results specified by tissue type converged with the analysis of ests for  <dig>  % ,  <dig>  % , and  <dig>  %  of the examined hits in the 'down', 'up' and 'normal-specific' groups respectively, i.e. precisely in the classes where an expression in the normal condition was expected, this percentage decreased to  <dig>  %  for the 'tumor-specific' group of transcripts.

cancer candidate gene analysis
the first general observation that could be made from our results is that a same gene could be either up-regulated or repressed according to the tumor cell type, allowing identification of tissue-specific gene expression profiles in tumor versus normal cells. for instance, among the set of candidates with differential expression in cancer, we observed a massive down-regulation of several collagen alpha chain genes  in various tumor tissues, including decreased expression of collagen alpha  <dig>  in skin, placenta, testis, eye and bone . interestingly, col1a <dig> has been reported as a tumor suppressor gene that could inhibit ras-induced oncogenic transformation  <cit> . apart from collagens, other types of proteins that could be used as useful biomarkers include cytokeratins . ck are particularly interesting epithelia specific intermediate filaments because their degradation gives rise to soluble fragments, measurable in the blood of patients and capable of cancer monitoring  <cit> . our results show that a total of  <dig> ck genes were differentially expressed between normal and malignant cells in  <dig> different tissues , allowing tissue-specific expression profiling . additionally, in line with previous microarray data  <cit> , we found that hair-specific type ii keratin was overexpressed in breast tumors compared to normal breast. we further determined that over the  <dig> genes which displayed aberrant expression in more than one tissue,  <dig> were "deregulated" in the same way . included in this list of 'consistent' candidates are  <dig> transcripts encoding different ribosomal components, in accordance with the increasing body of evidence from the literature that correlates changes in the protein synthesis machinery with cancer  <cit> . specific signatures for ribosomal genes could be determined, e.g. downregulation of the genes encoding 60s ribosomal l <dig>  l <dig> and l <dig> in libraries prepared from tumor skin and tumor blood, whereas placental cancer libraries appear to be specifically enriched in transcripts encoding 40s ribosomal s <dig>  s <dig> and s <dig>  as depicted in figure  <dig> , some genes display a tissue-specific pattern of differential expression in tumor types, thus making them candidates for specific diagnostic markers. among these  <dig> genes differentially expressed in only one tissue are 14-3- <dig> sigma in brain tumors and bnip3l in blood. this latter gene, belonging to the bcl- <dig> family of apoptotic regulators, has been described as a potential tumor suppressor  <cit> . last, it is worth noting that a novel member of the methyltransferase enzyme family , that contains clear transcriptional repressors  <cit> , was found to be specifically overexpressed in placental tumors.

taken together, these results suggest that est data could be successfully mined to provide digital profiles of differential gene expression at the full genome level between normal and cancerous tissues. our lists of transcriptional signatures might help to select candidate markers in cancer genetics or potential targets for therapy.

increased expression of bcl-xl in liver tumors
bcl- <dig> family member bcl-xl  was selected for confirmation by immunoblotting due to its plausible biological role in cancer susceptibility. moreover, both est and sage results indicated that bcl-xl was poorly expressed in normal liver, while abundant in other tissues , suggesting that this apoptotic regulator could constitute a good marker for liver cancer progression. as depicted in figure  <dig>  western blot analysis confirmed overexpression of bcl-xl in a subset of human liver cancer specimens  compared to normal liver .

identification of chromosome locations of differential gene expression in cancer
we next sought to analyze the chromosomal distribution of the genes which were over-expressed or repressed in tumor tissues. to this end, we mapped the previously identified genes showing significant differential expression between normal and tumor tissues along human chromosomes according to their banding, in order to build cancer-oriented transcriptome maps. to avoid possible biases due to chromosome length  or different chromosomal gene densities, we computed the percentage of candidate genes against the total number of genes present on a particular chromosome or banding .

first, our results show that some chromosomes appear to be more active than others , with, for instance, chromosomes  <dig>   <dig> and y being rarely involved in cancer-related gene expression changes compared to chromosomes  <dig> and  <dig>  as expected from the results of table  <dig>  most chromosomal regions associated with changes in expression levels actually correspond to gene inactivation patterns in cancer cells , striking examples of cancer-associated inactivation of gene expression being chromosome  <dig> and chromosome  <dig>  while most tissues  were clearly subject to these cancer-associated gene inactivation patterns , two tissues  did not follow this trend. chromosomal regions displaying at least five hits were further listed and this rough analysis was sufficient to detect  <dig> and  <dig> regions of clustering of up- and down-regulated genes, respectively . we found previously identified chromosomal regions associated with either tumor amplicon  or deleted  regions in tumors  <cit> . interestingly, some of the chromosomal locations which were identified show tissue specificity, e.g. 12q <dig>  in muscle. moreover, in some cases, candidate genes could be contiguous or clustered in limited banding intervals. for instance, 19q <dig> is associated in tumor tissues of placental origin with complete extinction of eight clustered genes, namely pregnancy-specific beta-1-glycoproteins psg- <dig>  - <dig>  - <dig>  - <dig>  - <dig>  - <dig>  - <dig> and - <dig>  these genes belonging to the carcinoembryonic antigen family encode the major placental proteins found in maternal circulation during pregnancy  <cit> .

in conclusion, in addition to providing differential expression profiles for individual genes, our est-based procedure identified discrete regions on specific chromosomes that are enriched in genes deregulated in cancer libraries.

discussion
owing to advances in biotechnology and bioinformatics, researchers can now capture "molecular portraits" of various particular cancers using gene chips or sage data. these methods provide information on tens of thousands of genes simultaneously, and some variations in genes might be directly related to the cancer phenotype  <cit> . as multi-dimensional analysis of est data is analogous to microarray experiments, we used the virtual differential display methodology to identify genes differentially expressed in normal versus tumor tissues. our comprehensive approach gives an overview of numerous candidate genes which may be useful as improved biomarkers for diagnosis or as targets for developing novel treatment methods. for instance, est-based formulation of collagen, integrin or cytokeratin expression profiles may have potential as a diagnostic aid for the detection of both tumor formation and development. noteworthy, for discovery of tumor-associated molecules, it may be beneficial to use a combination of various digital differential display procedures and experimental data on gene expression. this is illustrated by the identification of prostate-specific ets factor as a novel marker for breast cancer both computationally  <cit>   and experimentally  <cit> .

general limitations of est-based strategies, which have been abundantly discussed elsewhere  <cit> , include poor sequencing depth of the libraries, uncertainty concerning the origin of the samples, and differences in library sizes. in addition, analysis of tumor-related differential expression patterns of individual transcripts may have specific drawbacks. for example, cancer cells often proliferate more rapidly than adjacent normal cells and it is possible that, in some cases, the observed changes in transcript abundance may reflect a response to increased proliferation rather than transformation per se. one related problem is that many cell types are often pooled together during the preparation of est libraries. given that most cancers start as growths of single cells, the lack of cell-type specific libraries is a major limiting factor of the method. lastly, the determined variations in transcript expression may not correlate with similar variations in the abundance of the encoded protein, highlighting the need to experimentally test the computer-based predictions either by western blotting or immunohistochemistry. our validation result showing that bcl-xl protein expression was markedly increased in hepatocellular carcinoma and liver adenocarcinoma suggests that this bcl- <dig> family member represent a potential marker for progression of a subset of liver cancers. analysis of bcl-xl immunoreactivity in more liver cancer specimens is needed to enhance the reliability of this finding. however, as it correlates with previous results  <cit> , and in view of the pro-survival effect of bcl-xl, we hypothesize that bcl-xl overexpression could confer specific protection from death to several types of liver cancer cells compared to their healthy counterparts. if true, modulation of bcl-xl expression level and/or activity might represent an interesting strategy to optimize the efficacy of chemotherapeutic agents in this particular tissue, as liver cancer represents a significant source of morbidity and mortality worldwide  <cit> .

aside from the proposal of potential diagnosis markers and targets for future cancer research, a more theoretical perspective of our study is the identification of critical factors that could influence differential gene expression levels in normal versus cancer cells, including genomic landscape features, e.g. levels of polymorphisms, chromosome breakpoints, gene density, gc content and chromatin methylation status. in this regard, although we cannot rule out the possibility of unidentified biases in our data mining procedure, our result showing a higher frequency of gene inactivation patterns in tumor tissues is intriguing, and sheds light on the importance of understanding the molecular mechanisms of negative gene regulation in cancer.

CONCLUSIONS
the final outcomes of the present work are identification of chromosomal regions frequently associated with aberrant expression in cancer libraries, description of differential expression profiles, and listing of cancer candidate genes  which may be useful as tissue-specific biomarkers for cancer diagnosis or as targets for anticancer research.

