BACKGROUND
alzheimer's disease  is associated with neurofibrillary tangles containing tau proteins, and with extracellular amyloid plaques containing fibrils formed by aβ, aβ and aβ, amyloid-β  peptides generated by intracellular proteolytic cleavage of amyloid precursor protein , specifically the neuronal membrane app homologue, aplp- <dig>  although aβ peptides, especially aβ, are known to play an active role in the development of ad  <cit> , recent observations suggest that extracellular aβ fibrils and plaques are relatively inert  <cit> , like other amyloid fibrils , raising questions about the precise mechanism of aβ peptides.

attention has recently become focussed on pre-fibrillar aβ assemblies, especially globular oligomers  <cit>  normally containing from  <dig> to  <dig> molecules. unlike mature fibrils, aβ oligomers are soluble and "membrane-active". they may be crucial to the toxicity of aβ because they can form specific ion channels, or disrupt and permeabilise membranes through less well-defined mechanisms  <cit> . interestingly, different aβ peptides form specific, soluble oligomers in diverse ways  <cit> , which could help to explain their individual "toxicities", and although early studies suggested that monomeric aβ, as opposed to oligomeric aβ, formed discrete ion channels  <cit> , the active species may well have been a  oligomer  <cit> . in terms of a testable theory to explain the mechanism of ad, membrane permeabilisation by membrane-active forms of aβ could compromise cell function and promote cell death  <cit> .

although the precise role of aβ oligomers in ad remains speculative, their discovery calls for caution in the use of plaque-disrupting anti-aβ antibodies  <cit> , because increasing the relative levels of membrane-active forms of aβ might in fact accelerate the disease. these recent findings have also highlighted significant gaps in our understanding of the structural basis of the interactions of aβ peptides with cell membranes, including the importance of individual membrane lipids, especially cholesterol. cholesterol is a well-established risk factor in ad, but its role is complex, and many of its disease-related activities appear to be metabolic  <cit>  rather than structural. however, a plasma-membrane like concentration of cholesterol  promoted aβ insertion and channel formation in planar lipid bilayers  <cit> , suggesting the  sterol  may be directly implicated in the pathological mechanism of aβ at the level of the cell membrane. we set out to test the idea that well-defined oligomers  <cit>  of aβ can insert into cholesterol-containing membranes, and promote changes in membrane structure.

our first objective was to establish that oligomeric aβ inserts into membranes, and to confirm that  monomeric aβ does not. having found that cholesterol promoted the insertion of aβ oligomers into phosphatidylcholine monolayers, with a paradoxically small molecular insertion area suggesting concurrent lipid rearrangement, we used lamellar neutron diffraction to locate the individual membrane components. we discovered that peptide insertion is associated with significant displacement of the sterol towards the polar surfaces of the bilayer, leading to a measurable effect on membrane lipid order.

RESULTS
autoinsertion of aβ oligomers into membranes
monolayers  provide a useful in vitro model system to investigate membrane/protein interactions  <cit> . we noted that oligomeric aβ, but not monomeric aβ, inserted spontaneously into mixed chain palmitoyl-oleoyl phosphatidylcholine  monolayers containing cholesterol  , with an exclusion pressure of ~ <dig> mn/m . insertion was inhibited by  <dig> μm rifampicin, as shown previously for iapp oligomers  <cit> . the oligomers also inserted into negatively charged po-phosphatidylethanolamine/po-phosphatidylserine monolayers, but not into popc monolayers in the absence of cholesterol, consistent with the lack of aβ channel activity in popc planar bilayers  <cit> .

the oligomers had an unexpectedly small ''molecular insertion area'' , especially in popc/chol, lower than the minimum cross-sectional area of a single alpha helix . this suggested that protein insertion was accompanied by changes in lipid packing, with a net reduction in lipid surface area, and we proceeded to examine the structure of aβ/cholesterol-containing lipid bilayers using membrane neutron diffraction.

lipid profiles derived from lamellar neutron diffraction data
unlike x-rays, cold neutrons are well tolerated by biological materials, and cause relatively little structural damage. taking advantage of this, neutron diffraction measurements were carried out on multibilayer lipid samples enclosed in airtight humidified chambers, with and without pre-incorporated oligomeric protein. the lamellar d-repeat of 7: <dig>  popc:chol multibilayers, calculated using the bragg equation from  <dig> orders of diffraction at a relative humidity of  <dig> %, was  <dig>  ±  <dig>  Å . this was slightly reduced following the incorporation of aβ oligomers, to  <dig>  ±  <dig>  Å . however, the difference is not significant. observations over  <dig> hours confirmed that the diffraction peak positions and intensities  did not alter with time, indicating the samples were fully equilibrated, and remained structurally stable.

to help phase the diffraction data, and obtain more detailed structural information, the lamellar d-repeat was systematically varied by changing the membrane hydration. the d2o/h2o ratio was also varied in samples with and without incorporated peptide, to determine the water profile across the bilayer. fig.  <dig> illustrates how the data were fitted to assign signs  to structure factors derived from diffraction peak intensities. in fig. 2a, unscaled structure factors for  <dig> orders of diffraction at up to  <dig> different relative humidities  were plotted in reciprocal space and systematically assigned positive or negative values to achieve the best least-squares fit to a smooth continuous transform, and thereby satisfy shannon's sampling theorem. the phased structure factors were then placed on a relative absolute scale, and the scattering length density profile  shown in fig. 2b was derived by fourier synthesis.

as illustrated by the space-filling popc molecular models in part b, the lowest point of the profile, with negative scattering, marks the exact centre of the bilayer, corresponding to the hydrogen-rich terminal methyl groups of the popc acyl chains. the peaks of positive neutron scattering are associated with the phosphoester region of popc, situated towards the polar surfaces of the bilayer. the centrosymmetric "kinks" in the profile, ~ <dig> Å from the midpoint, reflect the oleoyl acyl chain double bonds. a table of all the experimentally derived structure factors used to calculate transbilayer sld profiles in the presence of  <dig>  mol% d2o, including the form factor errors from the fitting procedure , is provided in additional file  <dig> 

aβ oligomers displace membrane cholesterol
we next carried out experiments to locate the two membrane lipids, popc and chol, in the presence and absence of  <dig> mol% peptide, incorporated as pre-formed oligomers. appropriate neutron diffraction data were phased and placed on a relative absolute scale, and sld profiles were constructed by fourier synthesis. difference  profiles revealed the transbilayer distribution of specific membrane components, including components in which specific hydrogen atoms were isomorphously replaced by deuterium. as previously noted  <cit> ,  <dig> orders of diffraction were sufficient to achieve optimum  resolution of the specifically labelled components, and the mean positions of the labels were well-defined by symmetrical, single-component gaussian distributions in each leaflet of the centrosymmetric bilayer.

the location of membrane cholesterol was determined by collecting and analysing data from membranes in which the lipid was either unlabelled , or deuterated on its planar sterol rings. the resulting difference profile  was compared to a difference profile from samples containing aβ oligomers . strikingly, in the presence of the peptide, membrane cholesterol was displaced towards the surface of the bilayer, by  <dig>  Å in each leaflet. the 95% confidence limits of the experimental profiles  were well separated, and the calculated fits showed a highly significant difference in the position of membrane cholesterol with and without the peptide . in contrast, the position of the  phospholipid acyl chains was only slightly altered, in the opposite direction .

the membrane locations of aβ oligomers and water
a similar difference fourier approach was used to locate the peptide oligomer, and membrane-associated water, in bilayers containing cholesterol . two centres of mass were apparent for the unlabelled peptide oligomers, each  <dig>  Å from the centre of the bilayer, consistent with deep penetration of the peptide into each leaflet of the membrane. transbilayer water distributions were revealed by comparing the sld profiles of paired samples, with or without incorporated peptide, between  <dig>  mol% d2o, where the water is effectively "invisible" to neutrons, and  <dig> mol% d2o, where it diffracts strongly. unlike iapp)  <cit> , the incorporation of aβ oligomers was not associated with a pore-like water column extending all the way through the bilayer, and the water profiles were very similar in the presence and absence of the peptide .

membrane lipid order
the relatively rigid, planar rings of membrane cholesterol intercalate between the flexible acyl chains of neighbouring phospholipids, making the sterol a key determinant of membrane lipid order in eukaryotic cell membranes. to determine whether the outward displacement of cholesterol affects membrane lipid order, as predicted, we calculated the generalised polarisation  of laurdan, which undergoes a water dipole-dependent shift in its emission spectrum that can be directly related to lipid order.  <cit> . at 25°c, membrane popc was highly disordered, as expected, with a very low mean gp . the value was unchanged in liposomes co-reconstituted with  <dig> mol% aβ oligomers, which do not insert into popc membranes in the absence of cholesterol . the gp value for popc/chol liposomes was much higher, reflecting the appearance of an ordered, cholesterol-mediated, lo phospholipid phase. the incorporation of aβ was accompanied by a significant increase in lipid order, whereas co-reconstitution of liposomes with the non-membrane active reverse peptide, aβ , had no effect.

discussion
experimental materials
we reconstituted aβ rather than partial-length peptides, to enhance the relevance of our in vitro structural studies to the interaction of aβ peptides with cholesterol-containing membranes in vivo. we also avoided mixing lipids and proteins in non-physiological organic solvents, and prepared membrane-active water-soluble oligomers, as described in the background to this report. finally, we used popc, containing one saturated and one mono-unsaturated acyl chain. popc has a main chain melting  temperature close to 0°c, well below the experimental temperature of 25°c, but because it is a synthetic mixed-chain phospholipid, it cannot physically separate into complex 2-component mixtures containing saturated and unsaturated phospholipids. however, it still allows membrane cholesterol to intercalate normally in the bilayer  <cit> .

many previous structural studies have been carried out on the amyloidogenic aβ fragment aβ, including membrane-based studies involving  x-ray diffraction  <cit>  and neutron diffraction  <cit> . the fragment can be incorporated into both neutral and negatively-charged bilayers, and like aβ it is located within the hydrophobic, acyl-chain region. the peptide was exposed to lipid membranes for prolonged periods of up to  <dig> min, and could have become incorporated as an oligomer or as a monomer. aβ, a physiological form of aβ, has also previously been incorporated into monolayers  <cit> . the membranes had to be negatively charged, as in the present study in the absence of cholesterol, and the exclusion pressure was between 20– <dig> mn/m, also similar to the present study, again suggesting that spontaneous insertion requires relatively "loose" lipid packing. interestingly, the aβ solution was equilibrated for 1– <dig> hours in a low-ionic strength buffer at room temperature. aβ comprises a mixture of monomers and oligomers  <cit> , and incubation for 1– <dig> hours will have encouraged polymerisation  <cit> .

membrane autoinsertion of aβ oligomers
aβ oligomers  incorporated spontaneously into popc monolayers containing cholesterol, but not into pure popc monolayers. their paradoxically small molecular insertion area  suggested concomitant lipid rearrangement, and membrane neutron diffraction showed that peptide insertion was accompanied by significant outward displacement of membrane cholesterol as the peptide was accommodated between the popc acyl chains. lamellar diffraction does not probe structures in the plane of the bilayer, and any expansion of the unit cell in this direction would remain undetectable on the ''per lipid'' scale we adopted. however, despite our inability to see lateral reorganisation due to peptide insertion, we noted slight membrane thinning in the presence of the peptide , consistent with the idea that the protein is accommodated between the phospholipid acyl chains. this reflects the conservation of lipid volume. briefly, following insertion of a peptide taking up potential ''lipid headgroup'' space, a larger ''effective surface area'' per lipid will require a reduction in length, and shift the centre of mass towards the centre of the unit cell.

our study does not provide detailed information about the structure of membrane-located aβ oligomers, other than to suggest that  the local environment is highly non-polar. nmr structures of monomeric aβ in an apolar solvent revealed a hairpin-like molecule containing two α-helices between residues 8– <dig> and 28– <dig>  respectively  <cit> . however, the conformations of the aβ peptide in oligomers may differ substantially, and further insights may only be possible when the solution or membrane structures of the membrane-active oligomers become available. the absence of a contiguous "transbilayer" water profile  does not entirely exclude the possibility of proteineaceous transmembrane channels, which may be mostly closed in our conditions. the discrete peptide peaks may, however, argue against a conventional transmembrane protein pore.

at 25°c, popc membranes containing  <dig> mol% cholesterol adopt a mixture of fluid, liquid-ordered  and liquid disordered  phases  <cit> , and the sterol is laterally well-dispersed  <cit> . in our study, in the absence of aβ, the centre of mass of  membrane cholesterol  places its hydroxyl group  <dig>  Å from the bilayer centre, just into the hydrophilic region of the bilayer  <cit> . this is consistent with promotion of the lo phase. outward displacement of the sterol by  <dig> Å in the presence of aβ oligomers increased membrane lipid order, consistent with the effect of aβ on membrane lipid order previously reported by the steady-state anisotropy of diphenylhexatriene in cholesterol-containing liposomes  <cit> , which also required aggregated forms of aβ  <cit> . "vertical"  relocation of membrane cholesterol, even to the extent of "extruding" the sterol  <cit> , together with accompanying changes in membrane lipid order, could have an important impact on cell membranes  <cit> , affecting for example receptors  <cit> , signal transduction systems  <cit>  and endocytosis  <cit> .

aβ oligomers and cholesterol as risk factors for ad
kuo et al.  <cit>  noted over  <dig> years ago that the cerebral cortices of brains from patients with ad contained a large excess of water-soluble forms of aβ and aβ, including monomeric and oligomeric forms of the peptides. in primary human neurones, dimers actually appeared to form within the cell itself  <cit> , and in experiments on animals, dimers and trimers were shown to inhibit synaptic long-term potentiation  in vivo  <cit> . ltp is believed to be a key molecular process underlying some forms of learning and memory, and this important modification was mainly caused by trimers  <cit> . dimers and tetramers are less effective  <cit> , and memory deficits in tg <dig> mice  have recently been attributed to oligomers containing up to  <dig> peptides  <cit> . in line with all these findings, localisation studies  to ngf-differentiated pc <dig> cells, and found that adding cholesterol reduced cell surface aβ staining, whereas depleting membrane cholesterol  increased staining. the authors suggested that elevated  cholesterol is a risk factor for ad because it increases membrane lipid order, which in turn inhibits the interaction of aβ with the membrane, leaving more of the peptide free in the extracellular space to form potentially damaging fibrils.

our structural study has focussed on oligomeric aβ rather than fibrillar aβ, and we have demonstrated that membrane cholesterol relocates towards the bilayer surface following spontaneous incorporation of the peptide. this is consistent with the known toxicity of aβ oligomers, and also with the previous observations of yip et al.  <cit> , where aβ oligomers and membrane cholesterol appeared to "compete" for a similar membrane location. relocation of the free sterol following the autoinsertion of aβ oligomers could affect many important membrane processes both directly and indirectly , and we suggest that the transbilayer location of membrane cholesterol may be a key factor in ad.

CONCLUSIONS
oligomeric aβ autoinserts spontaneously into cholesterol-containing membranes, and insertion is accompanied by striking outward displacement of the sterol by  <dig> Å in each membrane leaflet, leading to functional alterations in membrane lipid order. our findings suggest that in patients with ad, the specific membrane location of cholesterol may be more important than the absolute amount. even if membrane cholesterol is reduced in ad , any increase in the amount that remains  could have a very marked effect on neuronal cell function, because of the unusual location of the lipid.

