BACKGROUND
proteins are dynamic macromolecules which may undergo conformational transitions upon changes in environment, such as ph, temperature, or upon interactions with other macromolecules  <cit> . it has been observed in laboratories that conformational transition plays a key role in carrying out several essential types of biological functions, including enzyme catalysis, macromolecule recognition, binding, and signal transduction  <cit> . for instance, the gtpase hras protein, whose gene serves as an oncogene of the bladder cancer, shows different conformations in the switch ii region when this protein switches between the ras-gtp state and the ras-gdp state  <cit> . another example is the u <dig> snrnp a from homo sapiens. the conformation of one portion of the rna binding region switches from a helix in the unbound state to a loop in the bound state respectively  <cit> . conformational switches sometimes even cause diseases. for instance, the prion protein  causes the mad cow disease when a specific secondary structure element changes from a helix to a β-sheet  <cit> .

as conformational flexibility is related to protein functions and interactions, scientists have been designing various types of predictors for identifying conformationally flexible regions in proteins  <cit> . in this respect, there are two major categories of predictors. the problem that was firstly addressed by young et al.  <cit>  concerns identifying polypeptide segments that may fold to form different secondary structure elements in different environments based on sequence analysis. another major category of the predictors attempts to identify conformationally flexible regions through analysis of protein tertiary structures  <cit> . as the availability of protein tertiary structures is generally limited, the design of predictors that work completely based on sequence information is crucial for advances of molecular biology research.

in this article, we will propose a novel approach to design a sequence-based predictor for identifying conformationally ambivalent regions in proteins. the novelty in the design stems from incorporating two classifiers based on two distinctive supervised learning algorithms that provide complementary prediction powers. these two machine learning algorithms are the relaxed variable kernel density estimation  algorithm  <cit>  and the quickrbf algorithm  <cit>  that we have recently proposed. with these two classifiers, the proposed hybrid predictor can operate under either the high-sensitivity mode or the high-specificity mode, depending on the user' s application. experimental results show that the overall performance delivered by the proposed hybrid predictor is superior to the performance delivered by the existing predictors. furthermore, the case study presented in this article demonstrates that the proposed hybrid predictor is capable of providing the biologists with valuable clues about the functional sites in a protein chain.

RESULTS
overview of the proposed hybrid predictor
fig.  <dig> presents an overview of the structure of the proposed hybrid predictor. the hybrid predictor consists of two classifiers that have been constructed based on two distinctive supervised learning algorithms. as mentioned earlier, the motivation to incorporate two distinctive classifiers was to exploit the complementary prediction powers of alternative supervised learning algorithms. during our study, we observed that for the application addressed in this article the quickrbf based classifier consistently delivered sensitivity around  <dig>  and specificity around  <dig>  regardless of how the user-controlled parameter was set. aiming to achieve higher specificity, we therefore investigated the possibility of incorporating two distinctive classifiers with complementary prediction powers. our study ended up with the design shown in fig.  <dig>  when the hybrid predictor operates under the high-sensitivity mode, only the quickrbf based classifier is enabled. on the other hand, when the hybrid predictor operates under the high-specificity mode, both classifiers are enabled and their outputs are merged to achieve higher specificity. with respect to merging the outputs of two classifiers, the following mechanism has been employed. in case the rvkde based classifier predicts a residue to be conformationally ambivalent but the quickrbf based classifier makes an opposite prediction, then the hybrid predictor will check the predictions made by the quickrbf based classifier for the four adjacent residues. if three out of the four adjacent residues are marked as conformationally ambivalent, then the concerned residue will be marked as conformationally ambivalent as well. otherwise, it will be marked as conformationally rigid. similarly, in case the quickrbf based classifier predicts a residue to be conformationally ambivalent but the rvkde based classifier makes an opposite prediction, then the hybrid predictor will check the predictions made by the rvkde based classifier for the four adjacent residues. if three out of the four adjacent residues are marked as conformationally ambivalent, then the concerned residue will be marked as conformationally ambivalent as well. otherwise, it will be marked as conformationally rigid.

the basis of the mechanism described above for merging the outputs of the quickrbf based classifier and the rvkde based classifier is to adopt a more cautious stand in predicting a residue to be conformationally ambivalent. during our study, we tried several alternative mechanisms and decided to employ the one describe above due to its effects observed in the cross validation procedure. the detailed design of quickrbf based classifier and the rvkde based classifier as well as the cross validation procedure employed to set the parameters of the classifiers will be elaborated in the section entitled " methods".

generation of the training data set
both the learning processes of the rvkde based classifier and the quickrbf based classifier in fig.  <dig> have been carried out with the training data set generated by the following procedure.

 all the protein chains in the pdb  <cit>   that have the same entry name and primary accession number in swissprot  are grouped. in the end, there are a total of  <dig> groups of protein chains.

 the blast package  <cit>  is invoked to check the redundancy among the groups of protein chains. it is guaranteed that no two protein chains in different groups have a sequence identity higher than 25%. in the end,  <dig> groups of protein chains remain.

 for each of the  <dig> groups of protein chains, the clustalw package  <cit>  is invoked to carry out multiple-sequence alignment on the protein chains in the group and the dssp package  <cit>  is invoked to label each residue in the protein chains with one of the following  <dig> types of secondary structure: helix, sheet, and coil. then, one protein chain is randomly selected from each group as the representative. in this respect, we further checked the sequence identity between the  <dig> representatives and the collection of  <dig> testing protein chains described in the next subsection. we removed  <dig> representatives due to there existing a homologous testing protein chain with a blast-computed sequence identity higher than 20%. finally, each residue in the remaining  <dig> representative protein chains was examined to determine whether the residue and all the residues in other protein chains that are aligned with the residue have been labelled with the same type of secondary structure. a conformationally ambivalent region is defined to be a segment of  <dig> or more consecutive residues within which each residue and the aligned residues have discrepant types of secondary structures.

 the training data set is generated by associating each residue in the  <dig> representative protein chains with a feature vector. the feature vectors are derived from the position specific scoring matrices  computed by the psi-blast package  <cit>  with window size set to  <dig>  as illustrated in fig.  <dig>  those rows in the pssm that correspond to residue types that are neither charged nor polar are deleted. furthermore, as illustrated in fig.  <dig>  those rows corresponding to residue types with charge are duplicated to increase their influence. then, a new row is added to record whether the corresponding position is at one end of the protein chain. finally, the feature vector is generated by concatenating all the rows in the matrix and the values in the feature vectors are scaled to range from  <dig> to  <dig> by applying the standard logistic function:

one may wonder why we discarded those rows in the pssm that correspond to residue types that are neither charged nor polar. the reason was that we conducted an analysis on the propensity of residue types in conformationally ambivalent regions and found that the propensity of hydrophobic residues is essentially uniform in conformationally ambivalent regions and in rigid regions. on the other hand, the conformationally ambivalent regions contain significantly higher percentage of charged and/or polar residues than rigid regions. therefore, we duplicated those rows in the pssm that correspond to residues with charge.

generation of the independent testing data set
the experiments reported in this article have been conducted with an independent testing data set derived from the collection of protein conformational ambivalence regions created by boden et. al. http://pprowler.itee.uq.edu.au/sspred/ <cit> . according to boden' s description, this collection of  <dig> protein chains was extracted from molmovdb http://www.molmovdb.org/ <cit> , which is a database that records the motion of macromolecules, especially proteins, from literatures of pubmed. as mentioned earlier, it was guaranteed that none of these  <dig> testing protein chains is homologous to the training protein chains described in the previous subsection by having a blast-computed sequence identity higher than 20%.

in generating the independent testing data set, we followed the procedure elaborated above for generating the training data set in order to associate each residue in the testing protein chains with a feature vector and labelled each residue as conformationally ambivalent or not based on the annotations in the molmovdb database. in the end, the testing data set generated contains  <dig> positive samples and  <dig> negative samples.

performance metrics
in this article, the experimental results are reported with the following performance metrics, where tp, tn, fp, and fn represent the numbers of true positive, true negative, false positive, and false negative, respectively.

the f-score is the harmonic mean of sensitivity and precision and is a widely used metric in machine learning research for providing a balanced assessment of the performance of a predictor.

comparison with boden' s predictor of protein conformational ambivalence
in this section, the performance of the hybrid predictor proposed in this article is compared with that of the predictor proposed by boden and et. al. the approach proposed by boden is in fact based on a predictor of protein secondary structures  <cit> . in boden' s approach, if a segment of polypeptide sequence cannot be decisively classified by the predictor of protein secondary structures, then the conformation of this segment is considered to be ambivalent under different environments  <cit> . accordingly, boden and et. al. calculated the entropy associated with each residue in the testing chain based on the probabilities output by the predictor of protein secondary structures. if the entropy of a residue is higher than a cut-off value, then the residue is classified as being in a conformationally ambivalent region. in calculating the entropy of a residue, boden et. al. employed two options of the predictor of protein secondary structures. with the first option, each residue in a protein chain is predicted to belong to one of the following  <dig> classes of protein secondary structures, alpha-helix, beta-sheet, or coil. on the other hand, with the second option, each residue is predicted to belong to one of the  <dig> classes of protein secondary structures defined in  <cit> . table  <dig> summarizes the performance delivered by boden' s 3-class predictor with the independent testing data set. in table  <dig>  each row corresponds to the performance delivered by the predictor under one specific cut-off value of entropy.

the numbers in table  <dig> reveal that when the hybrid predictor and boden' s predictor deliver comparable sensitivity, the hybrid predictor can deliver higher specificity and precision. furthermore, when the hybrid predictor and boden' s predictor deliver comparable specificity, the hybrid predictor can deliver higher sensitivity and precision.

comparison with kuznetsov' s predictor of protein conformational ambivalence
in this section, the performance of the hybrid predictor proposed in this article is compared with that of the sequence-based predictor proposed by kuznetsov  <cit> . it must be noted that kuznetsov employed a different definition of protein conformational ambivalence. by kuznetsov' s definition, a residue in a protein chain is said to be flexible, if its phi degree varies more than  <dig> or its psi degree varies more than  <dig> in two different conformations. in order to accommodate kuznetsov' s definition, we labelled the residues in our collection of training protein chains based on kuznetsov' s definition and then trained our hybrid predictor with this separately-generated training data set.

the testing data set used in this experiment was derived from boden' s collection of testing protein chains. again, in order to accommodate kuznetsov' s definition of protein conformational ambivalence, we labelled the residues in the testing protein chains based on kuznetsov' s definition. furthermore, in order to carry out a fair comparison, we removed those testing protein chains in boden' s collection that are homologous to one or more protein chains in kuznetsov's training set by having a sequence identify higher than 20%. in the end,  <dig> out of the  <dig> testing protein chains in boden' s collection were used for carrying out the benchmark reported in this section.

discussion
experimental results reported above show that the hybrid approach designed to exploit complementary prediction powers of distinctive supervised learning algorithms works more effectively than the existing predictors. in this section, we will present a real case to demonstrate the effects delivered by the proposed hybrid predictor. fig.  <dig> depicts two conformations of protein ap4a hydrolase from lupinus angustifolius l. one conformation is with ligand atp·mgfx, of which the pdb id is 1jkn  <cit> , and another conformation is without the ligand, of which the pdb id is 1f3y  <cit> . fig.  <dig> and  <dig> depict the conformationally ambivalent regions identified in  <cit> , and those regions predicted by the proposed hybrid predictor, respectively. it must be noted that in drawing fig.  <dig> if a gap between two predicted conformationally ambivalent segments contains  <dig> or fewer residues, then the residues in the gap were also colored as if they were predicted to be in a conformationally ambivalent region. fig.  <dig>  , and  <dig> altogether reveal that the conformationally ambivalent regions predicted by the proposed hybrid predictor largely overlap with the structural segments that swing widely in fig.  <dig>  furthermore, the three predicted conformationally ambivalent regions cover three out of the four conformationally ambivalent regions identified in  <cit> . meanwhile, the only conformationally ambivalent region identified in  <cit>  that does not overlap with the predicted conformationally ambivalent regions is the one with the smallest swing, which is colored by blueviolet in fig.  <dig>  as conformational transition plays a key role in carrying out several essential types of biological functions, including enzyme catalysis, macromolecule recognition, binding, and signal transduction, what the case presented in fig.  <dig> demonstrates is that the hybrid predictor proposed in this article is capable of providing the biologists with valuable clues about the functional sites in a protein chain.

CONCLUSIONS
in this article, we propose a novel approach to design a sequence-based predictor for identifying conformationally ambivalent regions in proteins. the novelty in the design stems from incorporating two classifiers based on two distinctive supervised learning algorithms that provide complementary predictive powers. experimental results show that the overall performance delivered by the hybrid predictor proposed in this article is superior to the performance delivered by the existing predictors. furthermore, the case study presented in this article demonstrates that the hybrid predictor proposed in this article is capable of providing the biologists with valuable clues about the functional sites in a protein chain.

nevertheless, experimental results also show that there exists a large room for improvement with respect to the performance of the predictor. therefore, it is of great interest to investigate how to design more advanced predictors. in this respect, it is of interest to investigate how physiochemical properties of polypeptide segments can be more effectively exploited. in this study, we have only exploited the information in the pssm and a natural extension is to investigate the effects of incorporating the other physiochemical properties of polypeptide segments recently exploited by the related studies  <cit> . furthermore, it is of interest to investigate the effects of incorporating the lately-developed machine learning approaches, e.g. the random forest design and the multi-stage design  <cit> . as conformational transition plays a key role in carrying out several essential types of biological functions, design of more advanced predictors deserves our continuous attention.

