BACKGROUND
damage of the cuticle, a hydrophobic layer protecting the aerial parts of plants, results in a loss of water and facilitates the entrance of various pathogens. this textbook statement has to be somewhat nuanced in the light of recent findings. for instance, when leaves of bean or arabidopsis thaliana plants are treated ectopically with fungal cutinase, they display resistance to fungal pathogens  <cit> . furthermore, a. thaliana engineered to express a fungal cutinase targeted to the cell wall also express a strong resistance  <cit> . the increased cuticular permeability allows for a better perception of elicitors generated during infection  <cit> . to further explore these observations, leaf surfaces of arabidopsis were wounded as an alternative approach to modify the cuticular barrier. this resulted in complete immunity to b. cinerea <cit> . this paradoxical finding was eventually explained when it was observed that this wound-induced resistance was only expressed when plants were maintained at high humidity after wounding. furthermore, ros including h2o <dig> and o2- can be detected within minutes at the wound sites of a. thaliana leaves crushed with forceps. ros precede and seem causally related with full immunity to b. cinerea inoculated at the wounded areas  <cit> . indeed, wound-induced ros are not detected and resistance to b. cinerea is lost in plants incubated under dry conditions after wounding  <cit> . the stress hormone abscisic acid  is strongly linked to the loss of ros under dry conditions. aba accumulates within  <dig> minutes after wounding in dry conditions while mutants damaged in aba synthesis still produce ros and display strong resistance under the same conditions  <cit> . interestingly, mutants with an increased cuticular permeability exhibit a similar high production of ros that is associated with complete immunity  <cit> . these experiments naturally lead to the question why the plant fails to react to the tissue damage inflicted by b. cinerea under natural situations. under natural conditions a weak ros production is only observed late after inoculation with b. cinerea  despite breakdown of the cuticle by the fungus. this question was eventually clarified when it was shown that the fungus interferes with ros accumulation by releasing oxalic acid, a calcium chelator, at the infection site  <cit> . the possible interference of oxalate produced by b. cinerea with calcium makes it likely that calcium is involved in ros formation and in the subsequent wir. another example for the interference with calcium signalling exists in phytopathogenic bacteria that produce polysaccharides that act at the same time as microbial associated molecular patterns  and virulence factors with a calcium-chelating action  <cit> .

in this work, we have investigated the hypothesis that calcium is involved in ros accumulation and wir to b. cinerea in leaves of a. thaliana. our experiments indicate that changes in calcium are relevant and take place at the same localization but earlier than ros in wounded leaves.

RESULTS
application on leaves of molecules disturbing calcium fluxes prevents ros production after wounding and wir
wounded a. thaliana leaves generate ros within minutes as revealed after infiltration with the 5--carboxy- <dig> -dichlorodihydrofluoresceindiacetate  probe  <cit>  . we have used a pharmacological approach to examine the importance of calcium in wound-induced ros formation. a calcium channel blocker  or calcium chelators  were applied as small droplets on the upper side of arabidopsis leaves. after  <dig> hours the droplets were removed and leaves were wounded at those sites. verapamil , egta  and oxalate  all affected wound induced ros formation . using this way of application, we cannot know how much of these compounds penetrated in the extracellular space. the effects of the chelators were visible at concentrations in the same range of the estimate extracellular calcium concentration   <cit> . a dose–response effect of the compounds tested could be detected starting at lower concentrations only when applied by vacuum-infiltration of detached leaves prior to wounding . none of these compounds affected cell vitality at the concentrations used as determined using trypan blue tests .

a distinctive feature of wir is that wounded a. thaliana leaves become resistant to the necrotrophic fungus b. cinerea <cit> . thus, we tested if verapamil and chelating agents affected wir to b. cinerea. droplets of tested molecules were applied on leaves and after  <dig> hours, droplets were removed, leaves were wounded and suspensions of b. cinerea spores were placed on the wound sites. after  <dig> days of incubation, the wounded control was fully protected while unwounded water-treated controls displayed the typical symptoms of b. cinerea infection  . similar to their effect on wound-induced ros formation, verapamil , egta  and oxalate  all affected wir . plants treated with oxalate and egta without wounding showed an enhanced lesion size, indicating a possible involvement of calcium in the basal resistance . taken together, these results indicate that calcium might be involved in the pathway that couples perception of wounding with the induction of ros and wir.

cytosolic calcium concentration increases after wounding in the same cells that later display ros burst
to further examine if calcium signalling is involved in ros accumulation upon wounding, we tested if wounding induces changes in the cytosolic calcium concentrations using transgenic a. thaliana plants expressing the photoprotein aequorin  <cit> . basal level and stability of the luminescence signal before wounding were then assessed by introducing the leaves in a luminometer where luminescence was immediately scored every  <dig> seconds for one minute. after this time, leaves were wounded directly in the luminometer and readings were carried out for three more minutes. in water-infiltrated leaves, wounding resulted in reproducible kinetics composed of a strong and transient signal between  <dig> and 6s that was coincident with the wounding event . this first peak was followed by a second transient increase of lesser amplitude, taking place after around 25– <dig> seconds. this second peak of luminescence was abolished in inhibitor-treated leaves compared to controls.

changes in intracellular calcium were further examined using an a. thaliana line expressing the yellow cameleon  <dig>  fluorescence resonance energy transfer-based ca2+ sensor in the cytosol  <cit> . wounding resulted in a first transient and steep increase in the yfp/cfp ratio , followed by a second, smaller but more sustained one  . the increase in calcium was restricted to cells proximal to the wound site and was observed in cells composing both epidermis and vascular tissue. both calcium peaks were abolished in the interveinal tissue of the epidermis when leaves were treated with  <dig> mm egta . surprisingly, only the second calcium peak was abolished in the veins of egta-treated leaves . the use of plants expressing the redox sensitive biosensor rogfp <dig>  <cit>  allowed also to monitor the effect of wounding on the cytosolic redox potential. wounding resulted in an immediate increase of probe oxidation in cell neighbouring damaged tissue , reflecting an effect clearly related to the observed production of ros . the oxidation of rogfp <dig> reached a maximum after 10– <dig> minutes after wounding . after this time it was possible to observe a slower decrease of probe oxidation, probably due to the fact that the damaged leaf is not kept in humid conditions due to equipment limitations. an additional effort was made to co-localize the calcium signal with the generation of ros after wounding. leaf discs of yc <dig> -expressing leaves were infiltrated with the ros-sensitive probe dcf-da prior to observation with confocal laser scanning microscope. the time course of changes in calcium and ros after wounding is presented in figure 5b. wounding lead to a rapid emission of a calcium signal at the wound site  that decreased rapidly with time. the appearance of fluorescence  caused by the sensing of ros by the dcf-da probe was also localized at the wound site but took place after the calcium signal. these results indicate that changes in calcium appear earlier than ros and both occur at the wounding site.

discussion
the implication of calcium as an early signal to abiotic and biotic stresses has been previously reported  <cit> . here we have focused on the importance of calcium in relation to wir in a. thaliana leaves. wounded leaves produce a rapid and local burst of ros and display a strong resistance when inoculated with b. cinerea <cit> . we have examined if changes in calcium levels are causally associated with ros and wir.

our pharmacological approach using verapamil, egta or oxalate indicated a correlation between interference with calcium levels and loss of wound-induced ros formation . these chemicals are known to act on calcium homeostasis and their application on leaves prior to wounding also inhibited wir to b. cinerea . overall, there was a correspondence between the concentrations at which these inhibitors interfered with ros and those at which wir was induced. calcium is also required for basic resistance as non-wounded leaves treated with calcium inhibitors were also more susceptible to pathogen attack . the calcium channel blocker and chelating agents interfered with the early steps taking place after wounding and did not damage cells as indicated by the vital staining . our results imply that calcium acts as an intermediary signal between the perception of wounding and wir to b. cinerea. this conclusion supports previous observations on the importance of calcium in the process on induced resistance  <cit> .

but where is the effect of calcium exactly taking place? wounding of leaves leads to an almost immediate crushing of cells with a loss of their integrity and compartmentalization. the calcium signalling for ros formation and induction of wir takes place in cells adjacent to the wound site  <cit> . this would imply an almost instantaneous transmission of information from the crushed cells to their neighbours. jasmonates are rapidly produced and translocated from cell to cell and across the plant  <cit> . although the experimental set-up used here is similar as in the report by glauser et al.  <cit> , jasmonates are unlikely to be involved, since mutants affected in jasmonate synthesis still express wir  <cit> ). rapid signalling from the crushed cells to their neighbours might possibly be relayed by calcium itself: decompartmentalization after wounding leads to an instantaneous and local increase in calcium that will extend from the cytosol into the apoplasm. verapamil or calcium chelators would act in preventing the calcium wave originating at the wounded sites to enter the intact neighbouring cells.

is it possible to visualize changes in calcium levels in leaves after wounding? we have used plants expressing aequorin or yellow cameleon  <dig>  proteins. both types of reporter lines indicate changes in cytosolic calcium exclusively. using both reporters it was possible to obtain reproducible kinetics of cytosolic calcium oscillations after wounding. a sharp peak occurred in the first seconds after wounding. this peak was transient and lasted only a few seconds. the second peak appeared around  <dig> seconds after wounding and it lasted ca  <dig> seconds longer than the first one . this calcium signature is difficult to interpret since it represents a view of a piece of tissue rather than single isolated cells. in fact, inhibitors or calcium chelators differently affected leaf tissues. treatment with 100mm egta blocked both calcium spikes caused by wounding in the interveinal tissue, but it prevented exclusively the second peak in the veins . these results are in line with the observations using aequorin-expressing plants, where only the second peak is prevented by treatments with inhibitors or chelators of calcium . aequorin-expressing plants are a much less precise method for our purposes: to obtain a detectable signal an entire leaf wounded on a wide surface should be analyzed and both interveinal tissue and veins are indiscriminately included in the quantification. the luminescence values read during this experiment are thus a sum of the single kinetics derived by the individual tissues. more importantly, aequorin is known to respond non-linearly in certain conditions and if the concentration of calcium is not homogeneous in the sampled population of cells, the overall aequorin light emission is dominated by the most responding sub-population  <cit> . for those reasons the kinetics of calcium obtained by the cameleon-expressing plants are more reliable and delimited to specific regions of interest giving a more precise idea of calcium dynamics after wounding. both peaks are associated with the ros formation and induction of wir and their sensitivity to calcium inhibitors that act outside the cell would imply that calcium transits through the apoplasm.

do the same group of cells that exhibit changes in calcium levels also produce a burst of ros? fret experiments combined with the introduction of the ros marker dcf-da showed changes in calcium levels in cells surrounding the wounded area accompanied by change in green fluorescence indicating a burst of ros . after the wound stimulus, the fluorescence caused by increased calcium levels was followed within minutes with the fluorescence reflecting increases in ros, indication a) a colocalization of both processes and b) calcium changes precede ros accumulation. these results obtained with cells embedded in the leaf are in agreement with many observations on cultured cells where calcium peaks preceded ros  <cit> . our results on calcium changes preceding the formation of ros at the same site are thus in agreement with our hypothesis. it is also interesting to note, that besides transient calcium and ros production, the oxidative status of the cells surrounding the wounding site changes, most likely caused by the burst in ros. these conditions could cause oxidation of various molecules, for example reactive cysteines present in the cell, hence potentially triggering other downstream responses  <cit> . it was previously reported that a basal level of glutathione is required for wir to b. cinerea <cit> . after a wounding event glutathione does not further accumulate in a col- <dig> wild type, but wounding leads to the priming of the expression of a glutathione-s-transferase  gene. these results suggest that glutathione functions in detoxification during wir rather than building up a reduction potential that might interfere with a ros-driven cellular oxidation. however, given the cytotoxicity of a strong ros burst, it cannot be excluded that glutathione might be still quench molecules arising form the oxidative burst. the role of ros in wir is not clear at the moment. reports indicate a role of ros in signalling  <cit> , while others propose a model by which ros play a role in cell wall reinforcing  <cit> . we have already demonstrated that ros are essential in wir against b. cinerea <cit> .

what sensory proteins are possible targets for calcium? calcium is a second messenger known to activate four different categories of calcium sensor proteins: calmodulins , cam-like proteins , calcium-dependent protein kinases  and calcineurin b-like proteins   <cit> . among the  <dig> cdpks of the arabidopsis genome  <cit> , cdpk <dig> was recently reported to be involved in elicitor regulated ros and innate immunity in protoplasts of a. thaliana <cit> . in potato cpk <dig>  the ortholog of a. thaliana cpk <dig>  can directly phosphorylate the membrane-bound nadph oxidoreductase rboh-d to stimulate its activity for ros production in response to pathogens  <cit> . however, our previous study has already excluded an involvement of rboh-d in wir  <cit> . here, we have tested cpk <dig>  cpk <dig> and cpk <dig>  single, double and triple mutants  <cit> , but wir was still active and the mutants were perfectly able to produce ros after wounding . further work is now needed to identify components involved in sensing calcium.

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, this work demonstrates the importance of calcium as an early messenger of wound-induced signalling that leads to resistance to b. cinerea. transient changes in calcium concentrations take place in a few seconds after wounding and are followed in the same location by a burst of ros and changes in cellular oxidation. this highlights the significance of the production by b. cinerea of oxalate as an effector that interferes with calcium.

