BACKGROUND
darwin suggested that female choice can help explain the evolution of extravagant secondary sexual characters in males, but he struggled over how to understand why females evolve mating preferences for such males  <cit> . jerram brown decided to "put aside the idea that there is a best male and that he is best for every female," and instead, he argued that females should prefer genetically compatible or heterozygous males to increase offspring heterozygosity or genetic diversity  <cit>  . he was inspired by studies on house mice  that found disassortative mating preferences for genes of the major histocompatibility complex   <cit> . mhc genes are a multigene family in vertebrates that encode cell-surface glycoproteins  that control antigen presentation to t-lymphocytes, and through this mechanism mhc genes play a pivotal role in immune recognition of pathogens and parasites. mhc-disassortative mating preferences may function to increase offspring heterozygosity - mhc or genome-wide - as both can enhance resistance to infectious diseases  <cit> . furthermore, mhc-disassortative mating preferences can also help to explain the extraordinary polymorphism of mhc genes  <cit> . more recent studies have found mhc-dependent mating preferences in fish  <cit> , reptiles  <cit> , and primates and other mammals  <cit> . however; more studies are needed, especially in birds and other wild, outbred species  <cit> . our aim was to test whether  mhc genes influence mating preferences in house sparrows .

several observational studies suggest that mhc genes play a role in mate choice in birds. first, a study on pheasants  suggests that females prefer males with "superior" disease-resistant mhc-genotypes, as predicted by good genes models of sexual selection  <cit> . second, a study in savannah sparrows  found evidence that females avoid males sharing similar mhc alleles  <cit> . third, a study on house sparrows found evidence that females avoid mating with males that have low individual mhc diversity and males that are too dissimilar  at mhc  loci  <cit> . fourth, a study on seychelles warblers  found that females were more likely to have extra-pair offspring when their social mate had low mhc diversity, and the mhc diversity of the extra-pair male was higher than that of the cuckolded male  <cit> . finally, mhc genes may also play a role in cryptic mate choice, as suggested in studies on fish, birds and mammals  <cit> . for example, it has recently been found that in peacocks , females lay more eggs when mated with males with high individual mhc diversity  <cit> . moreover, in red jungle fowl , males invest less sperm when copulating with females carrying similar mhc alleles  <cit> . taken together, observational studies in the wild and experimental studies on cryptic mate preferences provide intriguing evidence that mhc genes influence mating preferences in birds.

mhc-dependent mating preferences might function to enhance offspring heterozygosity, or produce offspring with intermediate or optimal levels of mhc-heterozygosity  <cit> . the "optimal heterozygosity" hypothesis follows from models suggesting that expressing more mhc molecules during thymic selection has negative effects on the development of the t cell repertoire  <cit> . interestingly, this hypothesis is directly supported by studies on stickleback fish : individuals vary in the number of mhc alleles they carry , and females with a low number of mhc alleles prefer males with a high individual diversity, whereas females with high diversity prefer males with low individual diversity   <cit> . thus, in sticklebacks, females' preferences are based on the number rather than the similarity of alleles they share with prospective mates  <cit> , and this preference is functional because individuals with an intermediate number of mhc alleles are the most resistant to parasites  <cit> . unlike disassortative mating, however, it is unclear how such sexual selection for optimizing offspring heterozygosity can explain or contribute to the evolution of mhc polymorphisms  <cit> . therefore, it is still unclear whether mhc-dependent mating preferences provide a general explanation for the evolution of mhc polymorphisms, or not.

we specifically tested whether female house sparrows are attracted to males carrying a high allelic diversity at mhc loci   <cit> , or whether their preferences maximize or optimize mhc allelic diversity of offspring   <cit> . if females seek the "best" mating partner, one would predict that most females will prefer one or few males, but if they are searching for a genetically compatible partner, females will differ in their preferences of males based on their own mhc diversity. we conducted a female mate preference test using a four-choice apparatus, in which the females had a choice between three males, each having either with low , medium  or high  number of mhc class i alleles , or a female control  in a fourth chamber . to estimate proximity preference, we measured the time spent by each female on the part of the perch in front of a male's compartment . stimulus individuals were tested to three experimental groups of focal females: females with low , medium  and high  diversity  of mhc class i alleles.

RESULTS
since focal females spent the lowest proportion of their time in front of the control female chamber, this confirmed that females showed sexual and not merely social preferences . we did not detect an overall preference for males with either low, medium or high mhc diversity, but when we considered the individual mhc allelic diversity of the females, we found that low diversity females spent significantly more time in front of the high diversity male . we found no evidence that morphological traits or multi-locus heterozygosity  had an effect on females' preferences . lastly, we found no significant correlations between mhc genotypes and variation in morphological traits .

fixed effects were female group  and stimulus group . male wing length, tarsus length, body mass, badge size and heterozygosity were entered into the model as covariates. we fitted the female individual identity as a random factor  to control for the non-independence of the data. significant f and p-values are shown in bold.

the difference refers to the mean difference in the arcsin transformed percentage of time females spent close to the stimulus groups. significant values are shown in bold.

discussion
we found no significant evidence that females prefer males carrying a particular number of mhc alleles, as predicted by the good genes hypothesis  <cit> . however, we found that females discriminate among males carrying different levels of individual mhc allelic diversity, and females' preferences depend upon their own and the individual diversity of potential mates. more specifically, females with a low number of alleles spent significantly more time near males carrying a high number of alleles, which might reflect a "mating up" tactic. unlike stickleback fish  <cit> , however, females with intermediate or high number of alleles did not show any significant preference based on males' mhc diversity. to our knowledge, our results provide the first experimental evidence in birds that mhc genes play a role in mating preferences. it is unclear whether our findings predict actual mating patterns in the wild, although they are consistent with an observational study on a wild population of house sparrows that found evidence that females avoid mating with males with low individual mhc diversity  <cit> .

there are several reasons to suspect that this mating-up preference by allele counting might enhance offspring disease resistance and fitness. first, a previous study on house sparrows found that mating pairs with high individual mhc diversity had offspring with high individual diversity  <cit> , which suggests that females with low diversity can increase individual  diversity of their offspring by mating up. second, another study with house sparrows found mhc-dependent immune responses   <cit> , and although the number of individual mhc alleles had no detectable effect, a study on peacocks found greater immune responses to phytohemagglutinin with increased individual mhc diversity  <cit> . third, an experimental study with stickleback fish indicates that there is an optimal number of individual mhc alleles for mounting immune defenses against multiple parasites  <cit> , which means that females with low individual mhc diversity should increase offspring disease resistance by mating with males carrying high diversity. nevertheless, further studies are needed to determine the expression of mhc in sparrows and to understand how mhc allele number affects host immune resistance.

moreover, our findings are consistent with recent studies indicating that females' quality or condition influences their mating preferences  <cit> . for example, female house mice show odour preferences for outbred over inbred males, though only inbred females show this preference  <cit> . house sparrows, in fact, provide another example of such condition-dependent preferences  <cit> . the black throat patch  of the males is an intensively studied plumage trait that appears to be involved in female mate choice, though differences exist among populations. a recent study found that females in poor body condition, unlike those in good condition, preferred males with average-size badges. taken together, our results here are consistent with the idea that females' mating preferences vary depending upon their own quality.

CONCLUSIONS
after dividing females according to their individual number of mhc alleles, we found that females with a low number of alleles are most attracted to males carrying a high number of mhc alleles, which might reflect a mating-up preference by allele counting. our findings raise questions about the phenotypic cues sparrows utilize to assess mhc diversity among conspecifics and the evolutionary consequences of these preferences. we found no evidence that individual mhc diversity was associated with any phenotypic trait  . it has been widely assumed that birds are microsmatic or anosmatic; however, there is increasing behavioral, physiological as well as genetic evidence that their olfactory abilities are better than generally assumed , raising the possibility that some birds might utilize olfactory cues to assess potential mates. indeed, t-maze experiments have found that crested auklets  exhibited an attraction to conspecific feather odour and preferentially orientated towards two chemical components of feather scent  <cit> . using a similar apparatus, it was demonstrated that blue petrels , could discriminate between their own, their mate's and an unknown conspecific's odour, and were attracted to their mate's odour  <cit> . moreover, it was found that the volatile compounds in the preen oil  of a songbird, the dark-eyed junco , contain reliable information about individual identity, sex and population of origin  <cit> . thus, it is plausible that mhc-dependent mate choice in birds is mediated by olfactory mechanisms. it remains to be seen whether mating with males having high individual mhc diversity provides indirect benefits for low diversity females. similarly, it has been suggested that homozygous females have the most to gain by mating with heterozygous males . finally, our findings suggest that mating preferences can potentially provide a selective factor favoring mhc allelic diversity in populations, duplication of mhc loci and copy number variation. duplications that increase the number of mhc loci must eventually have negative consequences on individual immunity, but the selective forces shaping the number and diversity of mhc loci within a species may include mating preferences tracking individual immunological optima, which likely varies in time and space.

