BACKGROUND
natural selection acts on phenotypes arising from a vast range of genomic variations: chromosomal and segmental duplications, local duplications, and smaller insertions, deletions and nucleotide substitutions. local duplication arises not only for whole genes or multiples of genes, but also for pieces of genes and for individual exons.

a pseudogene , in the case of protein-coding genes, is a copy of a gene that has symptoms of protein-coding deficiency  <cit> . symptoms of protein-coding deficiency include:  coding-sequence disablements ;  neutral codon substitution patterns ;  protein domain truncations  <cit> ;  mutation of deeply-conserved residue positions essential for protein function or structural integrity  <cit> . processed pseudogenes are made by reverse transcription and re-integration into the genome, and have been extensively studied elsewhere  <cit> . non-processed pseudogenes can arise after local or segmental gene duplication, and subsequent loss of protein-coding ability through mutation. a similar situation can arise within an individual gene structure: one or more exons can become duplicated within the vicinity of a gene. such partial gene duplications may then lose coding ability, becoming pseudogenic exons , in a similar way.

here, we have gathered genomic evidence for the distribution of pseudogenic exons  in the chromosomal milieu of annotated genes of four mammals with high-coverage genome assemblies and extensive transcriptional validation . such Ψes can have a functional role. for example, recently it has been described that Ψes with stop codons that are alternatively spliced can target messenger rnas to nonsense-mediated decay , in a way that causes changes in expression levels for other transcripts from the gene  <cit> . in our analysis, we define Ψes specifically using coding-sequence disruptions . we find a non-random distribution of Ψes in each mammalian genome, associated with certain subtypes of genes and positions within genes.

RESULTS
a pipeline was derived to detect pseudogenic exons  in the immediate chromosomal milieu of genes . a Ψe is defined as an exon copy whose coding ability is compromised by a frameshift or a premature stop codon. such frameshifts and stop codons are the most obvious indicators of coding-sequence decay. the designated parent exon for a Ψe is the most similar exon in the surrounding annotated gene structure. in addition, we annotated duplicated exons  in the transcripts from each gene, as described in methods.

we focused on four mammalian genome assemblies with high  coverage , to analyze the extent of the occurrence of Ψes. we examined for significant trends in the distribution of Ψes for a variety of properties. in particular, we focussed on assessing the peculiarities of the Ψes in comparison to the general population of duplicated exons. we analyzed the following:  divergence from designated parent exons;  association with protein families;  association with gene ontology functional categories;  position of Ψes with respect to the intron-exon structure of the gene;  participation in alternative splicing, and  coding-sequence selection pressures, as judged by ka/ks values.

* number that can be assigned orthologs, as determined in ensembl annotation. we can see that most assigned orthologs are in syntenic positions, with the exception of the dog genome.

† the number of genes bearing the exons is in brackets.

 divergence from designated parent exons
we analyzed the distribution of percentage sequence identity between the Ψes and their respective designated parent exons. these distributions were compared to an equivalent distribution for des . this equivalent distribution is from comparison of the des to their most homologous exons within the same gene. the distributions generally have a mode for both des and Ψes at 40–50% . therefore, Ψes are not unusually divergent in terms of protein sequence identity with respect to des in general.

in addition, we examined distributions of ks values for those exons which align to their designated parent exons with > = 70% amino-acid sequence identity  . although recently, evidence has been uncovered indicating that ks values are under selection in mammals  <cit> , they can still be used in a comparative sense to compare the age trends in populations of sequences. in general, there is a notable tendency for very young exon duplications, with a peak appearing in the ks distributions for all species at the interval  <dig> – <dig> , for Ψes and for duplicated exons in general. interestingly, also, a sizeable fraction of Ψes appear to be derived from anciently duplicated exons ; such exons were likely duplicated earlier in vertebrate evolution, and became disabled later during mammalian speciation.

the distribution of exon sizes of des has medians in the range ~40– <dig> amino acid residues . however, Ψes are substantially longer than des in general  . this larger size trend for Ψes arises chiefly from the exon size trends for the specific gene families that tend to make large numbers of Ψes, such as the zinc-finger-containing  genes . in aggregate, the majority of the Ψes  have at least half of their designated parents' length, and ~55% have between  <dig> – <dig>  of their parents' length . a small percentage  of the Ψes are marginally longer than their parent exons ; this is potentially because of neutrally-occurring insertions arising after duplication  <cit> .

 association with protein families
some gene families spawn large numbers of pseudogenes. examples include olfactory receptors  <cit> , ribosomal-protein genes  <cit> , abc transporters  <cit> , and heat shock proteins  <cit> . we noted previously that the gene families with the most non-processed pseudogenes tend to be involved in some form of interaction with the environment  <cit> , e.g. through roles in immunity  <cit> , chemosensation  <cit> , or small-molecule transport  <cit> . such gene families can also be linked to recent segmental duplications in mammals  <cit> . here, we examined which are the most common protein domain families in the Ψe and de data sets . these numbers indicate the number of exons with at least one copy of each protein domain considered. exons containing zinc-finger domains and immunoglobulin-like domains are consistently in the top five most abundant for both Ψes and des. genes for zinc-finger-containing  proteins have undergone lineage-specific expansions over the course of mammalian evolution, so decaying zfc exons are an expected consequence of this, and could perform regulatory roles as part of transcribed pseudogenes  <cit> . transcribed pseudogenes have recently been shown to regulate the expression of homologous genes through the formation of small, interfering rnas  <cit> . immunoglobulin-like domains are used in many proteins that are involved in various aspects of immunity, and have been previously noted to generate large numbers of pseudogenes  <cit> . the most notable difference between Ψes and des in general, is that Ψes rarely arise that contain egf-like  domains, whereas these exons are consistently abundant, generally . egf-like domains have expanded greatly in number over the course of mammalian evolution, and are found  either in the extracellular part of transmembrane proteins or in secreted proteins  <cit> .

 association with gene ontology functional categories
we used gene ontology  functional classification to assess which functional associations are the most common for Ψes . a pairwise comparison between lists of genes was performed to check over-represented terms according to various criteria, for Ψes, and for des generally. in this analysis, we only studied the human, mouse and rat genomes, since these are the genomes with extensive go functional annotation. specifically of interest are the go terms that are over-represented in Ψes compared to des . significant over-representation is calculated using a fisher's exact test with p' <  <dig> , and a correction to p' for multiple hypothesis testing  <cit> .

* over-represented term when compared with all genes.

§ over-represented term when compared with des.

† go term counts are listed for human, mouse and rat.

the top ten human des and Ψes go terms do not differ greatly from each other, in each of the species studied. however, each organism has distinct significant over-representations of go terms. in the human genome, 'ion binding' and 'nucleic acid binding' are significantly over-represented in Ψes, compared to des . this overrepresentation appears to be chiefly due to zfc transcription factors, which are obviously candidates for regulation through unproductive splicing and translation, or through the formation of regulatory transcribed pseudogenes. in mouse, 'receptor activity' is significantly over-represented in Ψes compared to des, and 'transferase activity' in rat. these indicate that different types of gene have undergone pseudogenic exon formation in recent evolutionary time in each of these three organisms.

 position of Ψes with respect to the intron-exon structure of the annotated gene
in general, the majority of Ψes are located within the 5' half of the genes in every studied genome . this scenario suggests that proteins tend to become more complex through addition of exons to the 5' termini of their encoding genes. these exons could be inefficiently spliced and therefore will appear in only a few transcripts, while they may be selected against if they disrupt the normal gene function  <cit> . interestingly, the Ψes are significantly 5' of their parents in rat . we suggest that this is due to lineage-specific activity related to specific gene families .

† significantly non-random, p <  <dig> , chi-squared test.

a key issue in examining the distribution of stop codons in Ψes, is whether they would produce transcripts that are susceptible to nonsense-mediated decay . we examined for individual stop codons in the Ψes that would lead to nmd targeting . the number of such stop codons in Ψes that would lead to nmd is significantly smaller than what is expected by chance , in human and cow, but not in the two rodent genomes. the expected distribution in this case, is calculated from the total size of the gene introns divided appropriately, given the position of the stop codons in each Ψe. this indicates a selection pressure in human and cow, against the positioning of individual stop codons in Ψes in places that would cause nmd. it has been shown that alternative splicing can be coupled to nmd to regulate the expression of other transcripts from a gene  <cit> . this mechanism has been dubbed regulated unproductive splicing and translation  <cit> . there may therefore be a selection pressure against placement of stop-codon-bearing exons in some genes, so that they are not affected by this mechanism.

we curated on the human Ψe data, to search for unexpected positional distributions in genes. in human, forty-five Ψes were found embedded in an untranslated region . these utr-embedded Ψes are not highly conserved. only eight of them are also found in chimp and rhesus , and none of them are shared by the three primate species simultaneously. none of the embedded Ψes is conserved in a non-primate species . this is despite syntenic conservation of  <dig> out of the  <dig> genes in a non-primate species involved in the embedding, when manually compared in the ucsc genome browser  <cit> . it is possible that these utr-embedded Ψes are remnants of overlapping gene arrangements. the manner of overlap for overlapping gene pairs changes very dynamically over evolution; for example, only  <dig> out of  <dig> human overlapping gene pairs were reported to be conserved as overlapping pairs in the mouse genome  <cit> .

 participation in alternative splicing
alternative splice products containing premature stop codons can be degraded through nonsense-mediated decay , and consequently cause altered expression of protein-coding transcripts through changes in abundance of splicing factors  <cit> . we examined whether any Ψes have been annotated as part of alternative splicings. to do this, we cross-referenced the asd alternative splicing database  <cit>  'splicing event' annotation, with our Ψe list from the human genome. of the human  <dig> genes that harbour a Ψe in their genomic milieu,  <dig> are present in the asd alternative splicing database. out of these, we found  <dig> genes  with evidence of transcription of a Ψe as an alternative exon. analyzing the alternatively-spliced forms in detail, we found four cases of an unusual topology of splicing . these four human Ψes can be differentially spliced in a topologically novel manner, in which one portion of a Ψe is recruited in one splice form, while a different portion of it can take part in another splice form .

 ka/ks analysis
ka/ks  is a measure of selection on coding sequences; values <  <dig>  can indicate purifying selection, whereas values ~ <dig>  are theoretically expected for neutral selection pressures. values significantly >  <dig>  indicate positive selection over the whole of a sequence. we examined ka/ks values for the different populations of Ψes and des. ka/ks values were calculated for all exon alignments with amino-acid sequence identity > 70%, to avoid consideration of saturated nucleotide sequences  <cit> . in general, the des exhibit a mode in the range  <dig> – <dig>  for ka/ks, indicating a tendency to purifying selection . in contrast, the Ψe populations do not exhibit such a mode, instead peaking in the range  <dig> – <dig>  . we have previously observed such a ka/ks peak for pseudogenic transcripts captured by transposons  <cit> , and for processed pseudogenes  <cit> . thus is to be expected for endemic populations of neutrally evolving sequences, from comparisons with their putative parent sequences. the reasons for such ka/ks values <  <dig>  may include:  continued purifying selection on the putative parent sequence;  an original protein-coding phase for the present-day Ψe. interestingly, ~30% of Ψe cases, have ka/ks values >  <dig> , which indicates that they may have undergone positive selection before becoming disabled.

CONCLUSIONS
we gathered genomic evidence to assess for non-random distribution of pseudogenic exons  in four mammalian genomes. we observed endemic populations of decaying exons consistently across genomes, arising for up to ~1% of genes. these Ψes were defined using coding-sequence disablements . of course, other pseudogenic exons may exist ; however, such pseudogenic exons would be likely to acquire coding-sequence disablements rapidly, soon after their initial disablement.

the pseudogenic exons  are longer than duplicated exons in general, are associated with genes encoding specific protein domain families, such as zinc-finger-containing proteins, and are noticeably lacking for genes containing domains that are otherwise abundant, such as egf-like domains. the Ψes also demonstrate species-specific over-representation of go functional categories relative to duplicated exons in general; for example, in human, go functional categories for 'ion-binding' and 'nucleic acid binding' are significantly over-represented, compared to duplicated exons generally. the Ψe populations indicate the sorts of genes that have undergone exon decay in recent mammalian evolution . we find statistical evidence for selection pressure on avoidance of stop codon placements in Ψes that would lead to nonsense-mediate decay. in addition, we find some interesting positionings of Ψes in gene structures, such as embedding in utrs, or partial alternative splicing. the Ψe populations are a potential resource for the formation of transcribed pseudogenes, which can function in the regulation of homologous genes through formation of small, interfering rnas  <cit> . they may also be involved in alternative transcripts that have a regulatory function  <cit> . the annotated Ψes that we have analysed will be a fertile source for study using large-scale micro-array expression techniques for these two potential regulatory functions. also, the Ψe data sets will be useful for further gene evolution study in mammals. the data are available from the authors at .

