BACKGROUND
cell proliferation concomitant with bacterial infections has been associated with carcinogenesis in chronic diseases caused by helicobacter pylori, salmonella typhi and citrobacter rodentium <cit> . proliferative changes resulting in a hyperplastic but non-carcinogenic process is induced in lawsonia intracellularis and bartonella spp. infections  <cit> . the inflammatory mediators generated during the chronic gastritis in h. pylori infections have been related with oxidative dna damage and cell transformation  <cit> . however, other gram negative pathogenic bacteria  are able to promote enterocyte proliferation with minimal inflammatory responses  <cit> . c. rodentium induces proliferation of mouse colonic enterocytes when it attaches to the apical membrane  <cit> . it is believed that l. intracellularis escapes from the endosome after internalization and multiplies freely in the cytoplasm of undifferentiated intestinal crypts promoting their proliferation and progressive replacement of the differentiated intestinal epithelium by immature infected enterocytes. although early pathogenesis studies also reported the ability of l. intracellularis to infect mature enterocytes, the bacterium seems to establish the infection in crypt cells  <cit> . these unusual pathological changes characterized by the presence of a large number of intracellular bacteria and proliferation of enterocytes suggests that l. intracellularis has adopted mechanisms of survival and pathogenesis that are unique among bacterial pathogens  <cit> . to date, hypotheses and speculations have been discussed regarding the pathogenesis of this infection but, the underlying mechanisms by which l. intracellularis induces proliferative changes have not been addressed.

lawsonia intracellularis is an obligate intracellular bacterium and the etiologic agent of proliferative enteropathy   <cit> . mild to severe diarrhea is the major clinical sign described in infected animals and is directly associated with cell proliferation and replication of the bacteria in the intestinal epithelium  <cit> . pe is endemic in swine herds, an emerging disease in horses and has been reported in various other species, including non-human primates, wild mammals and ratite birds  <cit> . microscopically, different levels of hyperplasia in the intestinal crypts associated with significant reduction in the number of goblet cells are observed in animals affected with pe. although inflammation is often observed at late stages of the disease, it does not represent a primary characteristic associated with l. intracellularis infection.

the disease was first reported in  <dig> but, due to its fastidious properties, porcine l. intracellularis was first isolated in  <dig> using rat small intestinal cells cultured in a strictly defined microaerophilic environment  <cit> . since then, the chronological dynamics of infection in vitro and in vivo have been well-characterized  <cit> . while proliferative changes in vivo follow an increase in the number of intracellular bacteria, the bacterium is not able to induce proliferation in infected cells in vitro <cit> . this intriguing observation associated with the fastidious properties of this bacterium has limited the studies on the pathogenesis of l. intracellularis. additionally, the adaptation of this microaerophilic, but obligate intracellular organism to grow freely in the cytoplasm of metabolically active enterocytes suggests that this organism has properties that are novel and unique among bacterial pathogens.

in the present study, we hypothesized that genes expressed by l. intracellularis in the host cytoplasm are capable of inducing proliferation and preventing differentiation of immature enterocytes by altering cell cycle-associated pathways. we established a method integrating laser capture microdissection  and rna-seq technology to characterize the host gene expression and the host-bacterial interactions in vivo. activation of transcription, protein synthesis and rho family genes in infected enterocytes characterized the transcriptional mechanisms involved in the cell proliferation. the ability of l. intracellularis in preventing enterocyte differentiation and maturation was proved by the consistent down-regulation of apical membrane transporters related to nutrient acquisition by infected enterocytes. the intracellular bacteria showed high level of expression of a sophisticated oxidative protection mechanism which involves redox enzymes and a rubrerythrin-rubredoxin operon . rho genes expressed by the host and associated with the high expression of bacterial genes encoding hypothetical proteins implies a potential role of unrecognized bacterial effector proteins that modulate eukaryotic cell cycle  in the pathogenesis of pe.

RESULTS
technical characterization of the lcm coupled with rna-seq analysis
based on previous studies reporting the chronological course of the l. intracellularis infection in vivo <cit> , experimentally-infected pigs in our study were monitored every other day regarding clinical signs  and quantitative fecal shedding of l. intracellularis dna until the end point of the study . the negative control group was also monitored and its negative status was consistent throughout the study period. one animal from the infected group exhibiting only mild to moderate lesions typical of pe associated with grade  <dig> and  <dig> in the ihc grading scheme was discarded from the experiment. in order to have the same number of replicates in both infected and control groups, one animal was randomly discarded from the negative control group. as a result, five biological replicates  from each group were included in the lcm procedures and rna-seq analysis.

the quality of rna samples extracted from microdissected tissues was evaluated by assessing bacterial and eukaryotic ribosomal rnas using agilent bioanalyzer  <dig> . the successful recovery of high quality eukaryotic rna from microdissected cells using the lcm procedures described in our study has been well-established  <cit> . since studies using prokaryotic rna from microdissected cells have not been well-explored, the feasibility of using l. intracellularis mrna for sequencing was confirmed by one-step rt-pcr using specific primers targeting three housekeeping genes .

the sequence reads representing the rna transcripts derived from the host cells and the intracellular bacteria were mapped onto both pig  and the l. intracellularis  reference genomes available at ncbi. from a total average of  <dig> , <dig> reads generated, 82%  and 4%  were mapped against the porcine and the bacterium genome, respectively . a total of  <dig>  genes were expressed in the porcine genome and met the criteria for differential expression analysis . up-regulation of  <dig> and down-regulation of  <dig> protein coding genes were identified in infected enterocytes  .

in the bacterial gene expression analysis,  <dig> protein coding genes had at least one mapped read against the reference dna sequence of the l. intracellularis phe/mn1- <dig> isolate, which was the same isolate used in the experimental infection. the top  <dig> genes highest expressed by l. intracellularis and their respective normalized transcription levels based on the rpkm values are described in table  <dig> 

in order to screen for the presence of any other microbial organisms in the experimental samples, the sequence reads were also mapped against viral, bacterial and archaeal genome databases. while no detectable hits were found against the viral and archaeal genomes,  <dig> % and  <dig> % of the sequence reads from the infected and control group, respectively, were mapped against the bacterial database. three unculturable bacterial species  and propionibacterium acnes were commonly found in both groups. an uncharacterized species of the genus peptoniphilus previously reported in the oral cavity of a human was exclusively found in the control group.

the rna-seq expression data were validated by qrt-pcr based on the relative quantification of  <dig> differentially expressed genes from the host and  <dig> bacterial genes . the averages of fold-change in gene expression from infected enterocytes and the relative transcriptional levels of l. intracellularis genes were plotted against the log <dig>  . the log <dig> transformed fold-change from the host gene and transcript levels from the bacterial genes were positively correlated on a linear regression model . based on the qrt-pcr validation, the rna-seq data properly estimated the fold-change expression in infected enterocytes and the transcription levels of l. intracellularis genes.

protein biosynthesis and transcription
the  <dig> porcine genes differentially expressed in lawsonia-infected enterocytes were analyzed regarding their biological functions and molecular networks based on the mammalian gene expression information available in the ingenuity® system. the system knowledge database recognized and analyzed  <dig> differentially expressed genes. the ipa system associates the set of differentially expressed genes with cellular networks  and creates a score based on the number of network eligible genes they contain . the protein biosynthesis network was most correlated with the set of genes differentially expressed and up-regulated in lawsonia-infected enterocytes. figure 3a shows the molecular interaction of this network which mainly includes ribosomal proteins and mrna translation factors. the eukaryotic initiation factor  signaling was the canonical cell pathway  more significantly associated  with the genes differentially expressed . a remarkable influence of ief <dig> signaling on the protein biosynthesis was identified by merging both network and pathway analysis .

functional clustering analysis using david knowledge database confirmed the involvement of the  <dig> differentially expressed genes in the protein biosynthesis  and also showed the association of four genes acting in the positive regulation of transcription . the activation of these two cellular processes  revealed a global increasing in the cell metabolism in response to the l. intracellularis infection and it has also been described to occur during the gap phase  <dig>  of the host cell cycle  <cit> .

cell cycle and apoptosis
in addition to the positive regulation of transcription, david clustering analysis identified genes associated with cell cycle and apoptotic events differentially expressed in infected enterocytes . cell cycle-associated genes mainly represented by ras homolog proteins were significantly induced in association with cyclin-dependent kinase  <dig> . the aberrant activation of rho-genes including those described in our study has been well-described in oncogenesis by causing deregulation of cell cycle progression and promoting cell proliferation  <cit> . additionally, the co-expression of rho proteins and cyclin-dependent kinases  specifically act by stimulating the entry and progression of the g <dig> phase of the host cell cycle  <cit> .

the functional clustering analysis revealed  <dig> differentially expressed genes associated with pro- and anti-apoptotic events . all seven genes related to anti-apoptotic events were up-regulated in infected cells. among the pro-apoptotic genes, four were down-regulated and three up-regulated. interestingly, two of these pro-apoptotic genes that are also involved in the cellular immune response against intracellular pathogens  were down-regulated. on the other hand, significant up-regulation of genes encoding the major histocompatibility complex class i  was identified in lawsonia-infected enterocytes .

nutrient acquisition and electrolyte secretion
consistent down-regulation of numerous genes expressed in the apical membrane of enterocytes that are involved in nutrient acquisition was observed in lawsonia-infected cells . these membrane transporters are involved in the absorption of carbohydrates , amino acids , bile acid , lipids  and vitamin b <dig> . additionally, the intracellular infection also affects the electrolyte secretion by decreasing expression of the chloride channel gene . the reduction of both nutrient acquisition and electrolyte secretion indicates that l. intracellularis may be able to prevent cell differentiation in immature enterocytes.

in contrast to the down-regulation of genes expressed on the apical membrane, the gene encoding the glucose transporter  <dig>  was highly up-regulated in infected enterocytes. this transporter was the third highest expressed gene  and its expression also has been reported on the basolateral membrane of human enterocytes in vitro <cit>  and rat jejunum in vivo <cit> . additionally, significant up-regulation of the high-affinity copper uptake protein  involved in copper absorption was also found in infected enterocytes .

host-pathogen interaction
the transcriptional landscape of the intracellular bacteria was determined by classifying all genes with at least one mapped read into one of three levels of expression: low, moderate and high. as expected, genes encoding ribosomal-related proteins were the functional category most associated with the mapped reads and the majority of these genes exhibited moderate to high expression. the l. intracellularis gene expression was characterized and discussed based on the most highly expressed bacterial genes .

the functional categories of bacterial genes that were highly expressed included those involved in protein folding  and biosynthesis , oxidative stress , secretion system effector-related proteins  and various hypothetical proteins. since we were not able to distinguish free bacteria in the cell cytoplasm from those organisms within cell endosomes, the host-pathogen interaction was discussed considering both scenarios. figure 4b illustrates the biological activities of the bacterial proteins encoded by highly expressed genes considering the intracellular microenvironment of lawsonia-infected enterocytes.

while redox enzymes catalyze reduction of o <dig> derived from the cell cytoplasm, cu-zn superoxide dismutase c  and rubrerythrin-rubredoxin operon  neutralize reactive oxygen species  generated in the endosome or from the reduced o <dig> molecule   <cit> . an operon genetically related to the salmonella pathogenicity island  <dig>  composed of three genes, a chaperone , an effector protein  and a hypothetical protein li <dig>  was highly expressed . interestingly, genes encoding the type iii secretion system  apparatus whereby these effector proteins would be delivered to the cell cytoplasm showed only moderate expression  and were located downstream of the spi2-related operon on the l. intracellularis chromosome.

among the ten genes most highly expressed by the intracellular bacterium, five represented hypothetical proteins. a summary of the predictive analyses evaluating their structures and biological functions are described in the supplemental material . two different families of proteins were predicted for the gene locus li <dig> . additionally, transmembrane proteins , proline isomerase, extracellular protease and secretory factor were also identified based on predictive motifs.

discussion
the present study used lcm technology to microscopically dissect enterocytes from pigs experimentally infected with l. intracellularis and to characterize the cell and the bacterial gene expressions using high throughput sequencing . the results demonstrated the usefulness of coupling lcm and rna-seq techniques to study the host-pathogen interaction in a specific cell population present in a heterogeneous tissue. the simultaneous evaluation of the gene expression changes in both the host and the pathogen has been recently designated dual rna-seq  <cit> . the challenge in studying both sets of transcriptional profiles from a common sample arises mainly because of the extensive variety of the bacterial organisms regarding their genomic compositions  and the particular characteristics of each infectious process at the cellular level. since the abundance of eukaryotic rna is significantly higher compared to the prokaryotic rna in an infected cell, a sufficient number of bacteria per host cell followed by an unbiased rna amplification step are crucial for studying the cell-bacteria interactions  <cit> . in light of this, we established the endpoint of our study , based on the chronological course of the l. intracellularis infection previously described  <cit> . this previous study demonstrated a progressive increase in the number of l. intracellularis in the feces of infected pigs from day two  through day  <dig>  post-infection. confirming these previous observations, our study showed at  <dig> days pi, numerous bacteria in proliferative enterocytes indicating the active stage of the infectious process. we hypothesized that the disease at this point was approaching its peak when the intracellular bacteria were exhibiting their virulence factors and the host cells were responding to the pathogen at appropriate levels to allow us to evaluate the changes in gene expression. we believe that earlier endpoints would not provide a sufficient amount of rna to be recovered and later stages of the disease would not represent the logarithmic phase of the bacterial growth. additionally, the increasing presence of l. intracellularis within the lamina propria along the disease progression would also reduce the number of bacteria in enterocytes. in addition to the limitation of having only one time point, our study also could not evaluate the role of soluble proteins and growth factors secreted into the extracellular matrix of the lamina propria and their influence in the enterocyte proliferation and differentiation.

a previous chronological analysis using microarray technology evaluated the host response of fibroblastic cells in vitro at three time points   <cit> . altered transcription of genes related to cell cycle and cell differentiation were described  <cit> . however, cellular proliferation which is the main phenotypic characteristic of the l. intracellularis infections in vivo has not been reproduced in in vitro models  <cit> . furthermore, the transcriptional response of mesenchymal cells which are not the natural target cells for l. intracellularis needs to be interpreted with caution.

a single time point analysis of the host gene expression profile using intestinal tissues from pigs naturally affected with pe was recently described  <cit> . although this study provided an interesting snapshot of the transcriptional host response, it used field cases of diarrhea where the samples were co-infected with porcine circovirus type  <dig> which may be a confounding factor in the evaluation of the expression of genes especially related to the immune response  <cit> . additionally, the microarray was performed using entire intestinal tissues. as a result, the specific characterization of the transcriptional host response was impaired by either the heterogeneity of the cell population included in the intestinal tissues or the virus infection. by applying the lcm technique to isolate ileal enterocytes in our study, we confirmed the identification of several genes specifically expressed in the intestinal epithelium of the ileum  corroborating with a recent comprehensive study describing the gene expression atlas of the domestic pig  <cit> .

gene network and pathway analyses revealed that protein biosynthesis and activation of transcription were the host cellular events most associated with the genes differentially expressed in lawsonia-infected enterocytes . in agreement with these molecular findings, ultrastructural studies in vivo using electron microscopy identified the numerous bacteria occupying the apical cytoplasm of infected enterocytes which was otherwise composed almost entirely of free ribosomes and scattered mitochondria  <cit> . these morphological findings associated with our molecular results suggest a global increase in the cell metabolism in response to l. intracellularis infection. taking the host cell cycle events into consideration, an increase in protein synthesis and transcription is required during the g <dig> phase in order to prepare the cell for subsequent division  <cit> . interestingly, this protein synthesis network was also associated with cell proliferation at an early stage of infection with human immunodeficiency virus  <cit> .

the differential expression of cell cycle-associated genes identified by the functional clustering analysis  showed specific activation of rho family genes . these molecules play a key role in carcinogenesis through their aberrant activation which results in cell proliferation  <cit> . rho family proteins specifically act on the g1-checkpoint of the cell cycle when the transition to commit the cell to the proliferative stage occurs. if the signals responsible for promoting this transition are not present then the cells enter into the non-proliferative phase   <cit> . additionally, a gene encoding rho gtpase was also highly up-regulated during l. intracellularis infection in vitro <cit> , suggesting that exacerbated activation of the g <dig> phase is an important mechanism involved in the proliferative changes induced by l. intracellularis in infected enterocytes.

in addition to their roles in cancer development, rho proteins are also pathologically activated by bacterial toxins also known as cyclomodulins  <cit> . cytotoxic necrotizing factor  found in uropathogenic escherichia coli, pasteurella multocida toxin  and dermonecrotic toxin of bordetella spp. act directly on rho family proteins to bring about their irreversible activation  <cit> . furthermore, cnf-expressing e. coli establish a persistent intracellular infection in the urogenital tract and suppress apoptosis by affecting the transcription levels of bcl- <dig> family genes  <cit> . it is thought that apoptosis inhibition in target cells may favor bacterial persistence at the epithelium surface, thereby favoring bacterial replication and spread inside the host cell  <cit> . although our study showed a predominant activation of anti-apoptotic-related genes compared with pro-apoptotic events, the bcl- <dig> gene was not significantly activated in infected cells . therefore, other mechanisms may be involved in the predominant activation of anti-apoptotic genes identified in the present study.

the contribution of apoptotic mechanisms for the pathogenesis of l. intracellularis infections has been speculated over the years and still needs to be elucidated. initially, a temporary reduction in apoptosis was hypothesized to be an important mechanism involved in the cell proliferation  <cit> . later studies suggested an increase in apoptosis based on the caspase- <dig> immunohistochemical staining  <cit> . one of these studies described the dynamic of the caspase- <dig> staining through the chronological evaluation of experimentally-infected animals and showed variations on the pattern of caspase- <dig> staining within different parts of the intestinal mucosa on day  <dig> pi  <cit> . our study showed activation of the gene-encoding caspase- <dig>  in infected enterocytes, but the level did not reach the parameters for statistical significance. considering the complexity and dynamism of the apoptosis process, the stage of the infection at the cellular level may directly influence the apoptotic gene network. therefore, an in vitro model displaying the proliferative phenotype would be an ideal starting point to address this question. despite the reduced expression of these two immune response-associated genes identified in our study, we observed significant up-regulation of mhc-i genes in infected cells, indicating that lawsonia-derived antigen is presented to the lamina propria through the basal membrane of infected enterocytes .

although the physiopathology of diarrhea in l. intracellularis infections remains to be elucidated  <cit> , the significant down-regulation of numerous genes related to nutrient acquisition observed in the present study indicates that malabsorptive diarrhea represents the major mechanism involved in the poor performance and growth of affected animals. supporting our observations, a lower absorption of glucose and electrolytes was reported using a hamster experimental model of pe  <cit> . the reduced expression of nutrient acquisition-related genes also indicates the lack of cell differentiation in infected enterocytes.

the deficiency in nutrient acquisition described above seems to contrast with the increase in the cell metabolism characterized by the activation of transcription and protein synthesis-related genes also described here. as proposed in the figure 4a, the high expression of the glucose transporter slc2a <dig> on the basolateral membrane appears to compensate for this lack of nutrient acquisition from the intestinal lumen, since it has been described as being expressed in the basolateral membrane of human enterocytes in vitro <cit>  and rat jejunum in vivo <cit> .

the only gene significantly up-regulated in infected cells which is involved in nutrient acquisition and is physiologically expressed on the apical membrane is the high-affinity copper uptake gene  <cit> . copper is an essential metal used by eukaryotic cells as a biochemical cofactor especially during the process of oxygen reduction by cytochrome c oxidase which leads to the production of atp  <cit> . the production of atp by the eukaryotic host is crucial for metabolism of lawsonia and two other groups of obligate intracellular bacteria . these organisms express atp/adp translocase which catalyze the exchange of bacterial adp for host atp allowing bacteria to exploit their hosts’ energy pool, a process referred to as energy parasitism  <cit> . in addition to this essentiality for host cells, an increase in copper uptake has also been reported as a defense mechanism against intracellular pathogens because of its toxic properties. free intracellular copper can lead to oxidative stress whereby cycling of copper oxidation and reduction produce reactive oxygen species through the fenton reaction  <cit> . interestingly, our study identified l. intracellularis genes related to oxidative stress highly expressed within the host cytoplasm .

three to five percent of the sequence reads generated in our study also mapped against the l. intracellularis genome. less than  <dig> % of the sequence reads mapped against four bacterial species commonly found in both infected and non-infected groups, when screened for the presence of virus and other bacteria. while three of these species represent unculturable organisms  related to insect symbionts, one  is part of the normal flora of the skin, oral cavity, large intestine, the conjunctiva and the external ear canal of humans  <cit> . the identification of the genus peptoniphilus, found exclusively in the control group, may be due to human contamination during the experimental procedures, since it was reported in the oral cavity through the human microbiome project .

l. intracellularis genes belonging to the oxidative stress protection were the functional cluster most associated with genes highly expressed in the host cytoplasm. although this fastidious organism requires a strict microaerophilic environment for cultivation in cell culture, lawsonia is often located close to the cell mitochondria, where the transport of oxygen is continuous due to the oxidative phosphorylation  <cit> . additionally, this intracellular location is important to exploit the host energy pool by exchanging bacterial adp for host generated atp, as discussed earlier. based on this scenario, our study demonstrated that l. intracellularis displays a sophisticated mechanism to survive in this microenvironment by coping with the oxidative stress and potentially incorporating intracytoplasmic copper taken by the host to combat the intracellular infection .

our study identified high expression of an operon  genetically related to the spi <dig>  the proteins included within this operon act as a translocon attached to the phagosomal membrane to allow translocation of effector proteins into the cell cytoplasm  <cit> . we hypothesize that this operon was highly expressed by l. intracellularis organisms in the cell endosome .

we found five genes encoding hypothetical proteins among the ten highest expressed by l. intracellularis . from the host gene expression, we identified significant activation of rho family genes which are crucial for the progression of the g <dig> phase of the host cell cycle and are targeted by bacterial toxins  <cit> . taken together, this evidence suggests the presence of an unrecognized cyclomodulin encoded by those highly expressed genes of l. intracellularis. our results form the basis for future studies focusing on the specific properties and functions of these genes.

CONCLUSIONS
the present study established a method integrating laser capture microdissection and rna-seq technology to characterize both the host and the bacterial gene expressions in vivo. this methodology was applied to investigate the proliferative changes induced by an obligate intracellular pathogen, lawsonia intracellularis, in intestinal crypt cells. the proliferative changes in infected enterocytes were associated with deregulation of the g <dig> phase of the host cell cycle based on the activation of transcription, protein synthesis and rho family genes  <cit> . the ability of l. intracellularis in preventing enterocyte differentiation and maturation was proved by the consistent down-regulation of apical membrane transporters related to nutrient acquisition . the gene encoding copper uptake protein was the only apical membrane transporter activated in the lawsonia-infected cells indicating a host defense mechanism by inducing copper toxicity  <cit> . high expression of the cu/zn superoxide dismutase  gene by l. intracellularis suggests that the intracellular bacteria incorporate intracytoplasmic copper to cope with oxidative stress. in addition to sodc, the intracellular bacteria showed high level of expression of a sophisticated oxidative protection mechanism which involves redox enzymes and rubrerythrin-rubredoxin operon . finally, rho genes expressed by the host and associated with the high expression of bacterial genes encoding hypothetical proteins implies a potential role of unrecognized bacterial effector proteins that modulate eukaryotic cell cycle  in the pathogenesis of pe.

