BACKGROUND
pathologists have long recognized that tumors are highly heterogeneous consisting of neoplastic cells with distinct morphological and molecular features that are associated with clinically distinct phenotypes  <cit> . in the past few years, large-scale next-generation sequencing provided evidence of extensive genomic diversity in histopathologically similar cancers, with each tumor effectively harboring a unique repertoire of genomic abnormalities . epigenetic changes that occur throughout tumorigenesis and the environmental cues conveyed through a tumor’s microenvironment contribute to the observed phenotypic heterogeneity, but genetic alterations are thought to drive the majority of tumor phenotypic variation  <cit> .

the early large scale transcriptional profiling efforts provided the initial impetus for characterizing the phenotypic heterogeneity of cancer that allowed to discover transcriptionally-uniform cancer subtypes that were associated with distinct clinical outcomes  <cit> . these subtypes were subsequently shown by next generation sequencing to be molecularly and genomically quite heterogeneous  <cit> . although the causal drivers of intertumor heterogeneity are not clearly understood  <cit> , genomic instability appears to be a unifying theme in many genetically diverse malignancies, acting to deregulate the control of dna replication thus promoting proliferation and destabilizing the genome  <cit> . the increased clonal diversity that results from genetic instability is associated with a higher risk of progression  <cit> , worst survival  <cit>  and resistance to chemotherapy  <cit> . a recent study reported that the pre-treatment genomic diversity among cells from each of the four breast cancer subtypes is preserved after chemotherapy, but tumors with lower genetic diversity before treatment are more likely to achieve complete pathologic response , irrespective of phenotypic subtype  <cit> .

breast tumors of the basal-like or triple negative breast cancer  subtype exhibit a broad range of complex structural dna alterations  <cit>  that render them particularly challenging to treat effectively as a group with standard cytotoxic chemotherapy or with targeted therapies. because a tumor’s transcriptional profile is an amalgam of the functional genetic and epigenetic variations that it harbors, higher intratumor genetic heterogeneity would be reflected in greater transcriptional diversity or dissimilarity between tumors of the same phenotype. such transcriptional diversity could be the reason why developing gene-expression based predictors of chemotherapy sensitivity for basal-like cancer has been unexpectedly difficult  <cit> . the term diversity is used here to denote the dissimilarity in gene expression or mutational profiles between individuals, which is a characteristic of a group of tumors, while the term heterogeneity here refers to the non-uniformity in genetic and cellular composition of an individual tumor.

in this paper we evaluated through extensive simulations a number of statistical metrics based on the pairwise similarity of transcriptional and genomic profiles and selected mean dispersion distance as the best measure of transcriptional diversity. using this measure, we observed that among basal-like breast cancers, those that were chemotherapy resistant were significantly more diverse than chemotherapy sensitive cancers. these results suggest that multiple resistance mechanisms may be active among cancers of the same subtype and such heterogeneity would need to be accounted for when developing predictive models of response to chemotherapy.

RESULTS
evaluation of transcriptional diversity metrics in simulated datasets
we used two different strategies to assess transcriptional diversity among a group of profiles. in the first strategy, we considered all possible pairwise distances among the profiles the group using pearson or cosine correlation for pairwise similarity of transcriptional profiles. in the second strategy, we used a dispersion distance metric to summarize the diversity as distance from the population centroid  <cit>  . we considered either the mean or the median of the distribution of pairwise or dispersion distances as a summary of the central tendency in the group. to evaluate the performance of the different metrics, we generated artificial gene expression datasets representing scenarios that differed in the number of latent subgroups present and in the within  and between  tumor sample variance using the r package umpire  <cit> . in each scenario, the log expression level for each gene was generated by a hierarchical model, in which σg controls the within-tumor variance and σp controls the variance across patients in the cohort  <cit> .

figure 1a shows eight simulated scenarios  corresponding to  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> even-sized latent intra-cohort subgroups, and two levels of relative between and within-tumor variation . a smaller σp/σg ratio indicates lower relative variation across tumors and therefore higher similarity in their expression profiles or lower overall diversity, whereas a larger σp/σg ratio or a greater number of latent subgroups implies greater within cohort diversity. the mean of all within-group pairwise distances was calculated for each scenario repeatedly over  <dig> independent simulations from the same distributions. all metrics consistently increased with increasing number of latent subgroups and σp/σg ratio, except for the cosine metric that exhibited lower sensitivity when the relative between and within-tumor variation was high . the mean dispersion distance tracked almost linearly the increase in heterogeneity due to increasing proportion in a two latent subgroup scenario . the median pair-wise distance was generally less sensitive than the mean , and the results were robust over a broad range of genes used to compute the distances . based on these simulations, we selected the mean within-cohort dispersion distance as the best metric to describe intra-cohort transcriptional diversity.figure  <dig> 
assessment of different transcriptional diversity metrics in simulated datasets. a) simulated gene expression profiles generated using a hierarchical model to independently control within sample  and between samples  transcriptional variation and the number of latent subgroups. each profile consists of  <dig> genes  and  <dig> samples . profiles for  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> latent subgroups are shown for low  and high  relative between-to-within sample variation. b) transcriptional diversity within the simulated profiles assessed using the mean pairwise pearson distance, the mean pairwise cosine distance, or the mean dispersion distance. the boxplots represent the distributions of these metrics obtained from  <dig> independent simulations of each dataset . c) same metrics as in b assessed in a two latent subgroup dataset of  <dig> samples with increasing proportion of the smaller subgroup. boxplots represent distribution over  <dig> independent simulations.



transcriptional and genomic diversity within tcga breast cancer subtypes
we assessed the transcriptional heterogeneity within the four breast cancer subtypes as assigned by the pam <dig> classifier using gene expression data from the cancer genome atlas  breast cancer project   <cit> . gene expression data were used as provided and probe sets with low expression or low variation across the dataset were filtered as described in the methods. mean dispersion distance was computed in groups of  <dig> cases from each subtype, repeatedly sampled with replacement over  <dig> bootstrap iterations. overall, tumors of the luminal a subtype were significantly less heterogeneous than other subtypes , while basal-like tumors had the highest transcriptionally diversity  . estimation of within-patient and between-patient variance  showed that luminal a tumors had the highest within-patient gene expression variance but the lowest between-patient variance , whereas the reverse was true for basal-like tumors that show a relatively narrow range of expression within each tumor but more diverse expression across tumors . comparing the luminal subtypes, luminal b tumors appear transcriptionally significantly more diverse , exhibiting a higher estimated σp/σg ratio, similar that of her2-enriched tumors .table  <dig> 
breast cancer tcga datasets used in this study


https://tcga-data.nci.nih.gov/docs/publications/brca_2012/brca.datafreeze. <dig> txt
https://tcga-data.nci.nih.gov/docs/publications/brca_2012/brca. <dig> pam <dig> sigclust.subtypes.txt
http://tcga-data.nci.nih.gov/docs/publications/brca_2012/brca.gene_expression.level_ <dig> tar
http://tcga-data.nci.nih.gov/docs/publications/brca_2012/genome.wustl.edu_brca.illuminaga_dnaseq.level_ <dig> . <dig> .tar.gz
http://tcga-data.nci.nih.gov/docs/publications/brca_2012/brca_hg19_qc.merged.segcharacterization of transcriptional and genomic heterogeneity of breast cancer subtypes. a) transcriptional diversity of cancers within each subtype from the tcga gene expression data  <cit>  captured by the mean dispersion distance metric. b) distributions of within and between patient standard deviations of gene expression levels for each subtype estimated from the tcga gene expression data. c) genomic heterogeneity of dna copy number within each subtype estimated by the mean pairwise hamming distance in the dna copy number profiles of cancers from the tcga dataset. d) mutational heterogeneity of subtypes estimated by the mean pairwise hamming distance between the somatic mutation profiles of cancers from the tcga dataset. e) transcriptional diversity of cancers from the affymetrix u133a datasets assessed using the mean dispersion distance metric. f) transcriptional diversity based on mean dispersion distance of basal-like tumors that achieved pathological complete response  or had partial or no response  to preoperative chemotherapy. g) estimated distributions of within and between patient standard deviations of gene expression within the pcr and rd basal-like phenotypes. h) patient-patient pairwise correlation plots clustered to show substructure within the pcr and rd basal-like tumors. the scale for the pearson correlation coefficient ranges from  <dig>  to  <dig> . while chemo-sensitive tumors  show less structure, resistant tumors  show a greater number of subgroups with relatively uniform gene expression. boxplots represent the distribution of the corresponding metric obtained from  <dig> bootstrap resampling iterations of  <dig> cases from each subtype or subgroup.



to examine whether the higher transcriptional diversity observed in basal-like tumors is associated with greater genetic heterogeneity, we evaluated the diversity in somatic mutation profiles and dna copy number variation as categorical data using the mean pairwise hamming distance  <cit>  to assess intra-cohort diversity of genomic profiles . the mean pairwise hamming distance was able to track the population diversity in the different simulation scenarios . as observed at the transcriptome level, basal-like cancers exhibited the highest diversity in the distribution of copy number aberrations and the second highest mutational heterogeneity, whereas luminal a tumors were genomically the least diverse . our results are consistent with the assessment in the original tcga publication that reported the highest overall rate of genome alteration in basal-like tumors and the lowest in luminal a tumors  <cit> . moreover, the almost indistinguishable patterns of molecular diversity that we observed in the genomic and transcriptomic profiles of breast tumors suggest that a measure of the transcriptional diversity could be a effective surrogate measure of the underlying genomic heterogeneity.

validation of transcriptional diversity patterns within breast cancer subtypes using microarray datasets
we evaluated the generalizability of the results obtained on the tcga data using publicly available gene expression datasets  to assess the transcriptional diversity of basal-like , her2-enriched , luminal a  and luminal b  breast cancers. we calculated the mean dispersion distance of transcriptional profiles within each subtype over  <dig> bootstrap iterations in groups of  <dig> cases per subtype. the pattern of transcriptional diversity was very similar to that observed in the tcga dataset , with basal-like cancers being the most diverse and luminal a cancers being the most uniform , except that her2-enriched cancers in this cohort appeared less diverse.table  <dig> 
breast cancer affymetrix u133a microarray datasets



total


basal-like breast cancers that respond to chemotherapy are transcriptionally homogeneous
among the  <dig> basal-like cases in the affymetrix dataset,  <dig> cases received preoperative combination chemotherapy , which allowed us to compare the transcriptional diversity of exceptionally chemotherapy sensitive cancers that achieved pathological complete response  to those who had partial or no response as evidenced by viable amounts or residual cancer after preoperative chemotherapy . we compared the transcriptional diversity of cancers from the two response groups by calculating the mean dispersion distance in sets of  <dig> cases per group over  <dig> bootstrap iterations. chemotherapy resistant basal-like cancers showed significantly greater transcriptional diversity compared to chemotherapy sensitive cancers . these resistant cancers had narrower within tumor expression range but a greater variation between cancers , and also a greater number of latent transcriptionally homogeneous subtypes . our results provide evidence that pathological complete response is associated with significantly lower pretreatment transcriptional diversity, corroborating previous reports of a significantly lower genetic divergence in tumors achieving pcr  <cit> .

transcriptional diversity extends at the level of individual pathways
the varying degree of transcriptional diversity within different breast cancer subtypes raises the question whether the observed heterogeneity is restricted to only genes from a few pathways or whether it is more of a global transcriptional phenomenon. we defined  <dig> pathways from the kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes   <cit>  that represent all biological processes but have minimal overlap in gene membership. the number of genes in these pathways ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig>  .

we applied the same bootstrapping procedure to calculate the mean dispersion distance within breast cancer subtypes, but now using only genes from each of the  <dig> pathways. most pathways showed the same order of diversity across the four subtypes as that observed globally, suggesting that transcriptional diversity is a global characteristic of the tumors and not primarily driven by heterogeneity in a few biological processes . certain pathways showed remarkably low diversity in all subtypes indicating a tight transcriptional coordination of genes involved in biological processes that are vital for all cells . only a few pathways were distinctively diverse within each subtype , and these were the same in all breast cancer subtypes  .

we also compared the pathway-level transcriptional diversity of chemotherapy sensitive  or resistant  basal-like cancers. almost all pathways  were transcriptionally more diverse in the chemotherapy resistant group , suggesting that the greater transcriptional diversity in these tumors is global and not restricted to certain pathways . pathways with greater diversity in rd cancers relative to pcr cancers included basal-cell-carcinoma, which includes genes from the hedgehog, wnt, tgf and p <dig> signaling pathways, folate biosynthesis, and dorso-ventral axis formation pathway involving genes from several key signaling pathways including the mapk and notch .figure  <dig> 
transcriptional diversity of  <dig> kegg biological pathways within breast cancer subtypes from the affymetrix dataset. a) heatmap of mean dispersion distance within breast cancer subtypes considering genes in each of the  <dig> kegg pathways. pathways  are ranked from the least diverse at the top to the most diverse at the bottom. blue represents low and red high mean dispersion. b) detailed expression heat maps for basal-like cancers showing the heterogeneity of gene expression for genes in the least heterogeneous  and the most heterogeneous pathways . blue represents low and red high expression level. c) distribution of pathway-based transcriptional diversity within each subtype. pathway-level mean dispersion distances were calculated by bootstrap as described in supplementary methods. d) comparison of pathway-level transcriptional diversity between two clinically distinct phenotypes of basal-like cancers, an extremely chemosensitive  and a chemoresistant . points on the plot represent the average pathway-level mean pairwise dispersion obtained from boostrap within each of the  <dig> pathways. the dashed red line is the diagonal, indicating equal transcriptional diversity between the two response phenotypes. the regression line  its 95% pointwise confidence interval  is consistently below the diagonal suggesting greater transcriptional diversity for rd cancers throughout the  <dig> pathways. pathways that were extreme outliers from the trend described by the regression line were identified by quantile-quantile plots of the standardized residuals. these pathways are indicated with letters as following: a – sphingolipid meta, b – snare interactions in vesicular transport, c – basal cell carcinoma, d – dorso-ventral axis formation, e – non-homologous end joining , f – folate biosynthesis.



discussion
in this study, we showed that the mean dispersion and the mean pairwise hamming distance provide quantitative metrics that capture the transcriptional and genomic diversity of breast cancer subtypes. we demonstrated that each subtype is characterized by a different degree of transcriptional and genomic diversity and provided statistical evidence that basal-like breast cancers are the most and luminal a cancers are the least heterogeneous. while this has been suggested in the literature  <cit>  it has never been previously demonstrated in statistical terms. the difference in transcriptional diversity between subtypes appears to concern the entire transcriptome with the exception of a few biological processes that are critical for cell survival, suggesting that basal-like and luminal a cancers differ in fundamental ways in how tightly gene co-expression is regulated within cells. these results are also consistent with greater intratumor cellular heterogeneity in basal-like cancers due to coexistence of either genomically different clonal populations or genomically similar cells exhibiting greater diversity in cellular states. but since we also observed identical trends in the relative heterogeneity of dna copy number alterations and somatic mutations between the subtypes, the results strongly suggest that genomic alterations leave a major imprint on transcriptional profiles  <cit>  and likely drive the higher transcriptomic diversity of basal-like cancers. transcriptional diversity can thus be considered as a surrogate measure of the underlying genomic heterogeneity of cancers. to further elaborate, we would expect repeat biopsies from a tumor with high intratumor heterogeneity to show greater transcriptional diversity, as biopsies may consist of different mixtures of clonal cells. high intratumor clonal variation would also imply higher variation between two such tumors and therefore a greater transcriptional diversity.

we also demonstrated that two clinically very distinct subtypes of basal-like cancers, chemotherapy resistant and highly chemotherapy sensitive cancers, which cannot not be reliably separated using gene expression based multivariate prediction models  <cit> , show significant differences in transcriptional diversity . chemotherapy resistant cancers had much greater transcriptional diversity across most biological processes. greater diversity in regulatory and metabolic pathways could confer greater resilience against cytotoxic insults  <cit> . pathways that are expressed more diversely in chemotherapy resistant basal-like cancers may provide biological insights into the mechanisms of chemotherapy resistance.

finally, our results generate new insights as to why it may be difficult to predict chemotherapy response in basal-like cancers. due to the greater transcriptional diversity in chemotherapy resistant tumors, a single gene expression signature of resistance would fail to represent adequately the spectrum of resistance mechanisms present and thus limit the sensitivity and accuracy of such predictors. this has been demonstrated to be the case recently through insightful simulations  <cit> . using genomic dna copy number alterations to substratify basal-like cancers into genomically more uniform groups could perhaps improve predictability, but this strategy will require considerably larger cohorts. alternatively, using a single metric that captures the within-patient molecular heterogeneity may prove a more effective strategy to predict general chemotherapy sensitivity of a given cancer.

CONCLUSIONS
we presented and systematically evaluated a quantitative measure to capture transcriptional and genomic diversity among cancers. results from different types of genomic data consistently demonstrated that basal-like cancers are the most heterogeneous while luminal a the least. such diversity appears to be a global characteristic reflected in most biological process. finally, we also showed that greater transcriptional diversity is also associated with basal-like cancers that are resistant to chemotherapy, suggesting that molecular heterogeneity is a manifestation, potentially a causal one, of treatment resistance. this also explains the difficulty in developing generalizable gene signatures that are predictive of chemotherapy response in the highly heterogeneous triple-negative breast cancers.

