BACKGROUND
the isolation of recombinant antibody fragments with unique binding specificities can be readily accomplished using antibody display methods such as phage display or ribosome display. in such display methods large naïve libraries are generated where the gene encoding an antibody is physically linked to the resulting antibody protein ). the binding properties of the antibody fragment are then used to isolate the encoding gene  <cit> . while phage display vectors are designed to display recombinant antibodies on the surface of phage, they are not necessarily optimal for scfv expression and often selected antibody genes are sub-cloned into a dedicated soluble antibody fragment expression vector. sub-cloning into an expression vector is also a requirement with ribosome display. the aim of the work detailed in this paper is to improve the production and utilisation of recombinant scfvs and generate a panel of expression vectors to facilitate this. the backbone expression vector utilises the high level expression promoter t7lac, driving expression of scfv to the bacterial periplasmic space via a pelb signal peptide sequence. resultant products are fused with a six histidine tag for one step immobilised metal affinity chromatography  and a tri-flag epitope tag for detection.

scfv expression was performed in two escherichia coli strains for comparison. for standard periplasmic expression of the scfvs and their derivatives, the bl <dig>  strain was used. this strain carries a chromosomal copy of t <dig> rna polymerase, under the control of the lacuv <dig> promoter. this can be induced using iptg or a simple auto-induction medium as we show here. t <dig> rna polymerase can be induced resulting in expression of genes driven from the t7lac promoter. this strain is also deficient in both lon and ompt proteases. we also investigated expression of scfvs directly into the cytoplasm using a vector which lacked a pelb signal peptide sequence. this was carried out in an e. coli k <dig> derivative strain  <cit> , which has mutations knocking out both thioredoxin reductase  and glutathione reductase  creating a more oxidizing cytoplasmic environment to facilitate disulphide bond formation.

in this study we compare the expression levels and elisa signals from crude bacterial cell extracts of a number of c-terminal modifications to the standard scfv format, including a free c-terminal cysteine residue  <cit> , and maltose binding protein . mbp has previously been shown to act as a solubility enhancing tag for recombinant proteins  <cit> . antibody fragments were also fused to a variant alkaline phosphatase gene with enhanced catalytic activity encoded by a d153g and d330n mutation  <cit> . the alkaline phosphatase fusion drives scfv dimerisation and provides a simple enzymatic fusion partner to facilitate direct detection of scfv fusions  <cit> . we illustrate the benefit of this system in a number of common assays including elisa, western blot and immunohistochemistry.

RESULTS
vector construction
scfv expression induced by auto-induction medium is equivalent to iptg induction
use of the t <dig> promoter in the psang vectors requires the use of de <dig> lysogen strains such as bl <dig> , where there is an integrated copy of t <dig> rna polymerase. expression is controlled by the lac promoter driving expression of t <dig> rna polymerase which in turn acts on the t <dig> promoter to induce scfv expression. the lac promoter is normally induced by the addition of iptg in mid-log phase growth. studier  <cit>  describes the development of a growth medium-controlled induction system, which does not require user intervention to switch on recombinant protein expression. the growth medium contains a controlled amount of carbon sources for the bacteria to utilize for growth, and expression is tightly controlled by catabolite repression. as the bacterial culture density increases the catabolite repression is diminished by loss of the carbon source. when this begins, expression from the lac promoter is turned on due to the presence of lactose in the induction medium.

we examined the expression levels achieved with four scfv clones expressed in both the scfv and scfv-ap formats using auto-induction medium and the more standard induction medium of 2xyt supplemented with iptg. figure  <dig> shows that the two systems give comparable expression levels. the advantage of the auto-induction medium is that optical density monitoring is not required prior to induction. the cultures are simply inoculated and then harvested  <dig> h after incubation at 30°c. for all subsequent experiments auto-induction medium was used for expression of the different scfv formats.

effect of fusion partner and site of expression on yield of scfv
antibody fragment clones specific for human collagen type vi and human desmin were expressed in a variety of scfv formats in two different bacterial strains. the total and active yields of the antibody fragments were assessed by western blot and an antigen binding elisa respectively. each clone was grown overnight in auto-induction medium, the bacteria pelleted and a detergent lysis performed. the different scfv formats were run in sds-page gels, blotted onto membranes and probed with an anti-flag tag monoclonal antibody coupled to a fluorescent tertiary antibody to assess both the quality and quantity of the scfv produced. we have previously shown that fluorescent western blots can be used to quantitate protein production  <cit> .

densitometry was also used to quantitate the yield of each scfv format and the data were normalised to the values obtained for the standard scfv format expressed in bl <dig>  cells . antigen binding elisas were also carried out to determine the relative amount of biochemically active recombinant protein in each preparation. figure  <dig> panel a shows the results obtained for the collagen vi specific clone. in the elisa, the scfv-cys format had an equivalent activity to the standard scfv. scfv-mbp fusion proteins were not as active in the elisa as the standard scfv. the addition of a free c-terminal cysteine did not improve the activity of the scfv-mbp format in the elisa. western blot analysis revealed the reduced activity in elisa was not due to diminished expression levels. in fact expression levels of both scfv-mbp fusions were far higher than the standard monovalent scfv suggesting interference in antigen binding with scfv-mbp fusions. there was also evidence of lower molecular weight bands which probably represent proteolytic cleavage products. the scfv-ap format produces scfv fused to bacterial alkaline phosphatase, which is enzymatically active only as a dimer. the elisa activity for this scfv-ap clone was superior to the standard scfv and yields were also higher as determined by western blot. figure 3b shows the results for an anti-desmin clone. the results for this antibody fragment clone are in broad agreement with those obtained for the anti-collagen vi clone. however, notably the yield and activity of the scfv-ap format was reduced compared to the standard scfv format for this clone. a third scfv clone specific for human her <dig> was also tested in the panel of vectors and gave broadly similar results to those obtained above .

all of the above clones were expressed in bl <dig>  cells and the polypeptides generated are directed to the periplasmic space of the bacteria by the presence of a signal peptide sequence. two vectors, psang15-3f and psang18-3f, were designed without a signal peptide to allow expression of the scfv and scfv-cys formats in the cytoplasm. to facilitate disulphide bond formation, the redox modified bacterial strain origami 2™  was used. in order to benchmark these clones, we also expressed the corresponding standard periplasmic scfv and scfv-ap formats from the psang10-3f and psang14-3f vectors respectively in the origami 2™  strain. in conclusion, expression of all constructs in origami 2™ cells was compromised relative to bl <dig>  cells and there was no evidence of improved expression using leaderless constructs  and these were dropped from further studies.

from this initial screen there are three useful scfv formats: scfv, scfv-cys, and scfv-ap derived from the expression vectors, psang10-3f, psang11-3f, and psang14-3f respectively.

direct detection of scfv fused to bacterial alkaline phosphatase
fusion of the scfv to alkaline phosphatase allows direct detection of binding. scfv-ap specific for collagen vi, desmin, and her <dig> were grown overnight in auto-induction medium. after pelleting, and detergent lysis of the bacteria to release the scfv-ap, the clarified lysate was diluted in assay buffer and the scfv-ap clones tested directly for binding to their cognate antigens in elisa by adding substrate. the fusion to alkaline phosphatase means this can be done directly without adding secondary reagents. this confirmed that the scfv-ap fusions work very well in a simple direct detection elisa .

the scfv-ap format provides a convenient and easy to use option for probing western blots for the presence of target antigen. figure 4a demonstrates the sensitivity of an scfv-ap clone directed to recombinant human desmin. doubling dilutions of the antigen were run on an sds-page gel and transferred to a pvdf membrane, blocked and then probed with a single dilution of crude bacterial cell extract from an overnight induction. the assay was again developed without the addition of an anti-tag secondary antibody using a standard colorimetric alkaline phosphatase substrate, nbt/bcip. the scfv-ap was able to detect the presence of antigen down to  <dig>  ng/lane.

enhanced performance of scfv following dimerisation by alkaline phosphatase
a panel of five scfv clones recognising the same epitope of the breast cancer marker her <dig> were used to investigate the effect of valency/affinity on performance. the affinities of this panel of five scfv clones have been determined previously  <cit> , with a range of equilibrium dissociation constants  ranging from a lowest of  <dig> nm to the highest at  <dig>  nm.

elisa
increasing the valency of the her <dig> specific scfvs resulted in a greater sensitivity in an elisa format. all five scfv clones were assayed as both monovalent scfv and bivalent scfv-ap at equimolar concentrations  on her <dig> coated wells. the monomeric molecular weight for the scfv-ap construct was used to calculate molarity. thus any difference in relative signal is therefore caused by increased valency rather than quantitative effects of two detection tags on the bivalent scfv-ap format compared with one on the standard monovalent format. binding was detected by time resolved fluorescence using a europium-labelled anti-flag secondary antibody. the results shown in figure  <dig> clearly demonstrate that the clones expressed as bivalent scfv-ap exhibit an improved sensitivity in this assay format.

immunohistochemistry
the same her <dig> clones were used to demonstrate the improved sensitivity of bivalent scfv-ap in immunohistochemical staining of acetone-fixed frozen human breast carcinoma sections. for example scfv clones, g98a and c <dig>  have equilibrium dissociation constants of  <dig> and  <dig> nm respectively. the clones were assayed at identical protein concentrations and binding detected using anti-flag and a tyramine-dnp amplification system. the results shown in figure 6a demonstrate that her <dig> staining for the monovalent clone g98a is weak, although positive, and for the c <dig>  clone, with a 20-fold improvement in affinity, staining of her <dig> is strong. in contrast, staining of her <dig> using g98a as an scfv-ap dimer is as strong as the monovalent c <dig>  clone. the increased avidity for her <dig> generated by making c <dig>  bivalent has less effect probably due to a threshold of affinity required for good immunostaining by this antibody-epitope combination. automated digital image analysis provides a means to quantify immuno-reactivity in tissue microarrays or tissue sections. the staining intensities for all five scfv clones were quantitated and are plotted in figure 6b.

western blot
the bivalent scfv-ap format demonstrated superior sensitivity over the monovalent version in detecting desmin from a recombinant source in western blot. using anti-desmin scfv clones as a model, we performed western blots with dilutions of recombinant human desmin  and probed the blots with purified scfv and scfv-ap clones diluted, as previously, to equimolar concentrations . binding of the scfv clones was determined by addition of an anti-flag alkaline phosphatase conjugate  or an anti-flag-hrp conjugate using ecl western blotting substrate. for the two anti-desmin clones  the bivalent scfv-ap demonstrates superior sensitivity over the monovalent scfv by  <dig> -fold and  <dig> -fold for clone c <dig> and d <dig> respectively, as determined by densitometric analysis of the western blots. detection of endogenous desmin in muscle lysates was also demonstrated .

discussion
phage display and other methods of generating recombinant antibodies have proven to be a powerful technology for generating antibody specificities. the widespread adoption of this technology outside of core labs however has been limited for a number of reasons. this includes lack of access to clones of desired specificity and problems of variable levels of production where clones are available. efforts are being initiated to generate and distribute recombinant clones for the research community e.g. the atlas of protein expression  <cit> , the proteome binders consortium  <cit> , and the national cancer insititute  <cit> .

to help deal with the issue of production of recombinant proteins in non-core labs, we have devised a simple vector system to facilitate production of tagged products. the system described here utilises auto-induction medium which does not require user intervention to switch on recombinant protein expression. in addition all products have a hexahistidine tag for imac purification, with options for additional detection tags to be added e.g. tri-flag tag as described here.

one particularly useful construct fuses recombinant antibody fragments to an optimised variant of bacterial alkaline phosphatase, a dimeric, periplasmic enzyme. this allows a simple assessment of production of fusion protein in culture supernatants or lysates, without the need for secondary detection reagents, based on alkaline phosphatase activity by elisa. we also demonstrate direct detection of binding based on alkaline phosphatase in commonly used assays such as immunohistochemistry and western blotting .

an additional benefit of this construct is that antibody dimerisation is driven by fusion to alkaline phosphatase. an alternative version was produced which includes a free c-terminal cysteine residue which also enables dimerisation  as well as facilitating the conjugation of a reporter molecule such as biotin or fitc  <cit> . theoretically increasing valency has the benefit of increasing binding affinity of the dimeric molecule. we show this in practice by comparing alkaline phosphatase fused single chain fvs  with their unfused counterparts in elisa, western and immunohistochemistry. this was done by indirect detection using the tri-flag tag present on all formats. the degree of improvement in sensitivity for the scfv-ap format over the standard scfv format for any given assay will be dependent on antibody affinity, assuming an equal fraction of active recombinant protein for any given preparation. this was highlighted using a panel of anti-her <dig> scfvs with a range of affinities to the same epitope. we demonstrated that, when compared on a molar basis, the alkaline phosphatase fused scfvs were more active in elisa. furthermore, using immunohistochemistry, enhanced staining of her <dig> positive breast cancer tissue samples was observed with alkaline phosphatase fused scfvs compared to the monomeric counterpart. however, the difference in staining diminished with increasing affinity of the monomeric scfv.

it should be noted, that the standard scfv format can spontaneously form dimers and higher order multimers. these multimers are not stable and the proportions of monomer, dimer, and higher order multimer after purification can change over time in storage. the ability of scfvs to form multimers again is a property of the individual clones and some are more susceptible than others to this phenomenon. the degree of multimerisation of the standard scfv may alter the relative performance of the scfv when compared to the scfv-ap format.

the performance of the different scfv formats was assessed in terms of total recombinant protein yield using a western blot of detergent lysed bacterial pellets to detect the presence of epitope tagged scfv protein. this gave a direct comparison of the yield of each of the scfv formats retained in the cell after production. as a total cell lysate however, it provides an estimate of the total recombinant protein produced, including not only the correctly folded active scfv format but also incorrectly folded, unfolded and aggregated recombinant protein. hence the relative amount of active scfv format in each preparation was also estimated by measuring the fraction of scfv that was active in binding to antigen coated elisa wells. together the two results clearly indicate the relative levels of expressed to active recombinant protein. although yields vary on a clone by clone basis, in general the specific activity is relatively constant with the exception of fusions to maltose binding protein. with mbp, the yield of scfv protein increased while the binding activity reduced . the improvement in total protein may be due to mbp acting to form soluble inclusion bodies  <cit> , which in turn may limit access of the scfv to antigen.

it is known that leakage of scfv into the culture medium occurs and this is dependent on the type of growth medium used for expression. leakage can even be enhanced by the addition of sucrose to the growth medium  <cit> . it is our experience that the leakage of the larger scfv fusion proteins  is reduced compared to the standard scfv format. by choosing to compare only the recombinant scfv protein retained within the bacterial cell therefore we may have underestimated the total production, particularly for the standard scfv. while measurement and recovery of scfv from culture medium is achievable, it is not a straight forward one-step ni-nta purification procedure  <cit> . thus we have deliberately chosen to work with the periplasmic fraction to facilitate concentration and purification of resulting product.

CONCLUSIONS
we have investigated a number of different scfv formats for expression and have generated three simple expression vectors  for the production of soluble recombinant scfv fragments. these vectors allow rapid cloning of whole populations of scfv fragments selected from phage display antibody libraries. they are easily modified to include tags or reporter molecules of choice. scfv expression is controlled by growth in a chemically defined auto-induction medium, which removed the necessity to monitor bacterial growth by optical density. all of the scfv formats produced from these vectors can be used in a variety of assays directly from either periplasmic or total cell lysates without the need for purification. one of the vectors, psang14-3f, which produces scfv-fused to alkaline phosphatase, offers a simple and convenient way of determining antibody fragment binding in a variety of assay systems without the need for antibody fragment purification and secondary antibody reagent addition. furthermore, the bivalent scfv-ap has been shown to confer increased sensitivity over monomeric scfv in elisa, western blot, and immunohistochemistry.

