BACKGROUND
arctic ecosystems have been a major focus of climate change studies because biological processes in the northern high-latitude environments are considerably limited by temperature and the existence of permafrost. records show that mean winter temperatures over northern continents have increased considerably in the last 30– <dig> years  <cit>  while paleoclimate evidence  suggest that the arctic has now warmed to the highest temperatures in the last  <dig> years  <cit> . arctic ecosystems are generally nutrient  limited, and climatic warming is expected to increase nutrient mineralization and decomposition rates  <cit> . this increase in availability and turnover of limited nutrients is predicted to have a positive influence on net primary production  and cause an increase in plant biomass of arctic vegetation  <cit> . process models indicate that the npp response of arctic vegetation to increasing co <dig> concentration in the atmosphere is dependent on increased nitrogen mineralization due to climate warming  <cit> . increased npp might in turn compensate for carbon loss from arctic soils by sequestering carbon as increased plant biomass production resulting from increased availability of mineralized nitrogen  <cit> . in alaskan tundra, for instance, annual aboveground plant production doubled in response to experimental fertilization  <cit> .

productivity responses at the community level are dependent on species diversity, plant community composition, and plant growth forms . higher species diversity is often correlated with higher primary production and biomass accumulation  <cit> . several studies have reported differential effects of climate change on biomass production of plant functional groups and, hence, plant community composition. in arctic alaska, species diversity declined following warming due to the increasing dominance of shrubs at the expense of graminoids and forbs  <cit> . this might again affect the carbon balance in the arctic because the carbon storage potential of shrubs is higher than that of graminoids and forbs  <cit> . recent observations of increased shrub abundance in arctic alaska  <cit> , as well as a meta-analysis of warming experiments at  <dig> arctic research sites, showed increasing dominance of shrubs over other functional plant groups  <cit> , and suggests that there is a potential for increased ecosystem carbon storage in the arctic in response to future warming .

however, herbivory may be an important and overlooked component of primary productivity responses to warming and plant community dynamics. experiments addressing the effect of grazing or browsing in several ecosystems have revealed that vertebrate herbivores have a considerable impact on plant biomass, npp, nutrient cycling and species composition  <cit> . these influences may mediate the response of vegetation to climate change, and may be especially important in the arctic, where productivity is generally nutrient limited  <cit> . in greenland, grazing by caribou has been reported to cause die-backs of dwarf birch  and the spread of poa sp. dominated grazing lawns  <cit> . both studies of caribou summer ranges in sub-arctic canada  <cit>  and  <dig> year old herding fences on reindeer pastures in northern norway  <cit>  suggest that grazing and trampling both have the potential to constrain productivity and reduce standing biomass of shrubs in the arctic. vertebrate herbivores have also been shown to reduce the depth of the moss layer through grazing and trampling, which could further affect soil temperatures and nutrient cycling  <cit> . studies of 40-year old reindeer herding fences in northern norway have revealed that reindeer grazing and trampling has produced a shift in tundra vegetation from moss-rich to graminoid-dominated meadows  <cit> , and resulted in increased soil temperatures, decomposition rates and nutrient availability  <cit> . similar results have been found in exclosure experiments on svalbard, where reductions in the moss layer have resulted in higher soil temperatures, increased litter decomposition, and enhanced primary production  <cit> . the overall effect of vertebrate herbivory will depend on the balance between negative and positive feedback effects that such herbivores exert on plant productivity and nutrient cycling  <cit> . neglecting the influence of vertebrate herbivores on plant productivity may bias estimates of ecosystem changes in relation to global warming in areas where large vertebrate herbivores occur.

here, we present results from a multi-annual field experiment conducted on the summer range of the kangerlussuaq-sisimiut caribou herd in west-greenland. using herbivore exclosures and open-top chambers , we investigated the influence of caribou and muskox grazing on the aboveground biomass response of arctic vegetation to warming. we hypothesized that herbivory by caribou and muskoxen has the potential to suppress growth of shrubs and promote development of graminoid-dominated swards, thereby mediating the expected accumulation of biomass in response to warming where these herbivores occur.

RESULTS
temperature treatments
maximum daily near surface temperatures  were on average  <dig> °c higher on warmed than on control plots  for the entire period of measurements. minimum daily near surface temperatures  were on average  <dig> °c higher on warmed than on control plots . maximum daily soil temperatures, measured at  <dig> cm depth, were on average  <dig> °c higher on the warmed plots than on the control plots  , while minimum daily soil temperatures  were on average  <dig> °c higher on the warmed plots than on the control plots .

the otc treatment did not increase soil or near surface temperatures as much as reported from similar experiments elsewhere, where a warming effect of 3–4°c has been reported  <cit> . nor was the temperature increase measured in this study within the range of an additional arctic warming of 4–7°c predicted by the acia for the next  <dig> years  <cit> . the maximum and minimum daily near surface temperatures were on average only  <dig> °c and  <dig> °c higher in the otc's compared to the controls, respectively. maximum and minimum daily soil temperatures differed by only  <dig> °c and  <dig> °c on average, respectively. it is therefore questionable if these relatively small differences in temperature could induce a change in plant production similar to what is expected during predicted climate warming. several other studies  <cit>  have shown that increased nutrient availability has the strongest effect on plant production, and that temperature has an indirect effect through increased nutrient mineralization rates in the soil. the relatively small increase in soil temperature observed in this study might not have been enough to stimulate mineralization rates in the plots comparable to nutrient concentrations added in other experiments. on the other hand, the warming effect achieved in this study was closer to the increase of  <dig> °c per decade in global average temperature observed during the last three decades  <cit> , and might therefore have been a more realistic warming treatment compared to what is expected to occur during a short term experiment.

above ground biomass
when aboveground biomass was analyzed across all years, "year" was highly significant for all plant functional groups , and there was a significant interaction between the exclosure and warming treatments for b. nana stems. there was a strong reduction in biomass from  <dig> until  <dig>  before there was a marked increase in biomass in  <dig> . this change appeared to some extent to depend on the treatments, but the overall strong reduction in aboveground biomass was due to the moth outbreak in  <dig> and  <dig>  causing a significant "year" effect , and potentially swamping out the warming and exclosure treatments.

 w: warming treatment, e: exclosure treatment, y: year. a marks significance level of p ≤  <dig> .

for b. nana leaves, on the plots exclosed from grazing, biomass was significantly higher in  <dig> and  <dig> than in  <dig> and  <dig> . however, on the plots exposed to grazing there appeared to be no significant differences between the years. for b. nana stems there were no significant differences between any of the years .

for graminoids there appeared to be the same pattern for all treatment combinations with biomass measured in  <dig> significantly higher than in all previous years . the biomass of forbs was significantly lower in  <dig>  the peak of the caterpillar outbreak, than in any of the other years for all the treatment combinations except for the grazed-ambient  plots . for the ga plots, the biomass observed in  <dig> was only significantly lower than that observed in  <dig> 

when the different temporal responses in biomass were analyzed, few significant effects of the treatments were noted . there was a marginally significant secondary  effect of the exclosure treatment for b. nana leaves, while graminoids showed a significant primary  response to the exclosure treatment  .

δp: primary change 2003– <dig>  δs: secondary change 2005– <dig>  δc: cumulative change 2003– <dig>  w: warming treatment, e: exclosure treatment. a indicates significance at the p ≤  <dig>  level.

during the primary response , the only noticeable effect was a significant increase in b. nana stem biomass for all treatment combinations . for the secondary response , there were significant positive changes in aboveground biomass for all the treatment combinations, except for b. nana stems . there were significant and positive cumulative responses  in aboveground biomass for b. nana stem, graminoids and b. nana leaves on the ungrazed plots .

ci: confidence intervals of the means for each treatment combination. a indicates that the mean is statistically different from  <dig> at p ≤  <dig> . δp: primary change , δs: secondary change , δc: cumulative change .

the purpose of this experiment was to investigate the joint effects of ungulate herbivores and warming on the aboveground biomass response of key plant functional groups in a low shrub tundra ecosystem. however, we acknowledge that the warming manipulations did not reflect all the possible environmental changes that are likely to occur as a consequence of increased greenhouse gas concentrations in the atmosphere, including increased precipitation, changes in precipitation and timing of snowmelt, and increasing length of the growing season. however, otcs were in place most years before snow melt, and likely influenced timing of snowmelt and initiation of the growth season within the warmed plots. our intention was to focus on one climatic factor that is predicted to have both direct and indirect influences on aboveground biomass of arctic plants. moreover, it is throughout the plant growth season that vascular plants are most exposed to ungulate grazing. finally, it should be emphasized that our otc treatments are comparable to those of other experimental studies of climate change in the arctic, and will facilitate comparisons of results, with the added dimension of herbivory.

our results do not provide any clear indication that the warming and exclosure treatments alone or in concert had any effect on inter-annual dynamics of above-ground biomass production by any of the plant functional groups during the first four years of warming and exclosure treatments. no significant differences in shrub , graminoid or forb biomass were found for any of the treatment combinations in any of the years. this result is somewhat surprising since several other studies have found clear indications of increasing shrub biomass and abundance at the expense of non-vascular plants to experimental warming  <cit> . however, the majority of these experiments have found that it is the addition of nutrients alone or in combination with warming that produces the strongest responses  <cit> . furthermore, the unexpected moth outbreak during  <dig> and  <dig> made a strong impact on aboveground biomass of all the plant functional groups and also potentially influenced nutrient dynamics. this highly pulsed event makes it difficult to draw conclusions about the experimental treatment effects, but some weak responses were found. our data from  <dig> suggest that the biomass of b. nana leaves and graminoids had begun to recover from the moth outbreak in that year , suggesting that additional years of warming and exclosure may be needed to detect effects of those treatments.

to some extent, the lack of strong responses found in this study lends support to the hypothesis that it is the indirect effects of cold temperatures that limit plant production through low nutrient availability, rather than low temperatures per se  <cit> . it has been shown that nutrient addition elicits a stronger response on plant biomass than increased temperature  <cit> . long-term nutrient addition and temperature manipulations in arctic ecosystems have revealed that elevated temperature can indirectly affect plant biomass and productivity by increasing nitrogen and phosphorous availability through increased soil mineralization rates  <cit> , while nutrient addition directly increases biomass production and alters plant community composition  <cit> .

there might be other explanations for the limited response in biomass production as well. the largest short-term effects of warming might not appear as responses in biomass but rather in other important plant traits such as flower and seed production  <cit> . furthermore, studies that found effects of warming treatments on biomass involved temperature manipulations of 2–3°c higher than what was achieved in this study. such a temperature difference could facilitate a much stronger biomass response.

the exclosure treatment was expected to increase aboveground biomass on the ungrazed plots compared to the plots exposed to grazing, especially for shrubs  <cit> . furthermore, the effect of grazing was expected to promote the production of graminoids and forbs. however, we found no detectable effects of the exclosure treatment at this stage of the experiment, possibly because this treatment was negated by the moth outbreak. the strongest effect we detected was that of "year". there was a reduction in aboveground biomass from  <dig> until  <dig> for all of the functional groups, followed by a strong increase in biomass from  <dig> to  <dig>  only the stem biomass of b. nana did not show the same strong reduction from  <dig> to  <dig>  this corresponds with the outbreak of the moth e. occulta that first reached noticeable numbers in  <dig> and reached even higher numbers in  <dig>  the strong reduction in leaf biomass, together with the lack of an effect on stem biomass, suggests that the shrub b. nana was more affected by caterpillar foraging than by our manipulations. it is quite possible that the effect of the exclosures and otcs on biomass production may have been concealed by the biomass off-take of caterpillar foraging. the density of caterpillars during the moth outbreak was found not to interact with the warming treatment, indicating that pulse herbivory by caterpillars reduced the plant community biomass response to warming  <cit> .

although our distinction between primary and secondary biomass responses is arbitrary due to the short duration of the experiment, these indications can still be useful in understanding any effects on inter-annual biomass production, especially when it comes to the direction and magnitude of change. there were very few significant temporal effects found in response to our treatments. but there was a significant increase in stem biomass for b. nana for all the treatment combinations for the primary and cumulative responses . this change in biomass is larger in the plots located inside the exclosures and suggests that grazing has a limiting effect on biomass accumulation in shrubs in response to climate warming.

furthermore, during the secondary response, there were significant positive changes in leaf biomass of b. nana for all treatment combinations; however none of our manipulations produced any changes in stem biomass. this difference in response between leaf- and stem biomass could indicate a resource allocation strategy as a response to the relatively heavy defoliation these plants experienced during the  <dig> and  <dig> moth outbreak. plants have been shown to exhibit such a compensational strategy in growth as a response to herbivory  <cit> , and what we have observed here could be a response to the limited photosynthetic capacity they experienced during the caterpillar outbreak that removed nearly all the leaf biomass  <cit> .

for both graminoids and forbs, the secondary change in biomass was significant and positive for all treatment combinations. this is most likely a recovery from the caterpillar outbreak, but might also be a response to the limited increase in b. nana stem biomass. when the cumulative change was examined, the change in leaf biomass of b.nana was only significant on the ungrazed plots, suggesting a negative effect of grazing. for graminoids, there was a significant increase in biomass, but no difference between the treatment combinations, suggesting a limited response to our manipulations.

overall, there was substantial variation in the direction and magnitude of the different temporal responses in this experiment. the findings lend support to other studies that have found that short-term responses of vegetation to warming are not good predictors of longer term trends  <cit> .

to reach a general conclusion about the variation in direction and magnitude of the changes in biomass among functional groups observed in this study is difficult and complex. interpretation of these results is further complicated by the outbreak of caterpillars of the moth e. occulta, which most likely is the main reason why several of the plots showed a reversal from a neutral to a sometimes strong positive change in biomass. our results indicate, thereby, an important role of highly pulsed herbivory, such as the caterpillar outbreak, on aboveground biomass. what remains unaddressed in this study is how both invertebrate and vertebrate herbivory will influence long-term changes in this ecosystem. such a general conclusion can only be reached as this experiment progresses.

CONCLUSIONS
the small observed responses to the warming and exclosure treatments presented here could be an indication that our study area is predominantly nutrient limited, and that nutrient limitation may explain the lack of responses during the initial stages of this long term experiment. on the other hand, if this system is not nutrient limited, then increased availability of nutrients due to climate warming might not result in increased biomass production. our preliminary results provide only limited evidence that vertebrate herbivory constrains the biomass response of shrubs to warming, and that grazing promotes establishment of graminoids and forbs. the overall strongest effect was from the unexpected moth outbreak. this highly pulsed event caused a reduction in aboveground biomass that likely concealed any treatment effect. although modest, there were changes in the biomass of the plant functional groups studied here, suggesting that vertebrate herbivory could mediate the competitive dominance of shrubs over graminoids that is a predicted response to climate change. furthermore, these results also indicate a limited response in forb biomass which could indicate that species of this functional group are more vulnerable to warming and herbivory than the other functional groups. the differences in the short-term and long-term responses also suggest that the short duration of this study may prevent general conclusions from being made about the interacting effects of climatic warming and herbivory. however, as this experiment progresses, more of the mechanisms controlling biomass responses of the vegetation should be revealed.

