BACKGROUND
escherichia coli is widely used to produce recombinant proteins of interest. one of the major concerns in the overproduction process is the formation of insoluble structures called inclusions bodies   <cit> . ib formation results from the aggregation of misfolded polypeptides that have escaped quality control by chaperones and proteases to interact through their exposed hydrophobic regions before precipitating  <cit> . aggregate formation and features are influenced by various growth conditions such as temperature and ph  <cit> , culture phase  <cit>  and glucose/oxygen availability  <cit> .

in vivo protein aggregation is a dynamic reversible process  <cit> . chaperones involved in aggregate dissociation, e.g. dnak/dnaj/clpb and ibpa/ibpb, colocalize with ib in e. coli  <cit> . recently, it has been reported that aggregate cellular localization is not random  <cit> . small protein aggregates are delivered to a cell pole to form larger structures that are further dissolved by an energy dependent process  <cit> . all proteins in ib were initially considered as unfolded, but it has been shown that some polypeptides inside aggregates are present in an active form  <cit> . several groups reported the formation of "non-classical" ib mainly characterized by the presence of folded and soluble recombinant proteins  <cit> .

here, we report a novel example of "non-classical" ib that contain folded and soluble recombinant proteins and only transiently interact with the ipba chaperone. indeed, overproduction of brucella abortus pdhs cytoplasmic histidine kinase  <cit>  in e. coli revealed that pdhs-mcherry fusions were first folded and soluble in aggregates formed during the stationary phase of culture before forming insoluble structures having all the characteristics of "classical" ib. these "classical" ib recruited ipba-yfp, as previously reported for other ib in e. coli  <cit> , unlike the intermediate "non classical" ib. we observed that ibpa-yfp was able to form foci with very dynamic properties inside e. coli and to reach and colocalize with soluble pdhs-mcherry aggregates.

RESULTS
pdhs-mcherry forms growth phase-dependent aggregates in e. coli
we used the pcvdh <dig> plasmid to overexpress the pdhs coding sequence  fused in frame with the cds for the fluorescent reporter mcherry . interestingly, the localization of this fusion in e. coli revealed foci at quarter , mid-cell  and polar  sites of e. coli s17- <dig> in the stationary phase  . the pdhs-mcherry was a stable fusion in e. coli, since western blot analysis using antibodies raised against mcherry revealed a major band with the expected molecular mass for the complete fusion . fusing the pdhs cds to the yfp or cfp cds on the same backbone plasmid or overexpressing the pdhs-mcherry fusion in dh10b, top <dig> and mg <dig> e. coli strains also generated similar fluorescent foci . when a pdhs-mcherry fusion was carried on a low-copy plasmid, there was no polar focus in e. coli, contrary to its expression in b. abortus where pdhs-mcherry monopolar foci were present . other b. abortus proteins  fused to the mcherry n-terminus did not generate fluorescent foci but rather a diffuse signal . taken together, this data suggests that foci formation in e. coli is mainly due to pdhs itself and to the abundance of the whole pdhs-mcherry recombinant protein.

given that bacteria growth conditions strongly influence aggregate formation, we checked whether the fluorescent foci were dependent on the growth phase, as previously reported for ib  <cit> . using the pdhs-mcherry overexpressing strain, we observed bacteria grown until the early, mid and late stationary phase, corresponding to bacteria having just reached the maximal turbidity of the culture , the bacteria  <dig> h later , and the bacteria  <dig> h later , respectively. at t <dig> of the stationary culture phase, very few bacteria  showed polar fluorescent foci as many were associated with a bright diffuse cytoplasmic fluorescent signal . twelve hours later in the same medium , polar fluorescent foci were observed , together with a decrease of the diffuse cytoplasmic fluorescent signal . no detectable refractile bodies were observed in these conditions. after  <dig> additional hours , larger and brighter fluorescent polar foci were formed, colocalizing with dense refractile bodies typical of "classical" ib, and accompanied by a strong decrease of the diffuse fluorescent signal .

when stationary phase bacteria  showing polar fluorescent pdhs-mcherry aggregates were placed on an agarose pad made with rich medium , fluorescent structures quickly disappeared  . interestingly, when bacteria of the same culture were placed on an agarose pad containing phosphate buffered saline , fluorescent foci were still detectable for  <dig> hours and even increased in size and intensity with the appearance of dense refractile bodies . fluorescence decrease in rich medium did not result from photobleaching, since fluorescence was still detectable after repeat exposure of bacteria on agarose pads without additional rich medium. the "classical" ib present in late stationary phase bacteria  were still observable when these bacteria were placed on an agarose pad supplemented with lb rich medium  or pbs . together, these data suggest that fluorescent foci observed during the mid stationary phase are reversible and different from those observed during the late stationary phase of culture.

colocalization assays between pdhs-mcherry fluorescent aggregates and ibpa-yfp fusions
ibpa  is a small heat shock chaperone discovered in e. coli  <cit> . the ibpa-yfp fusion was already successfully used to label inclusion bodies in vivo, in single cells of e. coli  <cit> . as pdhs-mcherry fluorescent polar foci generated during the mid and late stationary culture phases could differ from each other, we tested their possible colocalization with the ibpa-yfp fusion.

we transformed the pcvdh <dig>  to overexpress the pdhs-mcherry fusion, in a strain expressing a chromosomal ibpa-yfp fusion, previously used to monitor aggregates in vivo  <cit> . using fluorescence microscopy, we observed the pdhs-mcherry aggregates and ibpa-yfp localization in early, mid and late stationary phase bacteria . during the early stationary phase , the bacteria displayed a diffuse cytoplasmic pdhs-mcherry signal while ibpa-yfp foci were mainly present at the cell poles . surprisingly, in mid stationary phase bacteria , colocalization of pdhs-mcherry with ibpa-yfp was quite rare . indeed, only 15% of these bacteria  displayed the two corresponding fluorescent foci at the same poles, 15% at the opposite pole, 15% at an intermediate position  and, in 60% of these bacteria, only one fluorescent focus corresponding to pdhs-mcherry was detectable. moreover, in the bacteria with both fluorescent signals at the same pole, we systematically observed that pdhs-mcherry and ibpa-yfp did not exactly overlap . at a later stage of the stationary culture phase , polar colocalization of pdhs-mcherry and ibpa-yfp was frequent  , but the signal of both fluorescent fusions was also slightly shifted. in these late stationary phase bacteria, both foci also colocalized with dense refractile bodies seen in differential interference contrast  . at t <dig>  the polar ibpa-yfp foci were more frequent and were larger and brighter compared with non-polar ibpa-yfp foci. western blot analyses showed that the ibpa-yfp fusion was not cleaved .

time-lapse experiments were performed to monitor the kinetics of the cytoplasmic distribution of pdhs-mcherry and ibpa-yfp fusions. mid stationary growth phase bacteria  were plated on lb agarose pads and observed every two minutes at 37°c . we observed a very dynamic localization pattern of ibpa-yfp foci in bacteria that did not contain a pdhs-mcherry aggregate . in contrast, when the pdhs-mcherry aggregate was present in t <dig> bacteria, ibpa-yfp foci moved from pole to pole until they colocalized with the immobile pdhs-mcherry foci , which in turn progressively disappeared, as previously observed . in the late stationary phase cultures, the large ibpa-yfp polar clusters colocalizing with pdhs-mcherry did not move .

pdhs-mcherry fusions in fluorescent foci of mid stationary phase cells display properties of folded proteins
since the pdhs-mcherry foci observed during the mid stationary phase did not colocalize with ibpa-yfp, it was tempting to speculate that pdhs-mcherry fusions were correctly folded in these aggregates. in keeping with this idea, western blot analysis using anti-mcherry antibodies showed that pdhs-mcherry was mainly found in the soluble fraction of bacteria grown until the late stationary phase . when soluble extracts were examined by gel permeation combined with fluorescence and western blot analysis, soluble pdhs-mcherry proteins were identified as a single peak, with a predicted molecular weight between  <dig> kda and  <dig>  kda, the upper limit of the fractionation range . this suggests that the fusion is able to form multimers with a defined number of monomers, further implying that pdhs-mcherry is folded.

using yeast two-hybrid assays, it was recently shown that b. abortus pdhs was able to interact with fumc through its amino-terminal domain  <cit> , and with divk through its carboxy-terminal domain  <cit> . interestingly, fumc from caulobacter crescentus did not interact with b. abortus pdhs  <cit> . when b. abortus fumc-yfp and divk-yfp fusions were produced with pdhs-mcherry, colocalization of yfp and mcherry fluorescence signals was observed in mid stationary phase e. coli cells . interestingly, both fluorescence signals were overlapping, further suggesting that the shift in fluorescence signals observed between pdhs-mcherry and ibpa-yfp  was not an artefact. as a control, we checked that c. crescentus fumc did not colocalize with pdhs-mcherry . the ability of pdhs-mcherry to recruit b. abortus divk-yfp and fumc-yfp but not c. crescentus fumc-yfp suggests that the n-terminal and c-terminal domains of pdhs were at least partially folded.

discussion
we report that, when overproduced in e. coli, b. abortus pdhs fused to mcherry is able to form intermediate aggregates of soluble proteins resembling previously reported "non-classical" ib  <cit> , before forming "classical" ib. these intermediate aggregates are very different from "classical" ib because they are soluble, are quickly removed when bacteria are placed in rich medium , do not systematically colocalize with ibpa-yfp  and are still able to recruit known pdhs partners . the observation of "intermediate" aggregates of soluble proteins does not fit with a simple model of ib formation in which unfolded proteins precipitate to form ib immediately after translation. our observations thus suggest that some proteins could form aggregates of folded and soluble polypeptides before their precipitation into "classical" ib. the initial solubility of heterologous pdhs-mcherry could be due to a slow expression , since there is no predicted promoter identified upstream the cds in the pcvdh <dig> plasmid, and the codon bias of pdhs cds is probably not optimal for sustained translation. strong accumulation could lead to the saturation of chaperones and proteolysis activities, explaining the slow transition between soluble and "classical" ib.

the data we report suggests that pdhs-mcherry is folded in aggregates resembling "non-classical" ib. the data supporting the folded state of pdhs in e. coli are that pdhs-mcherry  is soluble and forms multimers of homogeneous size, and  is still able to interact with partners like the fumarase fumc and the response regulator divk. the recent resolution of a complex between a histidine kinase and its cognate response regulator  <cit>  strongly suggests that the dimerization and histidine-containing phosphotransfer  domain of the kinase needs to be folded to allow interaction with the response regulator. it is therefore predictable that at least the dhp domain of pdhs-mcherry is folded to allow interaction with divk-yfp. interestingly, we previously reported that b. abortus pdhs was able to colocalize with b. abortus fumarase fumc, but not with c. crescentus fumc  <cit> , and here the recruitment of fumc proteins by pdhs-mcherry is consistent with this specificity . moreover, it means that fusions to yfp are not all aspecifically associated to soluble aggregates of pdhs-mcherry resembling "non-classical" ib.

a striking observation is the mobility of ibpa-yfp foci inside cells during the stationary phase . this mobility is strongly decreased in late stationary cells , where larger and brighter ibpa-yfp foci are observed at the bacterial poles. ibpa-yfp foci also move around in pdhs-mcherry aggregates producing cells at t <dig>  until they meet pdhs-mcherry aggregates. the dynamic localization of ibpa-yfp suggests a model in which ibpa could scan the bacterial cell to bind to protein aggregates before taking part in a disaggregation process. this hypothesis is supported by the observation of a fading of pdhs-mcherry fluorescence when it colocalizes with ibpa-yfp, concomitantly with an increase of the diffuse mcherry fluorescent signal , suggesting that a fraction of pdhs-mcherry is removed from the "non-classical" ib. it would be interesting to test whether ibpa-yfp dynamic intracellular distribution is dependent on cytoskeletal elements. it would also be interesting to colocalize the ibpb co-chaperone with ibpa, and to investigate the role of the ibpa fibrils  <cit>  in the intracellular motion of ibpa. indeed, ibpa fibril formation is inhibited by aggregated substrates  <cit> , and here we observed that ibpa-yfp is moving until it reaches ib. the absence of systematic colocalization of ibpa-yfp with pdhs-mcherry  suggests that ibpa does not tightly and systematically bind all types of protein aggregates in e. coli. even when ibpa-yfp localizes to the same pole as pdhs-mcherry, the position of the two foci is clearly distinct , compared to the overlap observed for pdhs-mcherry and divk-yfp or b. abortus fumc-yfp . this suggests that ibpa-yfp and pdhs-mcherry do not truly colocalize, like pdhs-mcherry with divk-yfp or fumc-yfp, which have been reported to directly bind to pdhs  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
pdhs-mcherry is a new example of a protein able to form soluble "non-classical" inclusion bodies in e. coli. here we report a detailed characterization of these particular ib using several approaches. these ib are able to recruit partners of pdhs, suggesting that pdhs remains folded in these ib, at least during a first step of ib maturation. the "non-classical" ib are probably highly sensitive to proteolysis, since they are quickly cleared from the cells when the environmental conditions change. time lapse analysis of e. coli cells containing pdhs-mcherry "non-classical" ib indicates that ibpa-yfp foci move rapidly inside the bacteria until they reach fluorescent aggregates. the characterization of ibpa-yfp movement inside e. coli should be investigated further as it could indicate how the ibpa chaperone is able to scan the cytoplasm to recognize intracellular protein aggregates.

