BACKGROUND
there is evidence that cross-modal plasticity induced by auditory deprivation is apparent during sign-language perception. sign languages involve the use of the hands and face, and are perceived visually  <cit> . using functional mri , neville et al.  <cit>  observed increased activity in the superior temporal sulcus  during the comprehension of american sign language  in both congenital deaf subjects and hearing native signers. the authors therefore suggested that the sts is related to the linguistic analysis of sign language. nishimura et al.  <cit>  found that activity was increased in the auditory-association cortex but not the primary auditory cortex of a prelingual-deaf individual during the comprehension of japanese sign language . after this patient received a cochlear implant, the primary auditory cortex was activated by the sound of spoken words, but the auditory association cortex was not. the authors suggested that audio-visual cross-modal plasticity is confined to the auditory-association cortex and that cognitive functions  might trigger functional plasticity in the under-utilized auditory-association cortex. in addition, pettito et al.  <cit>  observed increased activity in the superior temporal gyrus  in native deaf signers compared with hearing non-signers. these findings suggest that the changes associated with audio-visual cross-modal plasticity occur in the auditory-association cortex. however, the age dependency of this plasticity is not known. to depict the age dependency of the cross-modal plasticity, we conducted a functional mri study of deaf signers with both early and late deafness, as well as hearing signers, performing a sign-comprehension task. 'early deaf' subjects were defined as those who lost their ability to hear before the age of  <dig> years, whereas 'late deaf' subjects lost their hearing after the age of  <dig> years.

RESULTS
performance on the jsl comprehension task was similar across the groups  =  <dig> , p =  <dig> , one-way anova). the patterns of activity evoked during the sign-comprehension task in the hearing signers and the deaf groups are shown in figure  <dig>  within the temporal cortex, all groups showed activation in the occipito-temporal junction extending to the portion of the stg posterior to the vpc line . in the early- and late-deaf subjects, the activation of the posterior stg extended anteriorly to the vpc line to reach the vac line . the activation was confined to the stg, extending into the superior temporal sulcus, and was more prominent on the left side. a direct comparison between early- and late-deaf subjects revealed significantly more prominent activation of the bilateral middle sts in the early-deaf subjects .

discussion
the onset of deafness is related to language acquisition. prelingual deafness occurs before spoken language is learned. hearing people generally learn their first language before  <dig> years of age; hence, prelingual deaf individuals are either deaf at birth or became deaf prior to developing the grammatical basis of their native language, which is usually before the age of  <dig> years. postlingual deafness is the loss of acoustic senses, either suddenly due to an accident or as a gradual progression after native-language acquisition  <cit> . hence, the early-deaf subjects in the present study are categorized as 'prelingual deaf' and the late-deaf subjects are categorized as 'postlingual deaf'. more than 90% of children with prelingual hearing loss have parents with normal hearing  <cit> . furthermore, in japan, the traditional teaching method for deaf children includes aural/oral methods, such as lipreading. native signers are usually limited to those who were brought up by deaf parents. because of this, the majority of prelingual deaf subjects learn spoken language  in artificial ways, such as aural/oral methods. in the present study, the parents of the deaf subjects all had normal hearing. five out of six of the early-deaf subjects started jsl training after the age of  <dig> years. thus, jsl is not the first language for any of the groups in the present study.

the posterior sts was activated in all groups during sign comprehension, which is consistent with the proposed neural substrates that subserve human movement perception  <cit> . the posterior sts region is adjacent to mt/v <dig>  which is consistently activated during the perception of human body movement  <cit> . hence, the activation of the posterior sts in both hearing and deaf subjects is related to the perception of the movement of the hands and mouth.

both the early- and late-deaf groups showed activation in the planum temporale, whereas hearing signers did not. anatomically, the anterior border of the pt is the sulcus behind heschl's gyrus and the medial border is the point where the pt fades into the insula. the posterior border of the pt involves the ascending and descending rami of the sylvian fissure  <cit> . functionally, the left pt is involved in word detection and generation, due to its ability to process rapid frequency changes  <cit> . the right homologue is specialized for the discrimination of melody, pitch and sound intensity  <cit> .

it has been shown that non-linguistic visual stimuli  activate the auditory cortex in deaf individuals, but not in hearing subjects  <cit> . mcsweeney et al.  <cit>  showed that the planum temporale is activated in deaf native signers in response to visual sign-language images and this activation is larger for native deaf signers compared to hearing signers. our previous study  <cit>  revealed that cross-modal activation in the temporal cortex of the deaf subjects was triggered not only by signs but also by non-linguistic biological motion  and non-biological motion . signs did not activate the temporal cortex of either the hearing signers or the hearing non-signers. thus, in the present study, the activation of the planum temporale in the early- and late-deaf subjects is probably due to the effects of auditory deprivation, rather than linguistic processes. this theory is also supported by the fact that the hearing signers in the present study did not show temporal-lobe activity during jsl comprehension, whereas the pt was more prominently activated in the deaf subjects irrespective of the timing of the onset of deafness. these findings indicate that auditory deprivation plays a significant role in mediating visual responses in the auditory cortex of deaf subjects. this is analogous with findings related to visual deprivation: irrespective of the onset of blindness, the visual-association cortex of blind subjects was activated by tactile-discrimination tasks  <cit>  that were unrelated to learning braille  <cit> . these results suggest that the processing of visual and tactile stimuli is competitively balanced in the occipital cortex. a similar competitive mechanism might occur in the pt following auditory deprivation. activation of the stg in hearing subjects during lipreading  <cit>  indicates which cortico-cortical circuits might be involved in the competitive balance between the modalities. in fact, we found that the cross-modal plasticity in the deaf subjects occurred within the neural substrates that are involved in lipreading in hearing subjects  <cit> .

the middle sts, anterior to the vpc line, was activated more prominently in the early- than the late-deaf subjects. this difference is probably not related to linguistic processes, as both early- and late-deaf subjects are equally capable of learning jsl with the same amount of training. the middle sts region is presumably the area that is selective to human voice processing  <cit> . this area is known to receive predominantly auditory input, being involved in the high-level analysis of complex acoustic information, such as the extraction of speaker-related cues, as well as the transmission of this information to other areas for multimodal integration and long-term memory storage  <cit> . this implies that early auditory deprivation  might shift the role of the middle sts from human voice processing to the processing of biological motion, such as hand and face movements . it has been suggested that once cross-modal plasticity occurs in the auditory cortex, the restoration of auditory function by means of cochlear implants is ineffective  <cit> . hence, the first  <dig> years of life might be the sensitive period for the processing of human voices.

considering that the sts voice-selective area is not sensitive to speech per se but rather to vocal features that carry nonlinguistic information  <cit> , the functional role of this region in early-deaf subjects with regard to the paralinguistic aspects of sign language is of particular interest and further investigation will be necessary.

CONCLUSIONS
the results of the present study suggest that in early-deaf subjects, non-auditory processing, such as that involved in the perception and comprehension of sign language, involves the under-utilized area of the cortex that is thought to be selective to the human voice . this indicates that the sensitive period for the establishment of human voice processing in the sts might be during the first  <dig> years of life.

