BACKGROUND
a number of studies dating back to  <dig> have shown that when subjects are not engaged in processing externally directed tasks or time-varying stimuli - when they are, from a behavioural perspective, at rest - mr images of the brain show correlated, low frequency fluctuations in functionally related areas. this has been interpreted as indicating functional connectivity between regions  <cit> . a number of distinct, largely independent assemblies, or resting state networks  have been discovered since using semi-exploratory and exploratory analysis methods.

it has recently been shown that rsn fluctuations explain not only inter-trial variation in the bold response  <cit>  but also behaviour  <cit>  and that some rsns are disturbed in pathologies such as alzheimer's disease . this has fuelled efforts to better characterise these networks through behavioural manipulation  <cit>  and by their interdependence on other networks  <cit> , not only to improve experiment design but also to better understand healthy brain function and a range of neurological and psychiatric conditions.

the first rsns were discovered using functional connectivity analysis, in which correlation is performed between the time course in a seed voxel or region and that in other voxels, in order to reveal areas whose activity is coupled. the discovery that functional connectivity could be observed between ipsilateral and contralateral sensorimotor regions  <cit>  was rapidly followed by similar observations for visual and auditory areas  <cit> , the amygdala  <cit>  and the thalamus and hippocampus  <cit> . it was later discovered that the group of regions which have come to be known as the default mode network, which had been observed to be more active during rest periods than during task processing  <cit> , also show fluctuations characteristic of rsns during rest periods  <cit> . the development of group independent component analysis methods allowed a fully exploratory approach to identifying rsns  <cit> , and led to the elucidation of other networks in posterior parietal areas, lateralised left and right frontoparietal regions, the anterior temporal lobe, cerebellum and limbic lobe  <cit> . to date, approximately  <dig> rsns have been reproducibly identified  <cit> .

there is no a priori model in functional connectivity analysis, but a seed voxel  time-course is selected by the experimenter. this process leaves the approach prone to omission unless correlations are computed between a large number of regions , and also to weakening by inter-subject variation if seed regions are defined on the basis of template anatomy rather than individual function. activation results from functional tasks may be used to define seed regions, but this becomes impractical if many networks are to be analysed in the same data. the sensitivity of the analysis is reduced if sub-regions of the same network are separated according to a hypothesis about possible division of function. alternatively, erroneous conclusions may be drawn about regions functionally connected if seed regions are used that subsume areas which contribute to different networks. in addition, the signal in a seed region comprises many sources, of both neuronal and non-neuronal origin . while the inclusion of motion parameters in the general linear model as well as regressors for global, ventricular and white matter signals allows these effects to be reduced  <cit> , it has proved difficult to separate a number of physiological artefacts from rsn-related fluctuations, such as those arising from changes in respiratory rate from the default mode  <cit> . likewise, the subtraction of global signal to try to mitigate this problem may introduce artificial anticorrelation relationships between component time courses  <cit> , making study of the interrelation between networks problematic. as a genuinely exploratory method, ica yields potentially interesting components in the context of the other signal fluctuations in the data and is generally capable of separating overlapping signal sources of physiological and neuronal origin  <cit> . as such is it well suited to an exploratory analysis aimed of rsns and their interrelations.

most rsn findings to date relate to the cerebral cortex. there are reports, mostly restricted to the functional connectivity literature, of correlated fluctuations between isolated subcortical structures, including the amygdala  <cit>  and the thalamus and hippocampus  <cit> . the involvement of the hippocampus in a  sensory-auditory rsn  <cit>  and in the default mode has been noted  <cit>  as has the inclusion of number of thalamic nuclei in the medial visual, auditory and medial frontal rsns  <cit> . jafri et al. also identify elements of the basal ganglia, albeit in a predominantly cortical frontal parietal subcortical network  <cit> . we recently reported the existence of an rsn in the basal ganglia and thalamus with weak projections to supplementary motor areas  <cit> . this network overlaps substantially with that identified in a contemporaneous functional connectivity study by di martino et al.   <cit> , and a subsequent incidental noting of the same network by damoiseaux et al.  <cit> . the network was not present in any other ica-based study of which we are aware .

these scant and inconsistent reports leave the consistency and role of this network open to question. a recent dispute indicates that apparently subtle variations in behavioural condition can give rise to the appearance of spontaneous activation  <cit> . both the di martino et al. study  <cit>  and our initial report  <cit>  were based on subjects visually fixating, unlike the majority of rsn studies, in which subjects had their eyes closed, and in which the basal ganglia rsn was not observed. in that light, it seems pertinent to investigate the conditions under which this network is manifest. the origin of these signal fluctuations likewise needs to be established; whether they are neuronal resting-state fluctuations or a physiological artefact. if the origins of these network are neuronal, to which of the many parallel basal ganglia circuits and functions do they correspond, and what relationship do they have to other resting state networks?

the basal ganglia consist of four nuclei; the striatum , the globus pallidus or pallidum, the substantia nigra and the subthalamic nucleus  <cit> . originally viewed as motor structures, tracing studies in the monkey suggested that the striatum could be divided into two networks, sensorimotor and associative  <cit> . a more recent model has suggested that the diverse functions in which the basal ganglia are involved are expressed through five parallel segregated circuits; motor, oculomotor, dorsolateral prefrontal, lateral orbitofrontal and anterior cingulate  <cit> . each of these receives input from a number of functionally related neocortical regions  and outputs to a single frontal region . in the current view, the basal ganglia are envisaged as comprising just three distinct functional assemblies; the sensorimotor, the associative and the limbic  <cit> . the fact that each of the corresponding circuits involves distinct regions of striatum, pallidum, substantia nigra, thalamus and cortex offers the possibility - within the limits of activation localisation - of identifying the circuit to which the network corresponds, and with that, its function.

we examine resting-state fluctuations in the thalamus and basal ganglia using two common resting state conditions, two large, independent study groups and a fast epi protocol optimised for structures with a short t2*  <cit> , combined with high field strength. we apply group ica tools to identify this network in studies using fixation and eyes closed conditions, and refer to known basal ganglia circuits and probabilistic tractography to identify the function subsumed by this network. temporal features of independent components are used in a novel classifier to distinguish rsns from physiological artefacts, and functional network connectivity is applied to elucidate the relationship between the basal ganglia resting state network and the default mode.

RESULTS
we find a resting state network involving the thalamus and a large portion of the basal ganglia in groups studied under both the eyes open and fixation conditions, and a temporally coherent network focussed on the caudate in the fixation study only.

the distributed basal ganglia network is symmetric and incorporates the pallidum, putamen, subthalamic nucleus and substantia nigra, as well as the thalamus, with weaker extensions to the transverse temporal gyrus and the supplementary motor area . the network is illustrated as it appears in the melodic analysis of the fixation study group of  <dig> subjects in figure  <dig>  previous studies employing pica have employed a posterior probability threshold of p >  <dig>  using the mixture model approach  <cit> . non-outlined slices in figure  <dig> derive from ica of downsampled, smoothed data and are thresholded using a more stringent threshold of p >  <dig> . to enable more exact localisation of activation foci in the region of the substantia nigra and subthalamic nucleus, results based on unsmoothed, non-resampled data have been illustrated for that region , and are thresholded at the canonical level of p >  <dig> . the same data and threshold were used for the slice showing activation in the sma . the component is overlaid on the mean anatomical  image for the group. to aid orientation the location of selected slices  is indicated on the mni template t <dig> image . the entirety of the network is shown in additional file  <dig> .

the basal ganglia network is also present in the analyses of the two subgroups of  <dig> subjects in the fixation study  and in the eyes closed study in which a separate group of subjects were scanned with their eyes closed . in all cases, it appears substantially unvaried from its manifestation in the whole group analysis . the eyes closed study included both male and female subjects and was conducted at  <dig> t with a very different epi protocol, showing the network to be reproducible across a wide range of factors; resting state condition , gender and measurement parameters, including field strength and repetition time.

in addition to the basal ganglia network, in which one element of the striatum - the caudate nucleus - is not present, a separate component was identified in the fixation study data, which consists of the caudate and, much more weakly, dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and posterior parietal cortex . this is absent in the study in which subjects had their eyes closed.

a public-access atlas of thalamo-cortical connection probabilities http://www.fmrib.ox.ac.uk/connect/ based on results of a prior study by behrens et al.  <cit>  shows that, for the basal ganglia the thalamic activation foci identified connect with high probability to motor areas. for the focus with mni co-ordinates  these probabilities take the values of  <dig>  to the primary motor,  <dig>  to the sensory and  <dig>  to the pre-motor cortex. for the focus at  the respective probabilities are  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig> . the probabilities of the primary thalamic connections being to none-motor regions  are below  <dig>  for both foci.

all the other resting state networks reported in the ica-based resting state literature to date  <cit>  were also identified in the melodic analysis of the fixation study . despite its reproducibility, the basal ganglia network emerges as one of the weakest in these data in terms of the percentage of variance in the data explained by each component . the only subcortical elements present in other networks were the hippocampus in the default mode  and the weak presence of the substantia nigra in the posterior parietal network.

† - no valid value was obtained for this component.

the same resting state networks, including the basal ganglia resting state network, were identified in the gift results, which were used to extract single-subject temporal responses for the assessments of temporal and frequency features that follow. the spatial map of the basal ganglia component identified in the gift analysis is shown in additional file  <dig> 

the mean frequency spectrum of the basal ganglia network is illustrated in figure  <dig>  in which the grey band indicates one standard deviation from the mean across subjects. on average, the position of the maximum in the spectral distribution was at  <dig>  ±  <dig>  hz.

to investigate the possibility of causal relationships existing between the basal ganglia and other rsns , the mean correlation was calculated between component time courses for the basal ganglia rsn and other rsns over all subjects. the most significant results are listed in table  <dig>  the basal ganglia rsn was anti-correlated with the default mode  and positively correlated, to a similar degree, with both the right and left lateral fronto-parietal networks . these values may be compared with those obtained in this analysis between the default mode and the lateral fronto-parietal networks; - <dig>  ±  <dig> , p =  <dig>   and - <dig>  ±  <dig> , p =  <dig>  × 10- <dig> . that is, the correlations between the basal ganglia rsn and the default mode, and the basal ganglia rsn and lateral parietal networks are consistent with those between the default mode and the lateral parietal networks but are stronger and more significant. functional network connectivity analysis  <cit>  applied to the basal ganglia rsn and the default mode - performed for  <dig> randomly-composed groups of  <dig> subjects from the population of  <dig> subjects - showed significant correlation between the two networks for all  <dig> groups. in  <dig> of these the hemodynamic response in the basal ganglia was in anticipation of that in the default mode , in  <dig> it lagged behind it.

*these networks possess an anti-correlation well-documented in the literature, and are presented for comparison.

a number of components were identified by experienced raters  as being of physiological origin based on their spatial distribution. these included components of vascular origin located in the circle of willis, distributed grey matter components arising from respiration rate variation of the type reported by birn et al.  <cit> , and csf flow between the ventricles. the mean frequency spectrum of the basal ganglia rsn is also plotted in figure  <dig> along with the frequency spectra of components of established rsn origin and physiological components. spectral power was focussed at lower frequencies for rsns than physiological components. the two frequency features described in the methods section, "dynamic range" and "low to high power ratio", are plotted for rsns and physiological component spectra in figure  <dig>  the known rsns are well separated from physiological components. the basal ganglia component clusters with known rsns.

the "dynamic range" feature afforded 93% accuracy in distinguishing resting state networks and physiological components, with  <dig> false negatives  and  <dig> false positive . the basal ganglia component was classified as an rsn.

discussion
we detail the structures contributing to a recently reported resting state network in the thalamus and basal ganglia. by using a high field, high bold sensitivity experiment design and high resolution analysis, we show that it encompasses not only the thalamus, pallidum, putamen and transverse temporal gyrus - as has been previously noted - but also the substantia nigra and subthalamic nucleus, allowing the basal ganglia circuit to which it corresponds to be identified. despite its non-observation in most resting-state studies to date  <cit>  it was found to be reproducible across subjects and mr measurement parameters and is evident in both the eyes closed and fixation resting state conditions. the network is positively correlated with the left and right lateral fronto-parietal  networks, and anticorrelated with the default mode, whose hemodynamic response it anticipates. the peak frequency and spectral characteristics are similar to those of other rsns, distinct from physiological fluctuations, and allow it to be classified as an rsn using the unsupervised classifier described. we proceed to identify which of the parallel segregated basal ganglia circuits this network corresponds to based on participating regions.

because of their historical significance as motor structures, the best studied basal ganglia network is the motor circuit. cortical input from precentral motor areas, postcentral somatosensory areas, the arcuate premotor area and the supplementary motor areas projects dominantly to the putamen. the putamen sends projections to the interior segment of the pallidum and on to particular thalamic nuclei  as well as the internal segment of the globus pallidus via the caudolateral substantia nigra to the thalamus . outputs from the thalamus project to the supplementary motor area, the motor cortex and arcuate premotor area, probably in distinct subcircuits  <cit> . the observed resting state network corresponds well with the motor circuit; the caudate is notably absent, and the putamen constitutes the focus of activation. the activated regions identified as substantia nigra are consistent with coordinates derived from stereotactic electrophysiological studies  <cit> . the presence of the substantia nigra suggests that the resting state network corresponds either solely to the indirect pathway of the motor circuit, which acts to inhibit movement, or both the indirect and direct pathways. weak activation in the supplementary motor area is likewise consistent with the motor circuit. myeloarchitectonics suggest that the thalamic activation corresponds to the ventro-lateral thalamic nucleus, which a prior dti study has shown to connect dominantly to motor regions  <cit> . in fact, endogenous bold fluctuations in this part of the thalamus have been found to be strongly correlated with motor and premotor areas by zhang et al.  as well as the whole putamen.

as well as there being good agreement between the areas observed in this rsn and the motor circuit, there is disparity between the principle sites of input to the striatum and the other circuits. the caudate provides input to the oculomotor, dorsolateral prefrontal and lateral orbitofrontal circuits and the ventral striatum provides input to the anterior cingulate circuit. the cortical regions to which the circuits send output are the frontal eye fields for the oculomotor circuit and the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, the lateral orbitofrontal cortex and the anterior cingulate area for those circuits respectively.

no components were identified corresponding to the associative and limbic thalamo-cortical loops  <cit> . the question arises of whether it is to be expected that an rsn exists for each of the tripartite or alexander subdivisions of the basal ganglia, and whether basal ganglia rsns  would be expected to correspond exactly with circuits that have been established from anatomical and afferent projections from the cortex. looking outside the basal ganglia, we know that whilst rsns reflect functional task networks, it is not the case that there is an rsn for every functional network defined by task or anatomy. where there are spontaneous fluctuations in networks at rest, other studies have shown that there is not complete correspondence with the network as defined by anatomy or tasks. the major anatomical afferents from the cortex suggest a functional partitioning of the putamen, with a minor portion classified as associative and limbic, and the majority as being sensorimotor. zhang et al. found functional connectivity between the motor and premotor cortex and almost the entire putamen  <cit> , however, as observed here. the temporal cortex also displayed a much weaker correlation with the caudal-ventral putaminal region, a finding not consistent with the classical striate nucleus tripartite subdivision. in addition, when looking at rsns involving associative cortical area, such as the default mode, ventral attention, dorsal attention and executive control networks, only a portion of the caudate nucleus participates, instead of the entire associative subdivision of the striate nucleus.

our hybrid simulations suggest that ica is capable of separating circuits which overlap to some extent, but which also have non-overlapping elements and different temporal behaviour . further evidence of this is provided by the fact that some brain regions  are present in multiple networks. the most likely explanations for not finding rsns corresponding to the associative and limbic thalamo-cortical circuits is, therefore, that they either do not show spontaneous low-frequency bold fluctuations or that these fluctuations are below the sensitivity of this study.

di martino et al. have reported a resting state functional connectivity analysis focussing on the striatum  <cit>  independent of our preliminary reporting of these results  <cit> . a gender-mixed group of subjects were studied while fixating on the word "relax" in a study with a sensitivity likely to be equivalent to that here; applying a similar, relatively short te epi protocol and comparable number of total image volumes . the connectivity results obtained for seeds in the dorsal and caudal putamen in the di martino et al. study is similar to the rsn observed by us  <cit> , although the involvement of the substantia nigra  was not reported. also, the dorsal putamen seeds indicated correlated activity in the anterior cortex cingulate, which relate to executive function, indicating some mixing of fluctuations relating to motor and executive control circuits. the basal ganglia rsn reported here was recently noted as an incidental finding by damoiseaux et al.  <cit> , adding independent verification of these results.

the conditions under which this resting state data were acquired were similar to those used in a number of previous studies which also applied group ica approaches  <cit> . the question then arises as to why this network was not reported in those studies, but has been observed only here and in the most recent publication by damoiseaux et al.  <cit> . the basal ganglia resting state network was one of the weakest identified in this study, measured in terms of the percentage of total variance in the data it explains. the sensitivity of this study is likely to be higher than that in the studies cited due to the high field strength , relatively large number of subjects  and short repetition time . the echo time of  <dig> ms is quite short and well matched to the t2* of basal ganglia structures at  <dig> t  <cit> , yielding optimal bold sensitivity. t2* is shorter in the basal ganglia than is typical in the cortex due high iron concentration  <cit> . while it is likely that, other than reference  <cit> , previous studies were not sufficiently sensitive to detect this network, it is also possible that it was simply overlooked in the wealth of components.

previous studies using functional connectivity analyses have demonstrated an anticorrelation relationship between the default mode and the dorsal attention network in the resting state  <cit> , which has been interpreted as indicating an interplay between modes thought to reflect stimulus-independent thought and goal-driven activity. these anticorrelation findings have been recently called into question, however, as global signal subtraction performed as a pre-processing step to reduce the influence of physiological noise and scanner drift itself introduces anticorrelations  <cit> . the approach taken here is not subject to these problems. we calculated the correlation between independent component time courses, with no prior global signal subtraction. the most significant results were as follow. the anticorrelation finding reported previously between the default mode and the dorsal attention network  <cit>  was reproduced. the basal ganglia network was also found to be anticorrelated with the default mode, and correlated, to a similar degree, with the lateralised attention networks. although we and others have shown that rsns possess similar frequency characteristics, it must be the case that they are at most weakly coupled, or they would not be separable in functional connectivity analyses  <cit> . correlation values observed here between component time courses are correspondingly low - in the range of  <dig>  to  <dig>  in magnitude - consistent with those observed in other studies  <cit> . despite the fact that they are weak, their consistency across subjects is such that these results are highly significant. there have been suggestions that the thalamus, with involvement of the basal ganglia, may be responsible for instigating the task-independent deactivation of the default mode observed when subjects are posed cognitively demanding tasks  <cit> . this would be consistent with findings by uddin et al., which have shown that correlations between homologous rsn structures in the cerebral hemispheres are preserved in a patient with complete commissurotomy, indicating that functional connectivity can be mediated by subcortical structures  <cit> . the hypothesis that the basal ganglia rsn represents the controller of fluctuations in the default mode is supported by the results of the functional network connectivity analysis. in  <dig> out the  <dig> randomly composed groups of  <dig> subjects, the time course of the basal ganglia independent component preceded that of the default mode. although this demonstrates that the hemodynamic response in the basal ganglia rsn consistently precedes that in the default mode, latency differences in the hemodynamic response functions  <cit>  in both networks would have to be analysed and corrected for  <cit>  before concluding that activation in the basal ganglia network precedes deactivation in the default mode. possible differences between the precedence of neuronal activation and the measured mr response arising from hemodynamic shape and latency effects  <cit>  preclude testing order hypotheses with this and other approaches such as granger causality modeling.

although rsns show a maximum in frequency spectra in the range  <dig>  -  <dig>  hz, this does not accurately reflect the frequency distribution of underlying neuronal fluctuations. the intrinsic autocorrelation of bold fmri data has 1/f behaviour in the frequency domain  <cit> , and low frequencies are cut off by sampling over a finite duration, leading to a low frequency peak. in fact, when the hemodynamic response function is deconvolved from rsn time courses prior to frequency analysis, the spectra of rsn components are essentially flat up to  <dig>  hz  <cit> . the analysis of rsn frequencies in this work serves two purposes, neither of which relate to the absolute frequencies observed in the spectra. the first is that differences between the compositions of rsn spectra can be observed. the frequency spectrum of the basal ganglia network is most similar in composition to that of the default mode, reinforcing the connection between the two networks. the second is that rsn spectra may be distinguished from components of physiological origin because their frequency distributions reflect the intrinsic convolution with the hemodynamic response function. this is the basis for the classifier used here, which can reliably distinguish rsns from physiological components using frequency characteristics alone  <cit> . the basal ganglia rsn clusters clearly with other rsns.

it is likely that the component which consists solely of the caudate  reflects activity relating to the inhibition of ocular saccades. as such, caudate activity is a task-specific response rather than an rsn. the caudate component is apparent in the fixation study, in which there was a point fixation condition, while no corresponding activity is apparent in the eyes closed study. the role of the caudate in saccadic eye movements is well documented  <cit> . fluctuations in caudate activity in this capacity  may arise due to phasic preparation of reflexive saccades and their voluntary inhibition. ultimately controlled by the superior colliculus, saccades can be generated and inhibited by the input of the caudate nucleus, via efferent projections to the substantia nigra pars reticulata  <cit> . the oculomotor basal ganglia-thalamocortical circuit, includes, as origins of input to the caudate, frontal eye fields, dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and posterior parietal cortex   <cit>  all of which areas are apparent in this component. frontal eye field neurons are known to fire during passive fixation  <cit>  as was the condition in the fixation study. the oculomotor network yielded from the dorsal caudate seed in the di martino et al. analysis  <cit>  is similar to the caudate component identified here in the fixation study. our hypothesis that this is a task-related response to the suppression of ocular saccades is consistent with the use of a fixation condition in that work, and it not being observed in the many previous studies which have used the eyes closed condition  <cit> .

another area of application of this network is as a candidate marker for neuro- and psychopathologies involving the basal ganglia. in a parallel with attempts to use default mode activity as a diagnostic marker for alzheimer's disease  <cit> , deficits in the basal ganglia rsn may offer a marker for one or more of the diseases in which the basal ganglia are known to play a role. parkinson's disease is a basal ganglia disorder characterized by the degeneration of dopaminergic neurons in the striatum. this has been shown to have opposing effects on the direct and indirect pathways in the striatum  <cit> , with hyperkinesia as a result. functional connectivity in the basal ganglia-cortical circuit has been demonstrated in this condition via synchronous oscillations between local field potentials in the basal ganglia and cortical eeg  <cit> , the transmission to the basal ganglia of motor cortex electrostimulation in the monkey and rat  <cit>  and oscillatory high-voltage spindles) <cit> . dopaminergic lesion in a rodent model for parkinson's has been shown to lead to an increase in oscillatory synchronisation in the basal ganglia and increase in frequency and duration of high voltage spindle events) <cit> . similarly, excessive synchronisation of subthalamic nucleus neurons has been confirmed as a cause of movement slowing in parkinsonism  <cit> . dopamine-dependent changes in the functional connectivity between the basal ganglia and cortex have likewise been demonstrated  <cit> . the discovery of the fmri manifestation of this functional connectivity will allow dysfunction in this system to be probed non-invasively, even if patients are not able to perform motor tasks appropriately.

CONCLUSIONS
we report the existence of a resting state in the thalamus and basal ganglia, showing greatest activity in the putamen, pallidum, substantia nigra and subthalamic nucleus, with projections to transverse temporal gyrus and the supplementary motor areas. the network is consistent with the cortico-subcortical motor control circuit of the basal ganglia and is robustly reproducible across subjects, scanning parameters and common behavioural conditions for resting state studies. the frequency spectrum of this component peaks at  <dig>  ±  <dig>  hz and is most similar in frequency composition to the default mode. spectral features are similar to those of other resting state networks and distinct from physiological artefacts. fluctuations in the basal ganglia network precede those in the default mode, with which it is anticorrelated. we posit that another independent component focussed in the caudate, which was observed in the fixation condition but not in the eyes closed condition, and which was recently reported as being associated with the resting state of the brain  <cit> , is related to the suppression of ocular saccades.

the basal ganglia resting state network reported here offers the possibility to improve experiment design and analysis in fmri studies of the striatum, and a possible window into disorders of the basal ganglia such as parkinson's disease.

