BACKGROUND
the nuclear receptors  comprise an ancient family of transcription factors  that are found in metazoa and are involved in the regulation of development, metabolism, homeostasis, reproduction, and cell death  <cit> . they are prominent pharmaceutical targets for diseases such as hypertension, cancer, diabetes, cardiovascular disease, cholesterol gallstone disease, and the metabolic syndrome  <cit> .

nrs form a complex and highly connected dimerisation network. they bind to dna as monomers, homodimers and heterodimers  <cit> . the homodimers and heterodimers can bind to dna elements that are oriented as palindromes, direct repeats, or even everted repeats. the two dimerisation domains, that is the dna binding domain  and ligand binding domain  work in tandem to enable dna binding. according to this two-step hypothesis, the lbd dimerisation interface initiates the formation of the dimer in solution. the formation of the second dimer interface within the dbd restricts the receptors to binding their cognate hormone response elements on the dna  <cit> . the ability of nrs to bind to these differently oriented repeats increases the level of complexity. the elucidation of the dimerisation network for this family is very important because the combination of different nrs in dimers increases the number of genes that they regulate , creates either permissive or non-permissive dimers, combines different signalling pathways on the same promoter, and creates competition for common heterodimeric partners. as an extra level of complexity, nrs can form non-dna-binding dimers using different interfaces. in these interactions, an nr can function as co-activator  <cit>  or it can repress the formation of another functional dna-binding dimer  <cit> .

our goal is to get a global understanding of the nr dimerisation network. for such a systems biology analysis, synthetic approaches are needed, where large-scale experiments like yeast two-hybrid  analyses  <cit> , microarrays  <cit> , protein arrays  <cit> , and text mining of the literature  <cit>  are integrated. while none of these experimental approaches has yet been perfected, they have revealed, for the first time, some of the statistical properties of biological systems, e.g. the scale-free nature of protein-protein interaction, protein-dna interaction, and metabolic networks  <cit> . in these scale-free networks, a small number of proteins are highly connected , whereas the majority are poorly connected   <cit> . it has been proposed that systems with such topologies favour fast information flow  and that they respond rapidly to changes, while exhibiting robustness to mutation or inhibition  <cit> . an effective control of many interdependencies with a minimal number of connections is a feature of biological systems that involve gene regulation  <cit> .

nrs are an extensively researched molecular class and, consequently, the literature corpus for nrs is very large; over  <dig>  articles were retrieved when querying with the generic keyword "nuclear receptor". this fact, combined with the large number of protein family members  and of synonyms  makes the elucidation of the dimerisation network a non-trivial task. therefore, we developed a semi-automated method to scan the literature exhaustively and to try to construct as complete a picture of the nr dimerisation network as possible. in doing this, we also integrated data from previous text-mining efforts  <cit>  and recent human y2h data  <cit> , in order to answer questions relating to the structure and functions of the nr network.

RESULTS
integration of interaction data from various sources
previous work by the koegl group revealed a network of  <dig> interactions among nrs with specific names. the data accumulated by that group combines interaction data obtained from text mining of literature abstracts for the years 1966– <dig>  <cit>  and a y2h screen of nrs  <cit> . no evaluation of the biological significance of the network topology was undertaken.

our text-mining effort, covering abstracts of papers published between january  <dig> and december  <dig> retrieved  <dig> specific protein-protein interactions. the  <dig> interactions were between proteins whose specific name and not the generic name  was used to describe them, e.g. the generic term rxr  could refer to any of the  <dig> paralogues . since paralogues share very similar dimerising dbd and lbd domains, it is often observed that all members of one phylogenetic group will interact with all members of another group, as is the case between the rxr-ppar  and rxr-rar  groups. this has also been observed for the bhlh  <cit>  and bzip  <cit>  families of dimerising tfs. nevertheless, exceptions exist – such as the minor  gene from the nr4a group, which does not interact with rxr  proteins, while its other two paralogues, nur <dig>  and nurr <dig> , do  <cit> . for this reason, we selected only interactions between proteins that have a specific name.

we integrated results from i) our text-mining effort ii) data from the most comprehensive and publicly available protein-protein interaction database, hprd  <cit> , iii) the large-scale y2h experiment in humans  <cit> , and iv) the previous datasets from the koegl group  <cit> , to obtain the complete dataset, with a total of  <dig> nr protein-protein interactions. each of the individual sources has a certain degree of overlap with the others, but it also contributes a number of unique interactions that were not covered in any other source. the contribution of each source and the number of unique interactions is shown in table  <dig> and in additional file  <dig> 

confidence in the protein-protein interactions
using data from literature-mining efforts , large-scale y2h experiments, and phylogenetics, we defined a simple measure of confidence and assigned a level of confidence to every interaction . the first level of confidence  includes  <dig> interactions that have at least two different sources of evidence, . the second level of confidence  includes  <dig> interactions between proteins that have only one source of evidence , but are members of phylogenetic groups that are also linked by at least one l <dig> interaction. for example, the interaction between shp  and rar-gamma  is found only in one large-scale y2h experiment  <cit>  ; nevertheless, there is at least one interaction of level  <dig> between the nr0b and nr1b phylogenetic groups . the use of phylogenetic information allows us to increase the level of confidence that may be attributed to a given interaction. the third level of confidence  includes  <dig> interactions between proteins that have only one source , but there also exists at least another one interaction, with only one source, between other members of these two phylogenetic groups. for example, the interaction between gr  and nur <dig>  is mentioned only once in the literature, but there is at least another interaction  between the nr3c and nr4a phylogenetic groups, that also has only one source of evidence. the fourth level of confidence  includes  <dig> interactions between proteins that have only one source , with no other interaction between proteins of the same two phylogenetic groups. all subsequent analyses reported in this paper are performed by excluding the interactions of level  <dig>  evidently, the interactions attracting most confidence belong to level  <dig>  which have been verified at least twice; whereas, levels  <dig> and  <dig> include interactions assigned moderate confidence, which have been verified by one source and are additionally supported by phylogeny. the interactions in which there is least confidence belong to level  <dig>  for which there is support from only  <dig> source.

topology of the interaction network
we tested the properties of the network that is formed by the dna-binding dimerising interactions, by plotting the log of frequency of proteins with k interactors against the log of k interactors . we found that its distribution of connectivity decays in a similar fashion to a scale-free network . this means that there are a few highly connected proteins-hubs  and many but poorly connected proteins that comprise the peripheral members of the network. a similar observation can be made for another dimerising network of tfs, the bhlhs  <cit> . the same kind of distribution was observed for the network that is formed by the non-dna-binding dimerising interactions, where the hub was shp  ; the log-log plot linear regression r <dig> =  <dig> . nevertheless, this statistical property was not observed when the two networks of nr interactions were merged into one .

the overall topology of the nr protein-protein interaction network that we constructed is in good agreement with several reviews  <cit> , a previous analysis that was performed manually  <cit>  and the two analyses by the koegl group. during the revision process of this manuscript, we also observed that the network is in good agreement with recent and extensive reviews on nuclear receptors  and still contains the most extensive interaction dataset  <cit> .

our own text-mining effort, and integration of all data sources, confirms the overall hub-based structure and the central role of rxr , which is the common heterodimerising partner of  <dig> phylogenetic groups. however, this new analysis also highlights the central role of shp  as an additional hub, which suppresses the function of  <dig> nr phylogenetic groups when it interacts with them. in a sense, shp  functions as a master negative switch due to the lack of a dbd and the presence of a repressor domain  <cit> . there is a distinct difference between the two hubs, rxr  and shp . rxr interactions, mediated by the dimerisation helix  <dig> of the ligand-binding domain, are true nr dimerisations and are a pre-requisite for dna-binding. in contrast, shp  interactions with nrs do not involve the dimerisation domain but require short nr-binding domains  within shp and the af- <dig> coactivator-binding surface within the nr ligand-binding domain. in a sense, shp is a co-repressor hub. we compared this promiscuous interaction pattern of shp with two well-known non-nr co-repressors, ncor <dig> and smrt, and found that these proteins also bind a large number of nrs .

our analysis reveals that the network is even more connected than was originally thought. many interactions exist among peripheral members that are not covered in any generic publicly available database, like hprd. this could be an effect of the distribution of information in the literature. pubmed retrieves over  <dig>  articles when querying with the keyword "nuclear receptor" and a certain sub-set of interactions are repeatedly mentioned, whereas a large number of interactions are mentioned very few times. this fact makes it extremely challenging for any researcher to detect rarely mentioned interactions, assemble a complete view of the interaction map, and update it with new data. to our knowledge, this paper presents the most thorough interaction dataset for nrs compiled to date and also identifies interactions of high confidence.

gene expression validates interaction data and shows a wide tissue expression pattern for nrs
as a quality control of this interaction dataset, gene expression data from normal human and mouse tissues were analysed. we verified that both partners of  <dig> out of  <dig> heterodimerising protein interactions with specific names in human and  <dig> out of  <dig> in mouse were present in at least one of the tissues . for most  of the remaining heterodimerising interactions, one of the interacting partners was not present in any tissue. this may well be due to high-stringency criteria in our gene expression data analysis . the above findings verify the biological significance of the nr interaction network.

the integration of gene expression, protein-protein interactions, and phylogenetic information also indicates the possibility that not all nr interactions have been verified yet. if there are at least two protein-protein interactions among any two phylogenetic groups, then other members of these groups could possibly interact if they are also co-expressed. this is the case for  <dig> pairs of nr proteins for which no interaction is reported. in human, there is at least one tissue where both interacting partners are present in the case of  <dig> out of  <dig> predicted interactions . in mouse, this number rises to  <dig> out of  <dig> predicted interactions. thus, we predict that a significant number of these  <dig> and  <dig> pairs of nrs,  form biologically significant dimers, which remain to be validated.

twenty human and  <dig> mouse nr genes are expressed on average in each of the  <dig> and  <dig> normal human and mouse tissues respectively. moreover,  <dig> nr phylogenetic groups  have at least one paralog  expressed in all  <dig> human tissues. this wide expression pattern is confirmed in  <dig> of these  <dig> families  in mouse, where, there exists at least one paralog , expressed in more than 90%  of the tissues. the widely expressed nr genes and their highly connected network, where the hub rxr  is always present, apparently create a competitive environment for the binding of peripheral members to the hub protein. this extremely competitive environment could be related to the fact that many nr dimers are ligand-activated, thus introducing an additional check-point in the network, in order to reduce noise.

protein-dna interactions and negative feedback loops in the nr network
protein-dna interactions among human nr genes were also retrieved , in order to obtain a better understanding of the nr network. the integration of protein-protein and protein-dna interactions reveals that there may be several negative feedback loops that all share the same component: the co-repressor hub, shp . the activation of several of the peripheral members , will create functional dimers or monomers. these functional proteins in turn, will activate shp. shp will then suppress the activating effect of these peripheral members by binding to them . due to the high sequence identity of the dbd, more than one member from each nr phylogenetic group  could regulate the promoter of shp. this, combined with a conserved interaction domain for shp, could increase the number of negative feedback loops from  <dig>  to  <dig> . the possibility of shp participating in negative feedback loops has been raised previously, but not to such an extent  <cit> . negative feedback loops are essential for establishing oscillations in transcription  <cit> . it has been reported that such loops occur at the post-transcriptional level, where the protein-dna interactions are thought of as the "slow" part , whereas the protein-protein interactions can be thought of as the "fast" part   <cit> . it is intriguing that this negative feedback loop pattern was not observed for the dimerisation hub rxr . it appears that the negative feedback loops occur at the co-repressor level and not at the dimerisation level. regulation at the co-factor level has previously been highlighted as a very important factor of gene regulation  <cit> .

discussion
the genomic era has revealed that dimerising tfs are at the "heart" of animal complexity and deserve a lot of attention, in order to deconstruct and understand the major control circuits of life. it has been observed that the increased complexity of organisms correlates with an increase in control functions per gene; i.e. both the absolute number of tfs and the ratio of that number to the number of genes controlled are increased  <cit>  as organisms become more complex. moreover, hetero-dimerisation has proved to be an efficient and successful strategy for increasing the complexity and range of gene regulation, since it combines already available factors in new control programmes  <cit> . a better understanding of regulatory networks has been achieved in the last few years by studying their architecture, motifs, function and evolution   <cit> .

previous work on the largest eukaryotic family of dimerising tfs , the bhlh family, has revealed that they form complex and conserved dimerisation networks that are not random, but hub-based  <cit> . such topologies evolved by single-gene duplications, domain re-arrangements and possibly whole-genome duplications  <cit>  . we observed that the topology of the dimerisation network for the second largest eukaryotic family of dimerising tfs , the bzips, is also not random, although it is not hub-based. the overall architecture is linked to redox control of dna binding  <cit> . again, this family has a similar evolutionary history  <cit> . in the current study, we focused on the third largest family of dimerising tfs, the nrs, and we observed that they have a hub-based topology, like the bhlhs. for the interactions that form dna-binding dimers, rxr  is the common heterodimerising partner. for the interactions that form non-dna-binding dimers, shp  is the common partner, and functions as a co-repressor. it is intriguing that when, the two networks were studied separately, they revealed their scale-free nature. nevertheless, when they were merged, this property was lost .

since the bhlh and nrs are dimerising tfs that also share a hub-based topology, it is interesting to compare the two families and their networks in order to reveal common features, which could be universal, as well as unique features that characterise each network.

similarities between the bhlh and nr dimerisation networks
fast information flow as a result of high connectivity and hub-based topology  <cit>  seem to be key elements of the nr and bhlh  <cit>  dimerising networks. furthermore, these two networks have both evolved proteins that lack the dbd . id and shp both retain the dimerisation domain and thus inhibit dna binding when they interact with the hub protein , or even with a protein that is a peripheral member of the network. these two networks share not only their topological features but also their evolutionary histories, since they both emerged by two waves of gene duplications – at the origin of metazoa, and the origin of vertebrates. step-wise gene duplications, that lead to new binding specificities and regulation, are a common mechanism in protein complexes  <cit> . alternative models of network evolution also exist, e.g by increasing the protein length, or acquiring regions of disorder and/or internal repeats  <cit> . it appears that evolution favoured the hub-based topology in both cases.

differences between the bhlh and nr dimerisation networks
despite these similarities, the two dimerising networks have a number of distinct features. although rxr  is a potent dimerisation hub, nrs have a great ability to bind dna as monomers or homodimers. in addition, we observed a large number of interactions between peripheral members that were verified both by text-mining and y2h approaches. in the bhlh network, on the other hand, heterodimerisation with the hub is the essential control mechanism. therefore, the role of the hub seems more important in the bhlh network. this results in the network being vulnerable to mutations in the gene encoding the hub protein. nevertheless, the role of the peripheral members should not be underestimated: when they dimerise with the hub, they regulate a large number of genes, thus becoming hubs as well in the overall genetic network. furthermore, the efficiency of the bhlh network is increased since it allows suppression of a large number of peripheral members by suppressing only one protein, the hub.

in the nr network, the ability of several peripheral members to be functional either as monomers or homodimers makes them less dependent on the hub. this may explain why two major mechanisms of suppression have evolved. one uses the couptf  repressor proteins, that compete with several rxr  heterodimers for common dna-binding sites  <cit> . the second exploits the emergence of an nr member  that lacks dna-binding ability, contains inhibitory domains, and not only interacts with the hub, but also interacts with peripheral members that are not entirely dependent on the hub. it would be reasonable to assume that the second mechanism of repression would be the prevalent one. it has been reported, based on rt-pcr experiments  <cit> , that shp  is ubiquitously expressed in rat tissues. paradoxically, however, from our human gene expression data, it appears that couptf  is more widely used than shp. possibly, the highly stringent parameters that we used in our gene-expression analyses underestimated the tissue distribution of shp . nevertheless, the wide gene expression profile of couptf  and the restricted gene expression profile of shp are additionally supported by q-pcr experiments in mouse tissues  <cit> .

one of the advantages of a hub-based topology is economical control at the genome level, since inhibition of the whole system can be easily achieved by evolving a minimal number of repressors that target the hubs.

data integration and static modelling are only the first steps in this new era of "omics" and systems biology. they allow us to capture a snapshot of the global picture, understand the properties of the system as a whole, generate new hypotheses  and perform, in the future, targeted experiments. quantitative measurements of protein-protein, protein-dna binding affinities, and mathematical modelling should be the next steps that would allow us to comprehend, to an unprecedented extent, the biology of nuclear receptors.

CONCLUSIONS
we infer that the topology of this network is hub-based, and much more connected than previously thought. the hub-based topology of the network and the wide tissue expression pattern of nrs create a highly competitive environment for the common heterodimerising partners. furthermore, a significant number of negative feedback loops is present, with the hub protein shp  playing a major role. we also compare the evolution, topology and properties of the nuclear receptor network with the hub-based dimerisation network of the bhlh transcription factors in order to identify both unique themes and ubiquitous properties in gene regulation. in terms of methodology, we conclude that such a comprehensive picture can only be assembled by semi-automated text-mining, manual curation and integration of data from various sources.

