BACKGROUND
plants are constantly exposed to microbial attacks and have developed sophisticated systems to counteract them. plants respond to infection using a two-layers innate immune system  <cit> : a first layer, basal resistance, responds to pathogen-associated molecular patterns . basal resistance is though to be the default defense system that allows limited restriction of pathogen growth. a second layer, gene-for-gene resistance, responds to pathogen virulence factors. both basal and the gene-for-gene induced resistances can generally be divided into three steps. in a first step, the plant throughout different recognition systems detects pamp or virulence effectors of the pathogen; these recognition systems involve pattern recognition receptors  for basal resistance and resistance  genes for gene-for-gene resistance  <cit> . in rice, the transmembrane glycoprotein cebip is the best-characterized example of prr for basal resistance to the fungal pathogen magnaporthe oryzae  <cit> . there is little polymorphism in the case of prr and in the molecular pattern that they recognize. the gene-for-gene recognition system is much more polymorphic. depending on the presence/absence of the r genes and of the corresponding pathogen molecule, the interaction will be incompatible  or compatible .

in a second step, signal transduction occurs and requires regulators such as map kinases  <cit>  and transcription factors  <cit> . these genes that are here collectively called defense regulators are often conserved across species; for example npr <dig> is a central regulator in both monocots and dicots  <cit> . many of these regulator genes are differentially expressed during infection  <cit> .

in a third step, defense responses are induced. these include production of antimicrobial secondary metabolites   <cit> , pathogenesis-related  proteins   <cit> , cell-wall strengthening  <cit>  and programmed cell death, leading to the hypersensitive response   <cit> . the genes that act downstream of the regulators controlling the disease resistance pathways are collectively called defense genes and are typically transcriptionally regulated upon infection.

besides these mechanisms explaining how resistance is built, breeders and biologists use an agnostic but operational term for a phenomenon found in many plant species: partial resistance. partial resistance is first characterized by quantitative limitation of pathogen growth. in rice, partial resistance to the blast fungus m. oryzae is often divided into two main values: the number and the size of lesions  <cit> . another characteristic of partial resistance is that it is controlled by the plant development and usually increases with aging  <cit> . rice is a good model to study partial resistance as breeders have extensively used it, through the identification of quantitative trait loci . there is a considerable amount of genetic data available that was recently reviewed  <cit> . more than  <dig> qtl have been identified and summarized to  <dig> metaqtls. further analysis lead to the identification of an operational set of about  <dig> genomic areas. importantly, this large set of genetic data could be compared to the large set of information available on r gene analogs, regulators and defense genes in rice  <cit> . this analysis showed that, on a global scale, r gene analogs are often found in intervals defining metaqtls  <cit> . this was an expected finding consistent with the hypothesis that partial resistance is due, in part, to defective r genes that recognize with low efficiency pathogens and trigger weak defense response. less expected was the finding that regulator and some defense genes were also significantly associated with metaqtls  <cit> . finally, partial resistance has long been considered as a durable form of resistance. this may be due to the fact that the low levels of resistance conferred by partial resistance do not impose strong selection pressure for the pathogens. this may also be due to particular mechanisms that cannot be easily broken down by pathogens.

preformed, constitutive, physical and chemical barriers likely play a role in partial resistance by limiting the growth of a normally virulent pathogen. they involve cuticle  <cit>  and cell wall strengthening  <cit>  and represent mostly broad-spectrum pathogen resistance. in rice, like in other plants, silicon accumulation plays a direct role in partial resistance by activating some defense mechanisms  <cit>  and an indirect role by deposition beneath the cuticle to form a cuticle-silicon double layer which can mechanically impede penetration by fungi and thereby disrupt the infection process  <cit> . antimicrobial molecules, called phytoanticipins, can also accumulate before infection  <cit> . although there is a large body of evidence that defense genes, especially pathogenesis-related  proteins, are constitutively expressed in uninfected tissues  <cit> , there is no indication of the effect of their level of expression before infection on resistance. in contrast, there are many indications that the over-production of pr proteins confers resistance  <cit> , that mutations in genes negatively regulating disease resistance can increase defense gene expression  or that over-expression of regulator genes acting positively on disease resistance can increase defense gene expression . thus there are indirect evidences that constitutive expression of regulator and defense genes could participate to plant pathogen resistance.

to face pathogen attacks, plants could use a proactive strategy of constitutive expression of inducible defense systems. recently, large-scale expression studies across arabidopsis thaliana cultivars have been completed and showed that gene expression greatly vary from one genotype to another  <cit> . interestingly, the  <dig>  differentially expressed genes were significantly enriched for genes classified as controlling biotic and abiotic responses  <cit> . thus these classes of genes seem to display high expression level polymorphism . however, there is little information of a possible link between these elps and biological traits. elp of major r genes can obviously explain the polymorphism in the disease resistance pathway  <cit> . in these cases, the presence/absence of the resistant r allele explains the elp and the corresponding resistance/susceptibility phenotypes. in the case of partial resistance, there is no evidence that plants show elps of the surveillance receptors and/or regulator and defense systems. our hypothesis is that such expression level polymorphism for receptors, regulator and defense genes belonging to plant disease resistance pathways play a role in partial resistance.

in this study, we wanted to test the hypothesis that, besides inducible defense systems, rice has developed a proactive strategy to face its major fungal pathogen, m. oryzae. for this purpose, we looked for possible links between constitutive levels of expression of genes markers of the disease resistance pathways  in relation to partial resistance. we show that constitutive expression of defense-related genes shows high elp and likely plays a central role in partial resistance to m. oryzae. thus we identify a possible mechanism underlying a phenomenon that has been known and used for a long time with no comprehensive knowledge of what was behind.

RESULTS
sampling rice diversity for partial resistance
the goal of this study was to try to establish possible links between the constitutive expression of defense-related genes and partial resistance. our approach was first to evaluate rice diversity  for partial resistance, trying to avoid resistance phenotypes resulting from gene-for-gene interactions. the analysis of partial resistance thus requires the removal of necrotic, hr-like, lesions that could result from defeated r genes triggering attenuated gene-for-gene resistance  <cit> . to meet this criterion, we selected rice/m. oryzae interactions that were as close as possible to compatibility. based on preliminary results , we selected  <dig> rice cultivars. we also included five rice accessions that are commonly used in the research community and for which genomic and/or genetic information exists . these cultivars represent 57% of overall rice allelic diversity, 51% for japonica sub-group and 55% for the indica sub-group as estimated by allelic diversity of microsatellites markers . these  <dig> rice accessions were inoculated with four multivirulent isolates with broad-spectrum virulence , and partial resistance was estimated. an index was created for partial resistance that measures fungal growth in planta as quantified by q-pcr . in calculating the partial resistance index, we were careful to remove as much as possible background gene-for-gene interactions. these were manifested by extremely low quantities of fungal growth and/or hr-like lesions. out of  <dig> rice accessions tested,  <dig> were finally selected as representing most of partial resistance quantitative diversity. the genotypes showing high resistance against all m. oryzae strains  were removed from the analysis as they likely reflect complete resistance driven by major r-genes. the well-known susceptible japonica genotypes sariceltik and maratelli were also found susceptible in this analysis. the indica genotype padi-boenor occurred to be the most susceptible in this assay. thus, a total of  <dig> rice accessions were characterized for partial resistance to rice blast disease and bacterial blight .

from this analysis, it appears that rice accessions from the tropical japonica sub-group were over-represented among accessions with elevated levels of partial resistance to rice blast . partial resistance index ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig>  . thus partial resistance to blast fungus is highly variable across rice diversity and can vary up to 23-fold. there was no obvious correlation between partial resistance to blast and bacterial blight.

constitutive expression of defense as a better indicator of partial resistance than inducible expression
we first address the question of the relative roles of inducible and constitutive expression of selected defense-related genes in partial resistance. for this purpose, we designed an experiment with a limited number of marker genes  and six representative rice accessions. this experiment was repeated three times independently to monitor gene expression before infection and  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> days post-inoculation .

this experiment indicated that most of the defense-related genes selected were induced after infection . in order to compare partial resistance to gene expression, we built an expression index that takes into account the expression values of all genes . we could then compare the partial resistance index to the expression indexes at the different times before and after infection .

regression analysis  suggests that there is a good correlation between both indexes before infection  but no statistically significant correlation of these indexes after infection. thus the data on expression of this selected marker genes evaluated on this small set of rice cultivars suggests that expression before infection, more than after infection, correlates with partial resistance.

the level of constitutive expression of defense-related genes is highly polymorphic across rice diversity
we wanted to further extend this analysis to a larger set of rice genes and accessions. we measured constitutive gene expression of  <dig> genes representative of the rice defense arsenal  in the  <dig> rice accessions for which we measured partial resistance . constitutive expression was measured in seven independent experiments at the time when inoculation is usually performed and when partial resistance has started to develop .

when treated individually, the constitutive expression of each gene revealed several points . first, we observed an important variability of the expression levels across cultivars. for example, the expression level of the classical defense gene pbz <dig> vary up to 35-fold , with a value of  <dig>  in one of the most susceptible cultivar, sariceltik, and a value of  <dig>  in the most resistant cultivar, moroberekan . second, the pattern of constitutive expression was sometimes different between the indica and japonica rice sub-groups .

we used hierarchical clustering to identify groups of genes that were co-regulated across rice diversity . several groups of genes that are co-regulated were found, as supported by bootstrap analysis. the first group  contains both pr genes and regulatory genes . the second group  mostly contains pr genes . the third group  consists in a last large group of genes that contains both regulatory and pr genes. the last group  contains genes involved in recognition  and signal transduction .

hierarchical clustering of the data also confirmed that the genetic background considerably affects constitutive expression of the selected genes . for instance, the sub-group of tropical japonica rice appeared clearly different from the other genetic groups of rice. this difference is mostly due to genes from regulons i and ii. thus, rice cultivars from different sub-groups display contrasting capacities to express defense-related genes before infection, suggesting contrasting regulation capacities.

the level of constitutive expression of defense-related genes strongly correlates with partial resistance across rice diversity
it was noteworthy from previous observations that the tropical japonica subgroup is also the genetic sub-group displaying the highest partial resistance index in our analyses . in order to search for global correlations between constitutive expression of tested genes and the measured partial resistance index, the expression data of the  <dig> selected defense-related genes in the  <dig> rice genotypes was analyzed using the expression index already used . we found a strong correlation between constitutive expression of defense-related genes and partial resistance . thus, the previous observation on a small subset of rice diversity  holds true when tested on a sample of cultivars representing a large subset of rice diversity. similar results were also found when separately testing indica and japonica sub-groups .

using principal component analysis  and anova , we could identify the genes that, in our selection, were the most significantly reflecting the correlation between constitutive expression of defense and partial resistance. the pbz <dig> gene from regulon i was found to be the best marker of constitutive expression of defense-related genes across indica and japonica rice sub-groups. thus, for the pbz <dig> gene, the observed correlation between constitutive expression and partial resistance holds true for almost all the  <dig> rice genotypes tested, despite the diversity explored. another gene from regulon i, the spl <dig> gene, appeared to be a good marker for indica genotypes. the burp and gluc genes from regulon ii were good markers for the japonica sub-group. overall, this analysis across rice diversity suggests that constitutive expression of defense-related genes and partial resistance are highly correlated.

constitutive expression of defense-related genes is developmentally controlled
partial resistance is well known to increase along plant development  <cit> . in particular, in rice there is a strong difference between resistance to blast in a 2-weeks old plant  and resistance in a 3-week old plant . it is also quite common that the last emerged leaf  is often more susceptible than the leaf that emerged one week before . we thus tested whether constitutive expression of defense-related genes was following the same developmental patterns. we chose the tropical japonica cultivars moroberekan and azucena, as they are good representative of constitutive expression of defense-related genes . constitutive expression of defense-related genes was measured in plants aged from  <dig> to  <dig> weeks, on two different leaves . as shown in figure  <dig>  the expression of these defense-related genes followed the same developmental pattern than partial resistance with a strong increase in expression between two and three weeks after sowing. this was true for the eight marker genes tested . this increase of expression was maintained for half of the genes tested. we have yet no explanation for the decrease of expression of some genes like rbbi <dig> later in development. we also observed that constitutive expression of defense-related genes was overall higher in leaf n- <dig> than in leaf n , a pattern very similar to age-related partial resistance. thus, this striking parallel between partial resistance and expression of defense-related genes during plant development further supports our hypothesis that partial resistance can be explained by constitutive expression of defense-related genes.

constitutive level of sa and ethylene do not explain partial resistance
there is a previous report that salicylic acid  a signaling molecule involved in disease resistance could play a role in partial resistance of rice to m. oryzae  <cit> . jasmonic acid   <cit>  and ethylene  <cit>  are also identified as important signaling molecules in plant disease resistance. we asked whether these signaling molecules could relate to constitutive expression of defense-related genes. we evaluated the sa and ethylene pathways by direct quantification of total sa and ethylene in 3-week old plants. we monitored the implication of the ja pathway by using the marker gene rci <dig>  <cit> .

the constitutive expression of rci <dig> did not correlate with partial resistance to m. oryzae . thus the ja constitutive levels, as monitored by the rci <dig> gene, do not seem to contribute to partial resistance.

total sa and ethylene were directly extracted and quantified. the amount of these two molecules was very different across rice diversity . in each rice sub-group, the constitutive quantities of sa or ethylene were similar in rice accessions showing elevated and weak partial resistance . we could not detect any correlation between the level of partial resistance and the levels of sa or ethylene . however, we observed that constitutive amounts of sa are 2-fold higher in indica cultivars than in japonica cultivars and this difference is statistically significant . conversely, the constitutive levels of ethylene were higher in japonica than in indica cultivars . thus, sa and ethylene constitutive levels negatively correlate . although we detected a high level of polymorphism for sa and ethylene in rice, we could not find any correlation between these molecules and partial resistance, nor with constitutive expression of defense-related genes.

co-localization of qtls controlling constitutive expression of defense-related genes and qtls for partial resistance
a prediction of our hypothesis is that we should be able to find areas of the rice genome that control both constitutive expression of defense-related genes and partial resistance. in order to identify such regions, we initiated a qtl analysis on gene expression. expression data has been recently used as quantitative traits for qtl analysis  <cit> . the resulting qtls are called eqtls, for expression qtls. two types of eqtls are expected: cis-eqtls that are located at the same locus that the gene monitored for expression  and trans-eqtls that are located at another locus.

we used two japonica x indica mapping populations: the moroberekan x co <dig> population with  <dig> recombinant inbred lines   <cit>  and the azucena x ir <dig> population with  <dig> rils  <cit> . among the genes tested in this study , we looked for genes that would show the strongest constitutive expression polymorphism between the parents of the available ril populations . the burp and chi genes showed the strongest polymorphism and were chosen for eqtl analysis. for each mapping population, two to three independent experiments were done in which constitutive expression of these genes was monitored as well as disease symptoms and used as quantitative traits.

the figure  <dig> shows the eqtl and qtl detected with lod >  <dig>  in at least two independent experiments . three eqtls  for the burp gene and three eqtls for the chi gene  were found. most of them were trans eqtls. one cis-eqtl was detected for the chi gene. quite remarkably, two eqtls were common to the chi and the burp genes, suggesting that the constitutive expression of these genes could be controlled by the same locus. the eqtls for burp and chi found on chromosomes  <dig> and  <dig> respectively were observed in both mapping populations, further supporting the existence of eqtls in these regions. in all cases the favorable allele increasing constitutive expression was from the tropical japonica parental line . for the burp gene, this is consistent with the observed positive correlation between constitutive expression of this gene and partial resistance in japonica but not indica sub-group .

twelve qtls for blast partial resistance were found . it was striking that two of these qtls, one on chromosome  <dig>  and one on chromosome  <dig>  are co-localizating with eqtl. this is the first genetic evidence that the control of constitutive expression of a defense-related genes could account for partial resistance.

discussion
the expression of defense-related genes and molecules is highly polymorphic in rice
we decided to use rice diversity in order to establish a role of constitutive expression of defense-related genes in partial resistance. we analyzed  <dig> rice cultivars that were randomly selected in the two major groups of indica and japonica. these cultivars represent up to 57% of rice diversity and thus can be considered as a representative sample. in order to evaluate partial resistance for magnaporthe oryzae, we generated an index that mostly takes into account fungal growth. complete resistance driven by specific gene-for-gene interactions was removed. overall, our quantitative index correlates with other measurements of partial resistance like lesion number .

partial resistance to blast fungus did not correlate with quantitative resistance to rice blight . this may be due to different lifestyles of the fungal pathogen  and bacterial pathogen  tested. this may also be due to the fact that partial resistance to blast was evaluated on 3-weeks old plants whereas resistance to bacterial blight was evaluated on 8-weeks old plants. finally, resistance to blight may not involve the same components that resistance to blast.

the genes that were used to measure constitutive expression are representative of the disease resistance pathway. most of the regulators have been demonstrated to be positive regulators of resistance by mutant analysis . many of the defense genes studied have also been shown to increase resistance in plants that are over-expressing them  <cit> . finally, the osks <dig> gene was selected as a representative gene for the momilactone biosynthetic pathway, one of the major rice phytoalexin  <cit> .

it was clear from our analysis that constitutive expression of the defense-related genes selected was highly polymorphic across rice diversity . this analysis revealed that the tropical japonica sub-group displays a unique capacity to express defense-related genes before infection . this observation likely reflects that these genotypes possess polymorphic and/or unique regulators of disease resistance.

the constitutive amounts of signaling molecules like salicylic acid and ethylene is also extremely polymorphic , especially between indica and japonica cultivars. comparing this polymorphism to expression polymorphism of other plant metabolic pathways would tell us whether these elp  are comparable or not. an analysis in arabidopsis suggests that defense-related genes display elevated elps as compared to genes belonging to other pathways  <cit> . it is also noteworthy that sequence polymorphism of defense-related genes is low in arabidopsis  <cit> . it is thus likely that disease resistance polymorphism results more from expression than from polymorphism at the protein level, with the exception of gene-for-gene polymorphism.

preformed defense, but not induced defense, is a hallmark of partial resistance to the rice blast fungus
our hypothesis was that the constitutive expression of defense-related genes was contributing to partial resistance. this was initially based on observation on a few rice cultivars and genes . this was also motivated by several piece of literature reporting that physical barriers  <cit>  and preformed antimicrobial molecules  <cit>  play an important role in disease resistance. we thus addressed the question of a putative contribution of defense-related genes in general in partial resistance. we built an index of gene expression where all genes participate to the same extent to the final value . when compared to the index of partial resistance, we found a very strong correlation between constitutive expression of defense-related genes and partial resistance . this correlation was extremely robust as we observed it in seven independent experiments in the past two years. we conclude that this constitutive expression of defense-related genes is a preformed defense system that contributes to partial resistance.

the group of tropical japonica cultivars showed an atypical pattern of constitutive expression of defense-related genes . these cultivars also displayed a high index of partial resistance and of constitutive expression of defense. this observation suggests that this rice sub-group harbors a particular preformed defense system.

some genes like the regulatory gene spl <dig> and the pr gene pbz <dig> were good markers of preformed defense . the only prr gene tested here, the cebip gene, was not a good marker of preformed defense. cloned r genes  <cit>  and more recently identified receptor-like genes   <cit>  need to be tested to determine if constitutive expression of defense-related genes involves all steps of the basal and gene-for-gene resistance pathways. finding more genes with an expression pattern correlated to partial resistance will help us to build gene sets to further studying preformed defense.

there was no obvious correlation between partial resistance and expression after infection of the defense-related genes tested . since the infection process of rice by m. oryzae occurs very early after inoculation, it is possible that we underscored early time points . it remains possible that gene expression in the very early steps of infection also correlate with partial resistance. it is also extremely difficult to estimate the part of partial resistance that can be attributed to preformed and induced defense. identifying genes that control preformed but not induced defense could help defining the respective contribution of each system. without rejecting the probable contribution of induced defense in partial resistance, our results strongly suggest that constitutive expression of defense-related genes highly contributes to partial resistance.

preformed defense parallels the developmental control of partial resistance
one of the best evidence for a contribution of preformed defense to partial resistance comes from the observation that these two phenomena are coordinated during development. partial resistance is well known in rice to be developmentally regulated  <cit> . when we measured constitutive expression of defense-related genes, we observed that this expression was following the increase of partial resistance during plant growth. the constitutive expression of all genes tested dramatically increase between juvenile  and young adult plants  . such a massive effect suggests that there is a major control of development on the expression of preformed defense. recently, zhao et al  <cit>  also observed that the constitutive expression of the r genes xa3/xa <dig> and xa <dig> were developmentally controlled. this could easily explain in this case why gene-for-gene resistance driven by these genes was effective in adult plants but not in juvenile plants. finding common regulatory points between development and defense may help us understanding how partial resistance is developmentally controlled.

the regulation of preformed defense has yet to be identified
in order to get further insights on the way preformed defense is deployed by rice, we tested the implication of three signaling pathways controlled by salicylic acid, jasmonic acid and ethylene in constitutive expression of defense-related genes. we did not find evidence that these pathways were involved. this was unexpected for the sa pathway since previous report  <cit>  suggested that constitutive sa levels were correlated to m. oryzae resistance. when we closely examined this report, we found out that the disease index used by silverman and colleagues was not defined and that disease resistance in their case most likely correlated with indica/japonica differences. this could simply reflect the fact that some m. oryzae isolates are better adapted on one rice sub-group than on another. we circumvented this difficulty by trying to incorporate in our disease index only partial resistance as monitored by using multivirulent isolates of m. oryzae. we conclude that neither constitutive expression of sa, ja nor ethylene pathway correlates with elp of defense-related genes.

alternatively, preformed defense could result from the leakage of the disease resistance pathways. for example, assuming that some signaling is constantly triggered by the environment, rice cultivars having efficient but leaky regulatory pathways would also display elevated levels of defense-related genes in the absence of infection. this mechanism would require positive regulators of disease resistance to be very active and negative regulators to be quite inactive. this mechanism would be similar to the mechanism by which the barley mlo gene confers resistance to powdery mildew. the mlo gene is a negative regulator of disease resistance and recessive alleles  of this gene confer broad-spectrum resistance  <cit> . some mlo alleles are weak negative regulators such that the plant constitutively expresses parts of the disease resistance pathway, leading to spontaneous cell-death that resembles hr  <cit> .

forward genetics is one way to identify the genes that regulate preformed defense. using qtl mapping, we show that preformed defense is amenable for genetics. several regions of the rice genome controlling preformed expression of the chi and burp genes were identified . the architecture of this control is probably complex since our analysis of only two genes revealed six eqtls. however, the observation that the burp and chi belong to the same regulon  is consistent with the observation that two eqtls are common to these genes . these regions of chromosome  <dig> and  <dig> may contain regulators of preformed defense that are specific to the tropical japonica sub-groups. fine mapping of these regions will help us identify the genes that control preformed defense and partial resistance.

more importantly, we show the first genetic evidence that two eqtls controlling constitutive expression of the chi and burp genes co-localize with two qtls for partial resistance. given the number of genetic markers used for mapping , the number of qtl  and eqtl  found, the probability to find such co-localizations was very low . a more detailed analysis will be necessary to establish a functional relationship between these two phenomena.

interestingly, one of the eqtl controlling chi constitutive expression co-localizes with the chi structural gene on chromosome  <dig>  thus this eqtl could be a cis-eqtl. we did not find a potential cis-eqtl for the burp gene, suggesting that constitutive expression for this gene is mostly controlled in trans. given the yet imprecise position of the eqtls, the eqtl controlling the chi around the rg <dig> marker could also be a trans eqtl. in such a case, this region around rg <dig> marker on chromosome  <dig> could be a common regulator of constitutive expression for burp and chi.

our qtl analysis already pinpoints some regulatory candidates that co-localize  with several eqtls. the eqtl on chromosome  <dig> co-localizes with oswrky <dig>  <cit> . this transcription factor has been shown to be involved in blast disease resistance as plants over-expressing oswrky <dig> show enhanced resistance to this pathogen. plants over-expressing oswrky <dig> also displayed constitutive, elevated, levels of expression of defense-related genes but pbz <dig> was down-regulated. thus this gene is unlikely a good candidate for regulating preformed defense. the eqtl on chromosome  <dig>  co-localizes with the osdr <dig>  <cit>  and the cigr <dig>  <cit>  genes. preliminary analysis of the cigr <dig> mutant suggests that this gene is not responsible for the eqtl . the osdr <dig> gene is involved in the vitamin b <dig> biosynthesis pathway and in thiamine accumulation  <cit>  is also found within  <dig> mb of the rg <dig> marker on chromosome  <dig>  interestingly, plants silenced for osdr <dig> show increased susceptibility to m. oryzae and reduced accumulation, before infection  of several pr genes, including pox <dig> but not pbz <dig>  this is only partly consistent with a possible role of osdr <dig> in preformed of defense. consistent with the implication of the thiamine pathway in preformed defense, thiamine is known to be an inducer of defenses in plants, including rice  <cit> . finally, the eqtl close to marker rg <dig> on chromosome  <dig> co-localizes with the rtga <dig>  gene  <cit> . although silencing of the rtga <dig>  gene increased the constitutive expression of defense-related genes, it is yet unknown whether this mutation affects resistance to m. oryzae. such attempt to co-localize known regulatory genes with eqtl is overall risky and fine mapping will be required to identify the genes explaining these eqtls.

preformed defense systems as a way to respond to environmental stresses in plants
plants have evolved sophisticated inducible systems to respond to pathogen challenge  <cit> . expression level polymorphism  has been shown to be important for the gene-for-gene resistance pathway  but there was up to now no indication that elp could play a role in partial resistance. by looking at elp in partial resistance of rice to m. oryzae, we provide several lines of evidence that constitutive expression of defense-related genes correlates with partial resistance in naturally occurring diversity. this is the first evidence of the role of constitutive expression of defense-related genes in disease resistance. plants have deployed such a proactive strategy to face abiotic stresses  <cit> . for example, a large portion of the genes that are normally induced by zinc stress in arabidopsis thaliana are constitutively highly expressed in a. halleri, a species of the arabidopsis genus showing enhanced tolerance to zinc. thus, constitutive expression of zinc-responsive genes has been proposed as a mechanism by which a. halleri naturally increases its tolerance to zinc  <cit> . using a similar approach, taji et al  <cit>  showed that a large number of abiotic or biotic stress-inducible arabidopsis thaliana genes were expressed under normal growth conditions in salt cress , a naturally salt tolerant plant specie. thus plants seem to have evolved proactive, non-inducible systems to face abiotic stresses.

therefore, it appears that constitutive expression of the adapted repertoire of genes is a general strategy used by plants to face environmental pressure. this is consistent with our current knowledge on trait evolution which poses that regulatory polymorphism might better account for phenotypical variability than structural polymorphism  <cit> .

fitness benefits and costs of preformed defenses
fitness costs can explain the evolution and maintenance of induced resistance in plants. in fact, it is generally believed that inducible defenses have evolved to save energy under enemy free conditions, but costs still arise upon activation of these defenses under hostile condition  <cit> . however, van hulten et al  <cit>  have shown that benefits of priming-mediated resistance outweigh its cost if the environment imposes relatively high levels of disease pressure. thus preformed defense may not be so costly, assuming a high and constant pressure from the pathogen.

we find that preformed expression of defense-related genes in rice affects rice blast but not bacterial blight resistance. during evolution in rice, a constant infection pressure by m. oryzae must have driven the selection towards this phenotype. indeed, rice and m. oryzae have been found associated for a very long time  <cit> . it is thus possible that during evolution, a constant infection pressure by m. oryzae must have driven the selection towards the maintenance of preformed defenses, because in this recurrent disease environment, preformed defenses benefits outweigh its costs.

CONCLUSIONS
past research has largely focused on inducible mechanisms to explain disease resistance. we provide three lines of evidence that constitutive expression of defense-related genes significantly contributes to partial resistance. the role of preformed defense is supported by our diversity analysis, our analysis of the phenomenon during development and genetic evidence. besides the fundamental aspect of this finding, this work also has important consequences for the breeding strategies. although indica and japonica sub-groups show some differences in their ability to express preformed defense, this study shows that constitutive expression of defense-related genes is a good prediction tool for identifying rice accessions with elevated partial resistance, a form of durable resistance. it remains to establish whether this phenomenon is observed in other plant species. we encourage colleagues to revisit their repertoire of inducible genes in the light of our finding.

