BACKGROUND
diabetes mellitus  is one of the most widely occurring metabolic disorders throughout the world which is characterized by chronic hyperglycemia as a result of insulin resistance or defect in insulin secretion. defects in insulin secretion and/or action, results in increased blood glucose levels and the condition is termed as dm. type  <dig> dm represents 90-95% of the cases and the individuals affected by this disorder generally have insulin resistance and a relative insulin deficiency  <cit> . even though, there are several medicines available for diabetic management, they are associated with significant side effects that affect the quality of life. herbal preparations also play a vital role in diabetic management. various drug targets have been detailed for dm and the need for systematic evaluation of herbal therapeutics at molecular level has been urged to be included in medical practices  <cit> . intense molecular studies on herbal remedies and the elucidation of their molecular mechanisms will bring out a potentially powerful anti-diabetic therapy and will be immensely beneficial to patients.

many indigenous plants with different biochemical properties have been reported to possess anti-diabetic properties. costus pictus d. don  is one such native plant of mexico and was introduced to india in recent years. it has gained increased popularity in recent years due to its anti-diabetic properties and is commonly called as “insulin plant” or “spiral ginger”  <cit> . the leaves of this plant have been reported to possess anti-diabetic properties  <cit> . a patent has been filed: “preparation process and a regenerative method and technique for prevention, treatment and glycemic control of diabetes mellitus using costus pictus extract” which describes that oral supplementation of c. pictus  per day brings down the blood glucose levels in diabetic patients  <cit> ; however, no commercial anti-diabetic product is available yet. various hypotheses, on the possible mechanisms responsible for the anti-diabetic potential of the plant include i) suppression of carbohydrate hydrolysing enzymes like α-amylase and α-glucosidase  <cit> , ii) stimulation of insulin secretory response by increasing ca2+ influx through voltage gated ca2+ channels  <cit> , iii) β-amyrin as being the active and responsible component  <cit> , and iv) ptp1b inhibition and irβ–pi3k activation  <cit> . however, the exact mechanism of action of the leaves is still elusive. the anti-diabetic properties of the leaves are strongly supported by their anti-oxidant properties  <cit> . there have also been reports on the leaves that they work against cancer  <cit> . the leaves are also suggested to act as anti-bacterial and anti-glycation agents  <cit> . c. pictus is also known to be a powerful diuretic agent which is used in treatment of renal disorders  <cit> .

genomic analysis of c. pictus, a non-model medicinal plant, is limited by the small quantity of publicly available sequence data. however, the emergence of next generation sequencing has paved the way for large scale sequencing of several non-model plants which can be valuable in investigating the basis of medicinal properties of such plants. different next generation sequencing  technologies and their potential applications in plant biology including transcriptome investigations have been reviewed  <cit> . strategies and tools which can be employed in transcriptome studies of non-model plants using second generation sequencing have been discussed  <cit> . non-model plants that have been recently sequenced include daucus cicer arietinum l. <cit> , carota var. sativus l. <cit> , hevea brasiliensis <cit> , sesamum indicum l. <cit> , ipomoea batatas <cit> , camellia sinensis <cit> , acacia auriculiformis, acacia mangium <cit> , cajanus cajan l.  <cit> , euphorbia fischeriana <cit> , myrica rubra <cit> , and many others are in progress. even though many plant species are reported to be of anti-diabetic importance, the only plant that was reported to be sequenced is gynostemma pentaphyllum <cit> . we have undertaken an ngs based approach to sequence the c. pictus transcriptome in order to identify and characterize transcripts potentially contributing to the observed medicinal properties. we have confirmed the presence of a precursor to bixin viz putative norbixin methyltransferase. this study will aid in the understanding of the therapeutic potential of c. pictus and serve as a valuable resource for numerous researchers working on developing treatments for dm. availability of this transcriptomic data in public domains will also enable genome wide comparative studies of closely related medicinal plants of anti-diabetic importance.

RESULTS
sequencing and quality control
a total of  <dig> million,  <dig> base paired-end reads  were generated by the illumina genome analyzer iix sequencer. the raw paired-end sequence data in fastq format is deposited in the national centre for biotechnology information's  short read archive  database under the accession number sra <dig>  raw reads were subjected to quality control using seqqc. high quality  bases were more than 97% in both the forward and the reverse  reads. percentage of unresolved bases  was observed to be very minimal . the results also showed that the average phred scaled quality score  was above  <dig>  at all base positions in both the reads indicating a very high quality sequencing run. after processing adapter sequences and low quality sequences from the raw data,  <dig> , <dig> high quality reads  were retained. these high quality, processed paired-end reads were used to assemble into contigs and further into transcripts.

de novo assembly
de novo assembly of the processed reads using velvet yielded  <dig>  contigs. a k-mer of  <dig> resulted in an optimal assembly in comparison to other k-mer assemblies based on different assembly quality parameters like n <dig> length, average contig length, total length of the contigs, total number of contigs, longest contig length and number of ns. the contigs were further assembled into transcripts using the transcriptome assembly software, oases. transcripts which were shorter than  <dig> bases in length were filtered out, resulting in  <dig>  transcripts. the lengths of the assembled transcripts are represented as a bar chart .

number of unresolved bases  was found to be very minimal . total length of the transcripts was observed to be  <dig> , <dig> bases  and average length of the transcripts was approximately  <dig> bases . the transcripts were found to be marginally at-rich -  <dig> % .

n <dig> is a statistic widely used to assess the quality of sequence assembly. higher the n <dig> value better is the assembly. the n <dig> in our assembly was found to be  <dig>  bases, which was higher than most other plant transcriptome assemblies published, barring a few exceptions . the assembled transcript sequences are deposited at ncbi's transcriptome shotgun assembly  sequence database and are assigned genbank accession numbers .

functional annotation
functional annotation of novel plant transcriptomes is a challenging task due to the limited availability of reference genome/gene sequences in public databases. being a non-model plant and without much availability of reference sequences in the databases, it is challenging to predict accurate annotations for the transcripts. in order to maximise annotation percentages, six different databases , were mined. this strategy resulted in  <dig> % of the transcripts being annotated. although the trembl database and the all viridiplantae mrna database from genbank lacked proper annotation, they were included to increase the possibility of annotating the unknown transcripts which do not have significant similarity in well annotated databases. a six-way venn diagram was constructed to depict the sharing of transcripts annotated by the six databases .

pathway annotation
pathways possibly contributing to anti-diabetic, anti-oxidant, antimicrobial, anti-glycation and antitumor properties of c. pictus leaves reported earlier  <cit>  were studied. the plantcyc database was used to annotate  <dig>  transcripts and was vital in retrieving pathways specifically from plants. terpenoids, also called isoprenoids, are a large group of secondary metabolites which are reported to function in communication and defense, as antitumor, as anti-malarial and as anti-diabetic agents  <cit> . we focused on studying terpenoid pathways along with other secondary metabolite pathways  to identify clues related to the medicinal properties of the plant with the help of plantcyc annotations.

the observed terpenoid pathways are represented in a pie-chart . a major share of the transcripts related to terpenoid pathways was noticed to be from bixin biosynthesis  and geraniol and geraniol biosynthesis  pathways which have been implicated with anti-diabetic functions  <cit> . abscisic acid  biosynthesis  transcripts observed are also reported to have anti-diabetic functions  <cit> . anti-oxidant properties have been reported in some of the by-products from the annotated pathways which include bixin  <cit> , astaxanthene, canthaxanthene  <cit> , all-trans-lycopene, lutein  <cit> , crocetin  <cit> , gossypol  <cit> , saponins  <cit> , oleoresin  <cit>  and this correlates with the strong anti-oxidant properties of c. pictus. transcripts corresponding to menthol biosynthetic pathway were also found to occur predominantly ; the end-product menthol might contribute to the antitumor proeprties  <cit> . the other by-products from the annotated pathways which could potentially render the antitumor properties include taxol  <cit> , all-trans-lycopene  <cit> , geraniol  <cit> , bixin  <cit> , astaxanthene  <cit> , crocetin  <cit> , gossypol  <cit> , vincristine and vinblastine  <cit>  and perillyl alcohol  <cit> . transcripts, corresponding to mevalonate pathway i, were observed to be in  <dig> % of the transcripts annotated for terpenoid pathway. isopentyl diphosphate  and its isomer dimethylallyl diphosphate , the end-products of mevalonate pathway, are the universal precursors of the terpenoid category  <cit> . transcripts related to artemisinin biosynthetic pathway were also observed in pathway annotations; artemisinin, the end-product of the pathway is a proven anti-malarial agent  <cit> . the annotations of transcripts relating to biosynthetic pathways of linalool, farnesene, bergamotene, capsidiol, gossypol, saponins, oleoresin, isopimaric acid, phytoalexins and sesquiterpenoid phytoalexins suggest that they might provide the plant with either anti-microbial or insect/herbivore defense. the other transcript annotations related to biosynthetic pathways include those of phaesic acid, palunotol, gibberelins and fenchol.

annotations from other secondary metabolite pathways also provide us information about certain phytochemicals . 4-coumarate-coa ligase transcripts, which were predominantly observed, are intermediates in a lot of metabolic pathways, indicating their pivotal roles in plant metabolism. a major chunk of the flavonoid biosynthetic pathway transcripts  was contributed by transcripts annotated as 4-coumarate-coa ligase. transcript annotations from scopoletin biosynthesis  were also found to occur. scopoletin is known to be involved in plant defense mechanisms  <cit> . myricetin, an intermediary metabolite from the observed syringetin biosynthetic pathway, is known to possess anti-oxidative and anti-diabetic properties  <cit> . transcript annotations related to anthocyanin metabolism  include rose anthocyanin, shisonin, pelargonidin, and gentiodelphin. leucopelargonidin and leucocyanidin biosynthetic pathway, precursor to leucodelphinidin biosynthesis, was also noticed in the annotations. we also observed transcripts corresponding to chalcone 2'-o-glucosyltransferase and aurone which are known for providing yellow coloration. antitumor properties might also have been obtained from the observed coumarin  <cit>  and quercetin  <cit>  biosynthetic pathways. insect resistance could have also been rendered by the presence of glycosyl transferases, pinobanksin and glyceollin biosynthetic pathways. other general pathways to which the transcripts showed similarity include flavonol biosynthesis i, isoflavonoid biosynthesis i and ii.

gene ontology  annotation
the swiss-prot database annotation covered  <dig> % of the transcripts and go terms were derived based on the annotation information . the three categories of go cellular component, molecular function and biological process were represented by  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig>  terms respectively .

in the biological process category, classes related to dna-dependent transcription  and dna-dependent regulation of transcription  were observed to be occurring most frequently. defense response was represented in many a number of pathways from pathway annotations. c. pictus is commonly known for its insect resistance properties and is a common factor in herbal plants, which was reflected in the occurrence of defense response among the top biological process category. in the molecular function category, atp binding  was found to be the most abundant class. the most frequently occurring go terms within cellular components include integral to membrane , nucleus  and plasma membrane .

kog annotation
the eukaryotic clusters  present in the cluster of orthologous groups  database are made up of protein sequences from arabidopsis thaliana, caenorhabditis elegans, drosophila melanogaster, homo sapiens, saccharomyces cerevisiae, schizosaccharomyces pombe and encephalitozoon cuniculi. the kog proteins from the eukaryotic clusters were used to annotate  <dig>  transcripts and with the help of the annotations, we were able to assign kog terms to each annotation . the kog classifications with multiple assignments were individually assessed and assigned to transcripts .

cellular processes and signalling  was found to be the major category from the kog classifications, of which signal transduction mechanisms were found to be prominent  followed by post translational modification, protein turnover, chaperones  and intracellular trafficking, secretion and vesicular transport . in the information storage and processing category, transcription , translation, ribosomal structure and biogenesis  and rna processing and modification  were observed to be highly occurring. in the metabolism category, the frequently observed classes were carbohydrate transport and metabolism , lipid transport and metabolism , amino acid transport and metabolism , energy production and conversion . our focus on the secondary metabolite transcripts and a fair representation of secondary metabolites biosynthesis, transport and catabolism transcripts in kog classification  further attests the data integrity both at sequencing as well as analysis levels. from the poor characterized annotations, general function prediction only represented  <dig> % and function unknown represented  <dig> %, which is quite expected since c. pictus is remotely similar to the organisms originally present in the eukaryotic kog database.

pfam annotation
using interproscan,  <dig>  transcripts were annotated against pfam domains  and the highly occurring pfam domains were plotted as a bar chart . the aim of this approach was to identify similarity at domain level, where the proteins have little similarity at sequence level but might share conserved structural domains.

protein kinase  domain along with protein tyrosine kinase  domain were represented the most in transcripts indicating strong signal transduction mechanisms. wd <dig> repeat domains which also have significance in signal transduction mechanisms were also observed. myb domain  annotations, significant for being transcription factors with a wide range of functions, were observed in pfam transcript annotations and corresponded to the observance of a lot of myb class proteins from swiss-prot annotations: my1r <dig>  myb <dig>  myb <dig>  myb <dig>  myb <dig>  myb <dig>  myb <dig>  myb <dig>  myb <dig>  myb <dig>  myb <dig>  myba <dig>  mybc, mybf and mybp. the other frequently occurring domain was cytochrome p <dig>  which mediates oxidation of organic substances. rna recognition motif , pentatricopeptide repeats , mn++ or mg++ dependent protein serine/threonine phosphatase domains , mitochondrial carrier domains  and zinc-finger related ring protein domains  were also highly represented in transcript annotations.

final annotation table
even though individual database annotations were used to interpret findings, a final annotation table was obtained in order to arrive at a single best annotation for each transcript. after deriving the best annotation for each transcript from multiple databases , the final annotations comprised  <dig>   transcripts from swiss-prot database,  <dig>   transcripts from plantcyc database,  <dig>   transcripts from kog proteins database,  <dig>   transcripts from trembl database,  <dig>  transcripts from genbank viridiplantae nucleotide sequences and  <dig>  transcripts from pfam database . trembl initially had the highest share of annotations. however, in the final annotation table, major shares of the results were distributed among the well annotated databases .

we observe that some of the transcript annotations were represented as predicted or hypothetical. the following terms were found in the annotation: probable , putative , unknown , hypothetical  and predicted . however, the number of such instances is very less, considering that it is a non-model plant from costaceae family.

mapping reads, calling variations and quantification of transcripts
alignment statistics were reported from the sam format alignment files using custom perl codes .

large number of the reads  aligned back to the transcripts as expected . due to low expression of certain transcripts, the reads belonging to them might be either partially assembled or left out completely during the assembly process. this leads to a small fraction of reads unused during the assembly process. in our case, 9% of the reads did not align back to the transcript reference sequences. post-processing the sam file using samtools and on further filtering, resulted in  <dig>  snps .

an expression profile of the transcripts was created using agilent's genespring . the transcript with the highest expression levels from the annotation was found to be a cell wall hydroxyproline-rich glycoprotein . the other protein annotations which were part of the top  <dig> highly expressed transcripts include isoforms from ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase small chain , polyubiquitin  <dig>  isoforms of chlorophyll a-b binding protein , photosystem i reaction center subunit v  and fog zinc finger proteins. there was a putative protein as well among the top  <dig> highly expressed transcripts. most of the highly expressed transcripts belong to the class of housekeeping genes. the transcripts which showed lower expressions belonged to either uncharacterized or probable  class of proteins. however, there was one transcript which showed match to auxin response factor  <dig> from the low expressed transcripts.

validation of assembled transcripts
validation of the assembled transcripts was performed for two high copy genes viz ribulose bi phosphate ribulose- <dig> -bisphosphate carboxylase and an unnannotaed transcript and two genes of biological significance viz. putative norbixin methyltransferase and lycopene cleavage oxygenase . all genes gave amplicons of expected sizes . lycopene cleavage oxygenease which was not detected by transcript assembly was also not detected by rtpcr using primers from a related species for the same gene .

ssr identification
short sequence repeats  are short repeat sequences of 2– <dig> bases which are important molecular markers in a wide range of genetics and genomics applications. a total of  <dig>  ssrs were identified in  <dig>  transcripts . more than one ssr was found to be in  <dig>  transcripts. compound ssrs were observed to be  <dig> in number. trinucleotide ssrs were the most abundant accommodating  <dig> % of the identified ssrs, followed by tetranucleotides  and dinucleotides  .

similarity-search among other anti-diabetic plant resources
after filtering the blast results using cut-offs mentioned in the methods,  <dig> out of  <dig> sequences from c. pictus were represented in the assembled transcripts. four trna partial sequences and a rpb <dig> partial gene sequence did not match with the transcripts. the results also showed that c. pictus is more similar to costus speciosus, another plant with anti-diabetic properties from the same genus .

hplc analysis
high performance liquid chromatography  was used to confirm the presence of bixin in c. pictus methanolic extract. uv-visible absorption spectrum of both standard bixin and the leaf extract was recorded at  <dig> nm. the chromatograms of the standard bixin and c. pictus methanolic extract recorded peaks corresponding to bixin .

discussion
transcriptome wide studies on a variety of organisms have recently been conducted on a large scale, following the revolution introduced by the emergence of next generation sequencers. whole transcriptome sequencing using an illumina gaiix sequencer and analysis of the c. pictus plant leaves were reported for the first time in this study, in order to understand molecular signatures related to the anti-diabetic principles. we obtained about  <dig>  gb of raw sequence data, which was processed and de novo assembled into contigs and further into transcripts. de novo assemblies are highly dependent on k-mer lengths. in general, plant assemblies are very hard and difficult owing to the complex gene contents, higher ploidy, higher rates of repeats and heterozygosity  <cit> . longer k-mers are advantageous in distinguishing repeats from real overlaps  <cit>  and are accurate, and in general suit the assembly of highly expressed transcripts  <cit>  while shorter k-mers are preferred for assembly of low expression genes. to balance between higher accuracy from longer k-mers and better assemblies for low expressed genes from short k-mers, we ran multiple assemblies to arrive at an optimal k-mer length for a better assembly. specific care was taken to remove adapters and low quality sequences from reads, such that a high quality assembly is obtained . the n <dig> value of the assembled data was comparable to other plant transcriptome assemblies indicating a high quality assembly .

the complete and accurate transcriptome assembly of plants is difficult and is limited to the currently available de novo assembly tools. hence, in our study, a single transcript might be present redundantly as multiple isoforms or in multiple fractions and some of the transcripts might have been lost during the assembly due to low coverage. for instance, 4-coumarate-coa ligase is present redundantly in multiple copies, whereas transcripts encoding lycopene cleavage dioxygenase - an important component of the bixin biosynthetic pathway were not observed at all. nonetheless, once newer efficient assembly tools with improved algorithms are developed in the future, the publicly available raw data can be re-used to create a better transcriptome assembly. the attempt was made to not only computationally characterize the transcriptome, but also to derive molecular clues to the medicinal properties of the plant. we were successful in establishing a relationship of the anti-diabetic property with the genetic makeup. interpreting high-throughput data is a challenging aspect and we have suggested ways to analyse and interpret a plant transcriptome. it has been estimated that  <dig> to 25% of the plant genome specifies pathways of natural product biosynthesis  <cit> . the high number of transcripts that have been annotated as secondary metabolite profiles from c. pictus is a clear indication of the genetic complexity of the species.

our primary focus has been to understand the transcripts involved in biosynthesis of the anti-diabetic principles. the surprising presence of high number of transcripts corresponding to bixin, norbixin and geraniol indicate possible involvement of these active constituents in the plant's anti-diabetic activities . the presence of the transcript for putative norbixin methyltransferase further confirms these findings . bixia orellana  is currently reported to be the sole source of the natural pigment bixin  <cit> , but our findings on the presence of significant levels of bixin in c. pictus leaves suggests that the leaves could be used as an alternative source of bixin for commercial supply. bixin and norbixin from annato has been indicated to activate peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor α , which in turn stimulates adipocyte differentiation and increases the insulin dependent glucose uptake in differentiated 3t3-l <dig> adipocytes  <cit> . the identification of bixin synthase transcripts from our current annotations was corroborated from results suggesting presence of bixin from hplc . geraniol activates both pparγ and pparα thereby improving hyperlipidemia and glucose uptake  <cit> . aba is another notable terpenoid observed in our transcript annotations which has anti-diabetic, anti-inflammatory, anti-obesity and immuno-modulatory properties. aba was observed to be an endogenous stimulator of insulin release from human pancreatic islets  <cit> . aba is also known to significantly increase the expression of ppar and its associated genes cd <dig> and ap <dig>  <cit> . an earlier report states that the administration of aqueous extract of c. pictus leaves in rats have significantly reduced the levels of triglycerides and cholesterol, along with reduction in glucose  <cit> . purified methyl tetracosanoate from c. pictus treatments in cells at  <dig> hours exhibited pparα expression equivalent to rosiglitazone  and the methanolic extracts exhibited anti-diabetic activity as well as anti-adipogenic activity  <cit> . it is possible that the reduction in the levels of glucose, triglycerides and cholesterol might have occurred through the activation of both pparγ and pparα pathways by aba, bixin, norbixin or geraniol. these terpenoids might act as insulin sensitizers in a way similar to thiazolidinedione drugs. ginger , a taxonomically closely related species, is shown to be effective against the development of cataract, a diabetic complication, in rats through its anti-glycating potential  <cit> . c. pictus is also reported to be an anti-glycation agent  <cit> , which might be due of the presence of geraniol and farnesene derivatives  which were observed to inhibit glycation and advanced glycation end-product  formation  <cit> , thereby inhibiting certain diabetic complications. aldose reductase, an enzyme of polyol pathway, is involved in diabetic complications and docking studies show that citral  as well as geraniol inhibit aldose reductase activity  <cit> . the frontline anti-diabetic drug “metformin” also known as “dimethylbiguanide” was developed from a plant based molecule from galega officinalis. current leads reported for the first time from c. pictus might also emerge as a powerful anti-diabetic and anti-glycation agents, if researched further. validation at the biochemical, cellular and pharmacological levels will supplement the transcriptomic observations.

reactive oxygen species  are beneficial to the organism and they are involved in signalling pathways and are also toxic to pathogens  <cit> . but an increase in ros may be observed in many metabolic disorders and are harmful. oxidative stress and an increase in ros are common events accompanied with type ii dm. in fact, ros have been shown to have a casual role in insulin resistance and a decrease in ros suppressed the insulin resistance activity  <cit> . hence, it is common to note that most anti-diabetic herbal remedies are also potential anti-oxidants. the anti-oxidant properties of c. pictus have already been reported  <cit> . ros may have potential role in either cell proliferation or cell death which is dependent on the intensity/location of oxidative burst and also the anti-oxidant activities. in cancer cells, an increased constitutive oxidative stress supports tumor growth and protects the tumor from pro-apoptotic signals promoting tumor progression  <cit> . a reduction in oxidative stress leads to suppressing tumors. c. pictus is also shown to have anti-oxidant as well as antitumor properties  <cit> . a number of secondary metabolites were reported in this study which corresponded to anti-oxidant and antitumor properties of c. pictus leaves. compounds classified as anti-oxidants generally reduce the oxidative stress, but under certain conditions they act as pro-oxidants. for instance, under non-physiological conditions, although norbixin, a precursor of bixin was able to protect dna from damage by ros, it might also create circumstances that amplify damaging oxidative signal, unless some other anti-oxidant comes to the defence  <cit> . this leads us to suggest that a single isolated compound might not have the desired effect and might also turn out to be toxic while promoting dna damage as a pro-oxidant. hence, a combination of plant compounds at optimal dosage is probably necessary for a beneficial effect on a system.

c. pictus plants are known for their excellent insect resistance potentials. they are also reported to have anti-microbial properties  <cit> . the same is supported by the secondary metabolite pathway annotations. it should be noted that secondary metabolites from plants are generally expressed in minimal quantities by the plants, in contrast to the expression of primary metabolites. the fragmentation of the mrnas during library preparation could lead to the potential loss of whole or part of some important genes, if their expression is very low. low expression also means that considerable sequence coverage will not be available and the fragmented sequences might not be assembled into complete transcripts. hence, we chose to include any pathway hit in the annotation, even if only fewer enzymes were captured in sequencing. for instance, lycopene cleavage dioxygenase which converts lycopene to bixin aldehyde was cloned in escherichia coli and it subsequently activated bixin biosynthetic pathway  <cit> . in our study, we did not observe transcripts corresponding to lycopene cleavage dioxygenase enzyme, whereas transcripts corresponding to the other two enzymes bixin aldehyde dehydrogenase and norbixin carboxyl methyltransferase were observed. one possibility could be that the transcript was not expressed at adequate levels and might have been lost during the de novo assembly or during cdna fragmentation before sequencing. the other possibility might be the presence of an alternate precursor for bixin biosynthesis. at this level, we could only attribute these reasons for the missing transcripts. critical annotations from go  and kog  supported evidences of signal transduction mechanisms, resistance properties, dna binding functions and defense mechanisms. pfam annotations  abounded with protein kinase domains. there is evidence that c. pictus initiates an insulin secretory response by increasing ca2+ influx through vgcc in mouse and human islets cell cultures  <cit> . in human granulocytes, aba has been shown to bind to plasma membrane through a pertussis toxin -sensitive receptor-g protein complex, which leads to an increase in camp, activation of protein kinase, phosphorylation of the adprc cd <dig> with cadpr overproduction, eventually leading to an increase of the ca2+ <cit> . the presence of aba biosynthesis transcripts  in the present study involving pathway annotations could be functionally correlated with the anti-diabetic activity of c. pictus possibly through activation of protein kinases.

the expression study gives us some clues about the assembly. the transcripts with least expression values could either be novel genes of interest with very low copy numbers or they could be mis-assemblies which did not find any similarity with the sequence databases. apart from just annotating the data, we have also mined the data for other information like snps and ssrs which will be invaluable, especially because c. pictus is a non-model plant without genome sequences being available. the reported snps and ssrs could be used as molecular markers for the construction of genetic linkage maps in the future. substantial quantities of oxalate content and oxalate oxidase activity were reported in fresh leaf extracts  <cit> . the annotation results, however, did not pick up oxalate oxidase or oxaloacetate acetylhydrolase  in our transcripts. our analysis indicates only the presence of malate dehydrogenase, the enzyme involved in the conversion of malate to oxaloacetate.

CONCLUSIONS
we are reporting for the first time, solid molecular signatures  for the anti-diabetic properties of c. pictus leaves and are also providing vital clues related to the other phytochemical functions like antitumor, anti-oxidant, immuno-modulatory, anti-microbial and anti-malarial properties through the secondary metabolite pathway annotations. further, an analytical proof of presence of bixin in c. pictus leaves is provided through hplc. we believe that this data will be of immense help to researchers working in the treatment of dm using herbal therapies. even though our focus was on transcripts relating to anti-diabetic principles, we have limited clues about the role of several other transcripts with no assigned function as of now. they may modulate an anti-diabetic role in conjunction with the major metabolites or conversely, they may exert adverse reactions at cellular level. advocating whole leaf consumption to diabetic patients may not be advisable considering the phytochemical complexity, as indicated by the transcriptome profile. hence, a thorough clinical research of the biochemical and physiological properties of c. pictus leaf extracts may be warranted before recommending it for large scale usage by hyperglycemic individuals.

