BACKGROUND
genetic patterns could not be studied comprehensively until whole genome sequences became available. the first such genome-wide sequence analysis focused on both the abundance and distribution of competence-associated sequence motifs in the prokaryote haemophilus influenzae  <cit> . since then, as more genome sequences became available, numerous other genetic features were studied in prokaryotes  <cit>  and eukaryotes  <cit> . many such genome-wide analyses concentrated on the genomic distribution of simple sequence repeats , stretches of mono- and oligonucleotide repeats  <cit> .

ssrs generally occur more frequently in non-coding regions of the genome. one of the reasons for this avoidance in the protein coding regions is that many ssrs predispose for disruptive frameshifts via strand-slippage during replication, transcription or translation  <cit> . recently ackermann and chao postulated that selection for sequence stability in coding regions has been a pervasive force in the distribution biases of mononucleotide repeats  in both prokaryotic and eukaryotic genome sequences  <cit> . more recently, we discovered that mnrs also display a biased distribution within coding sequences: in a wide range of both bacterial and archaeal genomes, mononucleotide repeats were predominantly biased towards the 5' end of genes  <cit> , presumably to prevent or reduce the expression of toxic or costly frameshifted proteins. however, for eukaryotes no such intragenic distribution analysis has been carried out.

the fungi represent a kingdom within the eukaryotic domain with many fully sequenced representatives. these can vary in genome size , cellular organization  as well as life-style   <cit> . with respect to ssrs, a previous analysis in sequenced fungal genomes described different patterns of their occurrence  <cit> , but did not study their intragenic distribution.

here we analyze genome-wide sets of predicted coding sequences from fully sequenced fungal genomes, and assess the intragenic distribution patterns of mononucleotide repeats. mnrs are more commonly present than the more complex repeats, which makes their interspecific distribution comparisons possible. this could illuminate the similarities and differences between the distributions of disruptive repeats in prokaryotes and eukaryotes, and help identify the selective forces that brought about these biases.

methods
transcript data of the coding regions  from  <dig> fungal genomes were obtained from the broad institute . the datasets, their size and the description of the strains are given in table  <dig>  truncated genes, transcripts with annotated internal stop codons and genes that are not multiples of three in length were excluded from the analyses, which basically rely on a genome-wide quantitative assessment of mnrs in the five quintiles of the annotated protein-coding sequences. sequence motif analyses and codon usage profiles were carried out using in-house perl scripts, which are available upon request.

*) all transcripts, except those with annotated internal stop codons, annotated as missing ends or transcripts that are not multiples of three in length.

fungal transcripts were compared to the kog database  <cit>  according to the nearest-neighbor method   <cit>  in order to distinguish between transcripts with a well-defined ortholog and transcripts that lacked an ortholog in the database.

RESULTS
intragenic distribution biases of mononucleotide repeats in fungal coding sequences
for each genome we tested the intragenic distribution profiles of the longest mnrs in the five quintiles of all predicted protein coding genes, with a minimal occurrence of  <dig> repeats of that length in the genomic transcript data . the gene repertoires of most strains  show a non-proportional distribution of mnrs over the five quintiles . the strongest bias is observed in candida parapsilosis, where83%  of all repeats of  <dig> bp or longer are in the first quintile of the genes. in several cases, the majority of repeats are in the last quintile  of the genomic gene set .

genes with mononucleotide repeats of  <dig> bp or longer
the  <dig> fungal transcripts with repeats of  <dig> residues or longer from all genomes combined are given in additional file  <dig>  again, when analyzing the intragenic distribution of the  <dig> repeats in these  <dig> fungal genes, a strong bias towards the first quintile of the genes is observed, both in transcripts with well-described functional orthologs , but also in transcripts without orthologs  in the kog database . as for the extreme cases, aspergillus fumigatus, aspergillus niger, aspergillus terreus, candida lusitaniae, histoplasma capsulatum, paracoccidioides brasiliensis and rhizopus oryzae each contain genes with mononucleotide repeats over  <dig> nucleotides long. the gene with the longest repeat is encountered in a. terreus , which contains a stretch of  <dig> consecutive adenine residues, encoding  <dig> consecutive lysines. among the intragenic repeats of over  <dig> nucleotides in length, guanine and cytosine tracts are relatively rare with only  <dig> out of  <dig> repeats, similar as to what was found previously  <cit> . still, some genomes harbour transcripts with repeats that consist solely of long guanine or cytosine tracts; chaetomium globosum , coprinus cinereus , neurospora crassa  and sclerotinia sclerotiorum . other genomes have repeat-containing genes with only adenine or thymine tracts of over  <dig> residues in length: candida albicans wo <dig> , candida lusitaniae , c. tropicalis , coccidioides immitis rs  and r. oryzae .

trinucleotide repeats in neurospora crassa coding regions
previous analyses have shown that fungal genomes also harbour oligonucleotide repeats, which on occasion have been associated with particular processes  <cit> . these repeats are mostly typical for the individual species, and though abundant, the total repeat-specific counts are still often less than  <dig> in the coding regions of a genome. however, in n. crassa, numerous trinucleotide repeats have been identified  <cit> , of which only a few are encountered in large numbers in the coding regions: n , n  and n . changes in the copy number of trinucleotides in a gene do not cause a shift in the reading frame, and therefore we hypothesized that these repeats need not be intragenically biased. nevertheless, we observed that all three trinucleotide repeats occur more frequently at the gene termini of coding regions, with over half of all ggt repeats in the last quintile of the coding regions . this suggests that the bias of repeats may not be caused solely by their risk for frameshifts.

intragenic repeat resistance as indicated by genome repertoire analyses and consecutive homogenous codon usage profiles
the fractions of genes per genome that contain a mononucleotide repeat decreases rapidly with increasing repeat lengths in all tested genomes . nevertheless, a substantial difference may exist between the tolerances of the species to disruptive intragenic mononucleotide repeats. short repeats  are encountered in most  of the protein-coding gene repertoires of all  <dig> tested species, and are never intragenically biased. however, with increasing repeat lengths, ever larger discrepancies arise between the percentages of the different genomic gene repertoires that contain repeats of such lengths . c. tropicalis has an 80× larger gene fraction containing repeats of  <dig> residues or longer than neosartorya fischeri , although n. fischeri contains almost twice as many genes. this higher gene fraction with repeats suggests that c. tropicalis enjoys a much higher tolerance for disruptive intragenic repeats.

comparing the expected versus observed frequencies of neighbouring lysine or phenylalanine codon, we find that n. fischeri avoids flanking homogeneous codons  to a much higher extent than c. tropicalis, corroborating the higher repeat tolerance of the latter species .

intrageneric comparisons of intragenic mononucleotide repeats
the dataset contains the gene repertoires from different species and strains from the same genus, which allows us to test for intrageneric heterogeneity of repeat distribution biases. three genera are tested, aspergillus, candida and coccidioides. firstly, both aspergillus and candida species show a 5' bias for intragenic repeat distribution patterns, which are relatively mild in aspergillus, and strong in candida. the sole outlier in the aspergilli is aspergillus flavus, which contrary to its relatives shows no  5' bias. in candida, there is a very strong bias of repeats to the 5' end, except for the species debaryomyces hansenii, which shows a 3' bias. the two species with the lowest observed 5' bias are candida guilliermondii and c. lusitaniae, which are closely related species, and both branch off with debaromyces hansenii in one of the so-called ctg-subclades  <cit> . finally, none of the two tested coccidioides species  show a distribution bias in mononucleotide repeats.

authenticity of the intragenic repeat bias
of the  <dig> fungal transcripts that contain repeats of  <dig> bp or longer, 36%  could be assigned to a eukaryotic cluster of orthologous genes . in this set of  <dig> orthologs to bona fide protein-coding genes, we observe a significant distribution bias of the repeats towards the 5' end . moreover, we discern that the genes with repeats at the gene termini are on average much longer than genes with the repeat in the middle of the gene . a similar trend was observed for the fungal genes that could not be assigned to a kog , i.e., 34% of all repeats are in the first gene quintile, and transcripts with repeats at the gene termini are longer than transcripts with a repeat in the middle of the gene . interestingly, a large proportion of the  <dig> genes with long repeats that also have homologs in the kog database are found in the pathogenic species c. tropicalis and c. parapsilosis  of which have the long repeat in the first gene quintile).

discussion and 
CONCLUSIONS
analyses of prokaryotic gene repertoires revealed a persistent bias of disruptive sequence repeats towards gene termini, potentially to curtail the metabolic costs or toxicity associated with transcribing and  translating non-functional genes  <cit> . in order to explore this phenomenon for the eukaryotic domain, we investigated the genome repertoires from  <dig> sequenced fungi, and discovered that this pattern is also evident in the fungal kingdom.

still, large discrepancies exists between the intragenic distribution bias of mnrs of the different genomes: coccidioides spp. show no intragenic preference for sequence repeats, whereas the candida spp. demonstrate a very strong 5' end bias, with even up to 83% of all intragenic repeats in c. parapsilosis in the first gene quintile. some genomes display a strong 3' end bias for intragenic repeats, such as botrytis cinerea, which has 36% of its mononucleotide repeats in the last gene quintile. a bias of these disruptive repeats to either gene terminus agrees with a selection pressure to remove potential toxic side products, or alternatively to reduce metabolic costs, similar to what was found by akashi and gojobori in a comparison of 'expensive' and 'cheap' amino acid usage in highly expressed genes  <cit> .

the species-specific gene fractions that contain long repeats could be a proxy for the species' tolerance for disruptive repeats. these differences are substantial, as the gene fraction of c. tropicalis with repeats of ten nucleotides or longer is  <dig> times higher than the gene fraction in n. fischeri. the adjacent homogeneous codon usage in these species also shows a higher avoidance of contiguous aaa and ttt codons in the latter species. a mechanistic explanation for a higher repeat-tolerance is still unknown, but could be studied by a more detailed functional characterisation of the genes that contain these long repeats.

when analysing the most abundant intragenic trinucleotide repeats in n. crassa, we find a strong bias of these repeats to the gene termini, even though differences in trinucleotide repeats do not cause a shift in the reading frame. this suggests that a selection pressure to remove potential toxic side products, or alternatively to reduce metabolic costs may not be the only explanation for the bias of repeats to gene termini. previous analyses on amino acid repeats in drosophila spp. also showed an avoidance of these repeats in the middle of genes  <cit> . numerous trinucleotide repeat disorders are known to cause disease in humans  <cit> , and studies into the intragenic repeat location biases could help determine mechanistic aspects of repeat expansions and contractions.

sequence repeats have been thought to convey adaptive benefits due to their potential to facilitate rapid changes in the coding content  <cit> , while one study also suggested that repeats are preferentially located towards recombination hot spots  <cit> . we find that larger genes have a more prominent bias of repeats at their gene termini. this could mean that many of the smaller transcripts with their mononucleotide repeat in the middle are misannotations, or gene remnants after the erosion of repeat-containing genes. alternatively, these small repeat containing genes could represent foci of genetic novelty.

this focus on intragenic distribution biases is new  <cit> , and could be expanded to other features previously not analysed as such, like methylation patterns, or targets for transcriptional or translational regulation. this can help resolve the origin and organization of new genetic features, as well as the evolutionary forces governing them.

authors' contributions
mwjvp conceived the project, carried out the analyses, interpreted the results and wrote the paper. lhdg interpreted the results and wrote the paper. both authors read and approved the final manuscript.

supplementary material
additional file 1
total counts of repeats in the gene quintiles. total counts of repeats in the gene quintiles , the fractions of the repeat counts in the different quintiles and the deviation from the expectancy values .

click here for file

 additional file 2
gene lists of the fungal species that have intragenic repeats  <dig> bp or longer. gene lists of the fungal species that have intragenic repeats  <dig> bp or longer . since some genomes do not have unique gene identifiers, their names are complemented with the line number of the gene name in the original fasta file. consecutive entries highlighted in green signify identical genes .

click here for file

 additional file 3
repertoire sizes of genes with different repeat lengths. gene repertoire sizes of the fungi, and the counts and fractions of genes that contain repeats of lengths five until greater than nine.

click here for file

 acknowledgements
the authors would like to thank the broad institute for releasing the data of the fungal genome sequencing projects. furthermore, the authors would like to thank carlos echavarri-erasun and teun boekhout for earlier discussions on this project, and arnold kuzniar for assistance with the functional classifications.
