BACKGROUND
human activities, particularly agricultural practices and fossil fuel emissions, have greatly increased inputs of nitrogen  to terrestrial and aquatic habitats  <cit> . in agricultural regions, n is leached from soil in the form of nitrate , which is often found in high concentrations in groundwater and groundwater-fed surface waters  <cit> . moreover, high no3- in surface runoff is often observed when fertilizer is used  <cit> . these sources of no3- pollution pose a particular threat to aquatic habitats where groundwater and surface runoff are a significant or primary source of input. vernal pools are temporary aquatic habitats that are common to temperate regions and filled by surface runoff following snowmelt, spring rain, and rising water table  <cit> . as such, n enrichment from no3- leaching can alleviate n limitation and have a significant influence on n cycling. because vernal pools are shallow depressions that often experience low dissolved oxygen concentrations  <cit> , increased no3- availability can favor anaerobic n cycling processes, such as denitrification and anaerobic ammonium oxidation, while suppressing anoxic pathways adapted to low no3- conditions, such as dissimilatory nitrate reduction to ammonium.

n cycling is almost exclusively mediated by microorganisms; therefore high no3- inputs can influence n cycling and also have cascading structural effects on the microbial communities involved. by studying genes for the enzymes responsible for the conversion of n between oxidized and reduced forms, there have been large advances in our knowledge of microbial functional groups involved in n cycling  <cit> . however, the n cycle is a complex network of pathways that can share some enzymes and can also be simultaneously influenced by the input of one nitrogenous compound, such as no3-  <cit> . therefore, studies which profile only one or a subset of n cycling enzymes may provide a limited view of how no3- pollution impacts microbial processes. in addition, most previous studies on the effects of no3- on microbial functional genes have limited their assessment to n cycling genes , even though elevated no3- is known to affect other microbial processes, such as those involved in c cycling . one method that could help overcome these limitations is a shotgun metagenomic approach, where multiple functional genes can be examined.

in this study, we utilized a shotgun metagenomic approach to examine the multiple effects of no3- addition on vernal pool microbial communities in a microcosm experiment  <cit> . two metagenomes were created, one for replicate microcosms that received no3-  and one for replicate microcosms where no3- was not added . our previous study using these microcosms found that the addition of no3- increased denitrification, while denitrification was not detected in the absence of no3-  <cit> . this functional change was not accompanied by any change in the denitrifier community structure, which was profiled with the nosz gene using terminal restriction fragment length polymorphism   <cit> . it is unclear, however, if this lack of response by the denitrifying community was physiological in nature or related to our functional gene choice. for the shotgun metagenomic method utilized here, the microbial genomes were randomly amplified, thus allowing for the potential inclusion of multiple n cycling genes, as well as genes involved in other microbial processes. in addition to denitrifier community structure, our previous analyses used trflp to profile the structure of general bacteria and fungi, which also did not respond to no3- addition  <cit> . because shotgun metagenomes also provide taxonomic information for microbial communities, we hypothesized that inclusion of more than one functional gene and obtaining taxonomic composition using a shotgun metagenomic approach would reveal community structural responses to no3- pulses not observed with the profiling technique, trflp.

RESULTS
for the +no3- metagenome, there were  <dig>  dna fragments for a total of  <dig> ,193 bp and an average sequence length of 316 bp. the –n metagenome contained a larger number of dna fragments with  <dig>  and a total sequence length of  <dig> ,623 bp with an average fragment size of 376 bp. the metagenomes were uploaded to the meta genome rapid annotation of sequence technology  server  <cit>  and were analyzed unassembled with a blastx comparison to the seed subsystems  <cit> , which provided both taxonomic composition and metabolic functions. after applying our filters of 10- <dig> or lower e-value and 50 bp or greater sequence similarity,  <dig>  sequences  and  <dig>  sequences  from the metagenomes matched with subsystems following the blastx analysis. the number of sequence matches to taxa with the blastx comparison were  <dig>   and  <dig>  . each of these characterized dna fragments represented an environmental gene tag , or a short segment of a gene found in the microcosm samples. the mg-rast output included metabolic functions at four different levels, with subsystem category as the highest level and a specific gene as the lowest . the taxonomic output included egt matches to domain, phylum, class, order, family, genus, and species; however because of the low sequence size cutoff of 50 bp, class was the lowest taxonomic group analyzed.

 <dig> the lowest significant level for each category is reported here. only the subsystem categories that were significantly different with fisher exact tests  are reported here. see additional file 1: tables s1-s <dig> for complete results of fisher exact tests.

although no3- addition increased denitrification rate -1 day- <dig> versus not detected in the microcosms receiving distilled water), no significant differences in nitrogen metabolism egts were found with the blastx comparison to the seed database . results from fisher exact tests at all subsystem levels and a chi-square test conducted at level two indicated no statistical differences between the n metabolism egts . of the  <dig>  egt matches to the seed database in the +no3- metagenome, only  <dig>  were to nitrogen metabolism subsystems. likewise, a low percentage of seed database egt matches  were to nitrogen metabolism subsystems for the –n metagenome. additional analysis of n metabolism egts was conducted with a blastn comparison of the metagenomes to a database of genes involved in n cycling pathways that we created from searches at the ncbi site. the database included genes for the enzymes involved in denitrification, dissimilatory nitrate reduction to ammonium , anaerobic ammonium oxidation , nitrification, and n fixation. . only the +no3- metagenome contained matches to the n metabolism database with the blastn, which included two sequences  from the +no3- metagenome that matched with a number of nitrate reductase sequences . 

1the query sequence indicates that only two sequences out of  <dig>  in the +no3- metagenome matched with sequences in the n metabolism database. seq.  <dig> matched with three database entries, while seq.  <dig> matched with  <dig> database entries.

egt matches to other subsystems found with the blastx comparison to the seed database, however, changed significantly between the treatments . egts that matched with genes in the categories of iron acquisition and metabolism, cell division and cell cycle, rna metabolism, and protein metabolism were proportionally higher in the –n metagenome . the +no3- metagenome contained a higher relative number of egt matches to genes in the fatty acids, lipids, and isoprenoids, stress response, and carbohydrates categories . lower level metabolic egt matches within these categories that were significantly different between the metagenomes are listed in table  <dig> 

at the phylum level, egt matches to acidobacteria, proteobacteria, actinobacteria, and virrucomicrobia in the domain bacteria and streptophyta in the domain eukaryota were proportionally higher in the +no3- metagenome . egt matches to the phyla bacteroidetes, firmicutes, and chlamydiae in the domain bacteria, to euryarchaeota and thaumarchaeota in the domain archaea, and to ascomycota and arthropoda in the domain eukaryota were proportionally higher in the –n metagenome . significant differences between the metagenome taxa were also deduced at the class level to specifically examine differences within the proteobacteria phylum . egt matches to alphaproteobacteria and deltaproteobacteria were proportionally higher in the +no3- metagenome, while matches to gammaproteobacteria were relatively higher in the –n metagenome .

discussion
metagenomic analysis revealed treatment differences both for functional and taxanomic egts between our +no3- and –n metagenomes. these differences were apparent even though the metagenome sequencing conducted here returned a lower number of sequences than are typically reported for shotgun metagenome studies  <cit> . however, a shotgun metagenomic sequencing effort conducted by fierer et al.  <cit> , where comparable sequence numbers to ours are reported, was able to elucidate increases in functional genes with increased n fertilization, suggesting that our sequence numbers are adequate for determining relative metabolic and taxonomic changes.

a somewhat surprising result was no proportional abundance change in any of the n metabolism egts between our treatments with the blastx comparison to the seed database. particularly surprising was no change in the denitrification egts  between treatments and no detection of denitrification genes with the blastn, other than two sequence matches to nitrate reductase in the +no3- treatment. the two sequence matches with the blastn in the +no3- metagenome were to the nitrate reductase genes napa and napb. because the periplasmic nitrate reductases, which are the products of napa and napb, are used in both denitrification and dnra  <cit> , no conclusions can be drawn on which of these microbial groups grew to a level where they could be detected in the +no3- microcosms. this lack of egt response was despite the fact that we observed denitrification rate responses to our treatments  <cit> , where the microcosms receiving no3- displayed a denitrification rate near or higher than the upper range of what has been measured in flooded soils in the field  <cit> . this result is consistent with a number of other studies that have found no link between function  and denitrifier gene copy number using qpcr  <cit> . we previously suggested that, in the absence of no3- addition, denitrifiers in our microcosms used other electron acceptors for respiration when no3- was not available  <cit> , since denitrifiers are known to use other respiratory pathways . there were proportionally higher egts in the iron acquisition and metabolism category in the –n metagenome, and the specific egt match was to a tonb-dependent receptor . tonb-dependent receptors are a category of energy-coupling proteins, which are known to be involved in iron uptake by members of the genus pseudomonas <cit> , and there is some evidence that one specific tonb-dependent receptor is involved in dissimilatory iron reduction by shewanella oneidensis <cit> . this suggests that the microbial community in the –n microcosms contained a greater number of organisms capable of acquiring iron and, perhaps, utilizing it for energy, which may have been a potential survival strategy in the absence of the no3- addition. to our knowledge, evidence to support this hypothesis is sparse . it is accepted, however, that denitrifying organisms primarily perform aerobic respiration and then switch to denitrification under anoxic conditions where no3- supply is sufficient  <cit> . there is a category available through mg-rast for respiration genes. there were close to  <dig> egt matches from the two metagenomes to this category for genes involved in both aerobic and anaerobic respiratory pathways. however, there were no proportional changes in respiration egt abundance between the +no3- and the –n conditions , likely because the microcosms were made anoxic prior to the metagenome creation, which could negate any advantage to aerobic organisms in either treatment. though we did not observe proportional changes for egts involved in a known alternative respiratory pathway for denitrifiers, the observed proportional increase in iron acquisition and metabolism egts in the –n metagenome suggests that iron might be biogeochemically important under anoxic n-limited conditions.

another possible reason for lack of denitrifier egt treatment response is that denitrifiers may have been in low abundance compared to other microbial groups, making changes to their population undetectable relative to the background population numbers. for example, the denitrification gene nosz is known to be in low abundance compared to 16s genes  <cit> , and there are estimates that only  <dig>  – 5% of culturable soil bacterial species can carry out denitrification  <cit> . this conclusion is supported by our blastn results, which found only two sequences from either metagenome that matched with a n metabolism gene. with the blastx comparison to the seed database, however, over 1% of our sequences from each metagenome matched with nitrogen metabolism subsystems. the fact that we found no differences in nitrogen metabolism egt relative abundance after no3- addition suggests that microbial populations involved in n cycling did not shift in the 20 hours following exposure to a no3- pulse. this lack of treatment response could be due to insufficient time between treatment initiation and sampling . however, we did see other egt changes, suggesting that some microbial populations grew and experienced a detectable community shift in response to acute changes in no3- concentration. the initial microbial community response to no3- in our metagenomes was toward organisms that contained stress response, carbohydrate, and fatty acids, lipids, and isoprenoid egt matches . the stress response egt that was higher in the +no3- metagenome was for an alkyl hydroperoxide reductase subunit c-like protein. the gene for alkyl hydroperoxide reducates, subunit c is upregulated by no3- exposure after only 30 minutes in desulfovibrio vulgaris, suggesting that such increases in this and other oxidative stress genes may be a general stress response by the bacteria  <cit> . within the carbohydrates category, one egt match that was higher in the +no3- metagenome was for fermentation. recently, there has been evidence for fermentation that is coupled to no3- reduction in both bacteria and fungi  <cit> . fermentation in the +no3- microcosms may have been particularly prominent for the fungi, because a switch to no3- -coupled fermentation as the primary source of energy for soil fungi under anoxic conditions has been suggested  <cit> .

the sequencing effort described here also showed changes to the proportional representation of taxonomic egts. there were highly significant increases in the relative abundance of alphaproteobacteria and acidobacteria egts in the +no3- metagenome. similarly, using freshwater microcosms, barlett and leff  <cit>  found an increase in alphaproteobacteria abundance when no3- was present as a n source and suggested a competitive advantage to this group of organisms under these conditions. under anoxic conditions, such as our microcosms, higher physiological activity and substrate uptake have been reported in several alphaproteobacteria species when no3- or no2- were present as an electron acceptor  <cit> . therefore, in our microcosms, there could have been a competitive advantage to the alphaproteobacteria due to greater growth compared to other facultative organisms in an anoxic environment with abundant no3-. to our knowledge, there have been no other studies that found such an increase in acidobacteria with no3- addition. however, a sequencing effort in cultured strains of acidobacteria recently found that these organisms possess no3- and no2- reducing genes  <cit> . alphaproteobacteria <cit> , and likely acidobacteria <cit> , are adapted to low nutrient conditions. while this seems counterintuitive to our microcosm study, vernal pools in nature are known to be oligotrophic  <cit> . the alphaproteobacteria and acidobacteria in vernal pools, then, may be adapted to survival in the disturbed, low nutrient conditions of these habitats and once no3- becomes readily available they have a competitive advantage due to their growth capabilities in the presence of no3-.

these taxonomic changes were not found in a previous examination of general bacteria or general fungi in these microcosms with trflp  <cit> . the metagenomic analysis reported here provides a greater resolution than trflp, which is a coarse community profiling tool. therefore, there may have been fine-scale changes in bacterial community structure that were not detected with trflp. another reason for this discrepancy is that our previous trflp analyses used the gene regions of bacterial 16s and fungal its for profiling  <cit>  and, in the current study, a nonredundant protein database was used for taxonomic comparisons. therefore, the conclusions drawn here regarding taxonomic changes may be limited to the taxonomic groups that changed functionally. the fact that whole genome amplification  was used prior to  <dig> sequencing could also be contributing to the differences seen between the metagenomes that were not noted with trflp. this is because amplification techniques with the phi <dig> dna polymerase, which was used in the current study, have been shown to exclude the amplification of certain dna sequences, particularly those in low abundance or those that are gc rich, and can skew the representation of certain otus compared to sequencing efforts of non-amplified dna of the same sample  <cit> . additionally, our study design cannot exclude the possibility that the communities changed between the treatments over the 30 day incubation period prior to our sample collection. thus, differences seen between the metagenomes may not be only because of the no3- addition, but could also be due to an incubation period that changed the communities in the separate microcosms. there were six replicate microcosms to help control for variability between each jar, and our previous trflp profiling of the bacterial and fungal communities and the nosz gene showed no differences in community structure between the +no3- and –n microcosms  <cit> . therefore, we expect community changes in response to the 30 day incubation to be minimal compared to the no3- addition. nevertheless, the observed proportional increase in alphaproteobacteria and acidobacteria in response to no3- addition in the metagenomes requires more in depth study on the ecology of these groups and how they tolerate no3- pollution.

CONCLUSIONS
these results suggest that no3- additions to vernal pool habitats may be accompanied by relatively rapid microbial community changes at both the functional and taxonomic level. the initial community shift after only 20 hours of no3- exposure was toward a more stress tolerant community capable of performing fermentation and away from a community more dependant on respiratory pathways involving iron, as evidenced by higher iron acquisition egts in the –n microcosms. surprisingly, we found no changes to n metabolism egts with the blastx in response to our treatments and only a two sequence increase in detection of nitrate reductase genes, despite a vast increase in denitrification rate with no3- addition. thus, in the absence of an no3- addition, it is plausible that denitrifying microbes used other respiratory pathways for energy and, although no3- addition altered their metabolic response, it did not alter or affect community structure or size. because microbial communities are diverse, they are thought to be functionally redundant  <cit> . our results suggest that the vernal pool microbial communities profiled here may rely on this metabolic plasticity for growth and survival when certain resources are limiting.

the construction of these metagenomes also highlights how little is known about the effects of no3- pollution on microbial communities, and the relationship between community stability and function in response to disturbance. future research could begin to unravel the importance of stress tolerance and fermentation for microbial survival following short-term exposure to no3-. in addition, future studies on the presence of acidobacteria, a group that is understudied as a whole, in high no3- conditions can also help to understand the distribution of this taxonomic group.

