BACKGROUND
transposable elements  are part of the middle repetitive portion of dna that is able to move and replicate within the genome. they comprise a considerable fraction of many eukaryotic genomes and their sequences exhibit broad structural diversity. the wide range of transposition strategies adopted by tes involve either rna  or dna  intermediates. selfish and thus in many respects indistinguishable in their behavior from parasites, these mobile genetic units increase in number within the genome because their rates of transposition are higher than those of spontaneous deletion. this evolutionary success of tes is a major force shaping the genes and genomes of almost all organisms  <cit> .

the movement and accumulation of tes serves as a rich source of genetic material, with a strong impact on the evolutionary reorganization of the genomes of their bearers. however, it is now clear that inactive tes also play a significant role in macroevolution, because the most influential contributions can arise and persist long after transposition activity has ceased, such that they are manifested as te by-products. the selfish and parasitic characteristics of tes ensure their long-standing residence within the host genome and imply their intimate co-evolutionary relationship with it  <cit> .

the specific features of dna transposons compared to other tes enhance their influence in shaping eukaryotic genomes, including the capacity to excise imprecisely, jump locally, cause multiple double-strand breaks, and undergo alternative transposition  <cit> . the transposon galileo was originally discovered in drosophila buzzatii, in wich three segregating chromosomal inversions were shown to have been generated by ectopic recombination between galileo copies . although galileo has long terminal inverted repeats  similar to those of foldback-like elements, it is classified as a member of the p superfamily of dna transposons  based on the sequence of its putative transposase . subsequently, galileo was identified in six of the  <dig> sequenced drosophila genomes of the two subgenera of sophophora and drosophila, indicating its widespread distribution within this genus. although potentially active galileo copies have not been found, non-autonomous copies are abundant in all species investigated  <cit> . in addition, two or more galileo subfamilies coexisting within the same genome have been found in several cases: three subfamilies are present in d. buzzatii , two in d. virilis , and five in d. mojavensis  .

according to in silico predictions, galileo is strikingly abundant in drosophila willistoni
 <cit> , the most widespread neotropical species of the genus drosophila
 <cit> , with an extensive gene arrangement polymorphism on all chromosomes . this high intraspecific polymorphism for chromosomal inversions and galileo abundance suggest a role for galileo in the generation of inversions in d. willistoni and related species. we have an ongoing project to test this hypothesis by identifying and isolating the breakpoints of d. willistoni natural polymorphic inversions. as a first step in this in this project, we carried out an exhaustive search for and characterization of the galileo copies present in the d. willistoni genome. a careful and detailed annotation of  <dig> galileo sequences revealed that they vary considerably in length and structure, ranging from nearly-complete to containing only one tir. two galileo subfamilies with a substantial nucleotide divergence were found by phylogenetic analysis of tpase-encoding and tir segments. in addition, by analyzing the preferred target sequence of galileo in d. willistoni, we identified a palindromic target site motif .

RESULTS
characterization of galileocopies in the d. willistonigenome
we characterized  <dig> galileo copies in the d. willistoni genome , classifying them into six groups according to their structure :  nearly-complete;  two tirs and a partial tpase-encoding segment;  one tir and a partial tpase-encoding segment;  two tirs;  one tir only; and  a tpase-encoding segment. only one nearly-complete copy, containing two tirs and a nearly-complete tpase-encoding segment, was found. this copy, identified in previous work   <cit> , is 4386-bp long and harbors a long orf  encoding a 905-amino-acid tpase. the only mismatch is in the start codon, with acg = thr instead of the canonical atg = met; thus, this copy cannot be functional. nonetheless, this putative tpase is similar in size and composition to other galileo elements  <cit> . protein functional analysis, performed using interproscan  <dig>  <cit> , revealed the presence of a thap domain  in residues 14– <dig>  and a thap-domain containing a protein  <dig> domain  in residues 251– <dig> . thap is a dna-binding domain present in tpases of the p superfamily; this domain includes a zn-coordinating c2ch signature and four other invariant residues  that are also required for dna binding  <cit> . these eight residues are fully conserved at positions c <dig>  c <dig>  p <dig>  w <dig>  c <dig>  h <dig>  f <dig>  and p <dig> of the putative galileo tpase. the second conserved domain included the triad dde and the motif dh, which is present in the catalytic domain of cut-and-paste tpases of the p superfamily
 <cit>  at positions d <dig>  d <dig>  e <dig>  and d449h <dig> table  <dig> 
galileo
copies characterized in the
drosophila willistoni
genome


te, transposable element.
galileo
copies identified in the
drosophila willistoni
genome were classified into the following six groups according to structure: a) nearly-complete with two terminal inverted repeats  and nearly-complete transposase -encoding segment ; b) two tirs and a tpase segment; c) one tir and a tpase segment; d) two tirs; e) one tir; and f) a tpase segment. the black arrows represent the tirs. the blue middle region in a represents the nearly-complete tpase-encoding segment. the green middle region  represents a partial tpase-encoding segment. the black lines in d indicate the spacing sequences between the 5′ and 3′ tirs. these sequences do not show homology at the nucleotide level to any known sequence in the databases.



most  of the copies with preserved terminal sequences are flanked by identical target-site duplications . approximately  <dig> %  contain other elements inserted within them,  <dig> %  have other elements inserted at the galileo termini, and  <dig> %  have both inserted and flanking elements . in one case, we identified a full-length p element   <cit> , possibly with imperfect tsds  inserted within the galileo copy, that contained only fragments of tirs and identical tsds. of the copies with a tpase-encoding segment only , 58%  are located at the ends of short scaffolds ; thus, they may be incomplete, either because the rest of the sequence is present somewhere else or it is missing. none of the copies in groups b–f have an intact orf encoding a putatively functional tpase .

tir structural variation
galileo copies in the d. willistoni genome exhibit remarkable structural variation. in particular, the tirs vary considerably in length and structure compared to the tirs of the nearly-complete copy , which are 765/757-bp long and have 99% identity . the 3′ tir has a 69-bp overlap with the tpase-coding segment . thus, the final piece of this segment is repeated  at the 5’ tir. this is a unique trait among the described galileo transposons  <cit> . also, there are two at-rich segments, with the 136-bp segment located in the 5′ tir  and the 137-bp segment located in the 3′ tir .

three galileo copies were found to display significantly extended tirs and each one is flanked by identical tsds . the longest copy  is 9021-bp long, including tirs of 4246-bp and 4680-bp . this copy contains only two tirs and it lacks a tpase-coding segment. however, the tirs are notable for their striking length and repetitive structure . they contain direct tandem repeats and an insertion of another te in addition to the at-rich segments. this longest copy is the only one with direct tandem repeats within the tirs. the repeats are ~140-bp long and located approximately 1710-bp and 1730-bp from the 5′ and 3′ ends, respectively. the 5′ tir contains three repeat regions, two that are 275-bp long  and another that is 443-bp long . on the 3′ end, we annotated two longer repeat regions, a 995-bp region  and a 1246-bp region  . the tirs of this copy contain fragments of two additional transposons: p element and mar. at the 5′ and 3′ ends, we identified one fragment  of a p element   <cit> . of the seven fragments of mar that were annotated, two are 107-bp long  and the other five are 202-bp long   <cit> .figure  <dig> 
schematic representation of the
galileo
copies with the longest tirs . the black and pink arrows represent the tirs and the direct tandem repeats, respectively. transposable element  insertions are shown as solid rectangles: orange , purple , green , red . gray rectangles represent a-t-rich regions. the green middle arrows indicate the tpase-encoding segment. in the second copy . the gap between the tirs  is indicated by a black line. small blue arrowheads represent the tsds.
dot-matrix plot of the longest
galileo
copy in the
d. willistoni
genome. the copy structure contains two long tirs. the principal diagonal line with disruptions  shows the alignment between the two tirs. additional repetitive regions are represented by diagonally striped rectangles.



the copy  with the second longest tirs  is 4306-bp long . the tirs are composed of: 130-bp of at-rich sequence, 140-bp and 172-bp stretches  similar to transposon  <dig>   <cit> , and at least 545-bp of the galileo tpase . thus, in this galileo copy, tpase-encoding segments are repeated, forming part of the tirs . in addition, there is a 872-bp gap between the tirs  that may hide a larger tpase fragment. the third copy  has tirs that are 959-bp  in length, with 132-bp of at-rich sequence and the same fragments of the <dig> transposon present in the copy previously described. these last two copies are similar in their structure and have  <dig> % identity over the first 959-bp. however, they have different tsds, indicating that they are independent insertions.

galileosequence diversity in the d. willistonigenome
we aligned the tpase-coding segments from  <dig> galileo copies and used a ~488-bp region  to build a phylogenetic tree using maximum-likelihood  and bayesian inference  methods. the phylogenetic trees of the tpase-coding sequences created using the two methods were similar and recovered the same two clades with significant statistical support . the two clades showed a substantial nucleotide divergence between them  and were termed galileo subfamilies v and w. the analysis placed the nearly-complete copy within the w subfamily. assuming a drosophila synonymous substitution rate of  <dig>  substitutions per nucleotide/myr  <cit> , we estimated the split between the two subfamilies to ~  <dig> million years ago . the two subfamilies have a modest mean divergence between copies within each one  compared with the mean divergence between them  .figure  <dig> 
bayesian inference tree constructed with
galileo
tpase-encoding segments. the bootstrap values of each group node are indicated . the two subfamilies, v and w, are strongly supported. copies highlighted with symbols are also present in the phylogenetic analysis of the tirs. galileo  of d. virilis was used as the outgroup.


nucleotide divergence estimates  for the
galileo
subfamilies using transposase-coding sequences


galileoof d. virilis

galileo of d. virilis

galileo  of d. virilis was used.

we also aligned the tir regions and built a phylogenetic tree with  <dig> homologous segments . the topologies of the tir trees also yielded two clades, with 11%– <dig> % nucleotide divergence . several copies , in addition to the nearly-complete copy , contain both the initial portion of the tir and a tpase-encoding fragment. the phylogenetic placement of these copies suggests that the two clades in the tir phylogeny correspond to the above-defined v and w subfamilies . subfamily v was represented by copies with extended tirs  that have the homologous tir region . there was no significant difference in the lengths of the tirs among subfamilies. the mean divergence between copies of the two subfamilies was  <dig> %, whereas the mean divergence within subfamilies was much smaller  . the divergence within subfamilies includes the estimates between copies and between the two tirs within copies.figure  <dig> 
bayesian inference tree showing the relationships among
galileo
tirs. the groups were compressed to facilitate visualization; therefore,  <dig> and  <dig> sequences were omitted from the w and v subfamilies, respectively. the bootstrap values of each group node are indicated . the two subfamilies, v and w, are strongly supported. the galileo, kepler, and newton subfamilies of d. buzzatii were used as the outgroup in the phylogenetic analysis.


nucleotide divergence estimates  for the
galileo
subfamilies using the terminal inverted repeat regions


subfamilies of d. buzzatii

galileo subfamilies k, g and n of d. buzzatii were used.

the consensus sequences for the terminal 40-bp segment in galileo subfamilies v and w differed by 4 bp . a comparison of the  <dig> terminal bp region conserved in  <dig> galileo sequences of diverse species and subfamilies showed a total of  <dig> conserved nucleotides .figure  <dig> 
comparison of the tirs ends. a consensus sequence was constructed for the v and w subfamilies of the galileo tirs in d. willistoni. alignments of the 40-bp tirs of each galileo subfamily and species are shown. identical positions  in all sequences are marked in black, and the 80% and 60% conserved positions in green and gray, respectively.



target site duplication and target site motif
in most d. willistoni galileo copies, the tsds were 7-bp in length, as similarly reported in d. buzzatti
 <cit> . however, we identified three copies  in which the tsds were 8-bp long . comparison of the  <dig> flanking sequences of those galileo copies with the 7-bp tsd suggested that the consensus sequence of their preferential insertion site is gtattac .figure  <dig> 
sequence logo and consensus sequence for the 7-bp tsd and the 15-bp target site motif. the sequence underlined in black is the target preference for galileo in the d. willistoni genome.




the majority-rule consensus sequence for the flanking sequences of d. willistoni galileo copies suggested that the insertion sites are localized at the center of the at-rich region. analysis of the 93-bp surrounding the tsds revealed a target site motif  with a 15-bp palindromic pattern composed of 7-bp duplicated upon insertion plus 4-bp on either side of galileo . two pentanucleotides, aangt and acntt, were identified on the 5′ and 3′ halves of the tsm  <cit> . this motif could adopt a stem-loop secondary structure when denatured.

discussion
in the present study, we used different search strategies and a detailed manual annotation to fully characterize galileo copies in the drosophila willistoni genome. in contrast to previous work  <cit> , which reported on  <dig> copies, this study presents information on  <dig> copies. the long term goal of this project is to contrast the hypothesis that galileo generated some of the d. willistoni chromosomal inversions segregating in natural populations. the detailed annotation of all galileo copies present in the d. willistoni genome will greatly assist in the interpretation of the breakpoint sequences.

galileostructural variation
putatively functional copies of galileo were not found, although one nearly complete copy harbors an orf coding for a 905-amino-acid tpase . among the non-autonomous copies with tpase segments, the majority  were composed of tirs and a spacing region. in addition, they exhibit a remarkable structural variation, particularly in the tirs. galileo, along with two other transposons, p‒element and  <dig>  are members of the p superfamily
 <cit> . p elements move to a new site through a non-replicative process, i.e., the cut-and-paste mechanism of transposition, in which the excised copy leaves behind a double-strand gap  <cit> . because gap repair is not always efficient, whether via homologous recombination or using the sister chromatid strand as a template, defective copies are often generated due to abortion, slippage, or template switching in the course of transposition and repair  <cit> . furthermore, because transposons are dispersed repeats in the genome, non-allelic homologous recombination or ectopic recombination events are likely, thereby increasing the probability of exchange between two copies and affecting the structure of the sequences. these molecular processes can explain the gradient of galileo copies found in the d. willistoni genome, ranging from an almost-complete copy to defective copies restricted to the tirs, with various degrees of degeneration.

moreover, galileo displays dynamic restructuring. a recent analysis of the drosophila mojavensis genome  <cit>  identified two patterns of extension for galileo tirs:  expansion of the direct tandem repeats and  recruitment of internal sequences  into the tirs. in the d. willistoni genome, we identified direct tandem repeats within the tirs, but in a single copy only . we also found evidence of recruitment of non-tir segments into the tirs. remarkably, in the nearly-complete copy, a 69-bp final piece of the orf is now part of the 3′ tir, and it is repeated  at the end of the 5′ tir. in other copies, the overlap between the orf and tirs is even greater. for instance, in copy  <dig>  the segment of the orf recruited to the tirs is more than 500-bp long . this is, so far, a unique trait of galileo transposons  <cit> . finally, we found a third pattern of tir extension: the insertion of another te into one of the tirs, which eventually may be transferred to the other tir, ultimately becoming a part of both. the te fragments are not occasional insertions in one galileo tir; rather they are part of the 5′ and 3′ ends in transposing copies. we detected the insertion of three elements in the longest tirs, i.e., p, mar, and  <dig>  the first two were previously studied in d. willistoni
, but the origin of the  <dig> fragment is obscure because in d. willistoni transposon  <dig> is missing  <cit> .

two galileosubfamilies in the d. willistonigenome
in previous work  <cit> , a limited number of galileo copies were isolated from the d. willistoni genome, and a subsequent phylogenetic analysis did not detect a significant structure. here, our phylogenetic analysis, based on an increased number of copies, revealed two strongly supported clades, which we named subfamilies v and w. the two clades were evident in phylogenetic analyses carried out using either a segment of the orf or the final 100-bp of the tirs. although in our study only six copies were shared between the two phylogenies, two in subfamily v  and four in subfamily w , the results are congruent and suggest the same grouping in the two subfamilies. the presence of galileo subfamilies within the same genome seems to be the rule rather than the exception, as was previously found in d. buzzatii , d. virilis , and d. mojavensis  . furthermore, the coexistence of different subfamilies, subgroups, or variants of tes was reported in studies of bari
 <cit>  and gypsy
 <cit>  in drosophila, p in anopheles gambiae and drosophila
 <cit> , and mariner in insects and humans  <cit> , among others.

how have these galileo copies differentiated in the genome of d. willistoni? horizontal transfer  and vertical diversification are the two main hypotheses that explain the coexistence of different subfamilies in the same genome  <cit> . ht would account for the appearance of the two subfamilies, via two independent events of galileo invasion in the d. willistoni genome. several mechanisms and vectors have been proposed to explain ht events. in drosophila parasites and parasitoids, such as mites and wasps, intracellular symbiotic bacteria, such as wolbachia and spiroplasms, are possible vectors of tes  <cit> . ht can also result from an introgression, as reported in the willistoni subgroup , and is a potential mechanism for p element spreading among this subgroup  <cit> . although the ht hypothesis in the case of galileo has yet to be disproven, our data suggest that, based on the landscape of this transposon in d. willistoni, the copies instead diverged from an ancestral element in the genome. although no complete copies of galileo have been found, its functional differentiation would have had to be driven by specific selective pressures, resulting in the formation of two distinct galileo tpases to overcome cellular repression of transposition. we identified galileo copies composed of tirs with conserved tpase site affinity in the genome; these could have served as a source for the other defective copies. furthermore, ht and vertical diversification are not mutually exclusive; thus, successive invasions and structural variations may have occurred during the diversification of tes. concerning the preservation of galileo tirs, the mean divergence for these sequences was only one half  of that for the tpase-encoding segment . under a neutral evolution model, the same degree of divergence would be expected; however, in the case of galileo, there are more constraints in the terminal segment  of its tirs than in its tpase-encoding segment because the former are required for transposition.

galileoinsertional preference
dna transposons generate, upon insertion, direct duplications of short genome sequences . in d. buzzatii, a comparison of the  <dig> flanking sequences suggested that galileo generates 7-bp tsds with the consensus sequence gtagtac  <cit> . a larger sample  in six sequenced drosophila genomes  identified the consensus sequence gtantac  <cit> . we found that the galileo tsds in d. willistoni are typically 7-bp but, as occurs in most p element insertions, three galileo copies had tsds of 8-bp. additionally, by comparing  <dig> galileo copies flanked by identical 7-bp sequences, we were able to infer that the preferential insertion site has a consensus sequence of gtattac, in which the fourth position differs from that occurring in galileo copies in d. buzzatii. these findings are in agreement with those of a study of six drosophila genomes. linheiro and bergman  <cit>  measured the degree of target specificity for different elements in d. melanogaster. they found that  <dig> and p elements seem to have a relatively low degree of target specificity. galileo seems to have a higher target specificity than either  <dig> or the p element. accordingly, it can be detected with a lower number of insertions  <cit> .

a previous study identified a 14-bp palindromic pattern centered on the 8-bp tsd generated by p element insertion  <cit> . sequence motifs at te target sites are always palindromes that extend beyond the tsd  <cit> . here, by analyzing the region around the tsds, a 15-bp palindrome was identified; in addition, the galileo tsm also had a general tendency to be at-rich. although the tendency in the tsms of both p element and  <dig> is to have an anagt motif in the 5′ half and an actnt motif in the 3′ half, the galileo tsm while palindromic, is not identical in sequence .

CONCLUSIONS
our detailed analysis of  <dig> galileo copies revealed an enormous variety in their size and structure. in some copies, there were different forms of tir extension, including internal duplications, recruitment of the final piece of the tpase-encoding orf into the tirs and secondary te insertions in one tir that subsequently become part of both tirs. two galileo subfamilies  coexist in the d. willistoni genome. they are evident in the phylogenetic trees of both the tpase-encoding and the tir segments. however, phylogenetic analysis showed that the divergence between and within subfamilies is smaller in the tir segment than in the tpase-encoding segment, presumably because the former is required for transposition. galileo shows a stronger target preference that  <dig> or p-element, the other two members of the p superfamily.

