BACKGROUND
during the last century, an erosion of cattle genetic resources was observed in many countries around the world as a result of a massive replacement of low-productive local breeds with highly productive ones. according to the fao , there are currently more than  <dig> taurine and indicine breeds in the world. among these, many local cattle breeds are already extinct , endangered  or have an as-yet unknown risk status , and they may disappear before they are fully studied or their characteristics are recorded  <cit> . many of these breeds have been selected for their adaptation to local environments, as well as from recent artificial selection programs, thus leading to a wide range of inter-population genetic diversities. the conservation of local breeds and the monitoring of their genetic diversity are fundamental to meet future breeding needs, especially in the context of global climate change  <cit> .

the emergence of high-throughput snp genotyping facilities coupled with the gradual reduction of genotyping costs may help elucidate the genetic diversity and structure of endangered populations. such information is crucial for the conservation and sustainable use of genetic resources. moreover, comparing the genomic structure of population sets from different parts of the world provides a new glimpse into their origin and history.

local cattle in tunisia belong to three main populations according to morphological criteria: the blonde du cap bon , the brune de l’atlas grise , and the brune de l’atlas fauve . today, these three populations are endangered by massive crossing with imported breeds to improve their production performance  <cit> . indigenous cattle in tunisia play an important role as cash reserves in low-income extensive farming systems in the arid regions of the center as well as in the northern mountainous regions of the country. these animals have low maintenance costs and are well adapted to the harsh conditions of these regions . additionally, local cattle have a strong cultural significance as they reflect a long history of symbiosis with human populations.

the aim of the present study was to provide a detailed assessment of the genetic structure of tunisian local cattle populations and to trace back their origin and history using medium density snp chips.

for this purpose, we first genotyped  <dig> tunisian individuals from the three populations using the illumina bovinesnp <dig> beadchip, and we subsequently combined our genotyping data with publicly available data from  <dig> other populations  representative of african , european  and zebu  cattle. the results of our study provide a detailed assessment of the genetic diversity and structure of tunisian local cattle populations, shedding light on the origin and history of tunisian local populations through their genetic relationship with the bovine hapmap dataset populations; these insights into population structure and genetic diversity in tunisian local populations are further elucidated by relating our results to previous reports about the domestication and dispersal of cattle in africa and europe.

RESULTS
genetic diversity
the genetic diversity of tunisian breeds measured by expected heterozygosity  using all available bovinesnp <dig> beadchip snps was similar to that observed for european breeds and broadly equivalent to  <dig> . indicine populations of indian origin  had the lowest hs rates, ranging from  <dig>  to  <dig> , while african populations had slightly higher hs values ranging from  <dig>  to  <dig>  . the large difference in hs levels between european breeds the one hand and african and indicine populations on the other is most likely due to the fact that snps on the bovinesnp <dig> beadchip were primarily identified from european breeds. bearing this in mind, an excess of low maf snps  was observed within african and indicine breeds . the exclusion of snps with maf lower than 1 % observed in aft and zeb breeds resulted in an increase of the expected hs levels for all breeds . this increase was most pronounced within hybrid , aft, and zeb populations with african origins . for tunisian populations, the increase in expected hs was smaller than that of the hybrid , and more pronounced than that observed for european breeds. therefore, the inference of population structure from the bovinesnp <dig> beadchip should be done with caution due to this ascertainment bias.

average inbreeding for all populations, measured by fis, was almost null  but slightly positive for bratg and bratf  indicating the absence of any cryptic population structure in our brune de l’atlas samples .

fis was slightly negative for blcap  but fis 95 % ci computed with  <dig> randomly chosen snps and  <dig>  bootstraps was slightly positive . this could indicate the absence of any population structure for blcap, as seen with the brune de l’atlas populations. on the other hand, the oul, bsw and sgt breeds had negative values for both the fis values and fis 95 % ci, indicating an excess of heterozygosity beyond that expected under hardy-weinberg equilibrium within these populations.

assessment of population structure using tree-based methods
in order to have a genetic characterization of tunisian local breeds, we first computed the genetic distance between each pair of individuals from the number of loci for which they differ. a neighbor-joining tree was computed based on the estimated genetic distances . the topology of the tree showed a clear separation between aft, zeb and eut populations  and maraichine ). individuals belonging to the same breed were grouped together leading to a clear separation between most breeds. most of the tunisian animals from the three populations were grouped into a single cluster that branched close to the european breeds. some animals belonging to bratf and bratg branched close to bru and bsw, suggesting a brown swiss influence on these animals. the admixed breed oul  from morocco was placed on the side of european breeds  whereas individuals belonging to the sgt breed  branched near ang. west african hybrid populations  were placed between african longhorn n’dama  and indicine populations from indian origin. similarly, hybrid cgu individuals  were grouped into two distinct clusters: the first was located in an intermediary position between aft and eut populations, while the second branched close to the african zebu, suggesting an indicine influence .fig  <dig> unrooted neighbor-joining tree of  <dig> individuals using  <dig>  snps. the distance between each pair of individuals was defined as the number of loci for which they differ. edges are colored according to the individual breed of origin



assessment of population structure using multivariate statistics
we used principal component analysis  to locate the tunisian individuals compared to the other populations of the study. pca grouped individuals in clusters according to their populations of origin . the first two principal components  explained approximately 13 %  and 7 %  of the global variation. the first pc axis  aligned populations according to an indicine/taurine gradient while the second one  aligned them according to an aft/eut gradient. tunisian populations were positioned close to european breeds along the second pc <dig> axis but slightly tilting toward zebu on pc <dig>  especially for blcap. for the other hybrid populations, sgt animals were positioned close to taurines on the pc <dig> axis and close to eut breeds on the pc <dig> axis. individuals belonging to the cgu breed fell at an intermediate position between indicine and taurine breeds on pc <dig>  but were closer to eut than aft populations on pc <dig>  as expected, bor and kur animals were placed on the zeb/aft segment, closer to indicine breeds on pc <dig> and to aft on pc <dig>  finally, shk, which was originally ranked as an aft breed, was placed on the zeb/aft segment but closer to indicine than aft.fig  <dig> pca results of allele frequencies obtained from  <dig>  snps genotyped in  <dig> cattle individuals from  <dig> populations. the first two principal components, pc <dig> and pc <dig>  accounted for 13 % and 7 %, respectively of the total variation. the first pc axis  aligned populations according to an indicine/taurine gradient while the second  aligned them according to an aft/eut gradient



the predefined group dapc  gave similar results to those obtained with pca, i.e., a first indicine/taurine axis and a second aft/eut axis . however, dapc enabled better discrimination between breeds from the same origin. in this regard, northern european breeds  were clearly separated from the other eut breeds. african shorthorn  was also clearly separated from the other aft populations.

dapc provides membership probabilities of each individual for the different populations of the study based on the retained discriminant functions. plotting these probabilities for tunisian animals revealed that one individual originally identified as bratf was instead assigned to bru . this individual was therefore discarded from our data analysis. in the same manner, four individuals initially identified as blcap and five individuals initially identified as bratg were assigned to the bratf population with membership probability close to one . we thus corrected for the population origin of these animals in our data analysis.

in the a posteriori dapc , the grouping obtained for k =  <dig> gave an accurate description of the data . most of the tunisian individuals were assigned to cluster eight and three bratg individuals to cluster  <dig>  both groups have their center of gravity tightly linked. genetic clusters  <dig> , nine  and four  were the closest to tunisian individuals.

assessment of population structure using model-based methods
we used the unsupervised hierarchical clustering implemented in the admixture software  <cit>  to estimate proportions of ancestry from each contributing genetic cluster in the populations of the study . in this analysis, we used several values of k corresponding to ancestral populations.fig  <dig> unsupervised hierarchical clustering of the  <dig> individuals from the  <dig> populations. results for k  =  <dig>  k =  <dig>  k =  <dig>  k =  <dig> and k =  <dig> are shown. individuals are grouped by population. each individual is represented by a vertical bar. the proportion of the bar in each of k colors corresponds to the average posterior likelihood that the individual is assigned to the cluster indicated by that color. populations are separated by black lines



for k equal to  <dig>  the aft, eut and zeb populations were clearly separated, whereas hybrid populations showed varying proportions of african, european and indicine ancestries. the tunisian samples were made up of the three ancestries in different proportions. in particular, blcap individuals showed the greatest proportion of aft  ancestry  followed by bratf with 43 % of aft  and by bratg with 32 % of aft . among all african taurines only shk showed more indicine  than african  ancestry.

increasing the number of clusters to k =  <dig> resulted in the main subgroups of european breeds. the first group included brown swiss  and south european breeds  while the second one can be viewed as north european breeds . on the other hand, tunisian populations showed more southern than northern european ancestry. of the three populations, bratg showed the highest southern european admixture level  while blcap showed the lowest .

when k was set to  <dig>  the two brown swiss populations, bru and bsw, formed a distinct cluster while two subdivisions appeared among african taurines that might be interpreted as representative of longhorn  and shorthorn . interestingly, both bratf and bratg populations showed a substantial level of admixture with brown swiss  and up to 25 % of admixture has been observed with some animals. african ancestry within tunisian populations and oul , is mainly from longhorn .

at k =  <dig>  zbo and zfu were placed together in a separate cluster. tunisian populations appear to have inherited their indicine ancestry via african ancestors since they shared almost all of their indicine ancestry with the zbo/zfu cluster.

finally, fixing k to  <dig>  revealed that almost 85 % of the blcap genome was shared with 35 % and 26 % of the bratf and bratg genomes, respectively.

genetic differentiation
to get more insight into the genetic relationship between the different populations of the study, we estimated the fst for pairwise comparisons of all populations, using both genepop software  and the r package stampp . the latter allows for the computation of fst 95 % ci intervals .

pairwise fst values obtained with both software packages were very similar and revealed lower values for blcap/bratf  and bratf/bratg  but higher levels of differentiation between blcap and bratg . tunisian populations had moderate fst values  with almost all south european breeds and presented high levels of differentiation  with north european breeds. we also observed moderate fst values between brune de l’atlas populations and the bru breed.

although, high fst values were observed between tunisian populations and african cattle, these were clearly lower with african longhorn than african shorthorn populations . among the three tunisian populations, bratf had the lowest fst values with both african and european populations, while blcap tends to have lower levels of differentiation with african populations than bratg. this trend was reversed when comparing pairwise fst values of these two breeds with south european breeds .

interestingly, low to moderate fst values were observed between tunisian populations and cgu ranging from  <dig>  for bratf/cgu to  <dig>  for bratg/cgu. surprisingly, these values were higher than those observed between tunisian populations and oul .

phylogenetic analysis
to provide additional insight into the origin and evolutionary history of tunisian populations, we constructed a neighbornet graph based on nei genetic distance . breeds belonging to one of the three main types  were grouped together. in agreement with fst and pca results, tunisian populations branched between aft and eut breeds with blcap closer than bratg to aft populations. additionally, tunisian populations showed short branch lengths indicating a low degree of divergence. sets of parallel edges  on the neighbornet graph observed between bratg and blcap indicate past hybridization events between the two populations.fig  <dig> neighbor net graph, constructed based on nei’s genetic distance, relating the  <dig> populations of the study. reticulations on the graph indicate past hybridization events between populations



finally, we used the treemix software to model both population splits and gene flow between a subset of  <dig> populations. we first constructed a phylogenetic tree where no migration events were allowed . among tunisian populations, bratg was the closest to european breeds while blcap was the closest to african populations. we then sequentially added up to eight migration events to the tree . to further check the topology of the phylogenetic tree and the consistency of migration edges, we performed two independent runs of treemix with eight migrations . we obtained roughly the same results in the three treemix runs.fig  <dig> maximum likelihood tree inferred from  <dig> cattle populations when no migration edges were fit. the scale bar shows ten times the average standard error of the estimated entries in the sample covariance matrix

fig  <dig> maximum likelihood tree inferred from  <dig> cattle populations when eight migration events  were allowed. migration arrows are colored according to their weight. the scale bar shows ten times the average standard error of the estimated entries in the sample covariance matrix



all the three phylogenetic trees showed bratg sister to brown swiss  and identified high levels of introgression from the common ancestor of these two populations into bratf . additionally, treemix runs showed an important level of african cattle introgression into bratg and oul populations  and evidence of gene flow between bratf and blcap . finally, low levels of indicine introgression were also identified into bratf and bratg . these results were in agreement with unsupervised hierarchical clustering results.

significantly negative f <dig> statistics  showed evidence for aft and eut admixture in the three tunisian populations with the strongest evidence for admixture found for bratf . however, there was a clear difference in the origins of the ancestral european population between blcap and bratg. in this regard, european ancestry of blcap derived mainly from north europe  while that of bratg derived mainly from brown swiss .

discussion
genetic diversity and relationship between tunisian indigenous cattle
our results show that gene diversity of the three tunisian populations, measured by heterozygosity, was among the highest within the populations of the study and was similar to those observed in european breeds. this is more likely due to the combined effect of their european ancestry and their admixed origin. indeed, all other hybrid populations with a european ancestry showed a similar range of genetic diversity.

we attributed low hs values  within indicine breeds to ascertainment bias in the snp discovery of the bovinesnp <dig> beadchip. indeed, in contrast to our findings, other studies showed that more diversity is observed within indicine breeds than within taurine breeds. for instance, the bovine hapmap consortium reported that nucleotide diversity in brahman cattle is more than twice that observed within holstein and angus breeds  <cit> . by analyzing sequence diversity assayed for  <dig> genes, murray et al.  <cit>  showed that nucleotide diversity is higher in indicine breeds than in european and african breeds, with the latter showing the lowest diversity for most of the sequenced genes  <cit> . the observed ascertainment bias led us to hypothesize that the genetic diversity of tunisian populations is underestimated with the bovinesnp <dig> beadchip as polymorphic sites of african origin present in the genome of tunisian cattle were not included on the chip. the higher dispersion of tunisian populations around their center of gravity in pca and dapc figures  and the neighbor-joining tree obtained from the genetic distance between each pair of individuals , indicate higher genetic diversity in tunisian populations than in european ones. this reflects the low levels of genetic drift  in tunisian populations.

low pairwise fst values between tunisian populations, shared ancestry detected between them in unsupervised hierarchical clustering when setting k to  <dig>  and reticulations observed between tunisian populations on the phylogenetic tree , all suggest high levels of gene flow between the three populations. moreover, pairwise fst values, genetic distances between individuals, and treemix phylogenetics all show that blcap and bratf are genetically closer to each other than bratg. this is probably due to the fact that the bratg population is primarily isolated in the mountainous regions of northwest tunisia, while the blcap and bratf populations are located in closer geographic proximity in more accessible areas, thus leading to an easier mixing between these two populations.

tunisian local cattle breeds with two main ancestries
in this study, we presented consistent evidence of an admixed origin of tunisian indigenous cattle with both african and european ancestries. our analyses showed that these two ancestries are present in varying proportions between the three tunisian populations. the difference is more pronounced between blcap and bratg. at k =  <dig>  the blacp population tended to have a balanced proportion of african and european ancestries while bratg had a more pronounced european influence. this hypothesis was corroborated by the results of pairwise population fst, pca, dapc, and the phylogenetic analysis.

increasing the number of inferred genetic clusters to five showed that european ancestry in tunisian breeds arises both from north and south europe, with the proportion of the latter being double of the former. this trend is supported by pairwise fst results  and by the proximity of tunisian populations from south european rather than north european populations in the pca and dapc. additionally, we noticed that the difference in the proportions of european ancestry between the three tunisian populations arises from a south european origin. previous genetic studies supported by archaeological evidence reported a difference between north and south european cattle populations, attributing it to movement of cattle occurring along two distinct routes from the cattle domestication center in the middle east. the first migration route, called the danubian route, was followed by neolithic farmers as they moved along the balkans into the plains of central and northern europe. the second, called the mediterranean route, arose as farming spread from the balkans and southern italy to corsica, southern france and spain by 7700 years bp  <cit> . based on these findings, we hypothesize that north european ancestry in tunisian populations is old and could likely be traced back to the first domestication center in the middle east, unlike south european ancestry whose influence on tunisian populations is more recent.

from f <dig> statistics and the results of unsupervised hierarchical clustering , we detected a substantial brown swiss influence, both on bratf and bratg and to a much lesser extent on blcap . however, when brune de l’atlas populations were analyzed independently, we observed that only 12 % of the animals had more than 30 % of their ancestry originating from brown swiss, while more than 77 % of bratf animals had less than 10 % of brown swiss ancestry  and ~75 % of bratg animals had less than 18 % of brown swiss ancestry. these findings led us to conclude that introgression from brown swiss occurred several hundreds of generations ago and left few footprints in the brune de l’atlas genome.

the pronounced signals of brown swiss identified in a few brune de l’atlas individuals most likely have a much more recent origin . indeed, due to their morphological similarity to brown swiss cattle, brune de l’atlas animals were commonly crossed with the brown swiss breed  <cit> .

likewise, from the low levels of genetic differentiation observed between tunisian populations and the cgu breed, it has been posited that tunisian populations are closely related to local breeds from the iberian peninsula. indeed, cgu cattle were introduced in the caribbean islands by spanish and portuguese conquerors after the second trip of columbus in  <dig> . many studies highlighted the north african taurine influence on iberian cattle, which took place during two distinct migration events: the first during the bronze age  <cit> , and the second during the moorish occupation from the 8th to the 13th century  <cit> .

additionally, our results suggest that african taurine influence on tunisian local cattle has a longhorn origin and that the small amount of indicine ancestry found in the three populations mainly has an african origin. archaeological studies reported that longhorn taurines were introduced from domestication centers  into africa through egypt and the horn of africa in about  <dig> bc  <cit> , while zebu was introduced later into africa from arabia and asia, through two migration waves: the first in around  <dig> bc, where zebu cattle were crossed with longhorn cattle in ethiopia and somalia, and the second during and after the islamic conquests in around  <dig> bc  <cit> . linking these reports to our results, we argue that indicine ancestry in tunisian local cattle was inherited via african taurine ancestors from the eastern and north-eastern sides of the continent  that spread west along with arabic influences. our hypothesis is corroborated by a recent study finding an increase in the percent of indicine ancestry when moving from west to east and from south to central africa  <cit> . additionally, we observed that, among the three tunisian populations, bratf showed the smallest degree of divergence. this was highlighted by shorter branch length in the phylogentic tree , by lower pairwise fst values with all breeds  and by greater evidence for admixture .

CONCLUSIONS
to our knowledge, our study is the first of its kind aiming to assess the genetic structure of tunisian indigenous populations and to establish their genetic origin using medium density snp chips and comparisons with worldwide cattle. in the present study, we show that tunisian local cattle populations have high genetic diversity, reflecting the absence of strong artificial selection. we also show the existence of a recent introgression of brown swiss in some brune de l’atlas individuals. given that our sample collection took place at locations that are quite remote with respect to artificial insemination circuits, we can conclude that the presence of purely local individuals has become rare and thus highlighting the need to implement a national conservation strategy. finally, as our study provided a comprehensive picture of the genetic structure and origins of tunisian local cattle populations, it can also be used to investigate genetic variants underlying adaptation traits in these populations.

