BACKGROUND
coevolution within predator-prey interactions has led to adaptations that are advantageous for either prey capture or predation avoidance. in predators, these traits may be under strong selection leading to successful capture of prey  <cit> , but they are relatively under-studied compared to the mechanisms involved in anti-predator adaptations  <cit> . darwin  <cit>  suggested that diversification of predators may be largely based on selection on predatory behaviors, and adaptations to observable phenotypic characteristics that are advantageous to prey capture are commonly examined. for example, evolution of craniofacial asymmetries has shown to increase predation success in scale-eating cichlids  <cit>  as well as in snail-eating snakes  <cit> . phenotypic plasticity undoubtedly plays a critical role in diversification of predators and prey, often leading to adaptations in behavior, life history, physiology and morphology of species  <cit> . further, competition, predation and utilization of dangerous prey have been proposed as the most significant factors of selection on organisms  <cit> . the ability of predators to adapt to dangerous prey, such as garter snake  resistance to tetrodotoxin  of taricha newts  <cit> , provides strong evidence for a coevolutionary arms race between predators and prey. however, adaptations in predatory behaviors to avoid complete retaliation from dangerous prey may be rare. nevertheless, natural selection can be expected to lead to adaptations influencing behaviors that are most advantageous to prey capture  <cit> , and further examination of the molecular mechanisms allowing for these large scale behavioral adaptations is critical for understanding coevolution between predator-prey interactions. many studies examining phenotypic plasticity in species address various forms of plasticity separately, yet this variety may have significantly different ecological consequences  <cit> . among venomous snakes, venom characteristics are under positive directional selection  <cit> , and the presence of specific venom components may have played a critical role in diversification of predatory behaviors of several snake taxa.

rattlesnakes and other vipers demonstrate one of the most advanced modes of predation among vertebrates, utilizing a strike-and-release mode of envenomation. this behavior provides the benefit of minimal contact or retaliation from potentially dangerous prey, but adds the additional task of locating the trail left behind by the envenomated prey that may wander several meters or more from the attack site. by using rapid tongue flicking  to detect, and the vomeronasal organs to analyze volatile and non-volatile chemical cues  <cit> , snakes must then differentiate between the trail deposited by the prey before and after envenomation has occurred, as well as the trails left inadvertently by other potential prey and non-prey sources. several hypotheses have addressed the source of chemical cues used to discriminate between trails of struck and unstruck prey. cues emanating from the mouse when it is punctured during the envenomating strike, as well as other potential chemical cues, such as urine or volatiles from venom left on the prey's integument, have been examined, yet are not utilized by snakes  <cit> . these previous results indicate that venom must be injected into tissues to initiate a release of chemical odor, permitting discrimination of envenomated prey and their trails. a convenient bioassay of vomeronasal chemoreception was previously developed for evaluating preference towards envenomated  vs. non-envenomated  mouse carcasses, with snakes showing high rates of tongue flicking directed toward e carcasses . this preference holds when envenomation occurs by a conspecific or by a closely related heterospecific  <cit> , or when lyophilized conspecific venom is injected into previously euthanized prey  <cit> . therefore, venoms represent not only a rapid-acting chemical means of dispatching potentially fractious prey  <cit> ; they also greatly increase the perceptibility of the envenomated prey carcass  <cit> . however, the specific component of snake venom allowing for successful recovery of prey and further diversification of prey handling behaviors has not been identified.

RESULTS
to determine which component of venom allows for rattlesnakes to differentiate between envenomated  and non-envenomated  prey, we offered western diamondback rattlesnakes  e and ne mouse carcasses; e mice were injected with either crude venom or with fractionated protein or peptide peaks of crude venom . non-envenomated mice were injected with a saline control. when artificial envenomation occurred with whole crude venom, the mean number of tongue flicks was significantly greater for the e mouse . when total number of tongue flicks were converted to percentage of tongue flicks , results confirmed that c. atrox directed significantly more tongue flicks at the e than at ne mice  . these results agree with numerous studies of vomeronasal response of rattlesnakes to e versus ne prey  <cit> , including a previous study performed using the same pool of c. atrox venom as used in this report  <cit> .

mean number of tongue flicks and mean percent  tongue flicks  directed at non-envenomated  and envenomated  mice by crotalus atrox when mice were envenomated by whole crude venom. single-sample t-test was conducted on mean percentages where mean percent to e mice were compared with 50%, the value expected under the null hypothesis; df =  <dig>  because the two means are not independent, the same t value but with the opposite sign would be obtained for each mean. for raw data, see additional file  <dig>  table s <dig>  ** p <  <dig> .

to test snake responses toward fractionated protein and peptide peaks, crude c. atrox venom was separated using low-pressure size exclusion liquid chromatography, and four major protein peaks, labeled i, iia, iib and iii, as well as three downstream peptide peaks, were resolved . when mouse carcasses were envenomated with either peaks i, iia, iib or the peptide peaks, there was no significant difference between the mean number of tongue flicks or the percentages of tongue flicks directed towards either the e or ne carcasses . however, for peak iii, there were significantly more tongue flicks directed towards the e mouse , and the mean percentage of tongue flicks toward the envenomated carcass  was also significantly higher than the null . analysis of variance  indicated a significant main effect of conditions . the newman-kewls range test also revealed that the mean for peak iii was significantly higher than the means for peaks i, iia, iib and the peptide peaks , which did not differ significantly among themselves . further, in  <dig> out of  <dig> peak iii trials, snakes tongue flicked more towards the e mouse , whereas for peaks i, iia, iib and the combined peptide peaks, there was no preference shown over the e mouse or the ne mouse .

mean number of tongue flicks and mean percent  tongue flicks  directed at non-envenomated  and envenomated  mice by crotalus atrox when mice were envenomated using biogel peaks i, iia, iib, iii or combined peptide peaks. single-sample t-test was conducted on mean percentages in which mean percent tongue flicks to e mice were compared with 50%, the value expected under the null hypothesis. because the two means within each paired comparison are not independent, the same t-value but with the opposite sign would be obtained for each mean. for raw data, see additional file  <dig>  table s <dig>  ** p <  <dig> .

we next sought to examine the components in peak iii that produced this significant vomeronasal response. because metalloproteinase enzymes are prevalent components of most viper venoms  <cit>  and because they would still catalyze degradation of non-living e mouse tissues, we hypothesized that these enzymes would be responsible for "tagging" of e prey. assays for enzymes common in rattlesnake venoms  indicated that all of these activities were confined to peaks i through iib . sds-page  and mass spectrometry of peak iii  revealed only peptides with masses of approximately  <dig>  kd. further analysis of peak iii through reverse-phase high pressure liquid chromatography  yielded two peaks  that were subjected to matrix assisted laser desorption ionization time-of-flight  mass spectrometer analysis. these results yielded masses of  <dig> . <dig> da  and  <dig> . <dig> da , respectively, indicating that the proteins isolated were the disintegrins crotatroxin  <dig> and crotatroxin  <dig>  n-terminal sequencing of peak iii proteins confirmed the identity of these disintegrins .

discussion
determining the molecular mechanisms leading to large-scale adaptations of predatory behaviors, including, in this case, relocation of prey, is critical for understanding predator-prey interactions, evolutionary biology and natural history of pit vipers. our findings show that the venom disintegrins crotatroxin  <dig> and  <dig> alone allowed c. atrox to distinguish between envenomated and non-envenomated prey sources, presumably by altering the chemical odor of prey integument. crotatroxins are medium-sized monomeric disintegrins with approximate masses of  <dig>  kda and contain  <dig> to  <dig> amino acids with six disulfide bonds, differing only by the presence of an additional n-terminal alanine in crotatroxin  <dig> . disintegrins are non-enzymatic and are produced by the proteolytic posttranslational processing of the c-terminal domain of p-ii snake venom metalloproteinases  <cit> . the presence of dimeric disintegrins in other viperid venoms has also been documented; however, only medium-sized monomeric disintegrins appear to be present in c. atrox venom  <cit> . it is currently unknown if dimeric disintegrins will produce the same type of vomeronasal response as the monomeric disintegrins did in this current study. a primary activity of disintegrins is the inhibition of platelet aggregation by selectively binding integrin receptors expressed on cell surfaces  <cit> . the majority of monomeric disintegrins, including crotatroxins  <dig> and  <dig>  contain an active arg-gly-asp  sequence  <cit> , which has been shown to block numerous classes of integrin receptors with a high degree of selectivity. therefore, the action of crotatroxins which results in successful relocation of envenomated prey via sics likely involves an integrin binding mechanism and further release of volatile cues detectable by rattlesnakes.

rattlesnake venoms are classified as either type i venoms, containing high metalloproteinase activity and lower toxicity, or type ii venoms, containing low metalloproteinase activity and higher toxicity  <cit> . although some strike-and-release rattlesnakes, such as c. scutulatus scutulatus  and c. tigris, contain less than  <dig> % venom metalloproteinases, proteomic studies have identified disintegrins in their venoms  <cit> . these species possess type ii venoms with potent lethal toxicity, so the possibility of prey wandering a significant distance from the attack site before it has succumbed to venom is much less likely than species exhibiting type i venom, making relocation following a strike less challenging for these highly toxic rattlesnakes. disintegrins make up approximately 2%  of the total venom proteins/peptides of crude c. atrox venom, though the abundance of this protein  may vary between individual snakes. the utilization of a relatively minor venom component to "tag" envenomated prey may also explain the "overkill method"  <cit>  employed by venomous snakes. it has long been observed that many taxa of venomous snakes inject prey with amounts of venom which vastly exceed the mouse model ld <dig>  often by several orders of magnitude  <cit> . in part, this "excessive" dosage is explained by differential sensitivity of various prey to specific toxins  <cit>  and venoms  <cit> , induced by coevolutionary responses of both prey and their snake predators  <cit> . for example, some prey species are much less affected by venoms, while others are highly sensitive . however, another important factor, in particular, among the strike-and-release predators, such as most viperids, is the need to discriminate between competing prey trails , selecting the one leading to the previously envenomated prey. this is likely a main reason why rattlesnakes use apparently large quantities of venom - to achieve a "minimum perceptible dose"  <cit> .

venoms consist of a myriad of proteins and peptides that may vary based on age, geographic locations and prey preference of the snake  <cit> 
. this complexity of venom composition, coupled with the fact that many species specialize on specific prey, likely result in selective pressures on venom characteristics, leading to the evolution of advantageous venom phenotypes and predatory behaviors  <cit> . on a trophic level, the roles of disintegrins and many other proteins found in venoms still remain relatively unknown. in whole venom, disintegrins which have not been proteolytically processed could potentially assist in the targeting of pii snake venom metalloproteinases  to specific integrin receptors in cell membranes  <cit> , giving rise to chemical changes recognized by the snakes. lys <dig> phospholipase a2s have also been suggested to act as a tag of envenomated prey  <cit> ; however, we have demonstrated that neither the metalloproteinase-containing nor the pla2-containing fractions of c. atrox venom elicited prey relocating responses.

to the best of our knowledge, all pit vipers that have been tested have shown significant preference for envenomated prey , indicating that disintegrins in other venoms, not just those in c. atrox, assist in prey relocation for other pit viper species. but not all snake venoms contain disintegrins. how are prey relocated in these cases? atractaspis species  use a unilateral slashing envenomation behavior to feed on neonatal rodents within nests and burrows  <cit> , and prey escape after envenomation is highly improbable. elapids are typically strike-and-hold predators  <cit> , with venoms rich in rapid-acting three-finger toxins  <cit> , and so the presence of a "relocator protein" in these venoms is not likely advantageous. similarly, neonate rattlesnakes that generally strike-and-hold prey  <cit>  produce much smaller amounts of venom and have significantly lower concentrations of metalloproteinases, the protein family that releases free disintegrins, when compared to venoms of subadult and adult rattlesnakes  <cit> . a major selective advantage for the evolution of free disintegrins among viperid venoms  is provided by their role in prey relocation.

natural selection undoubtedly has influenced snake responses to stimuli that are most likely to lead to successful capture or, as in this case, successful relocation of prey  <cit> . further, this preference for envenomated prey is an adaptive mechanism that facilitates optimal foraging efforts, leading to rapid relocation of prey after it has succumbed. snakes often will not attend to a second prey offered after the initial envenomating strike, suggesting that chemical cues arising from the struck prey may be focusing foraging efforts and redirecting the snake from additional, potentially confounding chemical cue sources  <cit> . our results strongly indicate that for c. atrox, disintegrins have evolved into multifunctional proteins which evoke vomeronasally-salient cues, enabling the snake to relocate envenomated prey after the strike. therefore, in addition to immobilizing, killing and predigesting prey, another biological role of venoms in rattlesnakes is for prey relocation.

CONCLUSIONS
these findings provide an important biological role for a non-lethal venom protein which has little apparent relevance to the well-characterized roles of disintegrins in disrupting cell-cell and cell-extracellular matrix interactions. thus, in order to understand the evolution of animal venoms and venom compositional variation, it will be important to consider possible selective advantages conferred by specific venom components to the behavior and ecology of the animals which produce them, in addition to the more apparent pharmacological effects. at present, it is unknown how the crotatroxins create an olfactory "mark" that snakes are able to recognize, but we hypothesize that integrin-mediated release of chemical cues from prey stimulate the vomeronasal system of snakes. studies now in progress are aimed at determining the mechanism by which disintegrins interact with prey tissues and facilitate relocation of envenomated prey by rattlesnakes.

