BACKGROUND
the inference of phylogenies from molecular sequence data, like most other quantitative problems in science, is most powerful within a model-based statistical framework. sophisticated models are available to describe how sequences change along branches of a tree, and how the rate of sequence change varies among sites. statistical measures describe both the quality of inferred trees, and the confidence that can be assigned to the existence and position of subtrees. likelihood-based approaches have proven especially powerful for inferring phylogenetic trees  <cit>  but are computationally expensive owing both to the form of the likelihood function itself, and to the need to search the multidimensional space of possible outcomes  for optimal trees. this computation then must be repeated, typically 100– <dig> times, if the nonparametric bootstrap  <cit>  is used to estimate the support for specific subtrees. as a result, maximum-likelihood inference can be prohibitively slow for problems that involve large numbers of aligned sequences, comprehensive search of tree space, and/or many bootstrap replicates. the much faster rell approximation  <cit>  can in principle replace the bootstrap, although so far it has not been extensively investigated with large datasets  <cit> .

at the same time, the ongoing success of genomic sequencing – new microbial genome sequences are now appearing at the rate of at least one per week – is yielding a wealth of ever-larger gene and protein datasets suitable for large-scale analysis of deep issues in comparative and evolutionary genomics, e.g. the relative contributions of vertical and lateral gene transfer to genomic diversity  <cit> . however, these datasets are too numerous, and many of them too large, for ready analysis by likelihood inference. for example, using an automated phylogenetics pipeline  <cit>  we have generated more than  <dig> protein datasets having up to  <dig> sequences each, for which we must infer trees. there is consequently much interest in approaches that offer improved search efficiencies while remaining within a model-based statistical framework.

among the most interesting of these is bayesian inference, in which the posterior probability of a hypothesis  is associated with its probability of being correct, given the prior probability, model and data  <cit> . although posterior probabilities cannot be computed analytically for interestingly large datasets, markov chain monte carlo  methods can be used to find and examine equilibrium distributions of trees, on the basis of which we can make probability statements about the true tree  <cit> . bayesian inference of phylogeny supports sophisticated evolutionary models, while mcmc, particularly with heated chains , recovers from the posterior probability distribution a sample of topologies within which the empirical relative frequency of a given topology converges to its corresponding marginal posterior probability  <cit> . the topology with highest relative frequency in this sample is typically reported, and posterior probabilities of subtrees can be estimated by consensus from the topologies visited  <cit> .

bayesian phylogenetic inference has been applied to simulated  <cit>  as well as empirical nucleotide datasets . the results establish the applicability and computational efficiency of the bayesian mcmc approach to molecular phylogenetic inference. however, concerns have arisen about  finding optimal trees,  overly liberal confidence estimates on subtrees  <cit> , and  the possibility that bayesian inference can resolve topological features  that do not actually exist  <cit> . certain other issues have not been systematically addressed with nucleotide data, notably the robustness of bayesian inference to relative branch-length differences and to model violation.

much less is known about the behaviour of bayesian inference with protein-sequence data. while there is no a priori reason that protein-sequence data should be more or less problematic than nucleotide data for bayesian phylogenetics, gene and protein sequences have distinct statistical properties, and are subject to different selective constraints; so it is not inconceivable that, in practice, the corresponding models of sequence change might tend to fail in different ways, or to different extents. bayesian inference has been applied to inference of phylogenetic trees for cytochrome b  <cit> , elongation factor 1α  <cit> , hydroperoxidases  <cit> , 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme a reductase   <cit> , membrane-intrinsic protein  <cit> , and concatenated mitochondrial protein  <cit>  and larger  <cit>  datasets. douady et al.  <cit>  report a linear, if noisy, correlation between bootstrap proportion and bayesian posterior probability for a 15-taxon hmgr protein dataset. as in the case of nucleotide data, the robustness of bayesian inference to branch-length differences and model violation with protein-sequence datasets remains unexplored.

to better characterize the behavior of bayesian phylogenetic inference with protein-sequence data, we have applied mrbayes  <cit>  to both empirical and simulated data. based on the analysis of  <dig> empirical protein datasets, we compare maximum likelihood bootstrap proportion and bayesian posterior probability as estimates of subtree confidence. from analyses of simulated data known to contain phylogenetic signal, we address the fidelity with which the correct topology is recovered under progressively extreme ratios of branch-length differences, both under the correct model of sequence change  and under a model that incorporates different amino acid substitution probabilities. given our ongoing research on lateral gene transfer , we were particularly interested in the number of discrete events  separating inferred from known trees.

in this work we compare and contrast results obtained using two popular software programs, proml  <cit>  and mrbayes  <cit> , as well-developed implementations of the ml and bayesian approaches to phylogenetic inference respectively. although the comparison is illustrative, it would be an oversimplification to view these two approaches as diametric opposites, or even as fundamentally mutually exclusive. both likelihood and bayesian are general statistical frameworks, with high-level decision criteria  and associated apparatus for e.g. examining solution space, estimating support, and assessing stability to stochastic error. only a subset of these broad bodies of theory and practice has so far been applied to phylogenetic inference, and even less implemented in platform-independent software. if we apply bic to alternative trees and assume equal prior probabilities, it becomes possible to estimate bayesian posteriors from their likelihood differences, linking the two approaches at this level  <cit> . stochastic approaches related to mcmc, including simulated annealing  <cit>  and the generalised gibbs sampler  <cit> , can be used to search tree space in ml. the nonparametric bootstrap, more typically applied in conjunction with parsimony and ml, has proven useful in assessing subtree support in bayesian inference  <cit> . the application of likelihood in hybrid methods  <cit> , the likelihood ratchet  <cit> , and a metapopulation genetic algorithm  <cit>  lie farther beyond the scope of this discussion, but illustrates the potential for further development of both of these phylogenetic approaches beyond the specific implementations used in this study.

RESULTS
empirical data
topology
we inferred maximum likelihood  and bayesian  trees for the  <dig> empirical protein-sequence datasets. for  <dig> of these datasets, every combination of approach and model that we investigated  yielded the same topology. interestingly, for these, the bootstrap consensus ml trees were topologically identical to the ml and bayesian trees, indicating that the sequences in these datasets show a high degree of internal consistency across positions . for another  <dig> datasets, one or more of these four approaches yielded a tree that differs slightly  from the others. no pattern was obvious among these disagreements: the differences do not, for example, systematically separate ml from bayesian trees. for these  <dig> datasets, the differences are simple edits, e.g. -) to -), or -) to -)). for the remaining  <dig> datasets, one or more of the four approaches yielded a tree that differed more substantially . over these examples, the datasets that yield more-conflicted trees are slightly larger  than those yielding slightly conflicted  or identical trees , although the numbers of datasets involved are too few for this observation to be generalized.

support for subtrees
we compared proml bootstrap proportions  with bayesian posterior probabilities  separately for all subtrees among the three groups of trees inferred from these  <dig> empirical datasets: the  <dig> trees for which all four sets of approaches and models  yielded the same topology, the  <dig> for which one or more approach yielded a slightly different tree, and the  <dig> for which one or more tree differed more substantially. in figure  <dig>  we show the relationship between bp  and pp for subtrees in these three groups of trees; results for proml using the hidden markov model  are very similar . where ml and bayesian approaches yield the same topology, the relationship between bp and pp can most simply be fit by a straight line . with very few exceptions, however, the pp values are greater, and almost all of the bp values above 80% correspond to 100% pp . for the  <dig> datasets for which at least one of the four approaches yields a conflicting tree, the relationship between bp and pp appears much more complex , although for the subset of non-conflicting subtrees among these  <dig> datasets  the relationship between bp and pp is similar to that for topologically identical trees . panel e combines data for all non-conflicting subtrees . in all of these views on the data , however, most points lie above and to the left of the diagonal , indicating that for empirical protein-sequence datasets, as for dna-sequence datasets , bayesian pps tend to be more generous than nonparametric bps as estimates of confidence in subtrees.

1all data: values based on all data shown in the respective panel in figure 1; bp <85%: values based on only those data for which the value of the proml bootstrap proportion is less than 85%.

2se, standard error; signif, significance ; y-intcpt, y-intercept; mult r <dig>  multiple r2; adj r <dig>  adjusted r <dig> 

from our data, it is not possible to reject the hypothesis that the relationship between bp and pp has the same slope whether the bayesian inference is conducted using jtt, or eq, as the model of sequence change. analysis of covariation  yields probabilities  <dig>  ,  <dig>   and  <dig>   that the lines described in table  <dig> differ in slope between the jtt and eq models. when data having >85% bp are removed from analysis, the probabilities become  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig>  respectively, but equivalence still cannot be rejected. given the limitations of these data, we did not attempt a more-complete analysis, e.g. involving minority subtrees  or higher-order  fit curves.

because for these trees the true molecular phylogeny is unknown, these results do not speak to the accuracy of the inferred topologies. for this, it is necessary to examine inferences based data simulated on trees of known topology.

simulated data
topology
we first examine cases where tree inference was carried out under the same model  as that used to generate the data, and where a single branch was progressively extended in length . when trees were inferred using gamma-corrected ml, the correct tree was recovered in 100%  of the cases in which the relative branch-length difference was 5-, 10- or 20-fold . the frequency of inaccurately reconstructed trees increased with further increase in relative branch-length difference, and the inaccurately reconstructed trees were increasingly inaccurate as judged by robinson-foulds symmetric distance  although not by edit distance .

we investigated two ways of assessing the performance of ml inference. in panel a of figures  <dig> and  <dig>  a pair of bars is shown at each value of branch-length difference. the left-hand bar shows performance assessed over  <dig> single ml reconstructions , while the right-hand bar shows performance assessed over  <dig> consensus trees . for datasets having a single long branch, the two representations yield very similar results, with the individual ml results usually showing slightly better performance. by contrast, the situation was reversed for datasets with two long branches. although consensus is an appropriate way to summarize bootstrap results, nonparametric bootstrap proportions do not measure support for subtrees in a simple, direct and unbiased manner  <cit> . for this reason, one might question whether an approach based on bootstrap and consensus appropriately summarizes the performance of ml for comparison with bayesian inference, as bayesian posteriors do directly measure subtree probabilities . the similarities we observe in both magnitude and trend for the two approaches demonstrate that the comparison we are making between ml and bayesian inference does not, in these cases at least, depend on whether or not the performance of ml is assessed using an approach that involves the nonparametric bootstrap.

with bayesian inference, inaccurately reconstructed trees were also first seen at the 30-fold branch-length ratio . compared with the ml consensus result , bayesian inference almost always yielded a higher frequency of accurate reconstructions. however, unless correction was made for asrv, the inaccurate trees, although fewer in number, could be more inaccurate as judged by symmetric distance. gamma correction for asrv greatly reduced the frequency of the most inaccurate reconstructions, yielding results  noticeably better than with gamma-corrected ml. in our simulations, use of an exponential prior  gave slightly fewer inaccurate trees at the most-extreme branch-length ratios, although the difference is not statistically significant .

in figures  <dig> and  <dig> we present the results of tree inference carried out under the same model  as that used to generate the data, but where two branches were progressively extended relative to the others. for each of the four sets of approaches and models considered, the first inaccurate tree reconstruction was observed at 20-fold relative difference. at higher branch-length ratios, relative performance among the four suites of approaches and models is much more striking than was seen when only a single long branch was present. with gamma-corrected ml, for example, by 50-fold ratio only 9/ <dig> tree topologies are accurately inferred, and at 70-fold ratio only 1/ <dig> . asrv-uncorrected bayesian inference  performs even worse, with no accurate inferences at branch-length ratios  <dig> or greater. however, gamma correction  yielded a much higher frequency of accurate reconstructions, with the uniform prior performing better than the exponential prior at the more extreme ratios  as judged by symmetric distance. about three-quarters  of the inaccurate topologies inferred in the case of two differentially lengthened branches showed long-branch attraction, i.e. the long branches were topologically adjacent in the reconstructed tree.

support for subtrees
in figure  <dig> we compare the quantitative support for subtrees, in trees inferred from these simulated datasets by ml and bayesian approaches, as assessed by bootstrap proportion and posterior probability respectively. panels a-c show the comparisons based on  <dig> extended majority-rule consensus trees for datasets with one long branch , and panels d-f are based on  <dig> consensus trees for datasets with two long branches. the values shown were derived by summation of bp, and of pp, values over all internal nodes only for the trees that were accurately inferred . by structuring the comparison in this way, we avoid cases where the ml consensus might be topologically different from the best component tree, and avoid dealing with the plethora of cases and sub-cases that arise in comparing topologically non-congruent trees.

for all three combinations of asrv correction and prior , the relationship between bp and pp, structured in this way, is best fit by a smooth curve that reaches 100% pp only at bp  <dig> %  or bp 100% , i.e. shows little or no "saturation". for both the single- and two-long-branches cases, the pp is greatest, compared to bp, for bayesian trees inferred without correction for asrv, and least generous for gamma-corrected trees where the prior distribution was assumed to be uniform. unsurprisingly, the lower values of subtree support, as measured both by bp and by pp, arise from the trees with the most extreme relative branch length differences.

performance under model violation
we next compared the performance of ml and bayesian inference under violation of the model of sequence change, by evolving datasets under a mammalian mitochondrial model , but inferring trees under the jtt model . performance of each of the four sets of approaches and methods was assessed by comparing four measures: the branch-length ratio at which inaccurate trees were first observed; the total number of steps  by which the  <dig> trees differ from the true topology; the weighted sum  of these steps; and the mean number of steps by which each inaccurate tree differs from the known tree. the latter two measures were each calculated using both robinson-foulds symmetric distance, and edit distance, yielding six comparisons in all. a more-complete description is provided at footnote  <dig> of table  <dig>  performance in the case of one long branch is summarized in figures  <dig> and  <dig>  and in the case of two long branches in figures  <dig> and  <dig>  in table  <dig> we summarize and compare the performance of ml and bayesian inference with these datasets under the correct, and an incorrect, model.

 <dig> protein-sequence data were evolved under the jones et al.  or, alternatively, mammalian mitochondrial  model of sequence change, and trees were inferred assuming the jtt model.

 <dig> performance was measured by six indices: first, the lowest investigated branch-length ratio at which at least one inaccurately reconstructed tree was found; wrong, the number of inaccurately inferred trees out  <dig> ; burdsd, the bipartition burden, calculated as the robinson-foulds symmetric distance by which each tree differs from the known tree, summed over the  <dig> trees; meansd, the mean robinson-foulds symmetric distance per inaccurate tree; burded, the edit burden, calculated as the edit distance by which each tree differs from the known tree, summed over the  <dig> trees; and meaned, the mean edit distance per inaccurate tree.

 <dig> inference methods: ml, protein maximum likelihood with gamma asrv correction; buu, bayesian inference, uncorrected for asrv, uniform prior; bgu, bayesian inference, gamma asrv correction, uniform prior; and bge, bayesian inference, gamma asrv correction, exponential prior. see text for further details.

for datasets in which a single branch was of relatively greater length, violating the model of sequence change degraded performance of the four approaches . in each case, inaccurate trees were first observed at 20-fold branch-length ratio, earlier than the 30-fold ratio seen in the absence of model violation. inaccurate trees were more numerous, in comparison with inference under the correct model. with ml, each inaccurate tree was about as inaccurate under the incorrect model as under the correct one, as measured by symmetric distance . with bayesian inference, inaccurate trees produced under the wrong model were, unexpectedly, sometimes less inaccurate than those inferred under the correct model , and in one case  the total burden of changes was less, as measured by symmetric distance. exclusion of results from the 70-fold data  demonstrated that this effect is not due to a loss of dynamic range at extreme values.

for datasets containing two long branches, model violation affected performance of ml and bayesian inference differently. with ml, inference under the wrong model produced a somewhat lower frequency of topologically inaccurate trees, although each inaccurate tree was more inaccurate as judged by symmetric distance . with bayesian inference, use of the wrong model increased the frequency of inaccurate trees, and each inaccurate tree tended to be more inaccurate as measured by symmetric distance. with bayesian inference uncorrected for asrv and using a uniform prior, the first inaccurate tree appeared at a ratio of only  <dig>  and no accurate trees were recovered at ratios  <dig> or higher; although by most indices the performance was not further degraded by violation of the model of sequence change, performance was already quite poor, and not much dynamic range remained available. use of an exponential prior again made a significant difference only with two long branches and assessment using robinson-foulds symmetric distance .

discussion
unlike the situation with established approaches based on pairwise distances, parsimony or maximum likelihood, relatively little experience has accumulated so far on the application of bayesian approaches to phylogenetic inference, especially for protein-sequence datasets. in this work we  extend the comparison of bayesian posterior probabilities with nonparametric bootstrap proportions as measures of confidence in subtrees,  systematically investigate the robustness of ml and bayesian inference to branch-length differences, and  compare the behavior of these two approaches to one specific violation of the model of sequence change. we used two measures to compare topologies , and it is clear that they captured different facets of topological incongruence.

support for subtrees
using  <dig> empirical protein-sequence datasets, we compared bayesian posterior probabilities with bootstrap proportions based on ml as measures of support for subtrees. to make this comparison as fair as possible, we restricted our analysis to a model of sequence change  and a correction for asrv  available in both proml and mrbayes. we did not optimize models separately for each approach or for each dataset, as jtt+gamma represents the most-parameterized combination that these two programs support in common. it is therefore possible that some of the difference observed between the two measures results from differential sensitivity of ml and bayesian inference, as implemented in these programs, to deviation of jtt and the discrete gamma distribution from an optimal description of the processes of sequence change that actually gave rise to these sequences . as it is unlikely that any existing model – certainly any that fails to account for lineage-specific processes and temporal variations along these lineages – fully represents the historical complexity of molecular evolution, the same criticism could be levelled, albeit perhaps in lesser degree, against all current applications of statistically based phylogenetic inference to empirical datasets.

the data presented in figure  <dig> demonstrate that, at least for these protein-sequence datasets, bayesian pps tend to offer a more-generous estimate of subtree reliability than does the nonparametric bootstrap combined with ml. this result supports and extends previous studies with dna-  <cit>  and protein-sequence data  <cit> . bayesian pps and nonparametric bootstrap bps are not commensurate  <cit>  and may be seen as "potential upper and lower bounds of node reliability" respectively .  our results strongly suggest that the interpretation of bps and pps being developed for nucleotide sequences will be applicable, as well, to protein sequences.

for sets of consensus trees inferred from simulated protein-sequence data , bayesian pps tend to be more generous than nonparametric bps in estimates of subtree support. however, whereas for empirical protein-sequence data  pps tend to "saturate", i.e. reach 100% at bp values less than 100% , with our simulated data the relationship between bp and pp resembles a smooth curve reaching 100% pp only at bp greater than 99%. further studies will be required to disentangle why little or no saturation was observed; possibilities include the structure of our simulated trees , the way that data were evolved on these trees , and/or the way we summarize the support data for ml .

relative branch-length differences
dissimilar sequences  create difficulties in phylogenetic analysis. the issue has been most extensively explored in parsimony analysis, where branch length can be an important consideration, e.g. in selection of outgroups and resolution of topologically problematic regions. parsimony analysis is particularly susceptible to "long branch attraction"  artefacts, in which two or more branches are resolved adjacent in a tree solely because they are highly divergent from the others  <cit> . ml inference can be more robust against lba, although to our knowledge this has been not been specifically examined for protein-sequence data. we are unaware of any systematic examination of the degree to which bayesian phylogenetic inference is robust against branch length-based artefact.

our results  indicate that for protein-sequence datasets of this size, both gamma-corrected ml and bayesian inference can be robust to artefact arising from the levels of dissimilarity likely to be encountered in empirical biological data. both ml and bayesian inference can be fully robust  to at least a 20-fold relative length ratio for a single branch, and both perform nearly as well when two branches are relatively lengthened. when a single branch is lengthened, performance  degrades slowly as relative branch length increases thereafter; bayesian inference with gamma correction for asrv performs best among these alternatives. when two branches are relatively lengthened, the performance of ml, and of asrv-uncorrected bayesian inference, falls off much more rapidly, whereas in our simulations asrv-corrected bayesian inference was more robust than ml. these performance characteristics have been demonstrated only for protein-sequence datasets of the size, length, composition, divergence and tree shape we examined, and for these implementations of ml  and bayesian inference . applicability to larger, longer, and more divergent protein-sequence datasets, to more-diverse tree shapes, and to different implementations seems highly probable, although further nuance will doubtlessly emerge, and scope may remain for further optimization.

model violation
both the mammalian mitochondrial  and jtt models embody empirical probabilistic models of amino acid substitution. codon usage is highly skewed in mitochondrial genomes compared with the cognate nucleocytoplasmic components  <cit> , and the amino acid transition probabilities in mtmam differ correspondingly from those in jtt. nonetheless, for the datasets we examined, both ml and bayesian inference perform well, at biologically reasonable ratios of branch-length difference, even when the jtt model is used to infer trees from protein datasets evolved under mtmam . with one exception, the first inaccurately reconstructed trees were observed at the 20-fold ratio . model violation increased the inaccuracy of reconstruction  by  <dig> to 39%  in the case of one differentially extended branch, and by - <dig> to 34%  where two branches are lengthened . in the former case, the total burden of these inaccuracies was 16% and 18% as assessed by symmetric and edit distances respectively. the effect of model violation on accuracy for trees with two differentially lengthened branches was more variable; little change  was observed for ml and bayesian inference without asrv correction, whereas violating the model greatly decreased the accuracy of reconstruction by gamma-corrected bayesian inference. nonetheless, even at this reduced accuracy, gamma-corrected bayesian inference performed much more-accurately than either ml or uncorrected bayesian inference at branch-length ratios of 20-fold and greater.

particularly in simulations where a single branch was differentially lengthened , using the wrong model of sequence change sometimes improved some aspects of performance. thus with ml inference, inference under the wrong model increased both the total number of inaccurate trees and the bipartition burden over the  <dig> branch-length ratios , but each inaccurate tree was, on average, slightly less inaccurate  than those inferred under the correct model of sequence change. the same phenomenon was observed with bayesian inference using gamma asrv correction and an exponential distribution of prior probability over branch lengths. with bayesian inference uncorrected for asrv, both the total bipartition burden, and the mean inaccuracy of inaccurate trees as assessed by symmetric distance, were lessened under the wrong model. in simulations with two long branches as well , we observed that with ml inference, model violation reduces the number of inaccurate trees and the burden of edits required to generate them, although the latter was not seen when using symmetric distance as the metric. others have reported situations in which using the wrong model improves the performance of ml . some of these cases appear to result from the specific placement of long branches in the "anti-felsenstein zone", where biased estimation can increase the efficiency of finding the correct topology  <cit> . however, this does not explain our results, as we separated the long branches from each other.

the degree of insensitivity to model violation we observe for gamma-corrected ml and bayesian inference goes some way toward mitigating possible concern  that the relative performance of these approaches as reported herein might, in part, reflect their differential sensitivity to sub-optimality in the models used.

measures of tree comparison
our results  illustrate how robinson-foulds symmetric distance and edit distance provide non-identical, complementary views of topological incongruence. the former metric enumerates the number of internal nodes that must be collapsed to make two topologies identical, whereas the latter counts the number of break-and-reanneal operations needed to convert one topology into another. the scores are identical if all incongruent subtrees can be reconciled by collapse through, or transfer across, a single internal node, but diverge from each other to the extent that incongruent subtrees are positioned more distantly  from each other. our results also illustrate the difference in dynamic range offered by these metrics, while simulation studies  <cit>  indicate their differential sensitivity to overall tree shape and/or local topology. other tree-comparison metrics are available and may offer advantages, e.g. in distinguishing transformations that affect large numbers of termini from those that affect small numbers of termini, in robustness against displacement of particular termini, or in application to very large trees  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
bayesian inference can be as robust as ml against relative branch-length differences of 20-fold or greater in inference of correct topologies from protein-sequence data, although details depend on the number of relatively long branches, the presence or absence of an effective correction for asrv, and  other factors. one might doubt that sequences so dissimilar as to produce a 20-fold  difference in branch lengths could be believably recognised as homologous, or reliably aligned. bayesian inference can also be as robust as ml to violation of the model of amino acid transition probability. for empirical protein-sequence data that might reasonably be encountered in biological research, then, both gamma-corrected ml and gamma-corrected bayesian inference perform well in recovering the correct topology. as bayesian inference is typically very much faster than even a single ml run, not to mention than e.g.  <dig> or  <dig> replicate runs required to estimate bootstrap proportions, asrv-corrected bayesian inference must be seen as an important alternative for statistically based phylogenetic analysis of protein-sequence data when computational resources are limiting. it appears that the interpretation of bootstrap proportions and posterior probabilities being developed for nucleotide sequences will apply as well to protein sequences.

our interest in lateral genetic transfer   <cit>  led us to investigate different measures with which to characterise topological difference among trees. whether lgt tends to occur primarily among closely related lineages, or alternatively whether the frequency of transfer depends more critically on some other factor  – or indeed is purely random – remains an open question. attention has recently been focused on hypotheses that accord to close-range lgt the central role in metabolic and physiological innovation  <cit>  and in shaping organismal phylogeny  <cit> . a statistic that captures both the number of transfer events , and the topological breadth of transfer , would thus be valuable in elucidating the pattern and significance of lgt. for such a statistic to be meaningful in a biological context, it must be sensitive to the annotation  of the subtrees involved. implementation of this, and of a broader range of tree-comparison metrics, in platform-independent software should be a matter of some urgency.

