BACKGROUND
the human body is colonized by an enormous array of microbes collectively referred to as the microbiota. it is estimated that there are approximately ten times more bacterial cells than there are human cells in the human body with microbiota being found in various receptive niches such as on the skin, in the oral and respiratory tracts, reproductive tract, and most numerously, in the gastrointestinal  tract  <cit> . in the gi tract, the microbiota form a community that fully interacts with one another and with the host. the gi microbiota have multiple beneficial effects on their hosts  <cit>  and the structure of the gi community can impact these functions. of the beneficial interactions between microbiota and host, those that involve the immune system are some of the most intensively studied, and several lines of experiments have demonstrated that the gi microbiota and the host immune system are deeply intertwined in each other’s development  <cit> . for example, germ-free mice, which have never been colonized by any type of microbe, have diminished immune responses compared to mice colonized with a healthy microbiota  <cit> . mice deficient in nod <dig>  a gene that encodes for a receptor that is involved in immune recognition of bacterial muramyl dipeptide, develop a unique microbiota that can lead to colonic inflammation when transmitted to wild-type mice  <cit> . it is now well recognized that the gi microbiota have strong effects on immunoregulation, and immune system activity, in turn, helps to shape the gi microbiota  <cit> .

it is estimated that over  <dig> different species of bacteria can colonize the gi tract  <cit> . despite this enormous species-level diversity, only a small number of bacterial phyla are represented. the vast majority of bacteria in the human gi tracts belong to the phyla firmicutes and bacteroidetes, with bacteria in the phyla actinobacteria and proteobacteria also comprising a smaller portion of the overall microbiota as well  <cit> . the gi microbiota of the murine gi tract is similar to that of humans, with the majority of microbes belonging to the major phyla, firmicutes and bacteroidetes <cit> . these populations shift slowly over time, but their general stability is important to the health of the host. abrupt changes to the gut microbiota have been shown to potentially lead to serious negative host health outcomes, including diarrhea, opportunistic infections, and obesity  <cit> . changes to the microbiota can be caused by factors such as antibiotic use and severe enteric infection. data from this laboratory, as well as others, indicate that exposure to either physical or psychological stressors can also alter intestinal microbe profiles. stressor exposure early in life has been demonstrated to alter the types and abundance of bacteria found in the intestines. separating infant monkeys from their mothers to induce a physiological stress response resulted in a significant reduction in the number of total lactobacilli that could be cultured from the stool  <cit> . reductions in lactobacilli are meaningful as certain species, including l. reuteri, are involved in immunomodulation  <cit> . in rats, separating the pups from their mothers during the first 14 days of life led to an altered gi microbiome  <cit> . stressor exposure during adulthood can also impact the stability of the intestinal microbiota. for example, exposing adult mice to a prolonged restraint stressor was shown to significantly alter microbial profiles in the cecal contents  <cit> .

similar findings have been associated with a social stressor called social disruption   <cit>  that involves repeated social defeat as a result of inter-male aggression over a 2 hr period. when repeated over  <dig> consecutive nights, this stressor induces a physiological stress response marked by the activation of the hypothalamic pituitary adrenal  axis and the sympathetic nervous system  <cit> . the study by bailey et al. demonstrated that this week-long exposure to the stressor can alter the cecal luminal microbiome in outbred cd- <dig> mice  <cit> . however, it is not known whether a single 2 hr exposure to the stressor could induce similar alterations, or whether other mouse strains, such as inbred c57bl/ <dig> mice that are widely used in infectious disease research, are affected by stressor exposure. knowing whether short-lasting stressors can impact the microbiota has translational importance particularly for the inflammatory bowel diseases  and irritable bowel syndrome . patients with ibd often report stressful periods preceding symptom flares  <cit> . it is not clear whether acute stress can exacerbate ibd symptomatology, but it is recognized that acute stressor exposure is associated with increased visceral sensitivity in ibs  <cit> . because alterations in gut microbiota community structure are evident in ibd and ibs  <cit> , and because these alterations are thought to possibly contribute to these diseases  <cit> , we determined whether a short-lasting stressor was sufficient to impact gut microbiota community structure.

previous studies assessing the effects of stress on the microbiota have relied on assessment of intestinal lumen or fecal populations  <cit> . studies in healthy individuals as well as patients with ibs, ibd, or hepatic encephalopathy demonstrate that luminal/fecal microbiota are significantly different than mucosa-associated microbiota  <cit> . because shifts in microbial populations that are in close proximity to the intestinal epithelium are thought to have the strongest effects on host immunity  <cit> , an additional aspect of this study was to determine whether stressor exposure could impact tissue-associated microbial community profiles.

stressor-induced changes in lactobacilli have reliably been found in laboratory animals as well as in humans  <cit> . however, stressor-induced changes in other taxa have not been widely reported. thus,  <dig> pyrosequencing was performed on the colonic tissue of inbred c57bl/ <dig> mice to determine whether a single 2 hr stressor exposure could change colonic tissue-associated microbial community profiles. quantitative pcr  was then used to determine whether stressor-induced alterations in relative abundances evident with the  <dig> pyrosequencing were also evident as alterations in absolute abundance in both inbred and outbred mice.

RESULTS
social stress affects the community structure of the colonic mucosa-associated microbiota
we analyzed the effect of a short term sdr stressor on the colonic mucosa-associated microbiota using 16s rrna gene pyrosequencing of samples from both sdr c57bl/ <dig> stressor-exposed mice and non-stressed hcc control mice. after normalization of the datasets by rarefaction, we observed no statistical difference in the total number of operational taxonomic units  between the sdr and control mice . additional analysis of the shannon, equitability and chao <dig> alpha diversity metrics showed no statistical difference between the two groups . thus, a single two-hour cycle of exposure to the social stressor did not affect the alpha diversity of the mucosa-associated microbiota.while we did not observe any statistically significant differences in the alpha diversity of the microbiota between the sdr and control group, beta diversity analyses did reveal differences in composition. a principal coordinates analysis  of the unifrac distances between samples showed that they clustered into separate groups according to treatment . an unweighted pair group with arithmetic mean  hierarchical clustering dendrogram confirmed this clustering . statistical analysis of the unifrac distances using the analysis of similarity statistic  indicated that colonic mucosal microbiota from sdr stressor-exposed mice were significantly different from those of the home cage control  mice .

populations of the genus lactobacillus and l. reuteri are reduced in mice exposed to a social stressor
the taxonomic profile of the microbiota at the phylum level showed no significant differences between the two treatment groups . analysis of relative abundances at lower taxonomic levels showed a reduction in the family porphyromonadaceae in sdr stressor-exposed mice compared to non-stressed hcc mice  . exposure to the sdr stressor also reduced the relative abundance of bacteria in the family lactobacillaceae  . this reduction in the lactobacillaceae was reflected by a reduction in the relative abundance of bacteria in the genus lactobacillus  . in addition to the reduction in the abundance of lactobacilli, it was evident that exposure to the sdr stressor significantly reduced the relative abundance of the genus parabacteroides , as well as an unclassified group within the phylum firmicutes  and an unclassified group within the class bacilli  .

data are the mean ± standard error. *p < . <dig> vs. hcc; **p < . <dig> vs. hcc.

data are the mean relative abundance ± standard error. *p < . <dig> vs. hcc; **p < . <dig> vs. hcc.

many bacteria in the genus lactobacillus have been shown to have immunomodulatory functions in the colon, and can be used as a probiotic to treat inflammation. thus, we used qpcr to quantify the effect of the sdr stressor on the abundance of this group of bacteria  <cit> . when the a priori hypothesis that repeated administration of the sdr stressor would reduce the abundance of lactobacilli was tested, it was determined that the absolute abundance of lactobacillus spp. was significantly lower  after 6 cycles of the stressor in comparison to baseline levels in c57bl/ <dig> mice . this reduction in lactobacilli abundance was also observed in outbred cd- <dig> mice , with the largest reduction in mean levels of lactobacilli also occurring after 6 days of the sdr stressor . in addition, qpcr analyses also revealed that exposure to the sdr stressor significantly reduced the abundance of the immunomodulatory species l. reuteri over the course of six cycles of sdr . this difference was only evident in outbred cd- <dig> mice . l. reuteri levels were below the qpcr limit of detection of  <dig>  copies/gram of wet tissue  in inbred c57bl/ <dig> mice.

relative bacterial levels differ by mouse strain
in order to confirm that stressor exposure was reducing the absolute abundance of other bacterial groups that were reduced in relative abundance in the pyrosequencing analysis, qpcr was performed on colonic tissues from both inbred c57bl/ <dig> mice and outbred cd <dig> mice. primers targeting the 16 s ribosomal rna genes of parabacteroides distasonis, a member of the parabacteroides genus, and bacteroides-prevotella-porphyromonas were used. stressor exposure did not significantly affect the absolute abundance of either p. distasonis or bacteroides-prevotella-porphyromonas genera . in addition, levels of bacteroides-prevotella-porphyromonas group and p. distasonis were similar in the two strains of mice.

data are the mean  of the copy number  of target  <dig> s rrna per gram of tissue.

colonic inflammatory cytokine mrna levels are not affected by social stressor exposure
the colonic mrna levels for il-1β, tnf-α, and inos were unaffected by exposure to the sdr stressor, suggesting that exposing c57bl/ <dig> and cd- <dig> mice to the sdr stressor did not result in detectable increases in colonic cytokines or inflammatory mediators .

data are the mean  of the fold change in cytokine gene expression over non-stressed hcc controls.

discussion
exposure to physical and psychological stressors has been shown to impact the gut microbiota of both laboratory animals and humans  <cit> . however, the majority of the previous studies have utilized repeated and prolonged stressors, and have assessed microbial populations in the lumen of the intestines or present in the fecal matter. whether stressor exposure has different effects on the microbiota of different strains of mice is also poorly understood. because gut microbes that adhere to the colonic mucosa can have different effects on the host  <cit> , this study assessed whether stressor exposure could alter the community structure of mucosa-associated microbes. this study demonstrated that as little as 2 hrs of stressor exposure is enough to significantly change the structure of the microbiota associated with the colonic mucosa. this effect was not manifest as alterations in alpha diversity, but rather as alterations in beta diversity. the anosim distance matrix analysis and cluster analysis based on unweighted unifrac demonstrated that microbiota within the samples from stressor-exposed mice were significantly different than those from the non-stressed hcc control mice. in addition to significantly changing beta diversity, exposure to the stressor significantly changed the relative abundance of  <dig> bacterial genera, namely parabacteroides and lactobacillus, and one bacterial family, porphyromonadaceae.

this study targeted mucosa-associated populations, but true stratification of luminal and mucosal populations does not exist. there is much crossover between microbes often associated with the lumen and those that can adhere to the mucus layer of the gi tract, as the former becomes trapped in the mucus layer and the latter sheds into the lumen. steps were taken to remove the majority of the fecal matter from tissue samples, wherein lie the majority of the luminal portion of the gi microbiota. this study extends previous studies that indicated that luminal and fecal microbiota can change as a consequence of stressor exposure to now include mucosa-associated populations.

to determine whether the stressor effects only encompassed changes to bacterial relative abundance or whether changes in absolute abundance  may also result from stressor exposure, qpcr was used to further investigate the effects of the stressor on bacterial abundance. this was performed in both an inbred  and an outbred  mouse strain, because studies consistently show that microbiota composition is associated with mouse strain  <cit> . in addition, different mouse strains can also have different physiological and behavioral responses to stressor exposure, including changes to anxiety-like behavior, as well as diarrhea output and colonic serotonin concentration  <cit> . thus, it was important to determine whether stressor effects were conserved across mouse strains. while 2 hrs of stressor exposure was enough to reduce the relative abundance of the genus lactobacillus, a reduction in the absolute abundance was only evident after repeated exposure to the stressor. this indicates that some of the effects that stressor exposure has upon the microbiota are additive. both pre- and post-stressor lactobacilli levels were similar in outbred cd- <dig> mice and inbred c57bl/ <dig> mouse strains, demonstrating that the effects of the stressor are consistent across mouse strains. this finding was not surprising given that stressor-induced reduction in lactobacilli levels have been documented in other host species, including human and non-human primates.

the finding that stressor exposure reduced the relative and absolute abundance of lactobacilli is consistent with previous studies demonstrating that stressor exposure can reduce the lactobacilli  <cit> . to date, however, the lactobacillus species that can be reduced by stressor exposure has not been addressed. many species of bacteria in the genus lactobacillus are known to have health promoting effects, and studies from this laboratory, as well as others, indicate that administering probiotic l. reuteri to mice can reduce colonic inflammatory responses  <cit> . because stressor exposure can exacerbate colonic inflammation  <cit> , we focused on whether indigenous l. reuteri was reduced in stressor-exposed animals. as predicted, l. reuteri was significantly reduced in colonic mucosa from outbred cd- <dig> mice exposed to the sdr stressor. interestingly, however, l. reuteri was not consistently detectable in inbred c57bl/ <dig> mice. thus, it is apparent that l. reuteri levels on the mucosa of c57bl/ <dig> mice are lower than levels observed in outbred cd- <dig> mice and below the detection limit .

although it is difficult to compare deep sequencing results across different experiments that assess different body niches and encompass different stressors, the use of  <dig> pyrosequencing demonstrated that the effects of stressor exposure are not confined to effects on the lactobacilli. the relative abundance of bacteria in the family porphyromonadaceae was found to be significantly reduced by exposure to the sdr stressor. this finding is consistent with a previous study demonstrating that exposure to a prolonged restraint stressor in oubred cd- <dig> mice was sufficient to reduce the relative abundance of cecal porphyromonadaceae <cit> . however, it was not previously known whether stressor exposure could reduce the absolute abundance of the porphyromonadaceae family. thus, qpcr was used to determine whether this stressor also affected the absolute abundance of porphyromonadaceae by assessing levels of bacteria in the porphyromonas-bacteroides-prevotella group as a surrogate marker. this was performed because of the problems designing qpcr primers specific for the porphyromonadaceae family. the absolute abundance of the porphyromonas-bacteorides-prevotella group was similar in cd- <dig> mice and inbred c57bl/ <dig> mice, and stressor exposure had no effect on the absolute abundance in either mouse strain. thus, although this study and others  <cit>  have found stressor-induced reductions in the relative abundance of porphyromonadaceae, these results indicate that absolute abundance of the porphyromonadaceae is unaffected by stressor exposure. stressor exposure also did not affect the absolute abundance of p. diastonosis in either strain of mice, even though the relative abundance of parabacteroides was reduced as detected by  <dig> pyrosequencing.

colonic inflammation is well known to impact the gut microbiota, and studies have found that intestinal inflammation can also reduce the abundance of the family lactobacillaceae <cit>  and porphyromonadaceae <cit> . given the bidirectional interaction between the microbiota and intestinal inflammation and increased intestinal physiological inflammation upon exposure to stressor  <cit> , it is often suggested that increases in intestinal inflammation during stressful periods could be responsible for changes in gut microbiota. however, inflammatory cytokine gene expression was not significantly changed by either 2 hrs of the sdr stressor or 2 hrs of the stressor repeated on  <dig> consecutive days. thus, the results of this study indicate that it is not likely that stressor-induced colonic inflammation is responsible for altering the abundances of the indigenous colonic mucosa-associated microbiota.

the effects of sdr on male mouse immunological, physiological, and behavioral functioning have been well characterized over the past fifteen years  <cit> . the consistent activation of the hpa axis and the sns makes sdr an ideal method of inducing an acute stress response in male mice. while it would be desirable to determine the effects on female mice as well, aggression in female mice is too low to induce a physiological stress response in this paradigm. other stressor paradigms, however, have shown that stressor exposure in a lab setting can also affect the microbiota composition of female mice  <cit> . thus, it is likely that a social stressor in female mice would also impact the lactobacilli, as well as porphyromonadaceae and parabacteroides. interestingly, studies have shown that male and female microbiota can evoke different levels of host sex hormone release and immunological outputs that can then feedback and alter microbial composition  <cit> . future studies comparing the microbiota, mucosal immunity and endocrine responses in both male and female mice are likely to demonstrate additional multidirectional interactions between host physiology and the microbiota. this requires further study.

CONCLUSIONS
gut microbes have important effects on the host especially when they are associated with the mucosa. previous studies have found that stressor exposure can affect the microbiota, in particular the lactobacilli. however, many of these studies focused on microbes that are shed in the stool during prolonged or chronic stressors  <cit> . it was not previously clear whether the effects of stress on the microbiota were limited to changes in the number of bacteria shed in the stool, nor whether short lasting acute stressors could also impact the microbiota. the present study demonstrates that exposure to as little as 2 hrs of a social stressor is sufficient to significantly affect some populations of the colonic mucosa-associated microbiota. this builds upon previous work by showing that exposure to the social stressor affects multiple regions  and niches  of the gi tract, as well as two different strains of mice, suggesting that the effect of social stresss exposure upon the microbiota is a universal process, as opposed to either an artifact or isolated finding. the mechanisms by which this occurs are not yet understood, but are not likely to involve stressor-induced inflammation in the colon. future studies should assess the impact of stressor-associated hormones and gut functioning since others have demonstrated that activation of the stress-associated hormone corticotrophin releasing hormone  alters gut microbiota, an effect that was associated with alterations in intestinal motility  <cit> . because the gut microbiota has been associated with diverse diseases that are known to be exacerbated by stressful situations, such as the inflammatory bowel diseases, irritable bowel syndrome, and even multiple sclerosis, it is becoming increasingly important to understand the impact that stress can have on the microbiota and whether stressor-induced alterations in the microbiota are involved in stressor-induced disease exacerbation  <cit> .

