BACKGROUND
canine pyoderma results from bacterial infection of the skin and associated structures. presentations can include a wide range of clinical lesions from erythema, alopecia and pruritus to macules, papules, pustules, crusts, collarettes, scaling, deep folliculitis, furunculosis, dermal fistulae, cellulitis, panniculitis and vasculitis. clinical sub-division of the condition into surface, superficial and deep pyoderma is made according to the depth and extent of bacterial infection present within cutaneous tissue. in the dog, the most commonly isolated causal pathogen is the coagulase positive staphylococcal species known as s. pseudintermedius. other staphylococcal  and non-staphylococcal bacteria  can also be isolated from affected skin in some cases. while these species can act as primary pyoderma pathogens, particularly in immune-compromised patients, they are usually secondary infectious agents or simply lesion contaminants  <cit> . canine pyoderma is usually secondary to one or more underlying disease processes which compromise the defence mechanisms protecting the skin from infection  <cit> . recurrence of pyoderma lesions after successful antimicrobial treatment is common if primary conditions remain undiagnosed or are not appropriately managed.

clinical consequences for individual affected dogs and the scale of disease-burden at a population level are both of concern when considering the overall impact of pyoderma on canine welfare. the condition causes varying degrees of pain and pruritus depending on depth and extent of associated lesions  <cit> . skin disease is one of the most common reasons for presentation of pet dogs for veterinary care  <cit> , and several reports support the clinical impression that canine pyoderma appears to be a relatively common diagnosis  <cit> . in addition, recent evidence-led guidelines agree that antimicrobial treatment, either topical, systemic or both, is indicated in all but the mildest cases of pyoderma in the dog   <cit> . thus, clarification of the impact of canine pyoderma on dog welfare, as well as the level and appropriateness of antimicrobial usage for the condition in the uk is required. large scale, uk-specific surveys using data from the primary clinical practice setting could provide an estimate of the proportion vet-visiting dogs affected by pyoderma over a specified period of time, and provide insight into the extent and nature of associated antimicrobial prescribing by vets managing these dogs. this information could facilitate evidence-based assessment of the potential impact of the condition in the uk with respect to animal welfare as well as exploring whether veterinary antimicrobial usage is in accordance with current guidelines  <cit> .

this study aimed to use pre-existing electronic patient health record  data from a large number of uk primary practices to describe the frequency of the condition and the treatment approaches adopted for canine pyoderma as managed by first opinion veterinary practitioners in the uk.

RESULTS
prevalence of diagnosis with pyoderma
a total of  <dig> dogs with at least one reported diagnosis of pyoderma in the year  <dig> were identified using available eprs from  <dig> individual practices. the total number of individual dogs with one or more clinical encounters  recorded by any of these vetcompass-participating practices during the year  <dig> was  <dig> . thus,  <dig> %   <dig> - <dig> %) of all dogs presented for any reason to participating practices in  <dig> were diagnosed with pyoderma at least once during that year. based on in-depth case review in the randomly selected subgroup , a 10% misclassification rate was estimated, suggesting the true prevalence within the study period was approximately  <dig> % .

characteristics of dogs diagnosed with pyoderma
of all  <dig> identified cases,  <dig>  were male. neutering status at the time of the earliest pyoderma episode in  <dig> was clearly recorded in  <dig>  identified cases and  <dig>  of these were neutered. neutering status at this time was neither recorded nor deducible from available information in the remaining  <dig> cases. median age at diagnosis was  <dig>  years and ranged from  <dig>  –  <dig>  years . weight was recorded on the date of diagnosis in  <dig> study dogs  and ranged from  <dig>  –  <dig>   kgs. at least one weight value was recorded within 28 days of the date of diagnosis in  <dig> dogs , within six calendar months in  <dig> dogs  and within one year in  <dig> dogs . of  <dig> different breeds represented, those accounting for at least 3% of all study dogs were the crossbreed , labrador retriever , west highland white terrier , staffordshire bull terrier , german shepherd dog , cocker spaniel , golden retriever , yorkshire terrier  and jack russell terrier .

prescribing of systemic and topical antimicrobial treatment
within 24 hours of the diagnosis of pyoderma,  <dig> cases  were prescribed at least one antimicrobial product for administration systemically and/or topically; most dogs  were prescribed at least one systemic antimicrobial, either alone  or in combination with a topical product . few dogs were prescribed a topical product only, or no antimicrobial treatment at all . agents most frequently prescribed for systemic antimicrobial treatment were amoxicillin-clavulanic acid , cefalexin  and clindamycin  . in total  <dig> study dogs  were prescribed at least one topical antimicrobial product. products most frequently prescribed were fuciderm gel , hibiscrub  and malaseb shampoo  .figure  <dig> 
antimicrobial formulation type/s initially prescribed by veterinarians treating uk canine pyoderma cases. frequency and proportions of all  <dig> identified canine pyoderma cases prescribed either systemic, topical or both types of antimicrobial agent within 24 hours of their earliest recorded pyoderma diagnosis in  <dig> 
systemic antimicrobial agents initially prescribed or administered by veterinary surgeons treating uk canine pyoderma cases. prescribing frequency of  <dig> individual, systemic antimicrobial agents among  <dig> canine pyoderma cases within 24 hours of earliest recorded pyoderma diagnosis in  <dig> .
prescribing frequencies of individual topical antimicrobial products among study dogs. prescribing frequency of individual topical antimicrobial products among the  <dig> study dogs prescribed at least one topical antimicrobial within 24 hours of earliest pyoderma diagnosis in  <dig>  the percentage of all  <dig> study dogs prescribed each combination are shown above the relevant bar. commercial details  for products shown are provided in additional file  <dig> 



of the subset of  <dig> study dogs randomly selected for detailed case review ten were excluded from further description due to confirmed  violation of study inclusion criteria: chronological review of all available free-text clinical history undermined the certainty of pyoderma diagnosis in eight dogs, and indicated that the episode identified was not newly diagnosed in  <dig> in two more. thus all available epr information  was reviewed in further detail for  <dig> study dogs, from  <dig> individual clinics. pyoderma lesion depth was classifiable in  <dig> of the retained cases, with superficial lesions the most frequent lesion depth category, reported in 37/ <dig>  of these dogs . eighty two  of the  <dig> cases reviewed in detail had been prescribed at least one systemic antimicrobial in association with the pyoderma episode of interest. in all cases antimicrobials were dispensed at the practice, with no evidence of clients being provided with a written prescription to obtain antimicrobials from elsewhere. in  <dig> of  <dig> cases  there was evidence that bacterial culture and antimicrobial sensitivity testing were performed during the pyoderma episode studied; in both cases results were available before the prescribed course of antimicrobial treatment commenced. test results  were available in the records of one dog , and were absent from the records of the other .table  <dig> 
summary of available data on depth of pyoderma lesions in the  <dig> episodes reviewed in detail



stated depth of pyoderma lesions
number of dogs
% of  <dig> dogs reviewed in detail

unclear/ambiguous/absent clinical description
40
 <dig> 

total
90
100


complete information on prescribed daily dose for administration was recorded in  <dig>  of the  <dig> cases prescribed at least one systemic antimicrobial agent. median theoretical total duration of treatment with the initially prescribed systemic antimicrobial agent was 14 days  and  <dig> %  of the dogs with available course duration information were prescribed treatment for a period of less than 14 days . prescribed daily doses were considered equivalent to the minimum mrdd in  <dig> dogs , while the remaining  <dig>  were prescribed doses below the recommended level. in  <dig> cases it was not possible to determine the mrdd; this was primarily due to absent weight data, but in  <dig> dogs prescription of multiple systemic antimicrobial agents concurrently prevented assessment of a single primary agent.figure  <dig> 
total estimated duration of treatment with the initially prescribed systemic antimicrobial agent in study cases. total duration of treatment with the initially prescribed systemic antimicrobial agent  in  <dig> of the  <dig> study cases reviewed in detail, prescribed at least one systemic antimicrobial in association with their earliest pyoderma diagnosis in  <dig> and with sufficient data available to calculate theoretical duration of prescribed treatment.



eight  of the  <dig> dogs in the subset with pyoderma were prescribed topical antimicrobial agents only. available instructions for administration of topical antimicrobial agents in these dogs did not indicate  the intended duration of prescribed antimicrobial therapy, or a theoretical date for treatment completion. shampoos or liquid washes were prescribed concurrently with antimicrobial treatment in 34/ <dig>  dogs; malaseb  was prescribed for  <dig> dogs and either hibiscrub, hibitaine  or generic chlorhexidine were prescribed for  <dig> others.

discussion
this study explores the prevalence and treatment of canine pyoderma in a population of uk dogs presented to primary care veterinary clinics during a single year, based on epr data recorded by vets during case management. existing studies describing the frequency of bacterial skin infections in dogs presented for veterinary care are sparse, have used a variety of case definitions for pyoderma, and were based on canine populations from different countries  <cit> . similarly, while studies reporting prescribing patterns of clinicians treating canine pyoderma in primary practice are available, they are often relatively small in scale, not based on uk data, or describe self-reported theoretical prescribing behaviour rather than objectively reporting therapeutic agents dispensed in canine pyoderma cases diagnosed in practice  <cit> .

using available electronic data from participating primary practices it was estimated that approximately  <dig> - <dig> % of all dogs presented during  <dig> were diagnosed with pyoderma at least once during that year. however, the strict case definition applied in this study, as well as the transient, often recurrent nature of the condition suggest that the level of pyoderma in this population annually or at any given point in time is likely to be higher than these estimates. it is particularly relevant to note that the requirement for use of the specific term ‘pyoderma’ as part of the criteria for inclusion of a dog as a study case may have been a particularly important factor in underestimation of true pyoderma frequencies. based on the data reviewed, a wide range of terms appear to be used by uk veterinary practitioners to describe canine dermatological infections, and diagnostic terms such as “bacterial dermatitis”, “bacterial folliculitis” or variants of “staphylococcal skin infection” are likely to indicate conditions consistent with clinical pyoderma in many cases. however, it was not possible to confirm this assumption with sufficient consistency and confidence using the available data, hence the decision to implement a strict case definition and include only those dogs where recorded diagnosis included the specific term “pyoderma”. while it may have been interesting to search epr data for each of the potential individual synonyms or equivalent terms for pyoderma  this was not attempted in the current study due to time constraints. an additional cause of potential prevalence underestimation relates to the frequent lack of recording of a diagnosis within clinical fileds: a diagnosis of any kind was not always stated in dogs presented with skin lesions suspicious of pyoderma, even if antimicrobials were dispensed in association with clinical examination of the skin. existing prevalence estimates based on dogs presented for primary practice care in the uk and usa are approximately three times higher  <cit> , however validity of comparisons with the estimate from this study is limited as these surveys were based on different methodologies for calculation of disease frequency measures. it is possible that the true prevalence of pyoderma in the uk pet dog population does lie somewhere between the estimate in the current study and those previously reported. however, it is important to note that  <dig> of the  <dig> ‘cases’ excluded from the current study after detailed clinical data review were discarded due to violation of inclusion criteria. this suggests that the initial search strategy used to identify pyoderma cases in this study was not sufficiently accurate to reliably identify cases; this and other potential study limitations are discussed in more detail later in this report. antimicrobial treatment was dispensed or administered at the time of diagnosis in most pyoderma cases identified. studies reporting antimicrobial prescribing patterns specific to canine pyoderma are not available for direct comparison, however this finding is consistent with results of existing surveys from the uk and new zealand reporting antimicrobial prescribing in companion animal dermatology cases  <cit>  and surveys of theoretical prescribing behaviour for canine pyoderma from the uk and australia  <cit> . these findings are in accordance with current recommendations for successful treatment of the condition, which agree that antimicrobial treatment is generally indicated to achieve clinical resolution of lesions  <cit> .

recent, evidence-based guidelines for prudent, effective management of canine pyoderma emphasize the importance of selecting appropriate antimicrobial therapy  alongside accurate diagnosis of lesion depth and management of any underlying diseases  <cit> . choice of antimicrobial delivery in the current study appears to be in line with advice advocating systemic antimicrobial treatment for most superficial and all deep pyoderma lesions in dogs, with concurrent topical antimicrobials or anti-septics useful as adjunctive therapy  <cit> . while systemic antimicrobial therapy alone was most common, around a third of cases were prescribed topical and systemic antimicrobials concurrently. a survey of theoretical prescribing behaviour among australian clinicians also found that most would prescribe systemic antimicrobials and an antibacterial shampoo for therapy of deep pyoderma in dogs  <cit> .

the most frequently prescribed systemic antimicrobial agents in the present study were amoxicillin-clavulanic acid, cefalexin  and clindamycin, all of which are considered appropriate first-line choices for treatment of straightforward superficial and surface pyoderma in dogs  <cit> . this finding is consistent with reports from various countries, including the uk, describing antimicrobial prescribing in companion animals generally, for dermatological complaints and specifically for treatment of canine pyoderma  <cit> .

bacterial culture and antimicrobial sensitivity testing was recorded as part of management in only 2% of all study cases reviewed in detail. low levels of c&s testing have also been reported in other studies describing general antimicrobial prescribing in companion animals, and specifically for treatment of canine skin infections  <cit> . in the present study enrofloxacin and cefovecin were each prescribed in approximately 5% of cases. empirical and first line use of fluoroquinolones or the 3rd generation cephalosporin cefovecin remains controversial for treatment of canine pyoderma, though it can be useful when difficulties with oral administration of treatment are experienced or foreseen  <cit> . thus, the findings of the present study could reflect frequent empirical selection of these agents for canine pyoderma in primary practice. it is, however, important to remember that antimicrobial choice may be dictated by factors relating to practicality of administration, compliance or previous adverse drug reactions and assessment of information justifying reasons for drug choice was beyond the scope of this study.

delivery of a sufficiently high dose of the chosen agent, at appropriate intervals, is recommended to avoid rapid reappearance of lesions while minimizing exposure of bacterial populations to ineffective levels of antimicrobial drugs  <cit> . traditionally veterinary surgeons have been advised to prescribe antimicrobials for 7– <dig> days beyond clinical resolution, as confirmed by physical or cytological examination, though this recommendation does not appear to be evidence-based. consistently sub-therapeutic dosing can lead to poor clinical response, necessitating further antimicrobial courses and encouraging selection of antimicrobial resistant bacterial populations  <cit> . in this study, around 25% of systemically-treated study dogs reviewed in detail were prescribed doses below those recommended to achieve therapeutic levels . in addition, the median treatment duration often appears relatively short, with antimicrobials prescribed for less than 14 days in around 40% of cases, even taking into account the likely predominance of superficial over deep pyoderma cases in the study population. other studies report similarly short, mean treatment periods for canine pyoderma cases in finland  <cit>  and new zealand  <cit> . limitations related to the primary practice setting could curtail treatment duration regardless of the preferred clinical approach of the managing practitioner. economic restrictions, client preferences and failure to attend for re-examinations could result in shorter treatment courses than would be prescribed based on clinical judgement alone. in addition, the study design did not allow evaluation of client compliance with oral dosing instructions; inconsistent or under-dosing is reportedly not uncommon in companion animal practice  <cit> . therefore, it is possible that the prescribing-focussed findings reported here overestimate the amount and duration of oral antimicrobial treatment actually received by study dogs prescribed systemic antimicrobials at or above the mrdd  <cit> .

the study approach was subject to certain inherent limitations related to the nature of the data used and canine pyoderma as a clinical condition. the retrospective data analyzed were not collected primarily for research purposes, thus researchers had no influence on the content, level of pyoderma-related detail or note-taking style of clinical entries and were reliant on the clinical opinion of the examining vet with respect to pyoderma diagnosis and progress assessment. the study case definition for pyoderma required diagnosis to be based on clinical examination by a veterinarian and recorded using specified clinical terminology. however, standardised coding of diagnoses was not consistently applied and the frequency of typing errors, abbreviation and synonym use as well as misspelling of clinical terms made case-searching using the keyword ‘pyoderma’ alone ineffective. the broader search strategy employed improved the sensitivity of the search strategy by capturing as many pyoderma cases as possible, while maintaining strict inclusion criteria to achieve a reasonable level of diagnostic certainty and specificity. this method was more time-consuming and still provided scope for misclassification, i.e. ‘false negatives’  and ‘false positives’. in addition, it appeared that few cases underwent confirmatory diagnostic testing beyond physical examination. nonetheless, detailed review of a sample of cases did enable quantification of the likely level of uncertainty and misclassification within the dataset and the majority of identified cases probably involved genuine pyoderma. while it is difficult to quantify the true extent of pyoderma misdiagnosis in this study, the condition does generally lend itself readily to diagnosis by simple clinical examination  <cit> , suggesting that the reported prevalence of pyoderma in uk dogs on an annual basis is likely to be of an order similar to  that reported in this study.

further limitations included missing or erroneously recorded data of interest; certain data fields were frequently unpopulated, or contained information which proved incorrect based upon full review of clinical notes. data on specific factors of clinical interest were often absent despite review of all available free-text data entries, limiting comprehensive description of study animals and evaluation of certain variables of interest in the study. a particular example was the frequent absence of recorded data on follow-up for study cases: re-examinations to confirm clinical resolution appeared to occur relatively infrequently, even when advised by the prescribing clinician. thus it was not possible to describe  clinical response to antimicrobial treatment or recurrence of pyoderma lesions after completion of prescribed therapy. in this study it is likely that the constraints of the clinical setting had a major influence on the data available for clinicians to report as well as the depth of information recorded: in private, primary-care practice non-clinical factors  often drive decisions on diagnostic approach, case management, as well as the occurrence and timing of any follow-up clinical evaluations. in addition, the time available to busy veterinary surgeons for clinical recording can be limited. however, the data accurately reflect prescribing behaviour of primary practice veterinarians with respect to a larger number of uk canine pyoderma cases than previously described, underlining the potential of epr data for use in large scale epidemiological studies and practice-based surveillance.

CONCLUSIONS
approximately  <dig> - <dig> % of nearly  <dig>  dogs attending uk primary practices during  <dig> were diagnosed with pyoderma during that year, however this is likely to be a conservative estimate of the true prevalence of the condition in this population at any given time. study findings suggested that there is scope for improvement with respect to prudent antimicrobial use in canine pyoderma treatment in uk primary-care practice, in terms of empirical selection of certain critically important agents, prescribing of adequate dose rates and particularly sufficient treatment duration. this report highlights the value of practice-based electronic health records for prevalence estimation and description of clinical management of conditions commonly seen in vet-visiting canine populations presented for primary health care.

