BACKGROUND
high-throughput, next generation sequencing  technologies and associated bioinformatics tools have fundamentally changed the scale at which dna sequence data can be gathered and analyzed  <cit> . ngs allows for a massive amount of sequence data to be affordably and quickly obtained. in principle, these approaches can be implemented without prior genomic knowledge of the focus species, thus offering tremendous potential for addressing various novel and long-standing evolutionary questions previously hampered by technology and cost  <cit> .

ngs allows researchers to investigate genome-wide molecular, structural, and regulatory mechanisms underlying adaptation, diversification, and speciation  <cit> . ngs also enables comparative genome scans for polymorphism which can then be used to infer demography and selection  <cit> . molecular phylogenetics also benefits from the increasing accessibility of ngs. large-scale, multi-locus data  combined with improved analytical tools for inferring gene trees, provides unprecedented opportunities for resolving species phylogenies  <cit> . toward this end, a core challenge of population genomic and phylogenetic studies is obtaining a reliable set of orthologous loci from a sufficient number of individuals across populations or species spanning a range of divergences  <cit> . even though the cost of ngs continues to fall, most evolutionary labs cannot sequence whole genomes or a large portion of genomic regions from samples spanning divergent clades. moreover, whole genome data simply is not necessary to answer many research questions. in this context, genome partitioning and targeted re-sequencing of a consistent subset of genomic regions will remain the most cost-effective and analytically straightforward approach for most evolutionary applications. genome partitioning with targeted dna capture allows for the selective ngs of thousands of genomic regions  <cit> , facilitating rapid assays of genetic variation. compared to partitioning methods that search for anonymous markers . however, the genomes of most organisms of ecological and evolutionary interest are yet to be sequenced, which has largely impeded the expansion of dna capture across the tree of life.

in this study, we propose a series of methods  aimed at adapting exon capture based ngs to organisms without pre-existing reference genomes. here we focused on array-based capture but note that the same general principles should directly extend to an in-solution approach. we focused on north american chipmunks of the genus tamias to test our methods. tamias are the focus of a comprehensive set of studies that aim to understand their evolutionary history, patterns of hybridization, and gene introgression . there is no reference genome currently available for this group; at the onset of our study the most closely related genomic resource was a low-coverage  draft genome of the thirteen-lined ground squirrel , which is around  <dig> million years  divergent from tamias. the house mouse  and rat  are the closest high-quality reference genomes, but last shared a common ancestor with chipmunks around  <dig> my. in this context, we developed genomic resources by first sequencing multi-tissue transcriptomes from one chipmunk species , and then designed arrays by targeting a subset of exons from the annotated transcripts. furthermore, to test how increased divergence affects capture efficiency, we included anonymous genomic targets from the thirteen-lined ground squirrel on this array. we then tested the feasibility of this approach by using these arrays to capture sequence from four chipmunk species, spanning the range of genetic divergence in this genus. up to  <dig> individually indexed genomic libraries from each species were pooled and hybridized on single arrays, enabling highly cost-effective sequencing  on a scale that is desirable for diverse population genomic and phylogenetic applications. finally, we developed novel methods for analyzing exon capture data in the absence of a reference genome. 

RESULTS
tamias alpinus transcriptome
the t. alpinus multi-tissue cdna library generated  <dig> , <dig> raw sequence reads with a total length of  <dig>  gb . after filtering, the total length of cleaned reads was  <dig>  gb. the de novo assembly information is summarized in additional file  <dig>  instead of subjectively selecting a single kmer size for transcriptome assembly, we explored multiple-kmer assemblies followed by merging raw assemblies and removing redundancies, as recommended by previous studies  <cit> . previous work has demonstrated that a multiple k-mer strategy increases both contig length and transcript diversity when compared to a single k-mer assembly method  <cit> . the mean contig length among the  <dig> raw assemblies generated by abyss ranged from  <dig> to  <dig>  bp with an overall average of  <dig> bp. the final merged consensus assemblies contained  <dig>  contigs  with a mean length of  <dig> bp. among these contigs,  <dig>   showed strong orthology  with known proteins from the combined human , mouse, rat and thirteen-lined ground squirrel protein dataset. the annotated transcripts matched  <dig>   of the unique protein-coding genes in the ensembl mouse protein database. among these contigs,  <dig> % covered the full coding sequences of a gene including partial sequences of 5’ and 3’ untranslated regions ,  <dig> % partially covered coding sequences with partial 3’ utr,  <dig> % covered partial coding sequences with partial 5’ utr, and  <dig> % only contained partial coding sequences. as expected, the annotated contigs are 3’ utr biased because the mrna were enriched through oligo-dt selection  <cit> . the mean length of the annotated transcripts was  <dig>  bp and the average base coverage was 54x . there was a positive relationship between transcript length and the number of reads mapped, but we found no strong correlation between coverage and the length of contigs . errors during the transcriptome assembly appear to be trivial. the percentage of open reading frames  that contained premature stop codons in the annotated contigs, which could be derived either from pseudogenes or by assembly errors, was only 1%. we also found that  <dig> % of the annotated contigs comprised more than one distinct transcript, which were spuriously combined during the assembly. the array probes were designed according to the exons identified by comparing mouse protein to mouse genomic dna, not the entire transcriptome. thus, the low level of chimeria present in our dataset is unlikely to introduce errors during the array design. we were able to identify  <dig>  putative exons across  <dig>  annotated transcripts.

exon capture array design
we used all identified exons that were longer than  <dig> bp  in length to design tiling probes for the capture arrays. note that shorter targets  are possible, but targeted capture performance is expected to decline for relatively short regions. in addition to the t. alpinus exons, we also targeted regions from the tamias mitochondrial genome,  <dig> anonymous i. tridecemlineatus genomic intervals, the y-linked sry gene, and seven previously sequenced nuclear genes . after filtering probes that likely contained repetitive elements,  <dig>  probes were synthesized onto the agilent 1m arrays.

probe design is critical for successfully enriching orthologous loci with variable rates of evolution from cross-species dna hybridization. ideally, probes should reflect the full range of evolutionary rates of loci. while highly conserved genes are expected to provide more efficient capture across species, they will often be less useful for resolving phylogenetic relationships. at the other extreme, rapidly evolving loci will reduce the efficiency of cross-species hybridization. furthermore, they might tend to reflect signatures of natural selection to a greater extent, and are thus more likely to introduce bias into the inference of phylogenetic relationships among species. our goal was to design an array that targeted the full genomic range of evolutionary rates in an unbiased manner. we compared t. alpinus annotated transcripts against the transcriptome of belding’s ground squirrel , which was sequenced and assembled with the same method described above . we found that the average sequence divergence between all identified orthologous regions from the two species was  <dig>  ±  <dig> %. the divergence between the targeted t. alpinus exons and the corresponding u.beldingi orthologs was  <dig>  ±  <dig> %, and followed a distribution similar to that of the overall divergence between the two species . these results indicate that our array design is unlikely to be biased towards highly conserved genic regions.

exon capture data filtration and assemblies
the libraries for all individuals within a single species were pooled into a species library. four exon capture arrays were used to capture each of the species libraries. after capture, the t. alpinus library  was sequenced on one lane, and the t. amoenus , t. ruficaudus , and t. striatus  libraries were equally combined and sequenced on two lanes. summary information for the de-multiplexed libraries is shown in additional file  <dig>  in total,  <dig>  and  <dig>  gb of raw sequence data were respectively obtained for the t. alpinus  species library and for the combined library of t. amoenus , t. ruficaudus , and t. striatus  species libraries. the sequence quality among individual libraries on each lane was consistent. for example, across the  <dig> t. alpinus libraries, the overall mean base quality score was  <dig>  ±  <dig> , while  <dig>  ±  <dig> % of the bases in the raw sequence reads had quality scores greater than  <dig> 

the results for data filtration are shown in additional file  <dig>  the raw reads of each individual library were filtered to remove exact duplicates, adapters, bacteria and human contamination, as well as low complexity and quality reads. on average,  <dig> % of the raw t. alpinus reads, and  <dig> - <dig> % of the raw reads for the other tamias species passed all of these filters. compared to the percentage of read duplicates present in t. alpinus libraries , there was a substantial portion of raw reads identified as duplicates in t. amoenus , t. ruficaudus , and t. striatus . increased data yield makes repeated sequencing of the same molecule, and thus duplicates, more likely in pcr amplified libraries  <cit> . these results indicate that additional sequencing of the captured t. alpinus libraries would result in higher unique coverage, while additional sequencing effort in the other species would present increasingly diminishing returns. duplicate reads were removed in all subsequent analyses to avoid inappropriate pseudo-replication.

the cleaned reads of each species library assembled by abyss and soapdenovo produced  <dig> and  <dig> raw assemblies, respectively . the mean and median lengths, and n <dig> of assemblies generated by various combinations of k-mer and k-cov were similar among species . the raw assemblies were merged by species to produce consensus assemblies, which were then compared to the t. alpinus exons and other targeted regions to identify the portion of consensus assemblies that are associated with various targets . as expected, the length of a contig in the assemblies was much greater than the length of the corresponding targeted t. alpinus exon , illustrating the potential for exon capture to obtain sequence information at flanking intronic regions even when probes are restricted to exons.

capture efficiency
we retrieved the complete tamias mitochondrial genome and all  <dig> nuclear control loci from all  <dig> individual libraries. for the targeted t. alpinus exons and for all libraries, the sensitivity, or percentage of exons that were covered by at least one read, was greater than 99%, which is consistent with other exome capture studies . for the  <dig> t. alpinus samples, the specificity, or the percentage of mapped reads that map to target regions, ranged from  <dig> % to  <dig> % with an average of  <dig> %. similar specificity was observed in the other chipmunk species:  <dig> % in t. amoenus,  <dig> % in t. ruficaudus, and  <dig> % in t. striatus . 

specificity levels are lower in our study compared to most studies in humans . this decline likely has two principle causes. first, amplified, multiplexed libraries tend to show much lower specificity  <cit> . we see the same range of specificity across differing levels of multiplexing , indicating that this is not an issue of multiplexing per se, but rather specific to enriching amplified libraries with long complementary adapters. the use of a different barcoding system that enables pooling and hybridization prior to amplification would likely help reduce these effects. a second and likely larger issue is the fundamental limitation of not having an available reference genome. we calculated specificity following previous studies as the proportion of reads that map to the genome that fell within target regions. one important caveat in our data is that we observe a much larger proportion of un-mapped reads. we suspect that the observed low specificity is a reflection of reduced mapping efficiency in the absence of a complete reference genome. for example, among the reads mapped to assemblies corresponding to t. alpinus target exons, only ~4% of them were exclusively within flanking regions, compared to  <dig> % in a recent human study  <cit> . although high specificity is often obtained in single sample capture experiments, this approach is simply not cost-effective for population-level sampling  <cit>  and the low overall specificity is more than compensated for by the ability to capture many individuals in parallel.

the average base coverage within target exons for individual t. alpinus libraries ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig> x, with a mean of  <dig> x .  <dig> % of the targets had a mean coverage of at least 1x,  <dig> % had a mean coverage greater than 5x, and  <dig> % had a mean coverage greater than 10x . the average coverage per lane for the other three tamias species libraries was approximately two times greater than for t. alpinus , as expected because nearly twice as much sequence data were generated.

as expected, average coverage for the mitochondrial genome was at least one order of magnitude greater than for nuclear exons due to the higher per cell copy number of mtdna. we also observed greater variance associated with sequence coverage among samples for the mitochondrial genome, which could reflect a difference in the amount of mitochondrial template present in each dna sample . nevertheless, the distribution of coverage for aligned reads  along the entire mitochondrial genome showed great concordance across all four species, indicating that the performance of each capture experiment is consistent.

the comparison of sequence coverage among intended targets within each library was influenced by the base composition of the targets. we found that targets with exceptionally high or low g/c ratios led to low coverage , which may be due to poor annealing and secondary structure formation during the hybridization  <cit> . we found a strong correlation in terms of capture efficiency between the same targets among species libraries , as well as among samples within each species , negating the existence of a species-specific capture bias. these results suggest that the performance of each target in different capture experiments is highly reproducible.

for each target exon, we found that the coverage among bases was mostly uniform except for at the edges. for example, base coverage for t. alpinus exons increased asymptotically from  <dig> x at the 5’ and 3’ ends of exons towards the center were it reached ~12x and plateaued at 80– <dig> bp from the ends . a major limitation of transcriptome-based array design is the absence of tiling probes that span exon-intron boundaries, and fewer probes tiled at the ends of exons results in reduced coverage of contig edges. to accommodate this shortfall, we applied extra tiling probes to the edges of each exon to promote more uniform coverage. however, our results indicate that this method did not completely solve the expected “edge effect”. to address the edge effect completely, future array designs could use denser tiling even further from the edge and/or print duplicate probes to target the first or last few bases of each exon.

estimate of empirical error rates
two important sources of errors in ngs analyses are sequencing  error and contamination. sequencing error, particularly on the illumina platform, can be as high as ~1%  <cit> . multiplexing samples can lead to cross sequence contamination caused by dna contamination among specimens during lab work, swapping sample-specific barcodes during library preparation or bulk amplification of libraries , and/or mis-assigning the reads during the library de-multiplexing. potential errors can also be derived from de novo assembly and alignment. these sources of errors can introduce bias into the variant calling based on exon capture data and result in false snps and hence, unreliable genotypes.

to address these related issues of exon capture and ngs sequencing, we targeted the complete mitochondrial genome, putative x-linked genes, and the y-linked sry gene on our capture arrays, while using both male and female specimens in the pooled genomic libraries. for males, these loci are haploid, and therefore, all variation within individuals should stem from sequencing or assembly errors. the spermophilus sry gene was captured in all male tamias samples and was absent in all females except for one t. striatus female that had  <dig> reads that mapped to sry. we identified a set of  <dig> putatively x-linked genes in t. alpinus for which we calculated overall error rate  in males to be  <dig> %. the error rate for the t. alpinus mitochondrial genome was  <dig> %, which is consistent with the x-linked loci. the results show that the empirical error rate for cleaned reads was comparable to that observed in dna libraries of other species sequenced using the same platform , and corresponds to a phred quality score between  <dig> - <dig> . we also calculated the average un-calibrated quality score of cleaned reads to be  <dig> , indicating an error rate of  <dig> %. this result suggests that the un-calibrated quality scores may under-estimate the true error rates of the sequence reads, which supports the notion that error rates estimated solely based on raw quality scores produced by ngs base-calling algorithms can be inaccurate  <cit> . the empirical error rate can be used to recalibrate raw quality scores and improve the accuracy of genotype calling  <cit> . since genotype calling is not a focus of the present paper, we did not perform quality score re-calibration but related information can be found in  <cit>  and  <cit> .

divergence vs. capture efficiency
one hundred and sixty-two  <dig> kb genomic intervals of i. tridecemlineatus were targeted on the arrays. the sensitivity of this set of divergent targets dropped to ~90% for all tamias species libraries, compared with a sensitivity of 99% when using t. alpinus exons as probes for target enrichment. owing to the fact that we had  <dig> t. alpinus libraries sequenced on the same illumina lane while the other  <dig> tamias libraries were sequenced on two other lanes, the total data yield of each t. alpinus library was only about 1/ <dig> that of other tamias libraries. to eliminate this bias we randomly sub-sampled  <dig> million reads from each individual library and aligned them to the assemblies associated with targeted t. alpinus exons and the i. tridecemlineatus genomic intervals, respectively. the normalized average coverage for t. alpinus libraries was 10x. the average sequence divergence between the targeted t. alpinus exons and the other two western chipmunks, t. amoenus and t. ruficaudus, was  <dig> %. the normalized coverage for t. amoenus and t. ruficaudus  was slightly higher but still consistent with that of t. alpinus. the eastern chipmunk, t. striatus, has a slightly more divergent genome  from t. alpinus yet the coverage for the two species was nearly identical . vallender  <cit>  applied human exome capture to non-human primates and suggested that the divergence cutoff for unbiased capture is around 4%. our study clearly demonstrates that there is no decrease in capture efficiency within  <dig> % divergence . according to these results, it is reasonable to postulate that unbiased sequence coverage could be obtained for all  <dig> chipmunk species across the western tamias clade using the array designed from a single species transcriptome.

as expected, there is an abrupt reduction in capture efficiency when using a divergent genome for capture array design. the sequence divergence between targeted i. tridecemlineatus genomic  intervals and genomes of the four tamias species ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig> %. the results showed a  <dig> to 4-fold decrease in average sequence coverage among these regions , which support the finding by vallender  <cit>  that the level of coverage starts to decrease rapidly when the divergence becomes greater than 5% or more . note that at least some of the un-captured i. tridecemlineatus regions are likely to be completely absent from the tamias genome. moreover, the sequence alignments between tamias assemblies and the corresponding i. tridecemlineatus genomic intervals are dominated by extensive indels that would reduce the mapping efficiency around such regions, which could amplify the effect of local nucleotide difference on the level of coverage. nevertheless, 90% of the i. tridecemlineatus intervals were still covered by reads at a mean coverage of 3-4x. the divergence between coding regions in tamias and in u. beldingi, a close relative to i. tridecemlineatus, is around 5%. non-coding regions are expected to be less conserved than protein-coding regions on average. therefore, if only orthologous exons of i. tridecemlineatus were targeted we would reasonably expect an elevated capture efficiency with sequence coverage falling into the range of  <dig> to 12x along with higher sensitivity . 

orthologous markers and detection of candidate snps
the number of orthologous loci shared between t. alpinus and each of the other three chipmunk species are very similar, representing an approximately  <dig>  mb genotypic alignment. overall,  <dig>  orthologous loci with an average size of  <dig> bp were mutually shared among the four species. by aligning the reads of each species to the t. alpinus in-target assemblies, we found numerous snps between and within species, across all locations , and across both functional categories  . we refrain from making too many conclusions based on these snp calls here, as snp calling is highly dependent on the read alignment software used and the variant calling algorithm. that said, our method demonstrates that transcriptome-based exon capture can facilitate the identification of a large number of orthologous markers with thousands of fixed differences among species of varying divergence. pooling population samples on a single capture also provides a cost-effective method for snp discovery that is invaluable for population genomic inferences of demography and selection.

a sequence reads of each species were aligned to the in-target assemblies of t. alpinus to estimate the level of genetic variability in the orthologous markers.

CONCLUSIONS
our goal for this study was to develop genomic resources for the application of ngs to a lineage lacking reference genomes, develop targets for exon capture, and test the performance of these new resources across phylogenetically divergent species. in summary, our strategy as it pertains to our study species, involved generating a de novo transcriptome for the chipmunk , designing an array based on identified exons, pooling individually barcoded genomic libraries of a few moderately divergent species  before exon capture, sequencing using multiplexed ngs, and applying bioinformatics approaches to analyze exon capture data without a reference genome.

the strategy developed here proved successful and will benefit future studies on multiple fronts: 1) our capture array design is only based on transcriptome sequences from one individual specimen. compared to whole genome sequencing, this is a much faster and economically viable approach for generating tens of thousands of genetic markers; 2) multiplexing prior to capture is key to cost-effective population-level sequencing. the level of specificity, sensitivity, and read coverage of target regions is highly consistent among samples, indicating that pooling indexed libraries before exon-capture is a highly effective method; 3) the performance of each target is highly reproducible among independent capture experiments and the specificity is independent of the number of libraries that can be multiplexed on an array; 4) base coverage is fairly even within exons, except at the edges. this edge effect could be further mitigated by extending the range of high density tiling baits at the ends of exonic regions, or by subsequent extension of probes into intronic regions of the assembled contigs recovered by initial captures; 5) without having a prior reference genome, de novo assemblies of the captured reads can effectively provide a reference for mapping sequence reads, which allows for variant calling using existing tools; 6) coverage does not decrease for species within  <dig> % divergence in coding regions, but significantly declines when using more divergent targets  for array design. however, even then, a sensitivity of ~90% can be expected based on our results; 7) over ten thousand orthologous loci and thousands of high quality candidate snps were identified that can be used for future population genomic and phylogenetic inference.

there are now diverse dna capture methods available for non-model organisms, including pcr-generated bait capture to enrich specific loci from tens of samples  <cit>  and dna-hybridization based capture to target hundreds of loci from hundreds of samples. we suggest that studies should select the methods that best suit the questions at hand. for example, approaches that use ultraconserved element anchors   <cit>  and anchored enrichment  <cit>  have demonstrated great utility for tackling deeper phylogenetic nodes. our study showcases the potential of a de novo transcriptome-enabled, multiplexed, exon capture method for sequencing thousands of orthologous loci over a vast number of non-model samples. our approach can target exons spanning a wide range of evolutionary rates, thus it can be applied to population genomics for detecting selection and demography, species delimitation, and resolving phylogenies at low-moderate phylogenetic distance. overall, adopting this cost-effective approach and associated analytical methods by ecological and evolutionary labs will expand the realm of possibility for addressing various evolutionary questions, ranging from populations to large assemblages of related species.

