BACKGROUND
the tetranucleotide gatc is methylated in escherichia. coli by the dna methyltransferase ; this enzyme methylates the adenine residue within 5'-gatc-3' sequences in double stranded dna. gatc motifs and their methylation by dam play an important role in e. coli; they are involved in mismatch repair  and the control of chromosome replication . the methylation state of gatc is also involved in the expression of the pap operon; this operon codes for the pap pili, which are of great importance in the pathogenicity of uropathogenic e. coli  <cit> .

mutants that lack dam are characterized by a pleiotropic phenotype; they show for example an increased sensitivity to dna-damaging agents, have a higher mutability and increased hyper-recombination  <cit> . recent transcriptome analyses on dam mutants show that nearly 10% of e. coli's genes are affected  <cit> . when we sort these genes according to their ecocyc functional classes and compare their distribution with all of e. coli's genes, one can observe that the two distributions are different  and that the class energy metabolism is particularly overrepresented in the genes sensitive to the dam genotype .

in  <dig>  hénaut et al.  <cit>  suggested the existence of a gatc regulated network thought to be involved in cold and oxygen shift. its existence has been recently confirmed by riva et al.  <cit> , who have worked with a virtual chromosome and used salmonella -a close relative of e. coli- as a control organism. the network consists of a number of genes which contain clusters of gatc within their coding sequences.

in fast growing cells  dam is a limiting factor and the dna will be undermethylated  <cit> ; this undermethylated dna possesses an increased melting temperature and thus an increased stability  <cit> .

according to the hypothesis of  <cit>  and  <cit> , the increased stability of the dna comes into play when the bacteria undergo coldshock , caused by the passage from the intestine to the external environment. at that moment, the transcription of genes containing a gatc cluster will be blocked at the level of the cluster because of the high stability of the hemi-methylated dna.

the aim of this article is to describe the gatc regulated network of e. coli in detail. in order to obtain more information about the characteristics of the network, we compare it with the genes known to be involved in the stress and sos response. by examining the functions of the genes belonging to the gatc regulated network, we try to address the question about the possible evolutionary advantage of developing a regulatory network controlled by gatc clusters present within the coding regions.

RESULTS
description of the network and its conservation
firstly we assigned each gene in e. coli to one of fifteen functional classes according to ecocyc  <cit> . this allowed us to examine whether the "gatc genes"  follow the distribution of all of e. coli's genes or not. the results are displayed in table  <dig> and figure  <dig> and show that the distribution  of the "gatc genes" in the fifteen classes is significantly different from all of e. coli's genes . as the gatc network is thought to come into play when the cell suffers from stress, namely coldshock , we compared the "gatc genes" with genes induced under various stress conditions according to ecocyc  as the two groups might overlap. the results of this second comparison are displayed in table  <dig> and figure  <dig> and show that the distribution  of the genes in the fifteen classes is clearly different in the two groups . a third comparison was made, between the "gatc genes" and the group of genes, whose expression is strongly affected by mitomycin c  according to a recent transcriptome analysis  <cit> . mitomycin c is an antitumor drug and antibiotic which has a strong ability to cause interstrand dna cross-links  <cit> . addition of mitomycin c to a culture of e. coli provokes a general stress in the bacteria, affecting almost  <dig> % of e. coli's genes; 7% of e. coli's genes show particularly strong changes in expression levels, including the genes in the sos response and genes belonging to other stress response pathways  <cit> . we have compared this latter group of genes with the "gatc genes". again the comparison shows the two groups of genes to be distinct .

the table shows the distributions of four groups of genes discussed in this paper, : the "gatc genes" , all of e. coli's genes, the "ecocyc genes"  and the "mitomycin c genes" . this table allows the reader to perform the statistical analyses carried out in this paper. the comparison of the distribution of the "gatc genes" with each of the other three groups shows that in all three comparisons three functional classes are overrepresented in the "gatc genes": energy metabolism, fatty acid/ phospholipid metabolism and nucleotide metabolism. these three classes characterize the gatc regulated network. for an easier interpretation these data are also displayed in the form of histograms in figures  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> 

the three comparisons show us that the "gatc genes" form a group apart. a characteristic of the gatc network is the overrepresentation of three classes, namely fatty acid/ phospholipid metabolism, nucleotide metabolism and energy metabolism, indicating that the genes belonging to these three classes are the ones which characterize the network and therefore deserve a closer examination.

two distinct arguments corroborate the fact that the three classes  are at the heart of the gatc network:

the first argument comes from an analysis of some transcriptome data. oshima et al.  <cit>  carried out a transcriptome study on e. coli in a dam+/dam- background. we have classified the genes affected by this background according to the  <dig> functional classes in ecocyc and compared the distribution of these genes with the "gatc genes". at first sight the distribution  of the genes in the fifteen classes is different in the two groups . if, however, we do not take into consideration the class "hypothetical", the two distributions do no longer differ from each other, with a p-value of  <dig>   and they follow the same distribution in the  <dig> ecocyc functional classes .

twenty-three genes are in common to the two bacteria ; even if we do not take these genes into account, the rest of the "gatc genes" in the two organisms still follow the same distribution .

we expected the network to be evolutionarily conserved, but not to be identical in the two organisms. a particularly interesting case is given when the same pathway is affected in both organisms, but through different genes, as this represents a particularly strong argument for the evolutionary conservation of the gatc regulated network, beyond the mere conservation of the sequences themselves. the following serve as examples:

the first regards the propionate catabolism, where three genes contain a cluster. prpe contains a gatc cluster in both e. coli and salmonella. prpb, which belongs to the same catabolic pathway, is affected in e. coli only. according to our hypothesis, transcription from these two genes would be halted during coldshock. prpr codes for the positive regulator of the propionate catabolism operon, to which prpe and prpb belong to. it contains a cluster in salmonella. according to our hypothesis, transcription of prpr would be halted under coldshock, thus inhibiting transcriptional activation of the propionate catabolism operon, effectively blocking propionate catabolism. it is interesting to note that the gatc regulated transcription block acts on two different levels: the genes involved in catabolism, as well as their operon's regulator.

formate metabolism is affected by gatc clusters in both organisms; according to our hypothesis, the insertion of selenocysteine  is blocked in e. coli via selb, in salmonella through cysn . furthermore, we find that in e. coli hyfr contains a cluster, whose product is required for the induction of the formate hydrogenlyase  <dig>  <cit> ; by blocking hyfr, the formation of the complex would be hindered and thus formate metabolism further inhibited.

in both organisms, a nitrate/ nitrite response regulator is part of the gatc network: narl in e. coli and narp in salmonella. the two enzymes fulfil equivalent roles in respiration, both being involved in the  regulation of a number of genes encoding oxidoreductases and dehydrogenases. the regulated oxidoreductases include a periplasmic nitrite reductase  and two nitrate reductases ; the formate dehydrogenase-n  is regulated by narl  <cit> .

discussion
evolutionary advantage of gatc network regulation
according to our hypothesis, the gatc network comes into play, when e. coli passes from a warm, nutrient rich environment, where it grows rapidly, to a cold, nutrient poor environment, where growth might be expected to be considerably slower, if not completely arrested. this process occurs naturally, when the cells pass from the intestine of their warm blooded host to the external environment. when growing rapidly, the dna is undermethylated  <cit>  and possesses an increased melting temperature and thus an increased stability  <cit> .

we hypothesize that when the bacterium undergoes coldshock, the transcription of genes containing a gatc cluster will be blocked at the level of the cluster because of the high stability of the hemi-methylated dna.

we will now draw the logical consequences of this hypothesis: if a gene contains a gatc cluster, its transcription will be blocked when the bacterium undergoes coldshock and the product the gene codes for will no longer be formed, affecting the biological process it is involved in.

we will apply this principle systematically to the genes belonging to the three functional classes characterizing the gatc network , in order to try answering the following question: is there one and the same selection pressure that can explain why these three particular classes are affected by the gatc network?

nucleotide metabolism
two main groups of genes can be distinguished: those involved in the synthesis of nucleotides  and those involved in dna repair . the shut down of macromolecule synthesis such as dna, rna and atp when undergoing coldshock might be seen as the "effort" of the cell to eliminate wasteful energy expenditure, as growth conditions in the new environment will probably be less comfortable than in the host's intestine.

the halt of the dna repair machinery, on the other hand, might have a different reason: when the cell passes from the intestine to the outside environment, it is halted in the middle of a rapid growth phase, which means that the dna double helix will be open in certain regions and "loose ends" of newly formed dna will be present . the dna repair machinery might interpret these fragments as damaged pieces of dna and proceed to its elimination  <cit> . an immediate halt of the dna repair machinery when undergoing coldshock would prevent such "erroneous" repair.

energy metabolism
again, we will look at two classes of genes, which are particularly interesting: those involved in respiration and those involved in the metabolism of succinate .

respiration
the respiratory system of e. coli has a modular character . there are three types of respiratory components :

1) substrate specific dehydrogenases which oxidize their substrates and feed electrons to the mobile quinone pool.

2) quinones, which deliver reducing equivalents to the terminal oxidoreductases.

3) terminal oxidoreductases which reduce the terminal electron acceptors.

the heme synthesis is blocked in e. coli  at the level of the aminolevulinic acid  production. ala is synthesized from glutamate through the action of gltx, whose corresponding gene, gltx, contains a gatc cluster . hemes play a fundamental role in the energy conserving electron transport chains and are also present as cofactors in a number of enzymes  <cit> . thus, if heme synthesis is blocked, the repercussions are felt by the heme containing enzymes, notably by the dehydrogenases poxb, sdhabcd, fdnghi, fdoghi, fdhf and lldd and the oxidoreductases torcad, toryz, nirb, nrfab, cyoabcd, cydab and cyxab.

respiration is further affected through narl, containing a gatc cluster in e. coli  which codes for a nitrate / nitrite response regulator and is involved in the  regulation of a number of genes encoding oxidoreductases and dehydrogenases. the oxidoreductases regulated include a periplasmic nitrite reductase  and two nitrate reductases ; the formate dehydrogenase-n  is regulated by narl  <cit> .

as discussed in the section above, the formate dehydrogenases require selenocysteine, whose incorporation is halted. we can thus expect formate to accumulate in the cell when it undergoes coldshock, an aspect discussed further below.

two more dehydrogenases – glpa and lldd – and oxidoreductases – dmsa and nirb- are blocked in e. coli.

if we now look at the respiration as a whole, at all the respiratory enzymes affected by the clusters, directly or indirectly, the following picture emerges : the great majority of enzymes are blocked.

interestingly, nyström  <cit>  points out that during aerobic starving conditions or stasis the aerobic respiration in e. coli is blocked . applying our hypothesis we come to the conclusion that genes involved in aerobic respiration are blocked and moreover, that almost the entire respiration, aerobic as well as anaerobic, is brought to a standstill.

a possible explanation for this can be found in the work of dukan & nyström  <cit> . they point to the fact that when encountering stress  the cell is likely to enter the stationary phase. dukan & nyström studied e. coli cultures when entering stationary phase under different conditions; they found that cell viability depends on the conditions the cell was prior to entering the stationary phase. cells entering the stationary phase aerobically showed a very high mortality. cells entering the stationary phase anaerobically, though, showed a much higher viability. seen from this perspective it could be that what we predict to happen through the gatc regulation is the "attempt" of the cell to stay in an "anaerobic mode": the bacterium does not, for example, start producing enzyme complexes needed for aerobic respiration. blocking respiration  might be a preventive measure because all respiration, in the presence of oxygen, is a potential danger as it can lead to the production of free radicals and peroxide.

metabolism of succinate
in the section above, we predict that formate probably accumulates in the cell when undergoing coldshock. a second prediction is that succinate might also be accumulating. if we look at the tca cycle in anaerobiosis we note that the reductive branch  is not affected by gatc clusters except for the last step, leading from succinate to succinyl coa. thus, we expect succinate to accumulate during coldshock. , also suggesting an accumulation of succinate in the cell.) as mentioned above, dukan & nyström point out that a cell undergoing stress  is likely to enter stationary phase; this coupled with recent work carried out on salmonella and e. coli  <cit>  might give an explanation: the authors suggest that when the cells are in stationary phase, an accumulation of formate and succinate has a protective effect against antimicrobial agents. the mechanisms and exact nature of this protection are not yet understood.

fatty acid / phospholipid metabolism
we can make two observations regarding this group. the first is, that the synthesis of two enzymes which are essential for fatty acid synthesis are under gatc cluster control: the biosynthesis of acp, the central coenzyme of fatty acid biosynthesis  <cit>  is halted through acps and ilvd ; furthermore, the synthesis of biotin, an essential cofactor in fatty acid synthesis, is hindered through mioc, which contains a gatc cluster . the second observation regards the metabolism of propionate. as mentioned above, propionate catabolism is halted in both e. coli and salmonella. propionate, a short chain fatty acid  is present in relative abundance in the warm blooded hosts' intestine  <cit> , and less so in the external environment. it might be, that the gatc network acts to quickly stop a catabolic process for which it will have less use once in the external environment.

the  mechanism
so far we have stressed the importance of the physical property of hemi- or unmethylated gatc motifs, especially when present in clusters: the increased stability of the dna, which comes into play when the ambient temperature of the bacterium is suddenly lowered.

we hypothesize that this increased stability hinders transcription of the gene containing a gatc cluster when the cell undergoes coldshock and is likely to enter stationary phase; we have looked at the effect this might have on the cell.

a question we might ask is that of the control mechanism: apart from the control exerted by the physical property of hemi- or unmethylated gatc motifs, is there something else that recognizes these motifs? the protein seqa, for example, recognizes hemimethylated gatc sequences placed on the same face of the dna double helix and it does so in a cooperative, histone-like manner, forming a homotetramer  <cit> . it might indeed be that the gatc cluster network also requires the intervention of such a protein in order to fully exert its functions.

this question, however, reaches beyond the abilities of the research in silico and would require an intervention from the wet lab.

CONCLUSIONS
e. coli and salmonella possess a gatc cluster regulated network. the clusters are found within the coding sequences and their distribution is not at random. three functional classes characterize the network: nucleotide metabolism, energy metabolism and fatty acid / phospholipid metabolism.

we hypothesize that the network comes into play when the cell passes from the warm, nutrient rich environment of its warm blooded host's intestine to the external environment, i.e., when the cell undergoes coldshock and is likely to enter stationary phase.

according to our theory, the transcription of genes containing a gatc cluster will be blocked at the level of the cluster when the bacterium undergoes coldshock and the product the gene codes for will no longer be formed, affecting the biological process it is involved in.

we have applied this principle to the three functional classes that characterize the gatc network and come to the conclusion that respiration is almost completely under gatc control and will be blocked at the moment of coldshock; this might give the cell a selective advantage as it increases its chances for survival when entering stationary phase under coldshock. we also predict the accumulation of formate and possibly succinate, which might increase the cell's resistance, in this case to antimicrobial agents, when entering stationary phase.

