BACKGROUND
although voluntary dexterous movements of the hand are mainly under control of motor cortical areas in the opposite hemisphere, there is evidence that the ipsilateral motor cortex may also contribute, but to a lesser extent. for instance, the activity of single neurons in the primary , supplementary , premotor  and cingulate  motor cortical areas was found to be modulated when monkeys performed movements with the ipsilateral hand.  <cit> . intracortical microstimulations in the primary motor cortex in monkeys were reported to evoke not only the expected movements of the contralateral digits  <cit>  but also responses of the ipsilateral fingers  <cit> . in human subjects, there is increasing evidence that the motor cortex is involved in the control of ipsilateral hand movements . the possible contribution of the motor cortex in the control of the ipsilateral hand may be important for normal function, although its precise role has not been elucidated yet. furthermore, it has been anticipated that the ipsilateral motor cortex may be crucial for recovery of motor function of a paretic hand after unilateral brain lesion, such as after stroke . however, the involvement of the intact hemisphere in the control of the ipsilateral paretic hand remains a matter for debate.  <cit> . moreover, there is clear evidence, in both monkeys and human subjects, that a significant re-organization of motor maps takes place in the affected hemisphere after unilateral lesion of m <dig>   <cit> , a re-arrangement crucially involved in the functional recovery of the paretic hand  <cit> .

regarding lesions of the spinal cord, several studies reported plastic changes of motor maps in the cerebral cortex in both monkeys  <cit>  and human subjects  <cit> . in a recent report, we described in detail the changes of motor maps that occurred in the motor cortex contralateral to a unilateral section of the corticospinal  tract at cervical level c7/c <dig>  <cit> . several months after the lesion, the contralesional hemisphere showed a dramatic decrease of the hand representation, compared with before the lesion, ranging from  <dig> to  <dig> % depending on the site and extent of the lesion. the progressive changes in hand representation occurred during the 30– <dig> days post-lesion, in parallel to the functional recovery of the affected hand. finally, we demonstrated that the re-arranged contralesional motor cortex with a diminished hand representation was crucial for the functional recovery of the affected hand, since its reversible inactivation abolished the recovered motor performance  <cit> . the goal of the present report was to address the issue of possible changes in the hemisphere ipsilateral to the unilateral cervical lesion, in other words the ipsilesional hemisphere. more specifically, the following questions were addressed:

- does a unilateral section of the cs tract at cervical level affect the hand representation in the ipsilesional motor cortex? if yes, to what extent as compared to the contralesional hemisphere? based on the small proportion of undecussated cs axons , one would predict a very limited, if any, impact of a unilateral cervical lesion on the ipsilesional motor cortex.

- in the context of the recovery of motor control from unilateral section of the cs tract, does the ipsilesional hemisphere play a role, in addition to the substantial contribution of the contralesional hemisphere?

RESULTS
unilateral section of the cs tract at cervical level
three monkeys  were subjected to a unilateral section of the cs tract at cervical level. the extent and precise position of the lesion were assessed from reconstructions of cervical cord histological sections cut in the paralongitudinal plane as explained previously  <cit> . the lesion was finally represented for mks1- <dig> on a transverse reconstruction of the cervical cord . for comparison, the left inset of figure  <dig> shows the distribution of the cs axons at cervical level after injection of the anterograde tracer biotinylated dextran amine  in the right motor cortex, as recently described  <cit> . the smallest lesion was in mk <dig> , which however interrupted most of the dorsolateral funiculus comprising the crossed cs axons originating from the contralesional hemisphere. a restricted part of the cs axons located in the most ventral and lateral part of the dorsolateral funiculus  may have however been preserved in mk <dig>  in contrast, the lesion was larger in mk <dig> and mk <dig>  for which the left dorsolateral funiculus was, respectively, completely or nearly completely transected . overall, as intended, the lesion affected substantially if not totally the left dorsolateral funiculus in mks1- <dig>  above the spinal segments where the motoneurons controlling hand muscles are located  <cit> . regarding the uncrossed cs tracts originating from the ipsilesional hemisphere, the comparison with the inset of figure  <dig> indicates that the lesion in mks1- <dig> interrupted most  or all  of the uncrossed cs axons located in the dorsolateral funiculus, but not the few cs axons running in the ventral funiculus.

mapping of ipsilesional m <dig> hand area before and after cervical cord lesion: icms data
the experimental paradigm is depicted in figure  <dig>  as a result of the left cervical lesion, the ipsilesional hand was paralyzed, but showed incomplete recovery in about 30– <dig> days  <cit> . in the present report, the ipsilesional hemisphere was investigated electrophysiologically, using intracortical microstimulation  at two time points: before the lesion  and a few months after the lesion  when the monkey has reached a plateau of manual dexterity recovery. the pre- and post-lesion cortical maps established in the ipsilesional hemisphere report on the movement elicited by icms on the contralesional  body side, with a focus on the hand not affected by the lesion . in the present experiments, as a result of icms in the ipsilesional hemisphere, no movements were observed for the ipsilesional hand.

the motor cortical map established before the cervical lesion  exhibits the presence of a clear hand area, defined here as the outline of penetration points represented on the surface along which the lowest threshold icms effect was a movement of digits  of the opposite  hand. in the three monkeys, the hand area in m <dig> is surrounded by points where icms elicited movements of other body territories, such as face , wrist , elbow  or shoulder . in mk <dig> and mk <dig>  a slightly more rostral position of the chronic recording chamber allowed us to investigate more anterior regions of the motor cortex. there we found a second, smaller hand area, characterized by slightly higher thresholds to elicit hand movements than the main hand area in m <dig> . to address the question of whether such somatotopic representations are influenced in the ipsilesional motor cortex as a result of the unilateral cervical lesion , the ipsilesional hemisphere was re-mapped a few months post-lesion . surprisingly, there were substantial changes in motor map in the ipsilesional hemisphere as well. the area of the hand representation in m <dig> projected on the surface of the hemisphere was reduced by a factor of 52% in mk <dig>  77% in mk <dig> and 43% in mk <dig> . clearly, some icms sites which elicited hand movements before the lesion were replaced at threshold by effects on other body territories post-lesion  or became non microexcitable .

the icms maps shown in figure  <dig> display only one point on the surface of the motor cortex for each electrode penetration and only the effect of the lowest threshold was indicated. as a result, other icms sites where digit movements were present  do not appear. for this reason, all electrode penetrations where digit movements have been observed  are represented in figure  <dig>  in which only the icms data pertaining to digit movements are represented. as expected, the hand territories in figure  <dig>  spread on a larger zone of the motor cortex than in the map considering only icms effects at threshold . nevertheless, as a result of the unilateral cervical lesion, some of these additional hand icms sites also disappeared or a few of them exhibited a higher threshold after lesion as compared to the pre-lesion map .

instead of considering only one icms site  per electrode penetration as in figure  <dig>  or only one body territory  as in figure  <dig> , one can also conduct an analysis taking into consideration all icms sites tested, pre- and post-lesion. in this way, one avoids  the underestimation of the hand territory lying in the rostral bank of the central sulcus, where a penetration all the way down the bank was represented by a single point on the surface map. in the post-lesion icms sessions, most electrode penetrations that were performed during the pre-lesion icms sessions were repeated. table  <dig> lists the distribution, in absolute numbers as well as in percentage, of all icms sites tested in the three lesioned monkeys, separately for the pre- and post-lesion icms sessions. the total numbers of icms sites  indicate that roughly comparable numbers of stimulation sites were tested pre- and post-lesion. for each monkey, the icms data points were divided into three groups based on the territories activated or absence of effect: i) digit movements , ii) movements of "other" body territories , iii) icms sites which did not elicit any visible movement . in all three lesioned monkeys, the comparison pre- and post-lesion of the distribution of icms effects observed at all sites tested clearly shows a decrease of the number of icms sites eliciting digit movements as a result of the lesion. in percentages, the number of digit icms sites was two to nearly three times lower post- than pre-lesion across monkeys, in line with the decrease of the surface of the hand area seen in figures  <dig> and  <dig>  the digit icms sites lost as a result of the lesion were replaced in most cases by non-microexcitable sites, as shown by the substantial increase  of such points comparing pre- and post-lesion data . for the other body territories, the number of sites slightly increased post-lesion in mk <dig> and mk <dig> , but decreased in mk <dig>  as shown in figure  <dig>  icms penetrations that belonged to the hand area before lesion  were replaced post-lesion mainly by penetrations which became part of the wrist, elbow, shoulder or even face representations.

comparison of icms thresholds
although both the surface of the hand representation and the number of digit sites decreased in the contralesional m <dig>  it was observed that the icms thresholds in the hand area post-lesion were not significantly higher than the icms thresholds derived from the hand area pre-lesion  <cit> . this analysis demonstrated that, at least for the contralesional hemisphere, the hand area though decreased in size as a result of the unilateral cervical lesion did not change with respect to its excitability to address the motoneurons of hand muscles, as well as the muscles of other body territories . the question here is whether the icms thresholds were also kept unchanged pre- versus post-lesion in the ipsilesional hemisphere? to address this question, we compared the icms thresholds in the ipsilesional hemisphere required to elicit movements from stimulation at the same stereotaxic points before and after the lesion, in the latter case when the manual dexterity score reached the plateau. in contrast to figure  <dig> where only the best icms site along each electrode penetration was represented, all icms sites of stimulation were considered. in the three monkeys, there was no systematic and statistically significant difference between the icms thresholds obtained in the ipsilesional hemisphere, before and after the unilateral cervical cord lesion, neither for the hand nor for other body territories .

variability of the icms mapping method
one may argue that the size reduction of the hand representation post-lesion, as compared to the pre-lesion situation , is due to the intrinsic variability of the icms method. in other words, what is the variability of icms sites elicited along two electrode penetrations performed at two distinct time points in an intact monkey? this question was addressed in an intact monkey , in which six electrode penetrations taken from the left hemisphere were repeated at time intervals ranging between  <dig> and  <dig> days . for instance, three electrode penetrations located in the hand area , in which movements of the digits were observed at the lowest threshold site when the electrode was inserted the first time , exhibited again a movement of the digits at the lowest effective current intensity  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> days later. interestingly, note that the icms thresholds were highly comparable at the two time points . along these three electrode tracks , the sequence of territories activated at the consecutive icms sites  remained generally comparable at the two time points.

two other electrode penetrations were taken from the wrist representation  and repeated at two time points, separated by an interval of  <dig> and  <dig> days, respectively . in both tracks, the first penetration yielded several icms sites at which the elbow  articulation was activated, replaced in the second penetrations by wrist movements in most cases. however, the lowest efficient current intensity corresponded to a wrist  movement in the two tracks, both during the first and the second penetrations . again, as for digits territories, the threshold obtained for these two wrist territories remained similar at the two time points tested. along the same line, in the electrode track located in the face representation , at the two time points tested , icms at threshold elicited movements of face muscles . in summary, from the six electrode tracks repeated at two time points , one can conclude that, in spite of some variability at some icms sites, the territory assigned to each track as defined by the effect observed at threshold did not change, even when the time interval was as long as  <dig> days. these observations support the notion that the size reduction of the hand area observed here in figures  <dig> and  <dig> cannot be explained by the intrinsic variability of the icms method and thus are indeed related to the cervical lesion. along the same line, a few individual electrode penetrations repeated twice before the cervical lesion in mks1- <dig> also showed reproducibility of motor map body territories assessed by icms  <cit> .

does the ipsilesional  hand area contribute to the post-lesion recovery of the affected hand?
to address this question, reversible inactivation sessions of m <dig> in the ipsilesional hemisphere were performed between  <dig> to  <dig> months post-lesion, when the manual dexterity score derived from the brinkman board test had reached a plateau, indicative of the maximal level of recovery. in a typical inactivation session obtained by infusion of muscimol, the manual dexterity task was initially performed just before the muscimol infusion and repeated  <dig> –  <dig> minutes afterwards- a time point at which its effect is well established. a pre- and post-inactivation manual dexterity score was thus determined for each hand, corresponding to the bars "b"  and "a"  in figure  <dig>  before infusion of muscimol , the manual dexterity score of the ipsilesional hand was that corresponding to the plateau of incomplete recovery . in the three lesioned monkeys, a reversible inactivation of the ipsilesional m <dig> did not noticeably affect the recovered manual dexterity score of the ipsilesional hand . in other words, the level of the recovery plateau for the ipsilesional hand was not modified by inactivation of the ipsilesional m <dig> hand area. in sharp contrast, as recently reported  <cit> , a reversible inactivation of the contralesional m <dig> led to a complete loss of the recovered performance of the ipsilesional hand . the data presented in the bottom panel of figure  <dig> for the contralesional hand demonstrate the efficacy of the muscimol reversible inactivation method since, as expected, the pharmacological lesion of the left m <dig> hand area dramatically suppressed the ability of the contralesional hand to perform the precision grip. recovery from inactivation using muscimol is slow  and therefore could not be tested within the same inactivation session. however, the day after, the animal had fully recovered its manual dexterity from before the inactivation session.

does the size reduction of the ipsilesional m <dig> hand area lead to a post-lesion motor deficit of the hand contralateral to the cervical hemi-section?
the manual dexterity of the contralesional hand was assessed during several weeks pre- and post-lesion using the "brinkman board" task . these data can determine whether a substantial reduction of the size of the m <dig> ipsilesional hand area is accompanied by a decrease of the manual dexterity of the contralesional hand. as shown by the behavioral plots, the manual dexterity scores for the three lesioned monkeys are very comparable pre- and post-lesion . the manual dexterity of the contralesional hand is thus not affected by the unilateral cervical lesion or by the plastic changes taking place in the ipsilesional motor cortex, as measured by the brinkman board test. in mk <dig>  there was a slight decrease of the manual dexterity score for a few days following the lesion, before returning to the pre-lesion level. such a transient effect might reflect a modification of the posture of the animal following the cervical lesion, rather than a direct effect on the contralesional hand.

to further test the motor skill of the forelimbs of mks 1– <dig>  the three lesioned animals also performed the so-called "reach and grasp drawer" task . in addition to precision grip skill, the drawer task tests the ability of the monkey to develop force with one or the other forelimb. the analysis of these data demonstrated that there was a deficit  for the ipsilesional arm but not for the contralesional forelimb . in line with the "brinkman board" task, the drawer task did not show any deficit of the contralesional hand in relation to the size reduction of the ipsilesional m <dig> hand area.

discussion
the present results demonstrate a quite surprising and totally unexpected substantial reduction of the ipsilesional hand representation in m <dig>  as assessed by icms, after unilateral section of the cs tract at cervical level. this observation appears robust since it was present in all of the three monkeys examined here. indeed, the cs undecussated projection originating from the ipsilesional m <dig> and affected by the unilateral cervical lesion represents only 5–10% of the whole cs tract  <cit> . moreover, the icms effects were assessed here only for the contralesional hand  and thus the unilateral cervical lesion would impact only on the undecussated cs axons that cross the midline at cervical level, representing themselves only a small fraction  of the population of cs undecussated axons . in other words, based on these numbers , one would expect that the unilateral cs tract section would impact only marginally on the icms map in the ipsilesional hemisphere. in sharp contrast, the present data show a substantial reduction of the hand area projected on the surface of the ipsilesional hemisphere, amounting to 52%, 77% and 43% in mk <dig>  mk <dig> and mk <dig>  respectively , not far from the area reductions observed in the contralesional hemisphere , amounting to 67%, 89% and 100% in mk <dig>  mk <dig> and mk <dig>  respectively. in other words, the reduction of the hand area observed in the ipsilesional hemisphere was thus at least  <dig> times larger than expected, based on the very small contingent represented by the undecussated cs axons crossing the midline at cervical level.

it is important to stress that the reduction of the m <dig> hand area in the ipsilesional hemisphere as a result of unilateral cervical lesion in monkeys is an observation made at a specific time point, namely a few months post-lesion after the  recovery of the affected hand had reached a plateau. the precise time course of such a reduction of the ipsilesional hand area during the few weeks post-lesion is unknown  and one cannot exclude that the ipsilesional hand area was different than it appears after the recovery. along this line, dynamic bi-hemispheric re-organization of motor networks during the recovery from hemi-paresis caused by corticospinal tract infarction has been observed  <cit> . indeed, this study showed that the early recovery of the paretic hand was correlated to a predominant activity on the intact hemisphere but, in later phases of the recovery, the activity in the lesioned hemisphere increased. one cannot exclude such progressive changes of inter-hemispheric balance between the hand areas in the two m <dig> in our monkeys during the recovery period, leading to the final, fairly balanced size of hand areas between the two hemispheres after recovery reached its maximum.

comparison with previous work
the present observation of substantial plastic changes of somatotopic maps as a result of a peripheral lesion  is in line with an abundant literature on this topic. however, most previous studies in the monkey addressed this issue in the contralesional hemisphere with respect to the spinal cord lesion, either in the somatosensory cortex  <cit>  or in the motor cortex  <cit> . in human subjects too, although it is relatively rare to have a cervical cord lesion restricted to one side, most studies aimed at assessing the cortical motor re-organization after spinal cord lesion were focused on the contralesional hemisphere  <cit> . in spinal cord injured patients, the cortical motor map changes consisted mainly of a displacement of the centre of gravity of cortical activity when using the paretic hand after partial recovery, towards a more posterior region  <cit> , which was interpreted as a possible role played by the somatosensory cortex in recovery. in the monkey, as a result of unilateral cervical lesion, in the contralesional hemisphere  <cit>  and in the ipsilesional one , the icms data showed a reduction of the hand representation, but no evidence for a posterior shift of the hand representation was found. however, this discrepancy may also be explained by the difficulty to compare directly motor maps based on icms in the monkey and on cortical territories activated when performing movements in human. the present observation of a considerable re-organization of the motor map after unilateral cervical cord lesion in the ipsilesional hemisphere is, to our knowledge, an original observation in monkeys. our finding can only be, to some extent, compared to previous observations in human subjects of functional reorganization in the ipsilesional hemisphere with respect to a cord damage due to lower limb amputation  <cit> .

interpretation of the motor map changes in the ipsilesional hemisphere after unilateral cervical lesion
how to explain then a plastic change in m <dig> in the ipsilesional hemisphere, nearly as large as that in the contralesional hemisphere as a result of unilateral section of the cs tract? the reduction of the hand area in the contralesional hemisphere was correlated with anatomical changes such as a shrinkage of the soma of layer v pyramidal neurons, involving the 90% of the axotomized cs neurons  <cit> . in the ipsilesional hemisphere, we did not observe such shrinkage, as compared with intact animals  <cit> , although this might have been difficult to detect since the unilateral cervical section would affect at most only 5–10% of the cs neurons, giving rise to the undecussated cs axons. in any case, the considerable plastic functional change observed for the hand representation in the ipsilesional hemisphere is not correlated with a major anatomical change , in contrast to the contralesional hemisphere. consequently, the plastic change of motor map in the ipsilesional hemisphere most likely does not result from a direct impact of the axotomized cs tract. one may thus speculate that the size reduction of the hand area ipsilesionally is the result of more indirect  influences of the lesion. the present data support the notion that a reduction of the hand area in the contralesional hemisphere  is accompanied by a nearly comparable reduction in the ipsilesional hemisphere. although the m <dig> hand area is quantitatively less connected transcallosally than other body territories in m <dig> or other motor cortical areas such as sma  <cit> , one may still consider the possibility that the reduction of hand area in the contralesional hemisphere provokes a "secondary" plastic change in the ipsilesional hemisphere, via the callosal projection. the process of secondary change may also occur more indirectly via non-primary motor areas , which are more densely connected via the corpus callosum, since lesions of the primary motor cortex induce modifications in the premotor cortex, for instance an extension of the hand area in the ventral premotor cortex  <cit> . such "secondary" plastic change in the ipsilesional hemisphere may appear reminiscent to some extent of the transneuronal change observed in the brainstem and thalamus in adult monkeys subjected to long term dorsal rhizotomies  <cit> . however, a common mechanism is unlikely because, in the case of the rhizotomy there was an anterograde plastic change induced by a lesion, whereas here after cervical lesion the impact on the cs neurons is retrograde. moreover, a transneuronal degeneration mechanism can be excluded because most axotomized cs neurons survived to the cervical lesion, although they shrank  <cit> .

the extent of the ipsilesional reduction, nearly as large as in the contralesional hemisphere, suggests that such secondary adaptive plastic change may come about as a consequence of the re-balancing of activity in the two hand areas. a roughly balanced hand area in both hemispheres is perhaps more appropriate in the context of bimanual movements as well as in the context of the functional recovery of the ipsilesional hand. indeed, after unilateral cervical lesion, the recovery of the ipsilesional hand strongly depends on the contralesional hemisphere  <cit>  and not on the ipsilesional one . if the hand area in the ipsilesional hemisphere had kept its original size after lesion, then there would be a bias in favor of the intact hand, which may be detrimental for mechanisms of recovery of the affected hand. possibly, recovery may be more efficient if the cortical area responsible for it is not too much reduced in size as compared to its counterpart in the intact hemisphere. however, the hand area in the ipsilesional hemisphere should not be reduced too much either, because this may affect the performance of the contralesional hand. in the present study, as a result of unilateral section of the cs tract at cervical level, the reduction in size in the ipsilesional hemisphere did not affect the performance of the intact hand, at least as assessed by the modified brinkman board test  or the "drawer" task. one cannot exclude that a reduction of performance may appear for more challenging tasks, involving more complex synergies of the fingers. along this line, one may speculate that the re-sizing in the ipsilesional hemisphere should be adjusted in order to reach an ideal compromise, favoring enough the recovery of the affected hand but preserving, as much as possible, the performance of the non-affected hand. the reduction of the hand area in the ipsilesional motor cortex may also be interpreted, at least in part, by postural adjustments as well as a facilitation of those movements not affected by the lesion, such as proximal movements and, but to a lesser extent, the wrist, taking place in the contralesional hemisphere. such contralesional motor changes, for example comprising strategies of substitution recruited for the recovery, may secondarily induce changes in the ipsilesional hemisphere as well. postural adjustments may also include the side of the body opposite to the unilateral cervical lesion, resulting in an increased engagement of more proximal muscles at the level of the wrist, elbow and shoulder in the ipsilesional hemisphere, at the expense of the hand representation.

plastic changes of motor maps resulting from a cortical lesion have been shown to be dependent on the level of rehabilitative training  <cit> . it remains to be determined whether this would also be the case here in the contralesional hemisphere after cervical cord lesion and, if so, whether the same dependence on training would also be present in the ipsilesional hemisphere. in the present study, the monkeys did not undergo a particular and systematic rehabilitative training program, except for the standard behavioral tests they performed every day  to assess manual dexterity.

in the contralesional hemisphere, we demonstrated that rapid plastic changes of the hand motor map took place within the first few days post-lesion. during the  <dig> weeks after the unilateral cervical lesion, no icms digit sites were found  <cit> . starting about  <dig> weeks after the lesion, icms digit sites progressively re-appeared, to form the stable, reduced hand area observed several months later. unfortunately, such a repetitive icms investigation was not conducted in the ipsilesional hemisphere . such a protocol is recommended for future experiments.

relationship between cortical plasticity and a possible role played for post-lesional recovery
regarding the mechanisms of the incomplete recovery of the hand affected by the cervical lesion, the present study confirms the notion previously put forward  <cit>  that only the contralesional hemisphere contributes to the recovered performance of the manual dexterity, as assessed by the precision grip task . indeed, reversible inactivation of the ipsilesional hemisphere did not modify the recovered manual dexterity score of the affected hand . nevertheless, we observed a change of the motor map in the ipsilesional hemisphere. it can thus be concluded that the presence of plastic changes in a certain brain region after a lesion does not necessarily mean that this region contributes significantly to the recovery. in other words, in the debate about whether the intact hemisphere plays a role in the recovery following a unilateral cortical lesion in patients , a change of motor map area in the intact hemisphere as compared to normal human subjects should thus not be systematically interpreted as a contribution of the intact hemisphere to the recovery. clearly, the strategy of reversible inactivation applicable to monkeys, as illustrated in the present study , remains a better proof than just the observation of motor map changes for the actual involvement of a given brain region in mechanisms of recovery. another conclusion of the present study is that there is no straightforward relationship between the size of the hand area in m <dig>  and the manual dexterity of the hand controlled mainly by this hemisphere. indeed, the manual dexterity score was the same pre-lesion with a large hand area and post-lesion with a reduced hand area . furthermore, regarding the generation of force, the drawer task did not show a difference of performance pre- and post-lesion. this conclusion, valid for the motor tests used in the present study , may not be true for other types, of most likely more complex finger movements, as the activity in the ipsilateral motor cortex is related to the complexity of unimanual hand movements  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
as a result of unilateral section of the cs tract at cervical level, the hand representation in the contralesional motor cortex was as expected dramatically affected  <cit> . the present study demonstrates that a substantial post-lesional reduction of the hand representation also took place in the ipsilesional hemisphere, an original observation in the monkey. the considerable extent of the ipsilesional hand representation reduction cannot be explained by a direct effect of the lesion. indeed, only a small number of transected cs axons originate from the ipsilesional hemisphere and could have contributed to the control of the hand opposite to the lesion by recrossing the midline below the lesion. we therefore propose that the paradoxical reduction of hand representation in the ipsilesional hemisphere is secondary to the changes taking place in the contralesional hemisphere, possibly corresponding to re-adjustments re-establishing a balance between the two hemispheres.

