BACKGROUND
seeds provide an attractive alternative to conventional large-scale recombinant protein expression systems since they can produce relatively high heterologous protein yields in a stable, compact environment for long periods of time, assisting in storage, handling, and transport of the transgenic product  <cit> . compared with other eukaryotes, plants are unique in their ability to naturally store large reservoirs of protein in specialized endoplasmic reticulum -derived compartments in developing seeds  <cit> .

prolamins are the most predominant class of seed storage proteins found in most cereals, such as maize, rice, and wheat  <cit> . in general, prolamins contain proline-rich domains and are alcohol-soluble, reflecting their general hydrophobic nature  <cit> . γ-zein, a prolamin and the major constituent of maize storage proteins, contains a highly repetitive sequence  <dig> that adopts an amphipathic helical conformation, which is able to self-assemble and may be responsible for this protein's ability to be retained in the er, despite the absence of an h/kdel er-localization signal  <cit> . although the sequestration mechanisms are not well understood, prolamin seed storage proteins are synthesized on the rough er and deposited as large, dense accretions known as protein bodies   <cit> .

although plant seeds have many positive attributes, major hurdles still exist for using seed-based systems as recombinant protein bioreactors. for example, there is a strong reluctance among scientists, regulators, and the general public to use seeds of major crops  for biopharmaceutical production, given the possibility of contaminating the food chain  <cit> . in addition, potential environmental damage could result from the dispersal of transgenes into the environment through pollen or seed  <cit> . alternatively, tobacco is well-suited as a production system for recombinant proteins since it has a high biomass yield and is readily amenable to genetic engineering. because the tobacco expression platform is based on leaves, harvesting occurs prior to flowering, thus minimizing the possibility of gene leakage into the environment. most importantly, tobacco is a non-food, non-feed crop, which minimizes regulatory barriers by eliminating the risk of plant-made recombinant proteins entering the food supply  <cit> . however, the low production yields of many recombinant proteins in tobacco remains a serious problem for this host system, since foreign proteins are often unstable and particularly susceptible to proteolytic degradation in the aqueous environment of leafy crops  <cit> .

a useful strategy for increasing the accumulation of recombinant proteins in plants may be to integrate the components responsible for stable seed protein storage with the inherently biosafe and high biomass-yielding leaf-based tobacco expression platform. in fact, it has recently been shown that prolamin storage proteins are capable of enhancing the accumulation of recombinant proteins in vegetative leaf tissues based on their ability to induce the formation of er-derived pbs  <cit> . furthermore, the induced pbs are dense organelles which can facilitate the recovery and purification of fused recombinant proteins by simple and inexpensive density-based separation methods  <cit> .

elastin-like polypeptides  are synthetic biopolymers composed of a repeating pentapeptide 'vpgxg' sequence which occur in all mammalian elastin proteins  <cit> . in an aqueous solution, elps undergo a reversible inverse phase transition from soluble protein into insoluble hydrophobic aggregates that form β-spiral structures when heated above their transition temperature   <cit> . this thermally-responsive property of elp is also transferred to fusion partners, enabling a simple, rapid, scalable, and inexpensive non-chromatographic method for protein purification called 'inverse transition cycling'   <cit> . itc has been used to purify cytokines  <cit> , antibodies  <cit> , and spider silk proteins  <cit>  from transgenic plants. as an additional beneficial side-effect, elp fusions have also been shown to significantly enhance the accumulation of a range of different recombinant proteins in transgenic tobacco leaves  <cit>  and seeds  <cit> . although it is thought that elp tags confer increased stability or solubility to their fusion partner, the means by which elp increases the production yield of recombinant proteins in planta has not yet been established.

the biochemical properties of elps and prolamins, such as γ-zein, share many similarities. for example, both proteins are generally hydrophobic and proline-rich, with the ability to self-assemble and form supramolecular secondary structures consisting of helices and spirals as a result of their highly repetitive sequences  <cit> . these shared characteristics led us to hypothesize that elp fusions may increase heterologous protein yield in a manner analogous to prolamin seed storage proteins. the objective of this study was to elucidate the mechanism by which elp increases recombinant protein accumulation in the er of plants and to determine the utility of elp in various intracellular compartments. thus, green fluorescent protein -elp fusions were targeted to the cytoplasm, chloroplasts, apoplast, and the er. interestingly, we found that gfp-elp fusions targeted to the er tended to form novel pb-like structures in leaves, which may exclude the heterologous protein from normal physiological turnover and may be responsible for elp's positive effect on recombinant protein accumulation.

RESULTS
localization of elastin-like polypeptide fusions to the cytoplasm, chloroplasts, and apoplast
to better understand the mechanisms that allow elp fusions to enhance recombinant protein accumulation in plants, the effect of elp on the subcellular localization of gfp was investigated. plant expression vectors were constructed to produce gfp-tagged elp protein fusions targeted to the cytoplasm, chloroplasts, apoplast, and the er, along with non-fused gfp controls . all coding sequences were introduced into a plant binary vector, with transcription driven by the constitutive camv 35s promoter. the gfp constructs were transiently expressed in leaves via agro-infiltration and the subcellular localization was analyzed by confocal laser scanning microscopy.

in the absence of additional targeting sequences, the cytoplasmic-targeted proteins  showed the same pattern of localization and were visible as diffuse expression across the entire cell . in both cases, the gfp fluorescence surrounded variously shaped and sized organelles and accumulated in the nucleus as a result of gfp's relatively small size, which allows for passive diffusion through the nuclear pores  <cit> . to direct the protein into the chloroplasts, the transit peptide from the tobacco small subunit rubisco gene was fused to gfp, in the absence or presence of an elp tag. without an elp tag, the gfp control protein was appropriately localized to the chloroplasts, which was verified by overlaying its image with the chlorophyll autofluorescence . on the other hand, when elp was fused to chloroplast-targeted gfp, the fluorescence appeared to be excluded from the chloroplasts and subsequently occupied the cytoplasmic space surrounding the chloroplasts . as expected, the secreted forms of gfp, with or without an elp tag, were observed to accumulate in the apoplast since they contained a tobacco secretory signal peptide without additional targeting sequences .

accumulation of elastin-like polypeptide fusions in various subcellular compartments
to evaluate the general utility of elp fusion tags in various subcellular compartments in plants, the expression constructs were agro-infiltrated into nicotiana benthamiana leaves and the concentration of gfp was quantified by measuring the fluorescence intensity of the leaf extracts. of the four subcellular compartments tested, gfp accumulated to the highest level ) in the cytoplasm, followed by the er, chloroplasts, and apoplast . the presence of an elp fusion tag had a negligible effect on the concentration of gfp in the cytoplasm, apoplast, or er. we speculate that in contrast to the less-stable recombinant proteins investigated in prior studies  <cit> , elp did not increase the gfp yield in n. benthamiana leaves because gfp is already a highly stable and soluble protein  <cit> . for the chloroplast-targeted construct, the addition of an elp tag significantly decreased the concentration of gfp eight-fold, which agrees with the confocal analysis showing no observable accumulation of the fusion protein in the chloroplasts . the er-retained constructs, with or without an elp tag, produced approximately  <dig> times more gfp than their fully secreted apoplastic counterparts, suggesting that the er provides a better environment within the secretory pathway for the accumulation of gfp or gfp-elp. to validate the quantitative results obtained in n. benthamiana, all of the expression constructs were also agro-infiltrated into nicotiana tabacum leaves. irrespective of the nicotiana plant host, the expression patterns observed between the constructs were very similar, with comparable amounts of gfp produced for each construct . clearly, the subcellular location of gfp greatly affected its accumulation, with the cytoplasm and er being the best of the compartments tested.

hyperexpression of an endoplasmic reticulum-targeted elastin-like polypeptide fusion induces the formation of protein bodies
previous studies have demonstrated that elp fusion tags have the ability to significantly enhance the accumulation of various er-targeted recombinant proteins in plants  <cit> . moreover, elp has been shown to promote the formation of distinct intracellular organelles within the leaves of n. tabacum . to better establish the role of elp tags in the accumulation of heterologous proteins, n. benthamiana plants were agro-infiltrated with the er-targeted constructs  along with the p <dig> suppressor of gene silencing, which has been found to significantly increase the production levels of recombinant proteins in plants  <cit> . in the presence of p <dig>  the levels of ppgk and ppgek were enhanced by approximately 20- and 30-fold respectively. in the n. benthamiana leaf extracts, the accumulation of gfp reached 11% of tsp with the elp tag, which was almost two times higher than the same construct without an elp tag .

the fluorescence of the er-targeted gfp control protein  resembled a characteristic reticulate pattern  consistent with the normal er morphology of plant epidermal cells  <cit> . relative to the control protein , the distribution pattern of gfp was very different in the presence of an elp fusion tag . the er-targeted gfp-elp fusion was easily observed as brightly fluorescing spherical-shaped structures distributed throughout the cells of the leaf following agro-infiltration . the spherical particles, which are assumed to be pbs, were highly abundant in the vast majority of n. benthamiana leaf cells following hyperexpression of the ppgek protein. the same ppgek-expressing cells also showed the network pattern of the er; however, the fluorescence intensity within the er was fainter than the densely-packed, very bright spherical structures, making it difficult to image both simultaneously.

in general, both the size and number of pbs tended to increase with time following agro-infiltration. when the level of gfp fluorescence was relatively low, the pbs could be visualized concurrently with the er network . the pbs appeared to originate at the er as small punctuate structures . over time , the accumulation of gfp continued to increase and the pbs appeared to be excreted from the er into the cytosol, where they remained as cytoplasmic organelles . a collection of confocal images were compiled together to create a three-dimensional rendering of the pbs . although the distribution pattern of the pbs was highly variable, they were most often found clustered together within the cell  . typically, the spherical pbs had an observable diameter of between  <dig>  and  <dig>  μm . however, the size of the novel pbs was fairly heterogeneous , with some of the pbs having diameters of  <dig>  μm , approaching the size of the cell's nucleus.

surprisingly, small pbs  were also occasionally observed in the cells when expressing the unfused gfp control protein  in the absence of p <dig>  when quantified, only 5% of the cells expressing ppgk  exhibited the presence of small pbs, whereas over 50% of the cells expressing ppgek  demonstrated the presence of small or large  pbs . in both cases, the remaining cells showed an er-like pattern of fluorescence. these results demonstrate that the addition of an elp fusion tag was responsible for significantly enhancing the formation of the spherical pb-like organelles; however, gfp alone may have a propensity to aggregate into pbs when expressed at high levels inside the er. when ppgk or ppgek were hyperexpressed in the er in the presence of p <dig>  both the frequency and size of pbs observed in the plant cells were drastically increased. approximately 44% of the cells  expressing ppgk contained pbs, whereas almost all the cells  expressing ppgek contained pbs . when expressing these proteins at higher levels, the size distribution of the pbs was significantly shifted towards larger pbs. most notably, the presence of an elp tag  enhanced the occurrence of large pbs six-fold, relative to the unfused control . these results support the notion that elp plays an important, although not fully understood, role in the formation of pbs in plant cells expressing large quantities of recombinant proteins. throughout the analyses, it was consistently observed that the most brightly fluorescing cells were also the cells possessing the highest number of pbs, typically of the large variety.

afor each experimental condition, a single leaf was agro-infiltrated on  <dig> different nicotiana benthamiana plants and visualized by confocal microscopy  <dig> days post-transfection. for each of the  <dig> individually infiltrated leaves, five 7-mm leaf discs were excised and  <dig> cells were analyzed at random from each leaf disc to avoid any bias. thus,  <dig> individual cells were classified for the presence or absence of protein bodies  and for the maximum size of pbs observed within each cell.

bthese cells exhibited an endoplasmic reticulum-like pattern of fluorescence.

cpb diameter was < <dig>  μm.

dpb diameter was > <dig>  μm. these cells also contain small pbs.

even though the ppgek construct contains a kdel er-retention signal, we wanted to ensure that the pbs were er-derived and not the result of incorrect protein trafficking to later stages of the secretory pathway. thus, the n-terminus of the ppgek coding sequence was modified to incorporate a potential n-glycosylation motif , in order to test whether the protein was being transported through the golgi stack by diagnostic glycosidase treatment  <cit> . the resulting protein, ppngek, retained the same pattern of gfp localization as the ppgek construct, consisting of bright fluorescence in the er and pbs . to characterize the glycosylation of ppngek, transgenic plant extracts were treated with various glycosidases, followed by western blot analysis. the ppngek protein was fully susceptible to digestion by peptide n-glycosidase f  and endoglycosidase h , resulting in mobility shifts for the protein , which is consistent with the glycosylation pattern of er-retained plant glycoproteins. taken together, these results demonstrate that the kdel-tagged ppngek protein was sensitive to pngasef and endoh, suggesting a high mannose oligosaccharide structure indicative of er localization with efficient retention/retrieval from the cis-golgi. furthermore, no colocalization was observed when ppgek was transiently expressed along with a sialyltransferase signal anchor sequence  <cit>  fused to red fluorescent protein, which specifically labeled the plant's golgi bodies .

movement of the novel protein bodies is highly dynamic and dependent on the actomyosin motility system
the pbs resulting from er-targeted gfp-elp  expression were observed to be highly mobile organelles, therefore time-lapse confocal images were taken of the fluorescent bodies in the epidermal leaf cells of n. benthamiana. we believe that this is the first reported example of pb mobility. the pbs exhibited various patterns of movement throughout the plant cells , which is very reminiscent of golgi stack trafficking. for example, the pbs generally moved in a stop-and-go manner, alternating between periods of rapid vectorial movement and periods of relatively static, non-directed oscillation resembling brownian motion. most often, the pbs moved throughout the cell in a sporadic, saltatory fashion, but they could also be rapidly transported in a unidirectional manner via cytoplasmic streaming  <cit> . thus far, the significance of incessant pb movement in the plant cells is unclear, as they appear to move continuously about the cell without a final destination.

in plants, trafficking of organelles, such as golgi bodies, mitochondria, and peroxisomes, occurs via the actomyosin motility system, which is empowered by myosin motors and is dependent on the actin cytoskeleton framework coextensive with the er  <cit> . to date, the movement of pbs and the mechanism responsible for their transport have not been investigated. to explore the possibility that pbs are associated with the actin cytoskeleton, co-localization of an mtalin-yfp fusion  <cit> , which serves as a reporter for the microfilaments, and an er-targeted cfp-elp fusion , was performed. expression of the mtalin-yfp construct revealed a filamentous network  resembling the actin cytoskeleton of plant cells  <cit> . replacing gfp  with cfp  in the er-targeted elp fusion resulted in the same localization pattern, consisting of fluorescence emitting from the er and pbs . co-expression of mtalin-yfp with ppcek showed that most of the pbs co-aligned with the microfilaments .

since the pbs were observed to be associated with the actin cytoskeleton, time-lapse imaging experiments were performed to determine the dynamic status of the pbs following treatment with latrunculin b, which is an inhibitor of actin polymerization. disruption of the cytoskeleton blocked intracellular trafficking of the pbs , indicating that normal translational movement of pbs is dependent on intact microfilaments. recently, myosin xi-k has been shown to play a major role in the movement of subcellular organelles  <cit> . overexpression of a dominant-negative mutant of myosin xi-k prevents nearly all golgi trafficking  <cit> , so the mutant myosin xi-k tail was co-expressed with ppgek to determine its effect on pb movement. in the presence of the myosin xi-k tail, pbs were still able to form in the cells, but their movement was severely halted , suggesting that myosin xi-k is required for the trafficking of pbs. taken together, these results demonstrate that pb movement is dependent upon the integrity of actin microfilaments and a functional actomyosin motility system.

endoplasmic reticulum luminal binding protein is localized to the protein bodies, but does not specifically interact with the elastin-like polypeptide tag
to provide further validation that the pbs are derived directly from the er, co-localization of the tobacco er-resident molecular chaperone binding protein  fused with cfp  and an er-targeted yfp-elp fusion  was performed. when expressed alone, pbck resulted in a fluorescent pattern consistent with an er-localization , whereas ppyek expression resulted in the formation of novel pbs . when pbck and ppyek were transiently co-expressed in n. benthamiana leaf epidermal cells along with p <dig>  the bip-cfp co-localized with the pbs induced by er-targeted yfp-elp expression . the presence of the er chaperone bip within the pb-like structures provides additional support that these accretions originate from the er.

bip has been implicated in pb biogenesis  <cit>  and has been shown to interact with prolamin-based pbs in a manner that is distinct from its normal chaperone activity  <cit> . thus, we examined whether the content of bip was increased in leaves following the induction of pbs caused by elp tag expression. western blotting was performed to compare total bip protein in crude extracts prepared from pooled samples of infiltrated n. benthamiana leaves, expressing er-targeted gfp  and gfp-elp  in the absence or presence of p <dig> . based on our analysis, the presence of an elp tag did not affect the levels of bip in the absence or presence of p <dig> expression. however, bip accumulation was increased in the presence of p <dig> expression, probably caused by the significantly higher accumulation of foreign protein in the er. these results suggest that the expression of an elp fusion protein in the er was not responsible for the induction of bip.

a computer-based bip scoring software, developed by blond-elguindi et al.  <cit> , was used to predict potential bip-binding motifs within the elp sequence. bip preferentially binds heptapeptides containing a high proportion of hydrophobic residues  <cit> . a single putative bip binding site  with a score of  <dig> was identified  <dig> times within the repetitive elp sequence. binding motifs with scores greater than  <dig> have been shown to have an 80% probability of binding to bip  <cit> . consequently, the specific interaction of elp with bip was investigated by co-immunoprecipitation analysis. equal amounts of pooled protein extracts from leaf samples expressing ppgk or ppgek were immunoprecipitated with anti-elp antiserum, resolved by sds-page, blotted onto nitrocellulose and probed with anti-bip antibody. for both ppgk and ppgek protein extracts, the vast majority of bip was found in the supernatant , whereas small equivalent amounts of co-immunoselected bip were only observed with long film exposures . this demonstrates that bip does not specifically associate with the elp fusion tag, and the small quantity of co-immunoprecipitated bip detected may be due to its general chaperone-binding properties.

subcellular localization of the endoplasmic reticulum-derived novel protein bodies
the addition of an elp tag to gfp was shown by confocal microscopy to induce the formation of er-derived pbs; however, we were unable to unequivocally establish whether the pbs remained in the er or if they were released into the cytosol from the er. therefore, electron microscopy  and immunogold labeling were performed on leaf tissue expressing er-targeted gfp-elp to further investigate this question. as expected, electron micrographs of the ppgek-expressing leaf tissues showed the presence of large, electron-dense, spherical pb-like structures in the cells . the pbs were typically  <dig>  to  <dig>  μm in diameter with larger pbs  also observed at a lower frequency . the size of the pbs determined by em was similar to the sizes suggested from the confocal analysis. pb-like structures were not observed in non-transfected leaf sections .

higher magnification provided more detailed images of the pbs, which were clearly surrounded by a distinct membrane that does not appear to be contiguous with the er network , suggesting that the pbs are terminally stored in the cytosol and not retained in the er. the novel pbs occupy the cytosolic space between the large central lytic vacuole and the cell wall, along with other cytoplasmic organelles such as chloroplasts, mitochondria, and lipid bodies . the membrane surrounding the pbs was studded with ribosomes , which is strongly suggestive of their derivation from the rough er  <cit> . in addition, the pb membranes are likely er bilayers because monolayer membranes exclude the attachment of ribosome-binding proteins  <cit> .

to further examine the intracellular distribution of er-targeted gfp-elp, ultrathin sections of the transfected leaves were immunogold-labeled using antibodies against the elp and gfp proteins. to optimize for immunoreactivity, the leaf tissue samples were embedded in lr-gold resin. the novel pbs were strongly labeled with immunogold particles , targeting either the elp  or gfp  portion of the ppgek fusion protein. no significant immunolabeling was observed in any other subcellular compartments. moreover, no background was observed in wild-type leaves or transgenic leaves treated without a primary elp or gfp antibody .

fluorescence recovery after photobleaching  was used to investigate whether the ppgek protein cycled in and out of the novel pbs. in these experiments, a small region of interest within a single pb  or encompassing many pbs  were selectively photobleached and the fluorescence recovery was monitored over time. after bleaching, most of the gfp fluorescence recovered inside the pbs within  <dig> min, indicating that continuous movement of ppgek into the pbs may be occurring from other regions of the cell. interestingly, we were unable to successfully bleach a specific region within a pb , suggesting that ppgek protein is very mobile inside the pbs. for all cases examined, the loss and recovery of fluorescence was steady and uniform throughout the volume of the pb.

discussion
the importance of appropriate subcellular targeting for recombinant protein accumulation
targeting of heterologous proteins to the appropriate subcellular compartment can be critical for obtaining suitable levels of accumulation, since the structure and stability of the recombinant protein is affected by its route and final destination in the cell  <cit> . in addition, proteolytic degradation of the recombinant protein by host proteases can be a major problem  <cit> , along with interferences between the foreign protein and the functions of the host's cellular components  <cit> .

when expressed in the absence of the p <dig> suppressor of gene silencing, the target protein, gfp, accumulated to the highest level in the cytoplasm, followed by the er, chloroplasts, and apoplast. the presence of an elp fusion tag had a negligible effect on the concentration of cytoplasm-, apoplast- or er-targeted gfp, but significantly decreased the level of chloroplast-targeted gfp. the elp tag may be preventing translocation across the chloroplast membranes into the stroma. alternatively, it is possible that the chloroplast-targeted gfp-elp may be rapidly degraded inside the chloroplasts, thus limiting its ability to accumulate. previously, elp was stably produced in tobacco chloroplasts  <cit> , but the yield of elp was very low compared with other heterologous proteins expressed in genetically engineered chloroplasts  <cit> . zeolin, a chimeric protein derived from the maize prolamin γ-zein and the bean vacuolar phaseolin seed storage proteins  <cit> , was also found to accumulate to significantly lower levels in the chloroplasts than in the er  <cit> . this was attributed to a decreased stability of zeolin in the chloroplasts as a result of increased proteolytic activity in this subcellular compartment.

when co-expressed with p <dig>  the presence of an elp tag significantly increased the concentration of gfp two-fold relative to the control. under the hyperexpression conditions, elp's enhancement of recombinant protein accumulation was only observed for the er-targeted proteins, likely corresponding to increased pb production. under the same hyperexpression conditions, the cytoplasmic-targeted gfp  and gfp-elp  proteins accumulated to similar levels  and the occurrence of pbs was not detected .

endoplasmic reticulum-targeted elastin-like polypeptide fusions stimulate the production of a novel type of protein body
to date, elp tags have been exclusively used as fusion partners to er-targeted recombinant proteins in plants, since the er provides the most suitable environment for complex post-translational modifications to occur, such as glycosylation and disulfide bond formation  <cit> . moreover, the flexibility of the er allows for direct accumulation of synthesized proteins in this stable intracellular compartment  <cit> , which has been shown to significantly enhance recombinant protein yields  <cit> .

based on our findings, fusion of an elp tag to an er-targeted gfp reporter protein was responsible for significantly enhancing the production of pbs, relative to the unfused control. although expressed in the leaves of plants, these novel elp-induced spherical particles appear very similar in size and morphology, based on confocal and electron microscopy analyses, to natural pbs found in the seed of maize  <cit> , rice  <cit> , wheat  <cit> , and soybeans  <cit> . furthermore, these particles closely resemble the artificially-induced pbs observed in the leaves of tobacco plants when expressing fusions to prolamin seed storage protein derivatives, such as zeolin  <cit>  or zera  <cit> . although prolamin seed storage proteins lack a typical h/kdel er-retrieval signal, they possess an unusual ability for being retained in the er, which has been suggested to play a role in the biogenesis of pbs  <cit> . in contrast, the presence of a kdel motif was necessary for a secreted elp fusion to induce pb formation in the present study. the kdel signal may function to concentrate elp fusion proteins within the er, resulting in the subsequent formation of novel pbs. notably, smith et al.  <cit>  demonstrated that expression of the hepatitis b surface antigen in plant cells produced tubular er-derived structures that accumulate in the cytoplasm.

presumably, elp-mediated formation of pbs may protect recombinant proteins from proteolytic degradation. in nature, pbs function to stably accumulate large amounts of storage proteins in seeds. recently, this process has also been shown to improve heterologous protein accumulation when artificially employed in other plant tissues and other eukaryotic systems  <cit> . encapsulation into stable intracellular storage organelles may exclude foreign proteins from normal physiological turnover in the plant secretory pathway via er-associated degradation , which is a component of the protein quality control system  <cit> . as a result of zera pb formation, torrent et al.  <cit>  demonstrated that recombinant protein accumulation in leaf material remained stable when dried at 37°c and stored for  <dig> months at room temperature, which are conditions usually responsible for extensive proteolysis. furthermore, a transgenic rice seed-based vaccine expressing cholera toxin b subunit was resistant to the harsh environmental conditions of the gastrointestinal tract when administered orally and maintained immunogenicity as a result of its accumulation in stable pbs  <cit> .

all existing evidence suggests that membranous er-derived pbs are physiologically inert organelles, which can function to segregate recombinant proteins from the host as a means of alleviating any undesirable activities towards each other  <cit> . therefore, the formation of pbs may provide a promising approach for depositing large amounts of concentrated heterologous proteins within the limited space of the cell, without subjecting the er to an intolerable level of stress  <cit> .

bip's role in the formation of elastin-like polypeptide-induced protein bodies
the er-resident chaperone bip has been shown to be associated with rice  <cit>  and wheat  <cit>  prolamin pbs. in addition, bip has been implicated in pb biogenesis because of its role in retaining prolamins in the er lumen by facilitating their folding and assembly into insoluble pbs in developing seeds  <cit>  and transgenic leaves  <cit> . in the present study, bip was localized to the novel pb-like structures, suggesting that bip may play a role in the formation of the elp-induced pbs in transgenic leaves.

previously, increases in bip accumulation have been observed in transgenic plants that expressed prolamins and produced pbs  <cit> . our data indicated that the presence of an elp fusion tag , which significantly enhanced the formation of pbs, was not capable of inducing bip accumulation more than the unfused control protein . bip expression correlated with the levels of recombinant protein production, but did not correlate with the levels of induced pbs or the presence or absence of an elp fusion tag.

previous studies have demonstrated that specific bip binding motifs identified within prolamins, such as phaseolin  <cit>  or zein  <cit> , using a bip scoring software  <cit> , were important for bip-prolamin protein interactions and the ability to form pbs. furthermore, bip has been shown to interact extensively with prolamins in a specific manner, which is unique from its normal chaperone activity  <cit> . although we identified a strong bip-binding motif repeatedly throughout the elp sequence, co-immunoprecipitation analysis revealed that no specific interactions exist between elp and the er-chaperone bip, which differentiates elp-based pbs from prolamin-based pbs. thus, our studies suggest that bip is not actively involved in the formation of the elp-induced pbs and er resident proteins are just passively incorporated non-specifically into the pbs during their formation.

mechanism for elastin-like polypeptide-induced formation of protein bodies: a working model
pbs function in the cells of seeds to store high concentrations of particular proteins in a localized stable organellar environment. in our case, it is possible that elp enhances the stability and solubility of its respective fusion partners, which increases their levels of accumulation. thus, elp-induced pbs may simply form as a result of heterologous protein accumulation reaching a critical local concentration exceeding the normal solubility limit, which subsequently triggers their aggregation and assembly into spherical pbs  <cit> . this argument is somewhat supported by the fact that er-targeted unfused gfp was also shown to induce pb formation, albeit to a much lower degree than in the presence of an elp fusion. to our knowledge, this is the first reported example demonstrating the formation of pbs following expression of er-targeted gfp, suggesting that findings have to be carefully interpreted when overexpressing foreign proteins. however, overexpression of heterologous proteins is our research objective, as we purposely attempt to maximize recombinant protein production in plants. aggresomes are often observed in the cytosol of prokaryotes and eukaryotes when overexpressing heterologous proteins  <cit> . however, many examples have shown that accumulation of aggregated proteins in the er is not sufficient to induce pb formation  <cit> . in our case, cytoplasm-targeted gfp and gfp-elp proteins accumulated to higher levels than their er-targeted counterparts; however, no aggregation of the heterologous proteins was observed. this suggests that pb formation is specific to er-related processes. thus, specific characteristics of the aggregating proteins play a fundamental role in their ability to self-assemble and form discrete pbs  <cit> .

because of their hydrophobic nature, prolamins have been thought to aggregate in a non-specific manner within the er lumen, but additional cellular factors are also necessary for their accretion into er-derived pbs  <cit> . similar to prolamins, elps are also relatively rich in hydrophobic amino acids, suggesting that elps may aggregate non-specifically with themselves as a means of reducing the hydrophobic effect experienced in the aqueous lumen of the er  <cit>  by directing the hydrophobic elp away from the aqueous phase  <cit> . the intrinsic biophysical properties of seed storage proteins have been shown to be important for the formation of pbs  <cit> . for example, the pppvhl repeat domain of zera, derived from maize γ-zein  <cit> , adopts a spontaneous polyproline ii conformation forming an extended amphipathic helix, which is able to self-assemble and form cylindrical micelles  <cit> . this intramolecular interaction among seed storage proteins appears to be indispensable for their aggregation and the biogenesis of pbs  <cit> . analogous to seed storage proteins, mammalian-derived elps also possess the ability to self-aggregate and undergo co-acervation via an ordered process, leading to the formation of a stable supramolecular structure  <cit> . as temperature rises, the soluble elp biopolymer collapses from an extended chain into an insoluble twisted filament structure consisting of β-spirals having type ii β-turns  <cit> . the plant growth conditions  used in this study should not induce the aggregation of an elp <dig> tag; however, the concentration of elp is also known to affect its own precipitation behaviour  <cit> . although not proven, high local concentrations of elp-fusion proteins in the er may play a role in their aggregation and subsequent formation into novel pbs.

prolamin-based pbs generally form directly within the lumen of the er where they can remain permanently stored, as demonstrated with maize and rice  <cit> . after formation, the pbs can alternatively bud off from the er as discrete spherical organelles, where they can either reside in the cytosol as seen for zera-induced pbs  <cit>  or be sequestered into protein storage vacuoles by autophagy as shown for wheat, barley, and oats  <cit> . based on our confocal and electron microscopy analyses, we hypothesize that er-targeted elp fusion proteins are synthesized on ribosomes associated with the rough er and then transported into the er lumen, where they accumulate and assemble into pbs by some unknown mechanism. the er-derived pbs are then thought to disconnect and bud out from the cisternal er into the cytoplasm where they remain surrounded by er membranes and are ultimately stored  <cit> . however, the frap analysis somewhat challenges the notion of distinct, non-connected, membrane-bound pbs terminally stored in the cytoplasm, since gfp fluorescence recovered in the pbs after they had been photobleached, suggesting continuous cycling of gfp in and out of the pbs. to explain this phenomenon, it is possible that transient or permanent connections may exist between the pbs, which could not be detected given the experimental techniques employed in this study. for example, stromules have been shown to be dynamic structures in plants, enabling transfer of proteins and macromolecules between interconnected plastids  <cit> . alternatively, membrane transport pathways between the er and pbs may exist in a similar manner to the specialized close connections that occur between golgi bodies and the er  <cit> . moreover, the kdel er-retrieval motif may be trafficking the soluble protein back to the er-membrane bound pbs from the golgi bodies via copi-mediated retrograde transport  <cit> . finally, the pbs may subsist as independent protein factories, as we have shown that they are surrounded by ribosome-studded er membranes and contain er-resident proteins, including protein-folding chaperones.

the process controlling the size of the elp-induced pbs remains unknown, but two mechanisms can be proposed. first, variously-sized accretions could form within the er prior to their release into the cytoplasm. alternatively, homogeneously-sized individual pbs could bud from the er once they attain a critical size and subsequently coalesce or fuse with one another in the cytosol to form larger pbs, which has previously been observed for prolamin-based pbs  <cit> . our observations suggest that the latter mechanism is more probable, since the vast majority of pbs had a comparable size, which generally increased with time following agro-infiltration. because recombinant protein is constantly shunted away from the er via pbs containing high concentrations of the target protein, the synthesis/degradation equilibrium within the er will shift towards increased synthesis without excessive build-up becoming fatally toxic to the cell. thus, a continual renewal of er-production capacity may exist, which may be responsible for allowing subsequently higher levels of heterologous protein to accumulate inside the cell.

our results, along with others, indicate that seed-specific factors are not required for the formation of pbs in vegetative leaf tissues  <cit> , mammalian cell cultures, insect cells, and fungal cultures  <cit> . in fact, given that expression of mammalian-derived elp was sufficient to induce the formation of pb-like organelles in plants, seed storage proteins may not be required in this process either. these findings suggest that the er possesses an intrinsic ability to form pb-like accretions in eukaryotic cells when overexpressing particular proteins with special physicochemical properties, such as elp.

CONCLUSIONS
this study's main objectives were to determine the utility of elp in various subcellular compartments and to elucidate elp's mechanism of action for increasing recombinant protein accumulation in the er of plants. in summary, the presence of an elp fusion tag had a negligible effect on the concentration of gfp in the cytoplasm and apoplast, whereas it decreased the accumulation of gfp in the chloroplasts. on the other hand, elp was shown to significantly enhance the yield of gfp to 11% of tsp when hyperexpressed in the er, in the presence of the p <dig> suppressor of gene silencing. based on confocal and electron microscopy analyses, our findings indicated that elp fusions targeted to the er induced the formation of novel pb-like structures in leaves, which may exclude the heterologous protein from normal physiological turnover and may be responsible for elp's positive effect on recombinant protein accumulation. interestingly, the elp-induced pbs were highly mobile organelles, exhibiting various dynamic patterns of movement throughout the cells, which were dependent on intact actin microfilaments and a functional actomyosin motility system. further studies indicated that the novel pbs were derived from the er and were terminally stored in the cytoplasm, since they:  contained proteins with er-specific glycans;  contained an er-resident bip protein; and  were surrounded by a distinct membrane studded with ribosomes. in addition, our results indicate that bip does not specifically associate with the elp tag and is not actively involved in the formation of the elp-induced pbs. pb formation enables high local concentrations of heterologous proteins to exist within the limited space of the cell, while insulating the protein from normal cellular protein degradation mechanisms, and without subjecting the er to an intolerable level of stress  <cit> . therefore, an er-targeted elp-fusion approach provides an effective strategy for enhancing the production yield of recombinant proteins in plant leaves via accumulation in stable pb-like organelles.

