BACKGROUND
cytosine c5-methylation plays important roles in several biological phenomena, such as restriction-modification in prokaryotes, genomic imprinting and carcinogenesis in eukaryotes  <cit> . this reaction is catalyzed by dna  methyltransferases , which transfer a methyl group from s-adenosyl-methionine  to carbon  <dig> of cytosine in specific dna sequences  <cit> . prokaryotic c5-mtases contain ten conserved sequence motifs and a so-called variable region located between conserved motifs viii and ix  <cit> . the conserved motifs are responsible for the general steps of the methyl transfer reaction  <cit> , whereas specific sequence recognition is mediated mainly by the variable region  <cit>  <cit> . our understanding of the three-dimensional structure of c5-mtases and of their interaction with substrate dna is mainly based on the x-ray structures of two enzymes: m.hhai and m.haeiii. they revealed that both mtases fold in two domains, the large domain encompassing most of the conserved motifs and the small domain containing the variable region and conserved motif ix. the two domains form a cleft where the dna substrate fits with the major groove facing the small domain and the minor groove facing the large domain. all specific dna-protein interactions are at the small domain – major groove interface  <cit> . eukaryotic c5-mtases are larger proteins but the sequence homology they share with prokaryotic c5-mtases and the available biochemical data suggest that they have the same catalytic mechanism  <cit> .

although the vast majority of characterized c5-mtases function as monomers, there are exceptions: m.aqui  and m.ecohk31i  consist of two polypeptides. the larger subunit of m.aqui contains conserved motifs i – viii and part of the variable region, whereas the smaller subunit contains the distal half of the variable region and conserved motifs ix - x  <cit> . in m.ecohk31i, the larger subunit encompasses conserved motifs i – viii, x as well as the predicted target recognition domain , and only motif ix is located in the smaller polypeptide  <cit> . the structural plasticity of c5-mtases is also supported by the phenomenon of protein fragment complementation observed with three enzymes: n- and c-terminal inactive fragments of three naturally monomeric c5-mtases  can assemble to form active mtase if expressed in the same e. coli cell,  <cit> .

the goal of this work was to test whether m.sssi, which has the same specificity  as the eukaryotic dna mtases  <cit>  and therefore has special importance as an experimental tool in the study of eukaryotic dna methylation, is capable of fragment complementation. in higher eukaryotes, dna methylation occurs at cg dinucleotides  and is associated with gene silencing  <cit> . targeted dna methylation, i.e. selective methylation of predetermined cpg sites in the genome is emerging as a promising technique for selective gene silencing  <cit> . the applicability of targeted methylation as a research tool or as a potential therapeutic approach critically depends on the specificity of targeting, i. e. on the difference of methylation between targeted and non-targeted sites. one approach to increase targeting specificity capitalized on the phenomenon of functional complementation between inactive fragments of the mtase. in the first implementation of this technique complementing n- and c-terminal fragments of the hhai mtase were genetically fused to zinc finger proteins  engineered to recognize different nine bp sequences. when the mtase fragment-zfp fusion proteins were expressed in the same e. coli cell, the targeted m.hhai recognition site, which was flanked by the two closely spaced zfp binding sites, became methylated, whereas the other m.hhai recognition sites on the same plasmid stayed unmethylated  <cit> . although this strategy is likely to require improvement to suppress the non-targeted background methylation mainly deriving from the reconstitution of the mtase in unbound state  <cit> , it probably remains the most promising approach for achieving the specificity required for using targeted methylation as a reliable research tool  <cit> . however, of the c5-mtases shown to possess the capacity of fragment complementation, only m.hhai can be used to target cpg sites, and even m.hhai can methylate only a small subset of cpg sites . to be able to target any cpg site, one needs a c5-mtase with cg specificity such as m.sssi.

here, we report that m.sssi shows the phenomenon of fragment complementation, thus it is, in principle, suitable for the split fragment approach of targeted dna methylation.

RESULTS
construction of plasmids expressing truncated fragments of m.sssi
m.sssi consists of  <dig> amino acids and contains all conserved sequence motifs typical for c5-mtases  <cit>  . there is no x-ray structure available for m.sssi, but a computational model has been created using previously solved structures of the hhai and haeiii mtases  <cit> . according to this model, m.sssi has the same global architecture as m.hhai and m.haeiii, it consists of a large domain comprising conserved motifs i-viii and x, and a small domain containing conserved motif ix and the trd. the function of several residues predicted by sequence homology and the computational model was tested by mutational analysis  <cit> .

to test complementation between split fragments of m.sssi in vivo, the gene segments encoding n-terminal fragments were cloned in pbad <dig> , whereas the gene segments coding for c-terminal fragments were cloned in the compatible plasmid vector pok-bad . in both vectors transcription of the target gene is under the control of the arabad promoter and the arac protein, expression can be induced by arabinose and repressed by glucose  <cit> . placing the genes of the n- and c-terminal fragments under the same transcriptional control allowed coordinated expression of the two fragments. for future applications, almost all fragments were designed to carry n- or c-terminal 6xhis-tag. because one of our aims was to explore possibilities of chemical coupling of the mtase to triplex forming oligonucleotides  <cit> , the c-terminal his-tag was engineered to carry a cysteine as the last amino acid .

numbers in square brackets specify the m.sssi fragment expressed by the plasmid.

1 n- and c-terminal extensions were added on purpose  or are byproducts of the cloning procedure. 2plasmid lacking the pbad promoter.

functional complementation between inactive fragments of m.sssi in vivo
first two plasmids  expressing n-terminal, and four plasmids  expressing c-terminal polypeptides were constructed.  some of the break points were selected to approximately match the ends or the beginnings of fragments of the other c5-mtases, for which the phenomenon of fragment complementation has been demonstrated  <cit>  <cit> . plasmids coding for n- or c-terminal fragments were introduced individually or pairwise into e.coli dh10b. the reca host was used in these experiments to minimize the possibility of recombination between homologous segments of the two plasmids. transformants were grown in the absence or presence of the inducer arabinose overnight. methylation status of plasmid dna isolated from the cultures was tested by digestion with the gcgc-specific restriction endonuclease hin6i whose activity is blocked by m.sssi-specific methylation. the vectors pbad <dig> and pok-bad contain  <dig> and  <dig> hin6i sites, respectively.

as expected, all plasmids purified from single-transformants were fully digestible with hin6i, indicating that the truncated fragments were inactive. similarly, the plasmids purified from double-transformants expressing the fragment pairs  +  or  +  were completely digestible. however, plasmid preparations purified from the arabinose-induced cultures of the double-transformants containing pbnh-sss plus pob-sss or pob-sss were partially protected against hin6i digestion . this suggested that the n-terminal fragment  could assemble with the  or the  c-terminal fragment to reconstitute the active mtase. the  +  combination gave barely detectable protection . no protection was observed with plasmids purified from uninduced cultures and complementation was more efficient at 30 °c than at 37 °c.

since the truncated genes of the complementing n- and c-terminal polypeptides contained overlapping segments, it was important to exclude the possibility that mtase activity arose by reconstitution of the intact mtase gene via homologous recombination. to test this, the arabad promoter and part of the arac gene was deleted from pob-sss and pob-sss leaving the  and  coding sequence intact. the resulting plasmids  did not complement pbnh-sss  indicating that for restoration of mtase activity synthesis of the c-terminal peptide was required, and a recombination mechanism can be excluded.

to determine the optimal c-terminal fragment length for complementation, nested deletions were generated by exonuclease iii digestion starting from the n-terminus of the  fragment as described in methods. the obtained plasmids encoding the truncated polypeptides , , , , , , ,  and  are listed in table  <dig>  when tested in combination with pbnh-sss, some protection against hin6i digestion was detectable for all fragments having overlaps with fragment . the most efficient methylation was observed with fragments starting at  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> . these residues are located between conserved motif viii and the assumed trd of m.sssi .

in a reciprocal approach, nested deletions were introduced from the 3’-end of the m.sssi gene. plasmids expressing the following polypeptides were isolated: , , , , , , ,  and  . because in these plasmids the truncated gene was fused to vector sequence, translation termination is determined by the next in-frame stop codon downstream of the paei site , and the fragments carry short c-terminal appendages of foreign sequence . these plasmids were tested in combination with pob-sss and pob-sss, two of the plasmids that most efficiently complemented the n-terminal polypeptide . the two shortest fragments  did not complement  . complementation by fragment  was rather efficient, whereas only poor methylation activity was observed with fragments  and . the low complementation capacity of the latter two fragments is probably due to the relatively long foreign sequence at their c-terminus . all longer fragments were active in the complementation test and resulted in comparable levels of methylation . similar results were obtained when  was used as c-terminal fragment although in this combination fragments  <cit>  appeared more active than with  . the complementation observed with the  +  <cit>  pairs is noteworthy because in these cases there is no overlap between the fragments.

it has been observed in several systems that sequence overlap between the fragment pairs was beneficial or even essential for complementation  <cit> . to test this requirement for m.sssi in more detail, a series of c-terminal fragments were tested in combination with . fragments  <cit>  were highly active in pair with , whereas the few residues shorter  fragment was already ineffective . it was shown before that the  +  and the  +  combinations were inactive . taking into account that fragments  and  were active in combination with fragment, which they overlapped, these observations show that the requirement for overlap depends on the location of the break. if the bisection point is in the proximal half of the variable region, no overlap is required, and even the loss of a few amino acids can be compatible with mtase activity. in contrast, if the bisection point is in regions less optimal for fitting the two polypeptides together, a short overlap between the fragment pairs appears to be necessary for the formation of the active complex.

to test how m.sssi tolerates splits in more distal parts of the variable region, plasmids producing different n-terminal fragments were tested in combination with pob-sss and pob-sss. methylation of the plasmid pairs expressing fragments  <cit>  +  was hardly detectable, and no methylation was detected with the  <cit>  +  combinations . these results and the previous observation that the  +  pair was inactive  suggest that for efficient complementation the small domain must be intact. a summary of the complementation properties of m.sssi fragments generated and studied in this work is in figure  <dig> 

to compare m.sssi activities in vivo between representatives of the best complementing fragment pairs and intact m.sssi, extracts were prepared from arabinose induced cells and mtase activity was determined using radioactively labeled adomet as described in methods. the following mtase activities  were obtained : 1016 ±  <dig> , 16 ±  <dig> , 53 ±  <dig>  and 65 ±  <dig> . assuming similar levels of expression, these values suggest that the activities of even the best complementing pairs is below  <dig> per cent of that of the intact enzyme.

in the envisaged approach of targeted methylation, targeting is achieved by zinc finger proteins fused to the mtase halves  <cit> . statistically, a 16 bp sequence occurs once in the human genome. thus, for the intended specificity, a 18 bp zinc finger binding site should be sufficiently long as has been demonstrated  <cit> . therefore, for testing whether fusion of the m.sssi fragments to zinc finger proteins could impair their complementation ability, we chose six-finger proteins that recognize 18 bp sequences. two n- and two c-terminal m.sssi fragments  were genetically fused to the zinc finger domains 6-zfp-a and 6-zfp-b described in  <cit> . the 6-zfp-b domain was fused to the amino end of the n-terminal fragments, whereas the 6-zfp-a domain was fused to the carboxy end of the c-terminal fragments to yield pb6zb-sss, pb6zb-sss, pob-sss-6za and pob-sss-6za . fusions to zfps slightly decreased complementation capacity in all tested cases , but with the two better combinations substantial activity remained and even for the fragment pair displaying the lowest activity  appending the zfps did not fully abolish mtase activity .

discussion
in this study we identified n- and c-terminal fragments of the sssi mtase, which can assemble with a counterpart fragment to form active mtase when produced in the same e. coli cell. all available evidence supports the conclusion that the observed phenomenon is indeed peptide complementation and not the result of dna recombination restoring the intact mtase gene. firstly, deletion of the promoter of two c-terminal fragments abolished complementation . secondly, plasmid pairs with longer overlaps between the 5’- and 3’ gene segments were not necessarily more efficient in complementation than fragments with shorter overlaps . thirdly, in the experiment in which the  fragment was shortened from the n-terminus by exonuclease iii digestion, many of the randomly picked clones contained m.sssi gene segments with substantial overlap with the gene of the  fragment but fused to the atg initiation codon in incorrect reading frame. when these plasmids were co-transformed with pbnh-sss, methylation was not detectable, confirming that m.sssi activity required synthesis of the c-terminal peptide . finally, complementation observed between some plasmids containing non-overlapping gene segments such as  +  <cit>   also argues against the recombination model.

although a large number of fragment pairs resulted in detectable m.sssi activity, the most efficient methylation was observed with fragment combinations involving c-terminal fragments starting between conserved motif viii and the assumed trd, with a sharp optimum between residues  <dig> and  <dig> . in lack of an x-ray structure it is difficult to rationalize these results but the location of split sites in the region connecting the predicted large and small domains  <cit>  would be consistent with the general principle that fragment complementation is most efficient between folded units  <cit> . the flexible random coil conformation predicted for the segment glu <dig> - ile <dig>  <cit>  could also be an advantage for fitting the two subunits together. it is noteworthy that the beginning  of the c-terminal m.hhai fragment producing complementation was in the same region, between motif viii and the trd  <cit> .

evaluation of the phenotypes of the n-terminal fragments generated by exonuclease iii digestion is less straightforward because the extraneous c-terminal peptides appended by the cloning procedure  are likely to interfere with assembly of the subunits. in contrast to the c-terminal fragments, the complementation ability of the n-terminal fragments did not show a clear optimum. all overlapping fragments, which did not have longer extraneous c-terminal peptide could complement fragments  and  and the complementation capacity of these fragments appeared to be similar .

this work was motivated by the desire to develop m.sssi into a programmable dna mtase suitable to methylate unique cpg sites in the genome. here, as a first step toward this goal, the ability of m.sssi for fragment complementation has been demonstrated and fragment combinations displaying different levels of mtase activity in vivo have been identified. these results open the possibility for developing a system for targetable cpg methylation using the split fragment approach, which will involve construction of fusions between fragments of m.sssi and appropriately designed zfp targeting domains. the split fragment approach is in many ways reminiscent of the technique using zfp-foki chimeric nucleases for targeted dna cleavage  <cit> . low activity of the heterodimers can be an advantage for increasing targeting specificity especially if it derives from the low affinity between the mtase halves  <cit> . ideally, the split mtase fragments should not be able to assemble in free state at cellular concentrations but should form active heterodimers due to increased local concentration when co-localized to the target site via the zfp domains. the best strategy to create a site specific mtase could be to start with fragments, which cannot associate into active mtase as has been suggested  <cit> . the level of targeting specificity required for methylation of unique sites in the genome will probably need extensive optimization of different parameters governing targetable methylation specificity, such as affinity to target and non-target dna, affinity between the mtase subunits, distance between the zfp binding site and the targeted cg, etc.. the large number of complementing fragment combinations representing a wide range of mtase activity will be a rich source of starting material to engineer zfp-m.sssi fusions for programmable dna methylation.

CONCLUSIONS
the cg-specific m.sssi, similarly to three other naturally monomeric c5-mtases of different specificity, shows the phenomenon of fragment complementation in vivo in e. coli. fusion of the split fragments to six unit zinc finger domains only slightly decreases the efficiency of complementation. these observations offer the possibility to develop m.sssi into a programmable dna methyltransferase of high specificity that can be useful in the study of dna methylation in higher eukaryotes.

