BACKGROUND
development of the human nervous system is a complex and precisely regulated process that occurs over a prolonged period of time and depends on a strict temporal and regional coordination of complex patterns of gene expression. as the developmental programme unfolds, genes modify their level of expression in the brain at specific times in response to changing demands for a variety of cellular functions. up to  <dig> % of brain expressed genes have been shown to be temporally differentially expressed between any two periods across regions, with  <dig> % of genes being differentially expressed at any two different time points across areas in the neocortex alone  <cit> . waves of intense variation in gene expression are particularly pronounced in specific stages of development. in the rat brain model, for instance, for most genes, the most dramatic changes in level of expression occur early in postnatal life  and plateau thereafter  <cit> .

observable changes in gene expression profiles throughout development are determined by an underlying network of precise regulatory interactions between individual genes  <cit> . elucidating the organizing principles that shape the whole network of gene regulatory interactions that ultimately instruct organismal development is one of the central goals of developmental biology. in this context, it is of critical important to ascertain whether the gene regulatory architecture driving development is itself a constant or variable feature of the developmental programme. most cellular processes are the result of a complex assembly of molecular and genetic components acting in concert  <cit>  suggesting the need of stable regulatory interactions between defined groups of genes throughout development. on the other hand, many genes have the potential to participate in multiple separate and sometimes seemingly unrelated biological functions  <cit> , also suggesting the existence of occasional events of regulatory reassembly giving rise to the emergence of new functional associations.

here we ask whether global changes in gene expression profiles during development are primarily the result of a dynamic driven by a fixed regulatory architecture, or alternatively, the result of temporally defined waves of regulatory reorganization.

genes linked by regulatory interactions tend to display similar expression patterns reflecting their functional association  <cit> . this coordinated expression can be readily detected by looking at existing correlations in expression levels between groups of genes across a series of suitable chosen tissue samples. along these lines, clustering analysis based on co-expression patterns has been used to identify groups or modules of correlated genes that may form molecular complexes, pathways, or participate in common regulatory and signalling circuits . apart from revealing functional interactions among groups of genes, gene co-expression also provides information on the underlying regulatory architecture associated to a global expression profile as co-expressed genes are likely to be under the concerted control of a common complement of transcriptional regulators .

in agreement with studies in other cellular systems, during development, the human brain transcriptome has also been shown to be organized into distinct coexpression networks of functionally related genes  <cit> . these networks are generally assumed to behave as single expression units where co-regulated genes vary jointly in their level of expression across development in response to changing demands of their collective functions  <cit> . current studies tend to suggest that the stability of the coexpression structure of the transcriptome is an essential condition for the normal function of cells and tissues as changes in the correlated status of groups of genes have been linked to a range of diseases and pathological conditions including cancer, obesity, degenerative conditions and neuropsychiatric disorders as well as progressive genome instability associated to age-related functional decline .

in this study, we analyse genome wide expression data derived from the developing human brain cortex at several stages across eight cortical regions and examine the relationship between changes in gene expression profiles and the correlation structure of the developmental transcriptome. clustering analysis of expression profiles show that gene expression throughout development is divided into two clearly defined temporal domains before and after birth. by comparing the coexpression structure of all cortical regions in the perinatal transition, we show that this sharp division between foetal and postnatal profiles is not the result of pronounced changes in the level of expression of existing networks of co-regulated genes. instead we demonstrate that the perinatal transition is marked by the widespread regulatory rearrangement within and across existing gene clusters giving rise to the emergence of new functional groups. our results reveal an acute regulatory reorganization of the brain transcriptome occurring specifically at birth and reflecting the reassembly of new functional associations potentially required during the transition from prenatal to postnatal brain development.

RESULTS
we examined rna seq expression data obtained from the nimh transcriptional atlas of human brain development . we selected  <dig> samples corresponding to eight brain structures for which there was available data across  <dig> pre and postnatal developmental stages . in order to maximize the number of genes included in this study, all genes displaying zero variance across samples were removed from the analysis, resulting in a total of  <dig> genes. we started by asking whether changes in gene expression profiles during brain cortex development are mostly associated to regional or temporal differences. to this end we carried out a principal component analysis splitting samples by either region or post conception age. using the first and second components  we found no significant association between variations in gene expression profiles and anatomical structure . by contrast, the global expression pattern showed a highly significant association with post conception age  demonstrating a more prominent contribution of the developmental stage to the observed changes in gene expression than differences attributed to regional variations. furthermore, when we split expression data into prenatal and postnatal samples, the association between expression profiles and these two developmental windows was even more pronounced .fig  <dig> developmental stage, but not anatomical structure contributes to the greatest component of variance in gene expression profiles. principal component analysis splitting samples of expression data by either a structure, b post conception age or c prenatal/postnatal stage. each plot shows the first and second components . kruskal-wallis test was carried out on pc <dig> to test for associations between this component and either, structure, post conception age or prenatal/postnatal stage. associated p values are indicated. d relatedness between average postnatal or prenatal expression profiles across anatomical regions. average expression per gene per cortical region was obtained for either prenatal or postnatal samples across all analysed cortical regions. unsupervised hierarchical clustering was conducted using pairwise correlations between all resulting average expression profiles as a measure of similarity. note, that the average expression profiles of any two prenatal regions are mores similar to each other, than they are to themselves across the perinatal boundary. acronyms for brain structures: dorsolateral prefrontal cortex , posteroinferior parietal cortex , medial prefrontal cortex , orbital frontal cortex , primary somatosensory cortex , posterior superior temporal cortex , primary visual cortex  and ventrolateral prefrontal cortex 



these results show that the single greatest component of gene expression profile variance corresponds to the developmental stage of the brain rather than anatomical structure. more specifically, these results reveal a distinctly pronounced transcriptional profile shift between prenatal and postnatal expression irrespective of brain region.

to directly test the apparent partition of expression profiles between prenatal and postnatal stages, we assessed the transcriptional relatedness between all brain regions, averaging, for each brain region, prenatal and postnatal expression per gene, resulting in a total of  <dig> average expression profiles; one for each of the eight brain regions at either prenatal or postnatal stages. using these profiles, we calculated correlation matrices of pairwise comparisons followed by unsupervised hierarchical clustering. this analysis revealed two highly correlated expression profiles sharply dividing foetal and postnatal stages . these results show that any two brain regions are more similar to each other within each developmental window than they are to themselves across the perinatal boundary and demonstrate the existence of two distinct global expression patterns characterizing the prenatal and postnatal development in nervous tissues irrespective of which anatomical region they belong to.

the observed switch in the global expression profile sharply dividing the prenatal and postnatal developing human nervous system can be alternatively explained as the result of two underlying processes: a) a pronounced change, during the perinatal boundary, in the overall expression profile driven by an otherwise constant network of regulatory interaction between genes  or b) a widespread reorganisation of the regulatory programme leading to the overall reassembly of gene regulatory interactions .fig  <dig> alternative models explaining the observed switch in the global expression profile sharply dividing prenatal and postnatal brain development. patterns of expression of six hipothetical genes in two prenatal  and two postnatal  samples. a switch in the global expression profile under constant regulatory interactions resulting from a pronounced change, during the perinatal boundary, in the overall level of expression of existing, but otherwise cohesive gene clusters. b a similar switch in the global expression profile resulting from a widespread remodelling of the underlying regulatory structure leading to the reassembly of new functional clusters. c relatedness between actual coexpression profiles across anatomical regions. gene coexpression matrices per cortical region were obtained for both prenatal and postnatal developmental windows. unsupervised hierarchical clustering was conducted using pairwise correlations between all resulting coexpression matrices as a measure of similarity. note that the coexpression structure of any two prenatal  regions are mores similar to each other, than they are to themselves across the perinatal boundary



we can discriminate between these two models, by using the overall gene coexpression structure of the transcriptome at a given developmental window as a measure of the underlying gene regulatory architecture, and use this coexpression structure to compare between prenatal and postnatal stages. under the static network of regulatory interactions model, we would expect the pattern of coexpression for individual brain regions to remain similar at both prenatal and postnatal stages . on the other hand, under the assumption of a regulatory reorganization occurring at birth, we would expect the split in expression profiles between prenatal and postnatal stages to be accompanied by a concurrent split in the coexpression structure precisely at the perinatal boundary .

to this end, we used a weighed a gene coexpression network analysis approach , where the coexpression structure of the transcriptome of a given brain region can be represented as the pearson correlation matrix of all possible pairs of genes across a number of developmental time points . accordingly, we obtained the coexpression matrices of each brain region for prenatal and postnatal stages separately, resulting in a total of  <dig> different coexpression matrices: one for each of the eight brain regions at either prenatal or postnatal stages. the resulting coexpression matrices where then used to conduct an average linkage hierarchical clustering analysis and defined similarity between any two coexpression matrices as , where r is again the pearson coefficient derived from correlating any two coexpression matrices.

as shown in fig. 2c and additional file 3: figure s <dig>  clustering analysis of brain regional samples based on their coexpression architecture shows a clear split between pre and postnatal samples, with coexpression structures within each developmental stage resembling more each other irrespective of brain region, than the same region resembling itself across these two developmental windows . this result demonstrates an overall reorganization of the coexpression structure of the brain transcriptome, as the developmental program crosses the perinatal boundary, further revealing a widespread remodelling in the gene regulatory structure of the developmental programme between late prenatal and early postnatal stages.

in order to characterize the pattern of regulatory changes occurring during the perinatal boundary, we conducted differential coexpression analysis as described by tesson et al,  <cit> . this method groups genes together when their correlations with the same sets of genes change between different conditions. briefly, we obtained the overall coexpression matrices for either prenatal or postnatal stages, each one comprising data from all seven ages and eight brain regions and obtained a matrix of adjacency difference  as defined by tesson et al . a topological overlap matrix based on the differential coexpression matrix was then calculated followed by hierarchical clustering to identify modules of differentially coexpressed genes . this analysis identified a total of  <dig> modules of differential coexpression that were further merged if their eigengene correlations were high  resulting in a total of  <dig> differential coexpression modules ranging in size from  <dig> to  <dig> genes . a close inspection of the correlation heat-maps of the resulting clusters confirms pronounced changes in the correlated structure of each module in the transition between prenatal to postnatal development with most modules displaying an overall increase in correlated activity in the postnatal stage . we quantified this effect by simply measuring the change in the average correlation of each module between pre and postnatal stages  and found that  <dig> out of  <dig> differentially coexpressed modules displayed a significant increase in correlated expression in the postnatal stage with  <dig> modules showing reduced correlated activity in the same developmental stage relative to prenatal development. to determine the statistical significance of the observed correlation changes in all modules, we performed a permutation analysis as described and implemented by tesson et al.  <dig> where  <dig> permutations are carried out on the expression values of each module and the proportion of changes in correlation higher than the one observed is determined  <cit>  this analysis revealed that the observed changes were significant at this level  for all  <dig> modules.fig  <dig> differential coexpression network dendrogram and gene modules. a dendrogram showing average hierarchical clustering based on the topological overlap of the adjacency matrix based on coexpression differences  and the corresponding gene modules indicated in different colours underneath. b histogram showing cluster size  per module. c heat maps of the pearson correlation coefficients between all possible gene pairs contained within each module. each heat map shows prenatal and postnatal coexpression separately . colour scale for correlation coefficients is shown at the top left corner of this panel. modules are arranged from left to right and top to bottom according to the median correlation difference between prenatal and postnatal stage. d graph showing the change in the average correlation of each module between pre and postnatal stages. each arrow represents the difference in postnatal average correlation relative to the prenatal stage.  <dig> out of  <dig> differentially coexpressed modules displayed increased correlated expression in the postnatal stage with six modules showing reduced correlated activity in transition from pre to postnatal development



together, these results demonstrate an overall reassembly of the regulatory structure of the brain transcriptome in the perinatal boundary, and show that this reassembly is itself organized into discrete modules or clusters of genes undergoing intensive regulatory reorganization.

in order to test the functional significance of the observed modular reorganization of the brain transcriptome in the perinatal boundary, we asked whether each regulatory reorganization module targeted a defined set of biological functions. to this end, we determined the number of gene ontology  terms, within the biological process category, statistically overrepresented within each module . as shown in fig. 4a,  <dig> out of  <dig> regulatory reorganization modules displayed significant enrichments in one or more specific biological processes . this result shows that the observed regulatory reorganization of the transcriptome in the perinatal boundary is organized into discrete regulatory remodelling networks, each significantly enriched in defined sets of biological functions.fig  <dig> regulatory reorganization modules are enriched in defined sets of biological processes and targeted by specific sets of transcription factors. a bar plot showing the number of significantly enriched go terms per individual module. statistical significance in enrichment of surveyed biological process go terms  was determined by means of a z-score test, where the expected number of genes annotated to individual go terms was determined numerically by comparing with  <dig>  <dig> equally sized random samples of genes. significance threshold was adjusted for multiple testing by benjamini hochberg correction . b bar plot showing the number of significantly enriched of transcription factor target motifs per individual reorganization module using webgestalt’s transcription factor target  enrichment toolkit. c venn-euler diagram showing the relative number of tf binding motifs statistically overrepresented within each individual module. the area of each circle represents the number of enriched tf binding sites in each module and the overlap represents the relative proportion of overlapping motifs between modules. note that each module targets a quasi-exclusive set of biological functions with rare overlap between modules



potential molecular drivers of this global regulatory remodelling during the perinatal transition could in principle include changes in expression of transcription factors specifically targeting individual reorganization modules. to test this hypothesis we looked at enrichment of transcription factor  targets among all detected reorganization modules. as shown in fig.  <dig> b, using the transcription factor target enrichment toolkit of webgestalt  <cit>  we found  <dig> modules significantly enriched in defined sets of tf binding sites. fig. 4c shows a venn-euler plot where the area of each circle represents the number of enriched tf binding sites in each module and the overlap represents the relative proportion of overlapping binding sites between modules. as can be seen in the graph, this analysis reveals that each module is enriched an almost exclusive set of transcription factor binding sites with rare overlaps between modules. this finding strongly suggests that each module is under the transcriptional regulation of a quasi-exclusive set of transcription factors. indeed, a closer inspection of this analysis reveals  <dig> enriched tf binding motifs in total across all modules. of these,  <dig> were each exclusively enriched in single modules with no overlap with any other module, . in order to assess the statistical significance of this strong bias towards non-overlapping transcription factor binding motifs, we performed  <dig>  <dig> permutations of the distribution of enriched tf bindings sites across modules and found that the observed number of module-specific  transcription factors was  <dig> times higher than expected purely by chance . these results demonstrates that the regulatory reorganization modules identified are each targeted by a quasi-exclusive, non-overlapping, set of transcriptions factors and suggest that the observed changes in the pattern of coordinated activity in these modules is brought about by the engagement  of distinct sets of module-specific transcriptional regulators.

within each module, the observed regulatory reorganization involved either events of increased or decreased coordinated activity between individual gene pairs or a combination of both. we can illustrate this in the examples shown in fig.  <dig> corresponding to modules m <dig>  m7and m <dig>  where each module is represented as a graph, with nodes representing genes and edges represent an existing high correlation  between the indicated pair of genes. red edges represent prenatal-only high correlations, whereas blue edges represent postnatal-only high correlations. module m <dig> shows an overall transition from high to low correlated activity for all involved gene pairs in the transition from prenatal to postnatal development. by contrast module m <dig> shows a transition from high to low coordination between genes in a subnetwork accompanied by a transition from low to high correlated activity in a second sub-network. module m <dig> on the other hand shows an almost exclusive perinatal transition from low to high correlation in all genes involved.fig  <dig> examples of network structure rearrangements during the perinatal transition. illustrative examples of the internal structure of the regulatory reorganization in three representative modules. each module or gene cluster is represented as a graph of coexpression relationships, where nodes represent genes and edges represent high correlations  between pairs of genes. red edges represent prenatal-only high correlations, blue edges represent postnatal-only high correlations and black edges represent constant  high correlations. a module m <dig> shows an almost exclusive transition from high to low correlation in all involved genes in the transition from prenatal to postnatal development. by contrast module m <dig> b shows a transition from high to low coordination between genes in a subnetwork with a simultaneous transition from low to high correlated activity in a second sub-network. module m <dig> c shows an almost exclusive transition from low to high correlation in all genes involved during the transition from prenatal to postnatal brain development. inset: bar plots showing the mean number of prenatal  or postnatal  edges per node  in each module



taken togeher our results demonstrate an acute and modular regulatory reorganization of the brain transcriptome occurring at birth and reflecting the reassembly of new functional associations potentially required during the transition from prenatal to postnatal brain development.

discussion
the development of the nervous system is a highly complex process, involving the coordinated regulation of thousands of genes instructing the generation, migration, final location, and connectivity of neurons and circuits. as the developmental program unfolds, gene expression patterns vary widely depending on the specific developmental trajectories of different neural structures  <cit> . global changes in gene expression profiles throughout development are strictly determined by an underlying network of precise regulatory interactions between individual genes and understanding the organizing principles that define this regulatory network is one of the central goals of developmental biology.

in this study we specifically asked whether the regulatory architecture driving global changes in expression profile during nervous system development is a constant or variable feature of the developmental programme. to address this problem we focused on the coexpression structure of the transcriptome as a measure of its regulatory architecture at defined stages during development. to this end, we used existing expression data derived from the developing human brain cortex in prenatal and postnatal stages and examine the relationship between changes in gene expression profiles and the underlying correlation structure of the developmental transcriptome.

we started by examining existing variations in global expression profiles across different developmental stages and cortical areas. our results reveal a sharp split occurring at birth across brain areas showing two distinct families of expression patterns charactering prenatal and postnatal development respectively. this result is consistent with previous findings in the rat model where gene expression profiles throughout development are also divided into two clearly defined temporal domains. in the rat model however, this split in expression profiles occurred between one and weeks after birth  <cit> .

this shift in the overall expression pattern is likely to reflect a major transition in the developmental trajectory and could be explained as resulting from two alternative underlying processes: a) a marked change, during the perinatal boundary, in the overall expression profile driven by an otherwise fixed network of regulatory interaction between genes or b) a widespread reorganisation of the regulatory programme, leading to the overall reassembly of gene regulatory interactions and the emergence of new functional associations.

to discriminate between these two models we compared the coexpression structure of the transcriptome between prenatal and postnatal stages for all cortical regions. under the constant network of regulatory interactions model we would predict little differences in the coexpression structure across regions and between prenatal and postnatal development. contrary to this prediction, we found a clear split in the correlation structures sharply dividing prenatal and postnatal samples precisely coinciding with the previously oberved divide between prenatal and postnatal expression profiles. this result is consistent with the regulatory reorganization model where the developmental gene expression programme undergoes an overall reassembly of gene regulatory interactions.

gene coexpression analysis has been widely used to gain insights into the functional organization of transcriptomes across tissues, conditions and species , and studies of the brain developmental transcriptome have revealed distinct coexpression networks displaying clearly defined patterns of temporal expression  <cit> . these networks are widely assumed to behave as single expression units composed of cohesive groups of co-regulated genes  <cit>  and expected to represent a constant feature of the normal developmental programme. in line with this notion, changes in the correlated status of groups or networks of genes have been linked to regulatory dysfunctions associated to the onset or progression of various disease states and pathological conditions such as cancer, obesity, neurodegeneration and neuropsychiatric disorders as well as potential genome instability associated to age-related functional decline . this link between pathological dysfunctions and changes in the global network of regulatory interactions suggest that the stability of the coexpression structure of the transcriptome is an essential condition for the normal function of cells and tissues. in this study, we found an overall reorganization of the coexpression structure of the brain developmental transcriptome, not as part of a pathological process but as part of the normal developmental trajectory of the nervous system.

using differential coexpression analysis, we further characterized the overall remodelling of the regulatory structure of the brain transcriptome at birth and found that this reassembly is itself structured into discrete modules or clusters of genes undergoing intensive regulatory reorganization.

in order to gain insights into the functional coherence of the observed modular reorganization of the brain transcriptome at birth, we asked whether these reorganization clusters targeted specific biological functions. gene ontology enrichment analysis revealed that each module targets a separate set of biological functions, with little functional overlap between modules. this result shows that the observed regulatory reorganization of the transcriptome in the perinatal boundary is organized into discrete clusters each involved in the regulatory remodelling of defined sets of biological functions.

our finding that this transition is organized into discrete modules targeting distinct sets of biological functions strongly suggests the emergence of new functional associations required for the normal transition from prenatal to postnatal brain development. thus for instance module m <dig> displays an overall reduction of correlated activity between its genes in the transition from prenatal to postnatal development. interestingly, this module shows a distinct, and statistically significant, overrepresentation of genes involved in cell cycle, mitosis and cell proliferation functions. this reduction in the level of coordination between genes directly involved in proliferative functions could potentially reflect corresponding differences in the level of engagement of proliferative activity during prenatal and postnatal nervous system development. indeed, cell proliferation is particularly pronounced during embryonic and late foetal stages of nervous system development as neuronal progenitor cells proliferate and their populations expand to eventually differentiate into mature post-mitotic neurons. at postnatal stages, proliferative activity virtually ceases for neural precursors and remains restricted to the sustained but low production of both astrocytes and oligodendrocytes  <cit> .

the transition from prenatal to postnatal development is marked by dramatic changes in the physiological environment under which the developmental programme unfolds, not least the transition from intra to extra uterine conditions. under these circumstances the organism faces the challenge of continuing with a normal developmental trajectory under a whole new set of environmental variables.

this adaptation can conceivably demand the widespread remodelling of previously existing regulatory interactions within and between gene networks involved in a wide array of existing and/or emerging cellular and developmental functions. one of the most prominent changes during the perinatal transition is probably the sharp increase in the oxygen concentration and adaptation of the developmental programme to these new conditions could potentially involve the remodelling of existing regulatory interactions involving genes associated to oxygen metabolism. we tested this hypothesis by asking if genes involved in the response to changes in oxygen concentration were significantly overrepresented among genes differentially expressed in the transition from prenatal to postnatal development. to this end we identified differentially expressed genes across the perinatal boundary using the limma package in r, and searched for enrichment of genes involved in oxygen response. this analysis revealed a significant overrepresentation , among differentially expressed genes, of negative regulation of reactive oxygen species metabolic process , response to reactive oxygen species  and reactive oxygen species metabolic process . a similar result was found using webgestalt as an alternative tool for go enrichment analysis  <cit> , also revealing an overrepresentation of genes associated to response to reactive oxygen species .

we can then test whether this gene expression response to changes in oxygen concentrations during the perinatal transition is in any way associated to an underlying remodelling of previously existing regulatory interactions. we can do this simply by looking at whether oxygen-associated functions were also significantly associated to specific reorganization modules.

a targeted search indeed revealed a significant overrepresentation of go terms associated to reactivity to oxygen species in specific modules. these include: oxygen metabolic process , regulation of response to reactive oxygen species , positive regulation of reactive oxygen species metabolic process , cellular response to oxygen levels , reactive oxygen species metabolic process, and regulation of response to reactive oxygen species . similar results were found using webgestalt .

these results demonstrate that the genetic response to the transition from low to high oxygen concentration during the perinatal boundary is itself associated to an underlying regulatory reorganization of genes involved in oxygen metabolism.

immediate molecular drivers of the observed regulatory remodelling could in principle include changes in expression of transcription factors specifically targeting individual reorganization modules. our finding that each reorganization module is targeted by a specific set of transcription factors with very few of them overlapping across modules, provides strong evidence of a potential mechanism driving the reorganization of the global regulatory architecture across the perinatal boundary and further supports to the notion of a re-organization of the underlying regulatory network. if, as suggested by this finding, changes in the pattern of coordinated activity of specific sets of genes is brought about the engagement  of specific sets of transcription factors targeting these gene clusters, we would expect these changes to be mirrored by corresponding changes in the coordinated activation  of numerous transcription factors. this means that we should expect transcription factors to be themselves over represented among clusters of genes undergoing changes in their coordinated activity across the perinatal boundary. indeed a close inspection of enriched functional categories within the "molecular function" go term domain reveals a number of reorganization modules with a significant enrichment of transcription factors . these results suggest a mechanism whereby changes in the coordinated pattern of activity of numerous transcription factors occurring during the perinatal transition can in turn trigger subsequent changes in the pattern of coordinated activity of specific target modules, all of them involved in a wide array of existing and/or emerging cellular and developmental functions required for the normal transition from prenatal to postnatal brain development.

additional higher order drivers of the observed regulatory remodelling occurring during the perinatal transition could potentially include epigenetic mechanisms. among these, dna methylation is probably the most extensively studied epigenetic modification and has been found involved in many important genomic regulatory processes, including genomic imprinting, x chromosome inactivation, and the regulatory instability of tumour suppressor genes in cancer. in the nervous system, several lines of evidence point to the importance of dynamic epigenetic changes during development  <cit> , with a potentially critical role for dna methylation in neurodevelopment, as suggested by the dynamic expression of the de novo dna methyltransferases dnmt3a and dnmt3b during the perinatal period  <cit> . along the same lines, a recent analysis of genome-wide patterns of dna methylation across human foetal brain development uncovered a considerable level of epigenomic plasticity occurring during the immediate prenatal period  <cit> . while these studies, taken together, highlight the importance of epigenetic reconfiguration events at critical stages in development, further work will be needed to determine their specific contribution to the regulatory reorganization of the transcriptional programme reported in this study.

in the present study, we contrast two models to explain the developmental shift in expression profiles during the transition from prenatal to postnatal development; one based on the assumption of a constant regulatory architecture and the other based on the assumption of a widespread reorganization of the regulatory structure of the developmental transcriptome. it is worth noticing, however, that the two contrasted models should not necessarily be regarded as opposed to each other. instead they could conceivably be regarded as the two ends of what may be a continuous spectrum. it is also worth noticing that, while the underlying developmental programme is itself as constant a feature as the developmental trajectory itself, given the complexity of the developmental process, an entirely static regulatory structure is not necessarily expected to start with. however the fact remains that instead of a series of gradual shifts in the regulatory structure of the developmental programme, we find two well defined regulatory architectures operating at either side of the perinatal boundary. in other words a remarkable regulatory stability is indeed observed across time and regions during prenatal development, followed by a major regulatory shift during the prenatal-postnatal transition leading to a second stable regulatory architecture during postnatal development.

CONCLUSIONS
in sum, we conclude that, during brain development, the pronounced changes in the genome wide expression profile observed in the perinatal boundary are the result of a regulatory reorganization of the developmental programme occurring at birth and reflecting the reassembly of new functional and regulatory associations required for the normal transition from prenatal to postnatal nervous system development.

