BACKGROUND
autochthony is generally considered for conspecific collections of individuals existing at a specified location. basically, autochthony is judged by the time over which the ancestry of the collection has existed as a population at this location. in a recent paper by kleinschmit et al.  <cit>  the close relationship between the autochthony of a stand and its state as a population was reasoned in some detail. this relationship is due to the local, temporal and genealogical continuity as well as the resulting adaptational specificity associated with the notion of autochthony. particularly the potential of reaching high degrees of adaptedness under long term regular conditions, as are imputed to autochthonous stands, requires a proper balance between internal reproductive coherence and external reproductive isolation over generations for its realization. these are in fact the generally agreed upon characteristics of  populations, and they imply the delineation of a spatial and environmental range within which the interaction between selection and gene flow or mating system characteristics presents a population as a unit of adaptation and reproduction. hence the conclusion of kleinschmit et al.  <cit>  that the autochthony of a stand involves as an essential determinant the range, over which it acts as a population.

almost all information on reproductive coherence in plants species is due to gene flow studies between more or less artificially delineated units or stands  <cit>  and  to mating relations  within such stands. the significance of the interplay between gene flow and adaptation, however, is usually a matter of the discussion sections in research reports. even more so the same seems to hold true in the reverse direction, where experimental studies are focused on the detection of adaptational processes, and where gene flow is not explicitly considered as to its effects on the range of the habitat to which adaptation has to take place. even the plethora of models treating joint effects of gene flow and selection resort to pre-defined populations or ranges, so that they cannot be applied to the  estimation of population ranges or to the detection of population subdivisions .

to overcome the problems of inference resulting from separate consideration of effects of gene flow and adaptation as well as from artificial delineation of stands or units in experimental studies, the integrated approach to population delineation suggested by kleinschmit et al.  <cit>  will be further developed in this paper. rather than estimating rates of gene flow and selection, the approach focuses on the outcome of the joint action of both processes as it shows in the spatial distribution of genetic information . this is based on the reasoning that in order for a collection of individuals to constitute a population

 <dig>  matings within the collection should be distinctly more frequent than matings with individuals from outside the collection,

 <dig>  offspring with one parent from the collection and the other from outside the collection should be less likely to survive to adulthood or to stay within the collection than offspring with both parents from the collection .

at least in plants, collections of individuals are primarily identified by their spatial distribution, and parent-offspring relations in combination with the local adaptational processes establish specific genetic structures. hence, fulfillment of the two conditions should indeed imply distinct spatiogenetic structures among adults after at least two generations. consideration of adult individuals is required, since earlier stages such as the seed stage may appropriately reflect effects of the mating system but do not sufficiently account for selection processes. adult stages summarize the outcome of the joint action of mating and selection. the problem of assessing autochthony thus presents itself largely as one of finding natural substructures in stands as indicators of combined adaptational and reproductive separation at a small or medium scale. reconstruction of population history is not of primary relevance in this concern. it is rather the presently observable outcome of the past action of population characteristics that matters. this is approached in two steps:  by finding associations between genetic differences and spatial distances, and  by identifying and characterizing groups of individuals which form spatiogenetic clusters. both of these aspects have to be analyzed independently as long as implications of one by the other are not obvious. while methods of type  can be selected from a large supply , methods of type  do not yet seem to have attracted much interest  <cit> . on the other hand, these methods are indispensable in order to not just indicate the existence but to concretely identify the groups of individuals, which show tendencies for the formation of subpopulations or populations. moreover, the large scale, on which associations are to be determined may show no significance despite the existence of smaller scale clustering.

to start with, we chose beech  as a dominant forest tree species in central europe. beech has been studied intensively for its genetic variation within and between stands with the general result that it appears to be less differentiated among stands than other comparable tree species . as potential explanations of this observation, gene flow and post-glacial re-migration were discussed in combination with the species's dispersal mechanisms and ecological state as a climax species . small scale studies showed that pollen dispersal detectable from paternal analyses might be limited , and local selection is likely to act, as was chiefly concluded from pairwise sampling studies  <cit> .

the apparent absence of distinct, large scale genetic differentiation, the restricted capacity of seed dispersal, and the possibility of locally acting selection pressures may be felt to be contradictory and therefore gave reason for the present study to concentrate on an analysis of medium scale structures in spatially more or less continuous stands. by this it is intended to check for the existence of spatiogenetic structures that indicate tendencies of forming subpopulations that cannot be distinguished in neither large nor small scale studies. for this purpose a number of beech stands is selected that differ in their autochthony characteristics. these characteristics conform with the most commonly applied criteria of autochthony. the criteria relevant for the present study are compiled and briefly explained in an appendix. the gene markers available in the present study are isoenzymes, which have been argued to be adaptive in some contexts and selectively neutral in others. together with the possibility of being stochastically associated with directly selected genetic traits, these gene markers can thus be expected to be involved in the above-mentioned conditions of population delineation.

four beech stands, three of them are located in hessen, and one in westfalia, have been selected because they represent different types of forest management. all trees of a trial had been spatially mapped and genetically characterized at seven polymorphic isozyme gene loci  in earlier studies  <cit> . before compilation the genetic data were adjusted to a standardized nomenclature of genetic variants. the stand characteristics are summarized in table  <dig> 

d0=∑kmax{g <dig> k, g <dig> k}2⋅l
dj=∑k∑k
dur=∑kgk4⋅l
l := number of gene loci, g <dig> k := number of gene states at the k-th locus present only in the first individual and absent in the second, g <dig> k := number of gene states at the k-th locus present only in the second individual and absent in the first, g <dig> k := number of gene states at the k-th locus present in both individuals, gk := number of heteroallelic pairs of individual genes, one from each of the two individuals.

nr.=: natural regeneration; lth.=: low thinning ; w.=: weak; h.=: heavy; pl.=: planting; hth.=: high thinning; planting in the horn stand comes from local origins and in the karlshafen stand from unknown origin

RESULTS
spatiogenetic correlation and asymmetry
csg := spatiogenetic correlation coefficient, p := proportion of correlation coefficients among  <dig>  permutations exceeding csg, second line in parentheses:= lower and upper  <dig> -quantile specifying the effective range of variation of spatiogenetic correlation obtained for  <dig>  permutations

for average spatiogenetic asymmetry the situation is even less discriminative between stands . in fact, there is almost no difference between the stands for all measures of genetic difference, and the effective ranges of variation across permutations consequently overlap substantially and are very narrow. moreover, the average asymmetries are of intermediate size, which accords with the almost independent association between spatial distances and genetic differences suggested by the low correlations of table  <dig>  it thus appears that under the marginal conditions, which are set by the spatial distribution of the individuals and by their genotypes in the four stands, both descriptors of spatiogenetic covariation detect no significant differences between the stands despite the conceptual distinctness of the descriptors. this suggests that, if there are any structural differences at all between stands, they are likely to be found in descriptors relating more directly to spatiogenetic clustering characteristics  and, ultimately in the spatiogenetic clustering patterns themselves.

a¯sg
 mathtype@mtef@5@5@+=feaafiart1ev1aaatcvaufkttlearuwrp9mdh5mbpbiqv92aaexatlxbi9gbaebbnrfifhhdyfgasaach8aky=wiffydh8gipec8eeeu0xxdbba9frfj0=oqffea0dxdd9vqai=hguq8kuc9pgc9s8qqaq=dirpe0xb9q8qilsfr0=vr0=vr0dc8meaabaqacigacagaaeqabaqabegadaaakeaacuwghbqygaqeamaabaaaleaacqwgzbwccqwgnbwzaeqaaaaa@3103@ := average spatiogenetic asymmetry based on spatial units, p := proportion of asymmetries among  <dig>  permutations exceeding a¯sg
 mathtype@mtef@5@5@+=feaafiart1ev1aaatcvaufkttlearuwrp9mdh5mbpbiqv92aaexatlxbi9gbaebbnrfifhhdyfgasaach8aky=wiffydh8gipec8eeeu0xxdbba9frfj0=oqffea0dxdd9vqai=hguq8kuc9pgc9s8qqaq=dirpe0xb9q8qilsfr0=vr0=vr0dc8meaabaqacigacagaaeqabaqabegadaaakeaacuwghbqygaqeamaabaaaleaacqwgzbwccqwgnbwzaeqaaaaa@3103@, second line in parentheses := lower and upper  <dig> -quantile specifying the effective range of variation of spatiogenetic asymmetry obtained for  <dig>  permutations

average and variance of spatiogenetic separation
μsg := observed average spatiogenetic separation in spatial units; σsg := observed standard deviation of spatiogenetic separation; p := proportion of averages and standard deviations among  <dig>  permutations exceeding μsg and σsg, respectively; in parentheses:= lower and upper  <dig> -quantile specifying the effective range of variation of the respective separation parameters obtained for  <dig>  permutations; μs := observed average spatial separation; σs := observed standard deviation of spatial separation.

moreover, with the exception of laubach a, the observed average separations of all stands are close to their lower  <dig> -quantiles . the variances show no such extreme behavior with respect to the position of observed values in their effective ranges of potential variation. the consistently smaller effective ranges of potential variation of average separation for the genetic difference measure dur suggests this measure to be the least sensitive to permutations of spatial position. this deviation from the other measures of genetic difference also concerns the position of the observed separation within its effective range of potential variation, which is closer to the upper  <dig> -quantile within this range for laubach a.

the ranking of the stands with respect to the average spatiogenetic separation is almost the same for all measures of genetic difference and this reflects their ranking according to intensity and type of thinning and of age of stands : the averages increase starting with weak low thinning  and continuing with low thinning , high thinning and intermediate average age , and high thinning and higher average age . the same ranking results with respect to overall stand density, however with much more pronounced differences between the laubach stands and smaller differences between the other two stands . thus, the observed average spatiogenetic asymmetry within stands is apparently not large enough to genetically dissolve or even reverse the general tendencies of spatial clustering. this might indicate  a tendency for lower genetic differences within than between disjoint spatial clusters. the tendency is weakest in stands with artificial planting , as was to be expected and as is confirmed by the distinct increase of the standard deviation of separation in these stands.

a more direct comparison between spatiogenetic separation and spatial distribution characteristics is obtained from computation of the purely spatial separations, i.e. the smallest spatial distance of an individual from all other individuals. the reference of spatiogenetic commensurability to the spatial component allows us to directly compare spatial with spatiogenetic separations. in particular, the minimum spatiogenetic difference of an individual from all other individuals always exceeds or is equal to its minimum spatial distance. if any of the spatially nearest neighbors has a genetic difference from the reference individual that is smaller than or equal to the spatial distance, then the minimum spatiogenetic difference equals the minimum spatial distance. hence, if the minimum spatiogenetic difference properly exceeds the minimum spatial distance than the genetic differences of all spatially nearest neighbors properly exceed their spatial distance. this is true in our stands. as is shown in the next to the rightmost column of table  <dig>  average spatial separations are distinctly smaller than average spatiogenetic separations with ratios μsg/μs varying for d <dig> between  <dig>  and  <dig>  . as opposed to the last suggestion, this can be taken as an indication for a tendency of genetic differences to dissolve the patterns of spatial clustering at the levels of nearest neighborhood. this, however, need not extend to higher levels of hierarchy at which clusters contain disjoint subclusters.
separation can be explained by stronger spatial structuring  in the stand of lower density . the higher average spatiogenetic separation together with the distinctly higher μsg/μs ratio in horn as compared to laubach c in turn hints at a stronger tendency in horn to dissolve spatial structures through a more equal distribution of genotypes over spatial clusters of relatively high density. the above observations and their apparently controversial assessments depend on associations between genotypes and locations to the degree that these can vary under the marginal restrictions provided by the distribution of individuals in space and by the kinds and frequencies of genotypes. because the potential variation of the average asymmetries, for example, is very small and does not allow for values close to zero , the marginal restrictions a priori prohibit situations of strong spatiogenetic clustering, where spatially separated groups of individuals are genetically clearly distinguished from other such groups. another effect adding to this restriction could be found in the fact that genetic differences for the studied gene loci show a distinctly lower resolution than spatial distances. under these restrictions, the observation that the average spatiogenetic separations are, with a few exceptions, realized very close to their lower  <dig> -quantile deserves further consideration.

in fact, within the limits set by the marginal restrictions and the resolution of the genetic differences, all stands can be considered to show very low spatiogenetic separation. this lends more substantiated support to one of the above suggestions, namely that genetically similar individuals tend to gather in spatial clusters rather than to disperse over these clusters. it also confirms the above-mentioned ranking of the stands for their averages of spatiogenetic separation. the medium sized standard deviations hint at the possibility of variability of spatiogenetic differences within and between clusters. these considerations are of course only relevant if disjoint spatiogenetic clusters exist, which are sufficiently isolated. the pertaining findings will be presented in the next section.

spatiogenetic cluster structure
the results obtained for the four elementary descriptors of cluster structure are summarized in table  <dig>  for purposes of illustration, spatiogenetic dendrograms based on the measure d <dig> of genetic difference are provided in figure  <dig> for the four study stands. the two types of cluster structure, primary and α-isolated, for which the descriptors are calculated are highlighted in this figure. averaging degrees of isolation over the primary clusters in the four stands  results in α =  <dig>  as the reference level of isolation based on the genetic difference d <dig>  likewise α =  <dig>  and α =  <dig>  for the reference levels based on dj and dur, respectively.

n := number of individuals in a stand, nc := number of individuals organized in clusters, k := number of clusters, ni := size of the i-th cluster. poc = nc/n, ecs=∑ini2/nc
 mathtype@mtef@5@5@+=feaafiart1ev1aaatcvaufkttlearuwrp9mdh5mbpbiqv92aaexatlxbi9gbaebbnrfifhhdyfgasaach8aky=wiffydh8gipec8eeeu0xxdbba9frfj0=oqffea0dxdd9vqai=hguq8kuc9pgc9s8qqaq=dirpe0xb9q8qilsfr0=vr0=vr0dc8meaabaqacigacagaaeqabaqabegadaaakeaacqwglbqzcqwgjbwycqwgzbwccqgh9aqpdaaeqaqaaiabd6gaunaadaaaleaacqwgpbqaaeaacqaiyagmaagccqggvawlcqwgobgtdawgaawcbagaem4yamgabeaaaeaacqwgpbqaaeqaniabgghildaaaa@3c67@, acs = nc/k, enc=nc2/∑ini2
 mathtype@mtef@5@5@+=feaafiart1ev1aaatcvaufkttlearuwrp9mdh5mbpbiqv92aaexatlxbi9gbaebbnrfifhhdyfgasaach8aky=wiffydh8gipec8eeeu0xxdbba9frfj0=oqffea0dxdd9vqai=hguq8kuc9pgc9s8qqaq=dirpe0xb9q8qilsfr0=vr0=vr0dc8meaabaqacigacagaaeqabaqabegadaaakeaacqwglbqzcqwgubgbcqwgjbwycqgh9aqpcqwgobgtdaqhaawcbagaem4yamgabagaegomaidaaogaei4la8yaaabeaeaacqwgubgbdaqhaawcbagaemyaakgabagaegomaidaaaqaaiabdmgapbqab0gaeyyeiuoaaaa@3d50@; hence, nc = poc·n = acs·k = ecs·enc

the probably most conspicuous result consists in the distinct effects of the three measures of genetic difference on the descriptors of cluster structure. for example, based on measures d <dig> and dj of genetic difference, the proportion of individuals organized in primary clusters exceeds 50% in all stands, and, when based on the measure dur, it is below 50% in all stands . for individuals organized in α-isolated clusters, the proportions based on d <dig> and dj are also consistently larger than the proportions based on dur.

there are also effects, which are consistent for all three measures of genetic difference:  across stands the proportion of individuals organized in α-isolated clusters is distinctly smaller and in several cases even less than half of the proportion organized in primary clusters;  the stand of horn shows the largest effective number of clusters for both cluster structures;  with one exception  all four descriptors of cluster structure show higher values in the primary than in the α-isolated cluster structure;  for two of the genetic differences, d <dig> and dj, the effective number of clusters in the primary cluster structure varies across stands in parallel with stand sizes. the fact that in all stands a higher proportion of individuals is organized in primary than in α-isolated cluster structures may be accepted as an explanation of finding . however, there is no fixed mathematical relation among all descriptors  as is demonstrated by the exception in the stand laubach a based on d <dig>  looking for consistency in ranking of stands for their descriptors of cluster structure it turns out that this holds in only one case, namely in the α-isolated cluster structure based on d <dig>  in fact, the four stands are consistently ranked by all four descriptors of cluster structure, with the effective number of clusters exactly inverting the order specified by the other descriptors. the ranking is laubach a, laubach c, karlshafen and horn, where laubach a shows the by far largest proportion of individuals organized in clusters, effective and average cluster size , and the smallest effective number of clusters . this ranking does not follow the previously considered rankings for stand size, stand density and average spatiogenetic separation.

discussion
it is probably widely ignored that descriptors of covariation between genetic differences and spatial distances may depend to a considerable degree on the spatiogenetic marginal conditions specified by the spatial positions of the individuals and their genotypes. this dependence may imply a strong a priori restriction to the potential variation of the descriptors. to assess this phenomenon, permutation analyses are required to include the lower and upper ε-quantiles realized over permutations in addition to p-values. in our study the effective ranges of variation are consistently small, which indicates that effects of the marginal conditions may be so dominant that effects of the distribution of genotypes over spatial positions play an almost negligible role in the determination of descriptors of covariation. this situation makes it difficult to evaluate the significance of the observations in terms of intrinsically structural aspects.

the effects of the spatiogenetic marginal conditions are less dominant for the descriptors of spatiogenetic separation. in fact, the intrinsically structural forces seem to act in ways driving the average spatiogenetic separation in all stands towards the minima that are realizable under the respective marginal conditions. this tendency is less consistent for the measure dur of genetic difference, where, however, this measure turned out to be the least discriminative among the three measures of genetic difference taken into consideration. minimization of spatiogenetic separation requires forces which promote the formation of spatiogenetic clusters. such forces are typically active through the quite limited effective ranges of dispersal of the heavy barochorous seeds of beech followed by natural regeneration and thinning. estimates of average seed dispersal distances in beech range between  <dig>  m  <cit>  and  <dig>  m  <cit> , which are surprisingly close to the average spatiogenetic separations found in our stands for the measure d <dig> of genetic difference. this phenomenon awaits further analysis.

the differences in average spatiogenetic separation between stands is closely associated with stand density and average spatial separation, as can be expected in the presence of spatiogenetic clusters. the distinct increase of the variance of spatiogenetic separation in the stands of horn and karlshafen goes directly along with the plantings practiced in parts of these stands and with the implied randomization of genotypes over spatial positions. the requirement of continuous local regeneration for autochthony  is thus not fully met by these two stands.

the above suggestions become more explicit in the analyses of spatiogenetic cluster structure. two elementary types of cluster structure are considered:  primary cluster structure, in which clusters are the largest with no true substructure , and  α-isolated cluster structure, in which clusters are the smallest to show a degree of isolation that equals or exceeds a specified level α. among these two types of structure the latter indicates the existence of  distinct subpopulation structure. the former specifies the entities within which no further subpopulation structure can be realized irrespective of their degrees of isolation. in order to capture the basic level of isolation realized in the primary cluster structure, α is chosen in accordance with the average degree of primary cluster isolation. concerning the proportion of individuals organized in each cluster structure as well as the effective number of clusters and their effective and average sizes it turned out that the three measures of genetic difference under consideration lead to different assessments of structure in several respects. they however agree in attributing distinctly larger proportions of individuals to primary than to α-isolated cluster structures in all stands. hence, above the level of primary clusters, there is not much true subpopulation structure . moreover, the stand of horn with its different age classes and admixture of planted trees shows the largest effective number of spatiogenetic clusters across both types of cluster structure and all measures of genetic difference. this accords with the assessment based on spatiogenetic separation, where a tendency in horn to dissolve spatial structures through partial random distribution of genotypes is suggested. thus, the existence of overlapping generations, which would have qualified horn as a stand with higher degree of autochthony , may imply less distinct spatiogenetic structure at the stand level.

a ranking of the stands, which is consistent for all four descriptors of cluster structure exists only for the most discriminative measure of genetic difference . in this ranking laubach a is the stand with the largest proportion of members organized in α-isolated clusters, the by far largest effective and average cluster size, and the smallest effective number of clusters. laubach a is also the stand that experienced the lowest degree of thinning, which apparently allowed for the maintenance of relatively few and large spatiogenetically isolated clusters within the first generation of natural regeneration. weak low thinning largely mimics natural selection in that only competitively inferior trees are removed.

the other extreme is realized by horn with the lowest proportion organized in α-isolated clusters and the smallest effective and average cluster size. horn and karlshafen were subject to the same type of forest management, namely high thinning, but horn would have been assigned a higher degree of autochthony due to the existence of a second generation at the same location. high thinning interferes most strongly with the stand's natural competition regime by changing the local competition relations. the implied selection, if any, is likely to be spread more evenly over the stand than is true for low thinning. this might have dissolved some spatiogenetic clusters or lowered their separation so as to lead to smaller proportions organized in clusters and smaller cluster sizes. apparently, and in contrast with karlshafen as well as with the other two stands, the second generation of natural regeneration has contributed further to a more even distribution of genotypes over local clusters at the stand level with the above consequences for clustering, and this tendency might have been enhanced by planting.

the stands, laubach c and karlshafen, which are of intermediate ranking, were subject to heavy low thinning and high thinning without a second generation. as was mentioned above, low thinning generally follows more directly the natural local selection regimes than does high thinning, and this relation is also true to a lower degree between weak and heavy low thinning. this accords precisely with the ranking according to the four descriptors of cluster structure.

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, natural regeneration in beech produces spatiogenetic cluster structure which becomes weaker with increasing intensity and selectivity of thinning but also with the presence of overlapping generations. this corresponds to observations of epperson and alvarez-buylla  <cit>  and hamrick et al.  <cit>  that natural thinning in tropical trees leads to a reduction of fine-scale genetic structure. this statement also applies to spatiogenetic cluster structure at the average level of isolation of primary cluster structures and to common stand dimensions. the surprisingly high correspondence between our descriptors of spatiogenetic structure and forest management types confirms the appropriateness of the applied measure of cluster isolation and of the criterion for the choice of α. however, since gene flow generally does not respect artificial stand limits, studies of the present kind have to be extended beyond these limits in order to test higher order structures of population delineation.

