BACKGROUND
complex gene and protein libraries allow the identification of pharmaceutically relevant drug targets by initial screening
 <cit>  in microtiter plates  followed by scaling up to industrial production. mtps are used for the high throughput parallel characterization of microbial cultures under identical conditions. furthermore, instruments based on the recently developed biolector® technology
 <cit>  allow fermentation parameters such as cell growth, dissolved oxygen tension  and ph to be monitored on-line, using specially adapted mtps
 <cit> .

the production of recombinant proteins during cultivation is often monitored using fluorescent fusion proteins
 <cit> . common fusion partners involve green fluorescent protein 
 <cit>  and its derivatives such as yellow fluorescent protein , as well as fluorescent proteins containing flavin mononucleotides  ) such as the evoglow® blue light receptor
 <cit> . the fluorescent proteins are detected using non-invasive, specific and sensitive devices that monitor product formation and localization in vivo. they represent the state of the art for screening and bioprocess optimization.

one drawback of fluorescent proteins based on gfp is their relatively high molecular mass  compared to typical target proteins. it is discussed in literature that this might impose stress on host metabolism during fermentation. gfp and its derivatives also require an aerobic environment with sufficient cellular oxygen to form the fluorophore
 <cit> . furthermore, detection of this fluorophore is completely inhibited in an oxygen-limited or anaerobic environment. the on-line measurement of gfp is feasible, but is not ideal in fermentation systems that yield active protein products, particularly those with a low molecular weight. the fmn-based blue light receptor evoglow® was developed as an alternative to gfp because it is smaller  and is not oxygen-dependent
 <cit> . although this is an improvement, even smaller fluorescent protein tags may be preferable because they would have a minimal impact on host strain metabolism allowing more resources to be committed to the production of the recombinant target protein.

one potential solution is the development of tags based on the auto-fluorescent properties of aromatic amino acids such as tryptophan , tyrosine  or phenylalanine 
 <cit> . here, delocalized π-electrons in the aromatic ring structures are excited to higher energy states when exposed to certain wavelengths of light, and emit fluorescence in the uv range when they return to their ground state. all three amino acids depict hydrophobic properties. tryptophan is the best choice for fluorescent tags because it has a relatively high quantum yield and a larger stokes shift than the other aromatic amino acids , with an excitation maximum at 280 nm and an emission maximum at 350 nm. its fluorescence is highly sensitive to the properties of the surrounding environment  and neighboring amino acids
 <cit> . therefore, the spectral characteristics of tryptophan can be enhanced in the presence of tyrosine
 <cit> . most proteins are statistically likely to contain tryptophan but the number and distribution of residues are variable
 <cit> . therefore, it should be possible to distinguish between untagged proteins and those carrying a specific tryptophan-based fusion tag . tags with tryptophan residues have previously been used to improve protein isolation by creating a hydrophobic affinity patch rather than a fluorescent label
 <cit> .

we designed a series of w-tags containing different numbers of tryptophan residues within a hairpin/β-sheet motif to determine whether they would act as unobtrusive fusion markers for the quantitative real-time measurement of product formation. the w-tag size corresponds to only 5-11% of the size of gfp and 12-27% of the blue light receptor, respectively. the tags were introduced into the pet expression vector
 <cit>  as in frame fusions with two single-chain antibody fragments:  as proof of concept, the anti-cd <dig> antibody ki-4
 <cit> , allowing functional analysis in the cd30-positive l540cy human hodgkin’s lymphoma cell line
 <cit> ; and  for additional measurements the anti-muci antibody m12
 <cit>  present on the human mamma carcinoma cell line mcf <dig> 

ki- <dig> has a tryptophan content of  <dig> % , challenging our detection system to distinguish between tagged and non-tagged proteins on the basis of fluorescence intensity  fusion proteins: w1-ki-4 =  <dig> %, w2-ki-4 =  <dig> %, w3-ki-4 =  <dig> %, w4-ki-4 =  <dig> %, w5-ki-4 =  <dig> %). therefore, we set out to determine the suitability of w-tags for non-invasive on-line monitoring using an adapted biolector filter device to detect biomass via scattered light and product formation via tryptophan fluorescence intensity. we also tested the binding activity of the ki- <dig> antibody carrying different types of w-tag by flow cytometry. we discuss the performance of our novel tags in comparison to conventional  and fmn-based fluorescent proteins. the newly designed w-tags present an alternative and very promising tagging method to gfp, its derivatives and the evoglow® blue light receptor.

RESULTS
w-tag design and vector assembly
we modeled short, optically active w-tags by integrating the auto-fluorescent amino acid tryptophan  into a naturally occurring β-sheet motif from the bacillus caldolyticus cold shock protein 
 <cit>  obtained by screening the protein data bank  for small motifs with the appropriate distribution of hydrophobic amino acids. bc-csp  is a small protein  comprising two β-sheets that form a β-barrel. the first β-sheet  consists of three β-strands connected by two loops, with a hydrophobic core and one tryptophan and two phenylalanine residues exposed on the surface. starting from the third residue, the sequence was systematically mutated in silico to increase the number of tryptophan residues. we used charmm  in discovery studio  to minimize the free energy of each model, and selected the models with the lowest free energy for each number of substituted tryptophan residues to construct the corresponding w-tags .

five different w-tags were developed, containing between one and five tryptophan residues  sequence using the pet-27b+ derived
 <cit>  pet-ki- <dig> expression vector already carrying a gene encoding the cd30-specific single-chain antibody fragment ki- <dig>  a pelb leader for export to the periplasm and a his6-tag for immunodetection and purification . the resulting vector series was named pet-wx-ki- <dig>  where x refers to the number of tryptophan residues in the w-tag. the w-tags were approximately three times larger than the his6-tag. table 
 <dig> gives an overview of the molecular sizes of the different w-tags and of the w-tagged fusion proteins. we used pet-ki- <dig> without w-tags as an expression control  for background auto-fluorescence, because the ki- <dig> sequence already contains six tryptophan residues. we also used the empty pet-27b+ as a true negative control . a homologous series of plasmids was created substituting the ki- <dig> sequence with that of the m <dig> 

protein expression
the five wx-ki- <dig> constructs plus controls were expressed in e.coli bl <dig> rosetta  <dig> , and expression was verified by testing the bacterial crude lysate by sodium dodecylsulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis  followed by immunoblot analysis against the his6-tag . we detected intense double bands ranging from  <dig> to 35 kda, confirming the over-expression of the different antibody fusion proteins with and without the pelb leader peptide. the double bands occurred due to the incomplete cleavage of the pelb leader when the fusion protein is transported from the cytoplasm to the periplasmic space. the identity of each protein band was confirmed by mass spectrometry .

the fusion proteins tagged with the w-tags w <dig> to w <dig> were found only in the cell pellet fraction not in the supernatant, whereas the untagged antibody  and the w <dig> fusion protein were partially secreted and found in both the supernatant and cell pellet .

fermentation and on-line fluorescence intensity measurements in mtps
we used an adapted biolector® device to measure biomass and tryptophan fluorescence simultaneously in induced and non-induced cultures over a period of 25 h . biomass was determined by measuring the scattered light signal at 620 nm
 <cit> , whereas tryptophan was excited at 280 nm and its emission was measured at 350 nm. the mean values for four parallel induced cultures and four parallel no induced cultures representing each wx-ki- <dig> fusion protein as well as the ec and nc constructs are shown in figure 
3a-e. the relative percentage deviation was less than 6% .

the scattered light signals in the non-induced cultures  increased during exponential growth phase and were comparable for all constructs up to  <dig>  h, when the glucose was almost depleted . these signals then declined until 10 h, when ramos  analysis confirmed that overflow metabolite acetate was fully metabolized . the scattered light signals increased from 10 h onwards in the ec and nc cultures and, after a short stable period, also in the other cultures  probably reflecting morphological changes of the bacteria
 <cit> . the tryptophan fluorescence curves of the non-induced cultures were similar to the corresponding scattered light curves . remarkably, the tryptophan fluorescence curves reached a plateau after  <dig>  h, confirming there is no further growth when the bacteria switch from consuming glucose to the overflow metabolite acetate. the similarity between the scattered light and tryptophan fluorescence curves shows that both signals provide data about biomass formation, which we discuss later in more detail.

for the non-inoculated wells, containing pure medium as a control, a slight increase for scattered light and tryptophan fluorescence signals was observed . no cell growth was detected towards the end of the experiment .

the induction of gene expression with 1 mm iptg in the early exponential phase  had a profound impact on the resulting growth curves. there was only a moderate increase in biomass formation  but the tryptophan fluorescence curves showed a rapid increase in fluorescence in all but the nc cultures . after 9-10 h, when the glucose was depleted, the tryptophan fluorescence intensity declined in the induced cultures.

in the non-induced cells, the correlation between increase of biomass  and tryptophan fluorescence intensity reflects the presence of tryptophan in the biomass . the tryptophan fluorescence is plotted as a function of the scattered light where all data points coincide more or less with one another. this means that all five w-tag variants behave in a similar manner in terms of fluorescence vs. scattered light intensity in no induced cultures. the correlation between tryptophan fluorescence and scattered light intensity can be described by a power function . consequently, the tryptophan fluorescence in the non-induced cultures is not dependent on the w-tag variant, but only on the scattered light intensity and, hence, the amount of cells.

in the induced wells, the overall tryptophan fluorescence signal is the sum of the fluorescence signal from the biomass and the fluorescence signal from the w-tagged fusion protein. the partial fluorescence signal from the tagged fusion protein can, therefore, be determined by subtracting the tryptophan fluorescence from the biomass  from the overall tryptophan fluorescence. if plotted against time  it is clear that the fusion protein begins to accumulate only after induction. the fluorescence intensity then increases until 10 h of cultivation and declines thereafter, perhaps reflecting protein degradation. the ec construct also generates tryptophan fluorescence because it contains six tryptophan residues, but the signal intensity is substantially lower than that of the w-tagged proteins. we observed that an increasing number of tryptophan residues in the w-tags does not perfectly result in a proportional increase in fluorescence intensity. the reason for this is not yet clear. it may be attributed to different amounts of total fusion protein produced, giving a signal not consistent with the numbers of tryptophan in the w-tags. this issue has to be quantified by future investigations.

two-dimensional fluorescence intensity scans of crude cell extracts
to ensure that the w-tagged proteins maintained their ability to fluoresce after extraction and solubilization, crude extracts from cells expressing the w1-ki- <dig>  w2-ki- <dig>  w3-ki- <dig> and ec constructs were analyzed by 2d fluorescence intensity scanning in a suitable mtp. tryptophan fluorescence was excited between 250-300 nm and the resulting emission was detected in a range from 300-400 nm, respectively in 2 nm steps. in the mtp wells containing crude extracts the fluorescence intensity correlated with the number of tryptophan residues in the tag, whereas no fluorescence was detected in empty wells or wells containing pure pbs . whereas the ec, w1-ki- <dig> and w2-ki- <dig> crude extracts generated maximum fluorescence values at comparable excitation/emission wavelengths , there was a shift to 296/330 nm for the w3-ki- <dig> crude extract.

flow cytometry analysis of antibody binding
the binding activity of the wx-ki- <dig> fusion proteins was tested by flow cytometry. we found that the w1-ki- <dig>  w2-ki- <dig> and the w3-ki- <dig> fusion proteins as well as the untagged ec antibody were able to bind cd30-positive l540cy cells  although the fusion protein variants showed a slightly lower statistical value for the mean fluorescence intensity  than the ec . this resulted in a slightly lower alexa fluor  <dig> signal and indicated that binding between the fusion proteins and cd <dig> is slightly weaker than the corresponding interaction involving untagged ki- <dig>  the slight decrease of fluorescence signal, illustrated by the mfi and geometrical mean , may result from the binding of the secondary antibody to the his6-tag of the fusion proteins. it is possible that the his6-tag is partially obscured by the w-tag or that the w-tag folding itself causes this change .

competitive flow cytometry analysis
an additional competitive flow cytometry analysis was performed in order to prove that the specificity of wx-ki- <dig> binding was not impaired by the presence of the w-tags . gradually higher concentrations of the bivalent monoclonal ki- <dig> full length antibody were incubated on l540cy cells simultaneously with the wx-ki- <dig> proteins to replace the monovalent single-chain fragment variable. we were able to show that the fluorescence intensity, indicating the specific binding ability of the ki- <dig> fusion protein, decreases with an increasing concentration of ki- <dig> full length antibody resulting in a lower fluorescence intensity and a curve shift to the left. binding of the ki- <dig> and w1-ki- <dig> is stronger, meaning higher concentrations of the ki- <dig> full length antibody were necessary to suppress single-chain binding, than the binding of the w2-ki- <dig> and w3-ki- <dig>  it can be concluded that the wx-ki- <dig> fusion proteins still possess active and specific binding ability. although, the binding specificity of the fusion proteins is not impaired, a higher number of tryptophan residues result in a decrease of the binding activity. this was shown by deletion of the ki- <dig> binding signal with a lower concentration of full length antibody for w <dig> and w <dig> .

extension of the w-tag concept to a second scfv antibody
in order to demonstrate that the w-tagging concept is generally applicable and not unique to the original model antibody the on-line measurement experiments were repeated using a second, unrelated antibody. we chose m <dig>  which is derived from a human monoclonal antibody that recognizes the antigen muc1
 <cit> . this second antibody was fused to the five different w-tags and was expressed in e.coli under the cultivation conditions described above for ki- <dig>  the fluorescence behavior of this antibody and the w-tags were similar to that of the original model .

discussion
the simultaneous evaluation of cell growth and target protein quantification without disturbing the actual cultivation process is a huge challenge when screening large numbers of cultures in parallel and producing recombinant proteins on a large-scale. fermentation in mtps
 <cit>  is a convenient method to validate the production efficiency of, for example, enzymes and pharmaceutically relevant target proteins. thus, the best performing clone can be identified by monitoring cultural growth using surrogate indicators such as optical density , oxygen transfer rate  or culture fluorescence
 <cit> . product quantification is usually achieved by sampling and off-line analysis e.g. by measuring enzymatic activity
 <cit>  or performing an enzyme linked immunosorbent assay . nevertheless, non-invasive on-line detection is preferable. this may be achieved by measuring intrinsic protein fluorescence or by expressing the target protein tagged with a fluorescent marker
 <cit> , e.g. a conventional fluorescent protein such as gfp
 <cit>  or a fmn-based proteins
 <cit> . major drawbacks of gfp and its derivatives are the large size, which may increase metabolic stress, inhibit protein folding or interfere with protein secretion into the supernatant, the dependence on a fully aerobic environment and the delay between expression and fluorescence detection
 <cit> . fmn-binding proteins are approximately half the size of gfp and are not oxygen dependent, but they may still cause metabolic stress and interfere with the folding of small target proteins.

in contrast, the short-chained w-tags we developed are comparatively small . tryptophan has the ability of auto-fluorescence and does not need oxygen to mature. therefore we presume a functionality of the w-tags even under oxygen-limited conditions. that means they are suitable for the multiplex parallel on-line analysis of cultivated cells producing fusion proteins without any of the disadvantages caused by larger tags. we developed energetically ideal tags in silico and then inserted the corresponding sequences inflame with the coding sequence for the ki- <dig>  we used a tightly regulated inducible pet expression system
 <cit>  so that we could compare non-induced cultures lacking the recombinant protein production to cultures expressing different w-tagged forms of the same recombinant antibody. the induced cultures showed a strong over-expression of the wx-ki- <dig> fusion proteins where the different tags could be distinguished according to the intensity of the fluorescence signal compared to the untagged protein. the calculated product fluorescence intensity increases with the number of tryptophan residues from ec over w <dig> to w <dig>  however, w <dig> and w <dig> do not follow this trend. even though they comprise a higher number of tryptophan residues they had slightly weaker fluorescence intensity than w <dig>  due to the high hydrophobicity from the accumulated tryptophan residues, the fusion proteins might preferentially interact with cell membranes, which may result in a partial quenching of fluorescence intensity. rather than hydrophobicity the formation of exciplexes presents another probable explanation. exciplexes are photo induced electron-transfer reactions, which occur during bimolecular encounter of an excited molecule and a quencher
 <cit> . the dense packing of tryptophan residues in the w4- and w5-tag as well as the increasing target product concentration towards the end of the fermentation may support exciplex formation. quenching and, therefore, decreasing fluorescence signal intensity may be a consequence of that effect.

during mtp fermentation, we monitored slightly increased scattered light and tryptophan fluorescence signals, even though no bacterial growth was detected. the mtps were sealed with a gas permeable membrane resulting in some degree of evaporation. due to the evaporation the medium components became more concentrated and, therefore, the signals  increased.

the binding activity of ki- <dig> 
 <cit>  was not affected by the presence of the w-tags, as we showed that all the different w-tagged versions of the ki- <dig> were able to bind the l540cy cell line expressing the cognate antigen. identical results for the on-line analysis in mtps were obtained with a second, unrelated antibody, demonstrating that the w-tagging concept is generally applicable.

our evaluation of the w-tags revealed that fusion proteins were not secreted into the medium, making them difficult to retrieve and quantify. this was probably caused by the hydrophobicity of the tryptophan residues and their placement on the outer shell of the protein loop. the w-tagged fusion proteins with four and five tryptophan residues  could not be detached from the bacterial pellet and were, therefore, not analyzed by either flow cytometry or 2d-fluorescence intensity scanning. however, protein extraction with tes buffer containing edta resulted in the partial release of proteins tagged with w <dig>  w <dig> and w <dig> from the cell pellet. as a result, whereas more tryptophan residues generated a stronger tryptophan fluorescence signal, they also made it more difficult to concentrate the tagged protein in the cell lysate.

purification of the tagged recombinant proteins by immobilized metal ion chromatography  was unsuccessful, probably indicating that the his6-tag was obscured by the w-tag  or that edta in the lysis buffer could not be removed from the protein solution by desalting. edta can form complexes with co2+ ions and elute them from the imac resin, thus preventing the capture of his6-tagged proteins. if steric hindrance is preventing protein recovery by imac, then potential solutions include switching the order of the tags, separating them with an intervening linker, or appending them to different termini. if the presence of edta is preventing sufficient recovery, then a potential solution would be to replace the his6-tag-with a flag epitope
 <cit> . this would also prevent edta disrupting downstream purification strategies involving the use of ni-nta or talon columns. the use of stronger lysis buffers with different detergents might also improve the recovery of purified target protein. bearing in mind that the w-tags described in this article are prototypes, it is also possible that their performance could be improved by additional structural modifications. although, our w-tags were designed for on-line product detection, the hydrophobicity of tryptophan could also be exploited as a strategy to purify target fusion proteins using an aqueous two-phase system
 <cit> .

the excitation and emission properties of tryptophan are strongly influenced by other compounds in the solution
 <cit> . we used an excitation of 280 nm for the on-line monitoring and recorded fluorescence emission at 350 nm, but these wavelengths did not map onto the maximum tryptophan fluorescence 2d-analysis in crude extracts . instead, maxima were observed at 292 nm  and 338 nm . but we have to consider that the surrounding solution during the cultivation and the off-line measurement of the 2d-analysis is not the same in relation to e.g. ionic strength and media composition. differences in the optimal excitation and emission wavelengths does not in principle affect the value of the data, and should be determined on a case-by-case basis for individual fusion proteins, media compositions, ph values and other parameters.

statistically, every cell contains proteins that include tryptophan residues, so the fluorescence signal produced by induced cultures expressing w-tagged recombinant proteins represents a mixture of the product signal and the biomass signal. it is, therefore, necessary to cultivate induced and non-induced cells in parallel to determine the biomass signal and subtract that from the total fluorescence to calculate the signal for the tagged recombinant protein . this strategy would nominally double the number of assays required and, thus, the number of wells used in mtps. however, as we have shown, the correlation between fluorescence intensity and scattered light intensity for the non-induced cultures was the same for all fusion protein variants. therefore, it should be sufficient to cultivate just one of the variants as a non-induced control to determine biomass fluorescence. the fluorescence intensity of each fusion protein is also substantially greater than that of the corresponding untagged target protein , even when that protein contains multiple tryptophan residues
 <cit> . due to the advantages of the w-tags, their high fluorescence intensity, future research should focus on optimizing the presented w-tags for being secreted or for purification application. ways to release the w-tags from the bacterial pellet still has to be improved.

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, our novel w-tags are ideal for the non-invasive monitoring of recombinant protein accumulation, lacking the main drawbacks of conventional fluorescent proteins such as gfp or fmn-based proteins such as evoglow®. the low-molecular-weight w-tags can be used to monitor online protein production. the binding specificity of our recombinant fusion protein is not affected. however, the binding activity of the recombinant protein fused to one of the w-tags decreases slightly with increasing number of tryptophan residues in the w-tag. w-tags, therefore, represent a valuable generally applicable alternative to gfp and its derivatives for the rapid on-line qualitative measurement of target recombinant proteins.

