BACKGROUND
in french guiana , about  <dig> ×  <dig> eggs in more than  <dig> turtle nests are laid every year over a  <dig>  km stretch of beach in the awala-yalimapo villages. the nesting season of the leatherback turtle  takes place from march to july, peaking in may. the females come ashore at night and dig a nest 60– <dig> cm deep in the sand, at the boundary of the high tide mark and vegetation limit. each nest contains about 80– <dig> eggs that hatch two months later. this large amount of nutrients and energy is exploited by vertebrates  and invertebrates . mole crickets, have been observed to pierce a hole in the turtle eggs, causing damage to an average of 18%  of yolked eggs in the nests  <cit> . on a nesting beach in florida, bouchard and bjorndal  <cit>  estimated that only 25% of the organic matter introduced into nests by loggerhead turtles returned to the ocean as hatchling, and 29–40% of all nutrients were available to decomposers. such studies only quantitatively assess egg predation by carnivores is . assessing the importance of the omnivores is not as easy, particularly when direct observations and analyzes of fecal pellets give limited information . assigning a diet at the species or population level leads to simplifications and ignores individual variations that exist in every population  <cit> . in such a view, a population could be composed of individuals of different ages, each of which may prefer and perform better on a particular subset of the resources  <cit> .

the mole cricket scapteriscus didactylus is an under ground insect, active at night. as such, its feeding behavior is difficult to investigate, a task not made any easier by the fact that very few identifiable remains are found in the digestive tract. s. didactylus is an introduced species, native of south america, to the caribbean islands and the south coast of australia. it lives inland and causes damages to crops . the life cycle of s. didactylus is likely to have two overlapping generations per year. juveniles hatch in march and april become adults in june and july. this first generation develops during the nesting season of the turtles. the second generation develops from september to october, becoming adults in january and february  <cit> . overlapping generations have been also observed in the amazon basin for s. didactylus and neocurtilla hexadactyla but more observations are needed  <cit> . the biology of s. didactylus has been studied in relation to the damages inflicted on golf lawns and the species was initially described as being mainly herbivorous, feeding on leaves and roots . however, analysis of the gut content of individuals collected on beaches of the dominican republic, indicate that this species may be carnivorous  <cit> . as such, the diet of s. didactylus appears to be omnivorous at the species level. a previous study  <cit>  could not determine if the mole crickets ate a significant amount of the turtle eggs. in order to quantify the mole cricket's contribution to the nitrogen and carbon cycles of the beach, we analyzed the cuticle of adults and juveniles for enrichment in the stable carbon and nitrogen isotopes.

stable isotopic signatures in animal tissues can be used to study food webs , especially to distinguish between terrestrial and marine nitrogen sources . leatherback turtles feed upon jellyfish, salps and other gelatinous organisms  <cit> . studying the isotopic signatures of three marine turtles, godley et al.  <cit>  showed that the leatherback turtle occupies an intermediate level in the marine trophic web between the herbivorous green turtle  and the carnivorous loggerhead turtle . hence isotopic enrichment of the turtle egg proteins exhibited high δ15n; values 6‰ and 12‰ were observed for the eggs of green and loggerhead turtles respectively  <cit> . we looked for such a signature in the cuticle of the mole crickets, and compared these to the signature values measured in the cuticle of mole crickets living inland. populations of s. didactylus were discovered in the cooking area of the village habitations. fishermen houses are a few hundred meters back from the beach and mole crickets concentrate in areas where inhabitants cook and leave food scraps.

the cuticle of insects has a fast turnover with tissue being replaced at each moult. mole crickets pass through  <dig> or  <dig> instars before the imaginal moult. at each moult, the old cuticle is digested and some of the materials present in the cuticle are conserved. chitin is rebuilt in long chains of a polysaccharide made up largely of n-acetyleglucosamine. it is associated with protein to form a glycoprotein metabolized during the preceding instar. fifteen to twenty days after the imaginal moult, the cuticle does not grow anymore  <cit> . isotopic composition of the cuticle of an adult has the potential to provide an understanding of what the insect consumed during its juvenile stages irrespective of its diet in adulthood.

RESULTS
 stable isotopic content  of the potential food resources
isotope signatures of the potential foods eaten by the mole crickets are presented in table  <dig>  on the beach, the dicotyledons ipomoeae spp. are the dominant plants which stay green all the year. at the top of the beach, grasses and sedges are wilted from august and the preceding five months of the dry season. the range of the δ15n values in herbaceous roots  is much lower than the mean value of leatherback eggs . dicotyledon roots were found to be less enriched in 13c  than grass roots . albumin of turtle eggs showed a higher enrichment in 13c  than the yolk .

mole crickets living in the habitation garbage feed on rice and cassava, both of which have low nitrogen content; as a consequence δ15n values for cassava were undetectable . at the habitations, enrichment in 15n of the mole cricket is mainly due to chicken meat  and fish scraps .

 mean isotopic enrichment between sampling locations
the mean stable isotopic ratio measurements in the cuticle are interpreted as isotopic signatures of the dietary history of the insect during the previous stages of development, and are compared between the two sample locations. at the habitation sites the mole crickets live in the cooking areas. their diet is dependent on the foodstuffs cooked during the year. we observed a narrow range of variation of the isotopic values  and analysis of the variance on δ15n and δ13c showed no significant difference in the ratio between juveniles and adults .

in the beach sample, carbon and nitrogen isotopic ratio have a wider range. standard deviations in the samples increased between juveniles and adults . a significant difference for δ15n and δ13c was found between the different developmental stages .

a welch's t-test  conducted on the data from animals sampled on the beach  showed that the δ13c mean ratio was significantly higher for adults than for juveniles iir + iiir  t =  <dig> ; p <  <dig> ; dl =  <dig> . furthermore, comparing adults from the beach and from habitations, the δ13c mean ratio was also significantly higher  t =  <dig> ; p <  <dig> ; dl =  <dig> . these results, combined with the high variability of the data, could reflect a change in the diet of the older larvae, which settled in the beach  before they became adults .

 temporal variations of the isotopic ratios
to understand the isotopic signature shift at the end of the development, adult data were re-analyzed taking into account the date of capture. model selection is shown on annex. models with constant δ15n and δ13c values according to julian date are selected for individuals caught at the habitation site, whereas second order polynomial models are selected for individuals caught on the beach . the selected model for standard deviation  is very different between individuals caught at the habitations  and individuals caught on beach . a single model for both individuals caught on the beach and near habitation is strongly rejected compared to a specific model for each location .

when the turtle eggs are present on the beach , the δ13c and δ15n signatures of the crickets are much more variable than outside the nesting season . after which it reaches the same value as for mole crickets sampled from the habitations, for which no temporal variation is detected .

the total contribution of leatherback turtle nests to the beach ecosystem was measured as kg of organic matter per month. this biomass is significantly correlated with the δ13c signature of mole crickets caught in the beach  but not with the δ13c signature of mole crickets from habitations . δ15n signatures for both habitation and beach sites are not significantly correlated with the mass of organic matter from marine origin deposited on the beach by marine turtles .

discussion
stable isotope studies, involving insects are generally investigated using the whole body or muscles  <cit> . muscle tissue has a slow turnover, which records long-term dietary differences and reflects the entire feeding history of an animal  <cit> . using this method, isotopic ratios are the result of a combination of the different food sources ingested during the entire life. methods have recently been developed to delimit the range of possible proportion of various food items in an individual  <cit> . however, it is always necessary to have isotopic values for the range of all possible food items; a fact lacking in the current study because mole crickets appear to be opportunistic omnivores. moreover, limited information is available about the fractionation processes responsible for the isotopic enrichment through metabolic pathways  <cit> . a difficulty for evaluating the incorporation of resources from mixed diets is that the isotopic signature may not exactly correspond to the signature of the food resource . this lack of information impairs attempts to evaluate the absolute position of consumers in the food webs  <cit> .

deniro and epstein  <cit>  tested experimentally the isotopic enrichment in the cuticle of the grasshopper melanoplus sp.. they did not obtain the  <dig> ‰ expected increase of δ15n that is generally observed between two trophic levels, but rather observed a depletion. as a consequence, it seems that stable isotopic ratios in chitin are no longer used as a method to assess the position of an insect in a food web. the cuticle, however, is an inert tissue that reflects relative dietary variations during the growth period, and it retains this information in a chronological manner at each molt  <cit> . hence our focus in this study was the analysis of the isotopic ratio variability within- and between age groups of the two study sites.

at the habitation site, the homogeneous carbon and nitrogen signals  obtained for the different mole cricket stages are interpreted as the isotopic signature of a mixed diet on a limited range of foods. the difference is striking when compared to the results obtained from mole crickets collected at the beach. the standard deviations in this sample suggest that the individual diets are heterogeneous.

the observed shift toward isotopic ratios of enriched marine resources is consistent with previous studies  <cit>  which showed that stable-carbon isotope ratio can be enhanced by about 7‰. the positive correlation observed between δ <dig> n ratios and the amount of organic matter in the beach confirms that mole crickets exploit this food resource during the nesting season. inversely at the habitation site, the correlation test rejected the hypothesis of an arrival of mole crickets adults from the beach that would have fed on turtle eggs. carbon and nitrogen stable isotopes of the cuticle appear in this context as markers of distinct feeding locations and it would allow to test the source-sink population hypothesis of a cyclic colonization in ephemeral habitats  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
from the wide range of isotopic signatures observed at the awala-yalimapo beach, it can be concluded that some mole crickets, but not all of them, feed on turtle eggs. the changes observed in the isotopic signatures resulted in the increasing mobility of the older mole crickets  <cit> . as s. didactylus increases in age it digs deeper into the soil and is more liable to encounter turtle eggs. werner et al.  <cit>  concluded that the consumption of a relatively limited fraction of the available resources was a means of feeding efficiency, i.e. nitrogen rich food for reproductive investment. generalist insects are able to balance their food supply by ingestion of food materials complementing each other  <cit> . from these results it cannot be concluded that the individuals settled in the beach are specialist feeders that evolved adaptations to use marine resources. as such, they do not constitute a sub-population exploiting a particular ecosystem.

