BACKGROUND
currently, there are two options available with respect to the creation of recombinant plasmids for gene regulation analysis. these are ligation-dependent and ligation-independent cloning . ldc, which includes ta cloning and heterostagger cloning, makes use of restriction enzyme digestion and dna ligation to produce the desired recombinants. the disadvantages of ldc are that it is time-consuming and labor-intensive, and that the availability of restriction sites is a rate-limiting step, especially for long sequences of interest. in addition, the cloning efficiency of ldc varies. it is largely dependent on the efficacy of restriction cutting and dna ligation. ldc can also introduce undesired operational sequences such as restriction sites at the junction of functional modules  <cit> . to circumvent these limitations, several types of lic methods were developed. uracil dna glycosylase  selectively degrades dump residues at the termini of pcr products, which has been incorporated into primers in advance, and generates 3’ overhangs. the processed products can be directionally cloned by annealing with vectors that were complementary to these 3’ overhangs, without in vitro ligation  <cit> . recombinase-dependent cloning utilizes recombinase as the cloning enzyme to catalyze the fusion of the insert into the target vector with homologous ends, but it is generally provided as proprietary components of commercial kits, which can be costly  <cit> . pcr-mediated cloning methods usually rely on so-called megaprimer to produce the desired hybrid sequences, but the efficiency of mega-extension is frequently variable, requiring significant labor input to establish optimal conditions  <cit> . a rapid and reliable method of cloning target dna is keenly desired.

in gene functional studies and transgene biology, there has been an increasing need to leave no any heterogenous nucleotides within expression plasmids  <cit> . typically, common cloning methods will result in inclusion of extra sequences like restriction endonuclease sites or plasmid polylinker sequences, which may be as much as one hundred nucleotides in length. these sequences can change the spacing between dna elements, which can have undesirable effects on the structure and activity of fusion protein and interfere with accurate analysis. they must be found to be free of translational start or stop sites. in certain cases, they must be examined to ensure the absence of unwanted functional elements. these limitations will compromise the applications of recombinant plasmids that contain extraneous residues  <cit> . a seamless cloning method that would guarantee that only intact dna sequences have been manipulated and assembled is highly desired.

in this paper, we outline a rapid and reliable dna cloning approach, combining asymmetric single-tube bridge pcr with intramolecular homologous recombination in bacteria to create plasmids without any extraneous nucleotides. we first conducted a proof-of-concept study by using a double-resistance reporter system to prove that this novel method yielded expected recombinants with 100% efficiency and fidelity. effects of homology and insert length upon its cloning efficiency were then investigated. next, we used this method to clone the regulatory elements of the porcine myostatin gene  into luciferase reporters and assessed their expressivity in cultured mammalian cells. finally we showed that the identified porcine mstn regulatory elements could coordinately drive the expression of egfp when organized as an expression cassette. this method was found to be reliable, efficient and site-specific. we believe that it will be widely applicable in dna engineering and gene functional studies.

RESULTS
validation of abi-rec through double-resistance reporter assay
in a systematic study of pig muscle-specific gene regulatory domains, we planned to clone several dna sequences for an assessment of transcriptional activity. however, the unavailability of restriction endonuclease sites rendered the cloning of these long sequences too slow by common ligase-dependent methods. the site selection, digestion and ligation processes consumed too much time and labor. we then decided to develop a novel cloning method independent of restriction site and ligase. inspired by the principle of quickchange site-directed mutagenesis , we propose that a long sequence of interest could be inserted into a specific site of target plasmid in a ligase-independent manner. the concept is shown in figure  <dig>  in the first step, a bridge pcr is performed to produce a long fragment fusing the insert of choice with the desired vector. three primers are required for a successful bridge pcr . in the primary reaction, pf and pr primers are used to amplify the insert of choice. in the secondary reaction, the resulting insert of choice would anneal with the homologous sequence in the target plasmid for extension to generate the long fused fragment. the ternary process proceeds with pf and p1r primers to amplify the large fragment in an exponential manner. the linear fusion fragment bears homologous ends at 5′ and 3′ ends. second, the pcr products are digested by dpni to degrade methylated circular plasmids. thirdly, the digested products are transformed into e.coli to generate the circular fusion plasmid. the identities of these recombinants can be verified by sequencing.

we designed a double-resistance reporter assay as a proof-of-principle experiment by inserting the kanr cassette of pires2-egfp into an ampicillin-resistant puc <dig> plasmid. as illustrated in figure 2a, when the kanr cassette was fused with puc <dig>  the resulting vector was resistant to both kanamycin and ampicillin. we attempted to obtain the fused sequence in one turnaround of a single-tube pcr reaction. we first began by titrating the concentration of pr primer from 20 μm to  <dig>  μm due to the following considerations:  to control the amount of insert in an suitable level to anneal with puc <dig> and generate linear sequences and  to permit kod plus polymerase to focus on amplifying the linear fragment in an exponential manner. it was found that an asymmetric pcr with pr primer from 2 μm to  <dig>  μm would produce readily detectable quantities of linear sequence . in comparison, pcr reactions out of this range, such as 5 μm to 20 μm of primer pr produced nearly undetectable amounts of products. a two-tube pcr reaction without p1r primer was conducted in parallel and yielded no products . we also compared the pcr efficiency by varying the annealing temperature , ratios of template, and number of cycles , but no improvements in performance were observed other than those described above .

next, we introduced these pcr products into competent e.coli cells to assess their recombination capacity. as shown in figure 2c, both unpurified and purified asymmetric pcr products yielded double resistant colonies in  lb plates. in comparison, the two-tube pcr reaction products and the mixture of insert and puc <dig>  did not generate recombinants in  plates.  plates transformed with either pires2-egfp or puc <dig> yielded no viable colonies, ruling out the possibility of genomic integration of the kanr cassette into the e.coli genome.

two lines of evidence proved the identity of double-resistant recombinants. first, an artificial apai restriction site absent from pires2-egfp and puc <dig> was introduced into pf primer. double digestion of pires2-egfp, puc <dig> and  plasmid by apai and sali revealed that the  <dig>  kb kanr cassette was released from the recombinant . second, sequencing demonstrated that the insert had been fused into the pre-selected site in puc <dig> as demarcated by the flanking apai and sali sites . this was found to be the case for all sequenced single colonies , indicating a 100% recombination efficiency and total fidelity.

by using a double resistance reporter assay and analyzing the inherent properties of single-tube pcr reaction, we have proven the concept of our novel method and consequently refer to this new form of dna engineering as abi-rec cloning for asymmetric bridge pcr and intramolecular homologous recombination.

effects of homology and insert length on the efficiency of abi-rec cloning
next we sought to evaluate the cloning efficiency of abi-rec by examining two parameters: homology and insert length. the homologous end of primer p1r was altered by decreasing the length from 45mer to 15mer. asymmetric bridge pcr showed that the amplification efficiency reached a peak around  <dig> or 25mer. both longer and shorter primers were found to be less efficient . the colony formation capacity of equal volumes of these products was consistent with the pcr reaction efficiency , implying a direct link between pcr output and colony formation. this test also demonstrated that p1r oligos of up to  <dig> mer in length are optimal for efficient pcr reaction and a high gene fusion ratio.

we then assessed cloning efficiency by fusing selected inserts varying in size from  <dig>  kb to 4 kb. a  <dig> mer p1r primer was used in all reactions. the asymmetric bridge pcr reaction revealed a varied pcr output . transformation of these pcr products yielded declining number of recombinant colonies with respect to the insert length . although long inserts were more difficult to fuse with the target plasmid, our data demonstrated that this method is applicable to the cloning of dna sequences up to 4 kb in size. sequencing  and restriction digestion revealed that all these recombinants harbored the expected inserts at the pre-selected sites .

in summary, a  <dig> mer length of homology, and a shorter insert size produced the highest yield of pcr products from the asymmetric bridge pcr reaction, and consequently, the highest yield of recombinant colonies.

construction and expression of porcine myostatin reporters by abi-rec
to determine whether abi-rec could be used to clone endogenous dna sequences intact rather than dna stretches from plasmids, we next applied it to direct cloning from a complex mammalian genome. the pig myostatin  gene was chosen because it has been proven to be a muscle growth inhibitor in mice, cows, sheep and humans  <cit> . mstn knockout mice are already known to be viable and fertile  <cit> . in this regard, mstn locus has become a safe harbor for transgene expression in animals. we believe that it would be particularly useful to identify porcine mstn transcriptional regulation elements in order to introduce site-specific modification at this locus for stable transgene expression.

in line with computational analysis of the pig mstn gene sequence , we designed primers to fuse its promoter  and terminator  into luciferase reporters using abi-rec. we first determined whether asymmetric bridge pcr would work for non-plasmid dna templates and amplify long fused sequences. as shown in figure 4b, the asymmetric pcr reaction robustly produced the expected fused sequences , especially at lower pr primer concentrations. we also explored different reaction parameters, such as the ratio of plasmid to genomic dna and the number of cycles, but no improvements in performance were observed . this was consistent with findings observed in the double resistance reporter assay. these data further demonstrated asymmetric primer concentrations in the bridge pcr to be a rate-limiting step for successful production of fused sequences.

next, we investigated the time required for dpni digestion and its role in cloning efficiency. different from the double-resistance system, a single selectable marker is used in most cases. therefore, removal of circular plasmid was critical to diminish background. an aliquot of selected reaction products was treated with dpni for  <dig> or  <dig> hours and transformed into competent dh5α cells. as outlined in table  <dig>  dpni treatment with  <dig> and  <dig> hours had yielded sufficient recombinants carrying inserts of choice with nearly 100% efficiency. the sequencing of randomly selected colonies revealed the insertion at pre-defined sites . single restriction nuclease treatment was carried out to confirm the sequencing result. bglii was used to digest promoter recombinants because of one natural bglii site in the cloned sequences and another in pgl3-basic plasmid. bglii digestion released fragments of expected sizes . xbai was used to digest terminator reporter and released a  <dig>  kb fragment as anticipated . these evidences indicated porcine mstn gene regulatory elements had been successfully cloned into luciferase reporters by abi-rec. these constructs were named pgl3-mstn- <dig>  kb, pgl3-mstn- <dig>  kb, pgl3-mstn-3′utr. the sv <dig> polya signal sequence in pgl3-promoter was replaced by the  <dig>  kb terminator sequence, indicating that concerted dna insertion and deletion  can be achieved in a single turnaround of abi-rec cloning.

third, the activity of these reporters was assessed in mouse myoblast c2c <dig> cell line because mstn is dominantly expressed in muscle tissues of animals  <cit> . equal molar quantities of these plasmids were transfected into c2c <dig> cells and luciferase activity was measured at selected time points. c2c <dig> differentiation status was induced with 2% horse serum for 5 days. as shown in figure 4d <dig>  kb and  <dig>  kb mstn promoters had similar activity in both proliferation and differentiation conditions, but it was lower in proliferation than that in differentiation. mstn terminator had similar activity in both conditions. this experiment indicated that the cloned porcine mstn gene regulatory elements are functionally active in a mammalian cellular context. these data also imply that the porcine mstn gene expression is likely to be tightly regulated by its promoter in differentiated muscle cells. this needs to be further investigated by quantifying nascent mstn mrna at endogenous sites.

fourth, we examined the expressivity of porcine mstn transcriptional unit by constructing a promoter-terminator expression cassette. the mstn promoter, egfp coding sequence, mstn terminator were assembled using abi-rec . the expression cassette plasmid was named puc19-5egfp <dig> and empty expression cassette plasmid named puc19-5mstn <dig>  equal molar quantities of these plasmids were transfected into c2c <dig> cells and green fluorescence was captured by leica microscope. puc19-5egfp <dig> was able to express egfp, in comparison to empty plasmid and a positive control pires2-egfp. quantitation of egfp fluorescence intensity by imagej indicated the expression level of pig mstn cassette  to be comparable to that of the constitutive cassette  . we concluded that the identified porcine mstn gene regulatory elements functioned in synergy to drive the expression of gene of interest.

discussion
the reliable and rapid native dna cloning strategy described here is based on an asymmetric single-tube bridge pcr reaction and intramolecular homologous recombination in e.coli. asymmetric pcr has two major advantages. the first is the introduction of the outermost oligo , which anneals to the end of the linear fragment and so produces large amounts of fused sequence. this manipulation results in an accurate and highly efficient gene fusion process that enables rapid cloning free of unwanted bases. this process can be used for a wide variety of dna molecules than previously reported pcr-based gene cloning approaches  <cit> . the second advantage is that the asymmetric reaction ensures that the insert is amplified in a limited amounts while dna polymerase generates long fused products. the concentration of pr primer was found to be critical to the success of pcr output and colony formation capacity. this was also shown during the cloning of porcine mstn sequences. this addresses the key question of how to enhance the efficiency in a pcr-based cloning method. in addition, we compared abi-rec with a two-step pcr-based cloning protocol described previously  <cit> . although it remains unknown why we did not find any singe colonies in the two-step protocol, our work demonstrated that abi-rec is powerful in term of cloning efficiency .

the double resistance reporter assay is a good way to prove the underlying principles of abi-rec. this model enabled us to investigate the inherent properties of abi-rec, including the effects of homology and insert length. in this study, we found 20-25 bp homologous arms to be sufficient to produce long fused sequences in pcr and to provoke efficient recombination in bacteria. these short homologous arms allows abi-rec to be classified as an oligonucleotide-based strategy. in this way, it is cost-effective. we extended the insert length from  <dig>  kb to 4 kb, allowing this process to cover a wide range of genes of interest in molecular biology. we predict that longer dna sequences can be cloned by abi-rec, in the assumption that the bridge pcr reaction will become optimized with either potent dna polymerase or a more robust buffering system. this will definitely be investigated in future studies.

although the double resistance reporter assay is an ideal proof-of-principle model, it is not very versatile in gene engineering. this is largely because, in many cases, only a single resistance marker is present. this makes it difficult to apply abi-rec to single-marker cloning systems. in other words, it is important to remove the original circular plasmid to diminish background. dpni is the method of choice for this process because it is capable of cleaving the methylated nucleotides present in plasmid  <cit> . we studied the association between time required for dpni digestion and the ratio of positive colonies. we found that with increasing dpni digestion time, the positive rate shifted from 93% to 100%. this indicates that abi-rec is nearly zero-background under single-marker conditions with suitable dpni treatment. a previous study introduced a new logic gene engineering method based on intermolecular  homologous recombination in bacteria, but this study failed to address the background of methylated circular plasmids in the single marker system  <cit> . another previous study also attempted to enhance mutation efficiency by adding limited amounts of circular plasmid in pcr reaction  <cit> . abi-rec outperforms these two methods in that removal of circular plasmid and intramolecular recombination reduce the time required for single marker cloning experiments. given the ultra-high efficiency of abi-rec, sequencing is required on a very limited number of clones to check for the presence of junction sites. please note that a dam + e.coli strain like dh5α is required for successful abi-rec in order to discriminate against methylated and hemimethylated parental plasmids.

the two major findings presented in this work will have practical implications for genetic engineering and transgenic biology. first, abi-rec described here will be particularly favorable to gene functional studies. it has been intensively documented that widely used ligation-dependent cloning methods introduce unwanted bases into target region and that these bases can cause the inclusion of extraneous amino acids or unexpected regulatory sequences  <cit> . these unwanted bases can compromise the function of protein of interest or even bring misleading results. abi-rec takes advantage of homologous recombination in bacteria so that native sequences can be fused into pre-selected sites in target plasmid without the involvement of any heterologous nucleotides. this method is free of unwanted base and is totally independent of availability of restriction sites and thus highly desirable to dna engineering and protein function analysis. moreover, abi-rec is likely to be a high-throughput method because of the compatibility of its primer design. presumably, a series of porcine mstn gene regulatory elements could be cloned just by changing the site of p <dig> sequence, without any other modifications upon the whole procedures. in addition, abi-rec works independent of the availability of restriction sites or even the knowledge of the entire sequence of chosen dna molecules. this makes it amenable to the construction of dna library. for example, the pf and pr primers could be used as adaptors to link to target dna or cdna, and then the linked molecules could be fused into recipient plasmids. therefore, the experimental design could be adapted to automated high-throughput applications favoring mass generation and large-scale screening of mutants. this will greatly reduce the time, difficulty and labor required to create recombinant plasmids.

second, the porcine mstn expression cassette is of highly importance to site-specific modification in transgenic animals. in this work, the porcine mstn expression cassette was proven to work in a synergistic manner. this cassette could be used to express gene of interest as commonly used gene expression unit. genes of interest could be introduced into the native porcine mstn locus for in situ expression through gene targeting or zfn technology  <cit> . taking into account the research conducted in mstn knockout mice  <cit> , one can conclude that mstn locus is a safe harbor for genome modification. the present study has identified the docking site for transgene integration. this will be of significance to transgenesis in pigs. given the high conservation of mstn across mammals, the gene regulatory elements identified here will also be helpful to the study of other types of transgenic livestocks, such as cattle and sheep. the application of this locus in transgenic large animals is now underway.

CONCLUSIONS
we have developed a novel dna cloning method named abi-rec. it mainly featured a 3-primer asymmetric pcr and intramolecular homologous recombination. this new method eliminated the use of restriction site and ligation, excluding operational nucleotides. it does not involve any pcr purification, gel excision and expensive cloning kits. the flexible and formulated primer design allows directional and site-specific positioning of insert into any pre-selected location in any desired plasmid. using a double-resistance reporter assay and pig mstn gene regulatory element identification, we have demonstrated its reliability, reproducibility and high efficiency. we anticipate that abi-rec will be applicable to dna engineering and gene functional analysis.

