BACKGROUND
genomic studies mostly provide one-dimensional information encoded in dna, but we cannot ignore the fact that in eukaryotic organisms, dna is packaged into chromatin structure, where dna folds to a global compaction of at least  <dig>  <cit> . genome homeostatic histone concentration ensures most of dna to be wrapped into nucleosomes   <cit> , which are structural units of 145- <dig> base pairs  long, where the interaction with regulatory proteins is severely handicapped. nucleosomes are separated from each other by short linkers  where site-specific recognition by proteins is easier. therefore, dna compaction has clear functional implications, since it modulates the accessibility of genomic regions to regulatory proteins. indeed, a close relationship was established between nucleosome positioning and important regulatory signals  <cit> , such as proximal promoters  <cit>  and splicing sites  <cit> . further evidence on the connection between three-dimensional chromatin structure and function was obtained from genome-wide analysis of chromatin dnase i degradation profiles, which revealed a cross-link between dnase i hypersensitive sites and regulatory regions  <cit> .

dna underlying sequence has long been considered to be an important contributor to nucleosome assembly  <cit> . crystal structures of nucleosome core particles revealed a lack of direct readout mechanisms between histones and dna bases   <cit>  which led to the postulate that histone-dna direct interactions are not the major determinant of nucleosome positioning  <cit> . accordingly, the dna relative affinities for nucleosome formation   <cit>  should be based on an indirect readout mechanism, where the ability of a given dna sequence to be deformed would account for the nucleosome assembly preferences  <cit> . nevertheless, to which extent nucleosome positioning in vivo is really dictated by the dna sequence is still an issue of strong discussion  <cit> .

our group and others have provided indirect evidence highlighting the connection between dna physical properties and chromatin organization  <cit> . in particular, we have previously reported theoretical studies showing that human promoters display very unusual stiffness properties  <cit> . these might affect dna binding of regulatory proteins, either directly by hampering or favoring complex formation, or indirectly through the modulation of the chromatin structure and hence the dna accessibility  <cit> . here, we have pursued this hypothesis by a genome-wide analysis of conformational properties across yeast naked dna using micrococcal nuclease  degradation profiles as an experimental descriptor. we were able to characterize in detail, mnase preferences for naked dna, extending fractional information derived from small-scale experiments. these preferences  correlate with ab initio physical descriptors derived from molecular dynamics  simulations of short dna oligonucleotides  <cit> . this finding confirms that mnase can signal genomic regions with unusual physical properties  <cit> . very interestingly, mnase-hypersensitive sites in naked dna are mainly located around tss and tts, which supports experimentally our suggestion that those regulatory regions are signaled by physical properties. moreover, the correlation of genome-wide nucleosome positioning profiles with md-derived mesoscopic calculations evinces that the main mechanism by which physical properties influence gene regulation is through nucleosome positioning. altogether, our experimental and computational integrative analysis demonstrates a clear relationship between sequence-dependent structural properties of naked dna, accessible from first-principles simulations, and regulatory signals in chromatin structure.

RESULTS
preferential mnase cut sites
yeast dna fragments were prepared and sequenced following the experimental approach described in figure  <dig>  the analysis of our whole genome sequencing experiments, containing more than  <dig> million short fragments, provided a fully converged description of the mnase sequence preferences for cutting naked and nucleosomal dnas . as suggested from previous small-scale experiments  <cit> , we indeed observed that in naked dna, the enzyme preferentially cuts tetramers with a central d step, but without the requirement of flanking dc or dg bases suggested by low-scale experiments. the high-cutting susceptibility for d·d tetramers found in mouse satellite dna  <cit>  was also detected in our massive experiments, although these tetramers were not the most predominant cutting sites. on the other hand, tetramers resistant to mnase cleavage were very diverse, except for the presence of a central purine-purine dinucleotide step . overall, mnase displayed quite strong sequence preferences in naked dna   that could not be simply ascribed to experimental artifacts, given the fact that control experiments where dna was fragmented by sonication did not show any marked variation in genome-wide profile . it is noteworthy to mention that mnase resistant tetramers were different between naked and nucleosomal dna samples, which demonstrate that the nucleosome structure protects specifically certain sequences from mnase degradation. conversely, we found a good agreement in the preferred cutting sites between naked and nucleosomal dnas . this suggests that tetramer signals that are directing the first mnase cut in chromatin are intrinsic to naked dna.

experimentally detected and expected frequency ratios of mnase-preferred tetramers at the cutting sites for naked  and nucleosomal  dnas. displayed tetramers are observed in at least two-fold higher frequency than expected, with a statistically significant difference  . ratios for d·d and d·d tetramers in nucleosomal dna are  <dig>   and  <dig>   respectively.

experimentally detected and expected frequency ratios of different tetramers in mnase-digested lrs for naked  and nucleosomal  dnas, and in clrs . displayed tetramers show a significant enrichment  respect to genome average .

preferential mnase degraded regions
upon an initial endonucleotic cleavage, mnase displays an exonuclease activity that continues with the degradation of dna  <cit> , leading to digested areas that we identified as low coverage regions  in our sequencing experiments . tetramer composition along naked dna lrs was different from the one observed in the cutting sites, suggesting that the degradation of a particular fragment does not only depend on the existence of cleavage sites in its vicinity, but also on the differential sequence preferences of endo- and exo-nuclease activities. for example, d was the most abundant tetramer in naked dna lrs, nearly four times more frequent than expected , while the same tetramer was rarely present at primary cutting sites . moreover, the tetramer composition was very similar in both naked and nucleosomal lrs and in the common low regions   indicating that sequence susceptibility for mnase degradation in nucleosomal dna was not exclusively dependent on the chromatin structure, but was also related to the intrinsic properties of naked dna .

low coverage regions and physical properties
the mnase tetramer preferences  are so diverse that they cannot be explained in terms of direct dna base reading. analysis of md-derived physical properties  <cit>  revealed that primary cutting sites are characterized by high flexibility  and wide opening in the major groove  at the equilibrium geometry . furthermore, the total dinucleotide-based stiffness parameter ktotal  unveiled that lrs  are located in regions with large variations in flexibility, where an extremely flexible site is surrounded by stiff motifs . remarkably, the same results were obtained when we considered the parameters fitted to the tetramer level by the abc consortium  <cit>  confirming the robustness of our conclusions. dinucleotide and tetranucleotide data  are available upon request and are incorporated in our dnalive webserver ,

nucleosome positioning and gene structure
as previously suggested by other groups  mnase resistant regions in nucleosomal dna are mainly concentrated at the beginning of transcribed regions . whereas very sensitive regions  were mostly identified at regulatory regions, either upstream of transcription start sites   or downstream of transcription termination sites  . additional differential regions, such as mnase resistant areas upstream of ttss or downstream of tsss, were less certain than the major signals mentioned above . considering that mnase degradation profiles were only dependent on nucleosome positioning  <cit> , we could locate more than  <dig>  "well positioned" and around  <dig>  "fuzzy" nucleosomes along the yeast genome . notwithstanding, the surprising similarity observed between nucleosomal and naked mnase profiles  indicate that nucleosomal degradation profiles might not only reflect nucleosome positioning, but also the intrinsic susceptibility of naked dna to mnase digestion  <cit> . this is clearly illustrated in the reduction of nucleosome positioning signals in additional file 1: figure s <dig>  when nucleosomal mnase degradation maps are corrected with the naked dna ones . however, figure  <dig> clearly demonstrates that strong nucleosome depletion or "well positioned" nucleosome signals, such as upstream of tss and downstream of tts, are not affected by the correction of intrinsic mnase susceptibility biases. these observations thus support most of the claims in previously reported nucleosome positioning studies about the connection between nucleosome organization and gene regulation  <cit>  and toned down some recent criticisms about the neglect of the mnase bias.

physical properties, nucleosome positioning and regulatory regions
the analysis of md-derived descriptors of naked dna showed that key genomic regions, such as at tsss and ttss, were marked by unusual flexibility properties   <cit> . since those regions are strongly nucleosome depleted, we hypothesized that unusual physical properties might control nucleosome positioning in those regions, which in turn would affect the dna accessibility to regulatory proteins and ultimately impact gene regulation. to verify this hypothesis, we computed the deformation energy required to wrap a dna sequence around a histone octamer by using a simple elastic energy function based on the md-derived physical descriptors . figure  <dig> clearly shows that clrs, which are nucleosome depleted, correlate with high deformation energy confirming that in these regions it is more difficult to wrap dna around a nucleosome core. it is interesting to note  that, often,  <dig> bps regions with high deformation energy contain a high flexible  step, indicating that global concepts about the impact of point flexibility on chromatin organization needs to be considered with caution. overall, results in figure  <dig> strongly suggest that the properties that make a dna segment a good substrate for mnase are also those that avoid dna wrapping around a nucleosome. in fact, very encouragingly, deformation energies for wrapping a dna around a nucleosome core particle can accurately predict in vivo nucleosome distribution around tsss and ttss in yeast . these results suggest that, without dismissing the importance of cellular mechanisms for controlling chromatin structure, very important details of the nucleosome organization around tss and tts can be rationalized considering physical properties of the naked dna sequence.

CONCLUSIONS
the molecular mechanisms that regulate gene expression in eukaryotic organisms are very diverse and complex. considering the large amount of basal gene expression in cells, it is difficult to believe that regulation is entirely modulated by specific direct-readout mechanisms, where regulatory proteins would directly interact with dna through hydrogen bonds in the major/minor grooves and compete with histones  <cit> . thus, a combination of direct and indirect readout mechanisms is required to achieve the correct interaction affinity and specificity  <cit> . direct mechanism can be very specific, but has implicitly a large energetic cost. indirect mechanism is obviously less precise, but implies no energy cost for the cell and might be useful in cases where no specific regulation of the gene is needed.

genome-wide sequencing of mnase treated nucleosomal dna shows that key regulatory regions such as the start and the end of transcribed sites, which have been traditionally interpreted as nucleosome depletion sites, are actually signaled by a differential pattern of mnase susceptibility in naked dna. this observation, which could initially raise some concerns, does not contradict previously reported nucleosome maps where mnase degradation was supposed to only reflect nucleosome positioning  <cit> . indeed, nucleosomal degradation profiles corrected with naked dna data maintained major nucleosome positioning signals, such as nucleosome depletion upstream of tss or downstream of tts, thereby supporting previous mnase based nucleosome positioning conclusions  <cit> . nevertheless, our experiments with nucleosomal and naked dna suggest caution in the interpretation of nucleosome positioning signals in regions with anomalous mnase degradation profile.

the high correlation of mnase degradation profiles of nucleosomal and naked dna and with unusual stiffness properties indicates that  intrinsic physical properties of naked dna determine major nucleosome location signals in yeast, especially those at tss and tts. this hypothesis is indirectly supported by very recent studies  <cit> , where nucleosome positioning signals are clearly identified after genome-wide nucleosome reconstitution in vitro.

essential regions for gene regulation like tsss and ttss are characterized by unusual physical properties that disfavor positioning of nucleosomes and therefore expose dna to interaction with regulatory proteins. this property of regulatory regions is quite general across the genome. the genes with well-defined clrs at regulatory regions did not differ from those with more diffuse signals in terms of gene ontology analysis  <cit> , promoter architecture, transcription rate or their dependence on regulatory proteins. accordingly, we can infer that unusual physical properties are perhaps a general property of gene regulatory regions that can confer a basal mechanism of gene regulation. furthermore, we speculate that additional specific signals were evolutionarily conferred to enable proteins to directly read dna sequences in those genes that might require a finer regulatory mechanism.

all conclusions drawn here have been derived from the analysis of yeast genome and thus concerns exist whether they can be validated for higher eukaryotes with a different sequence composition at regulatory regions. therefore, we compared the sequence-dependent physical properties of the drosophila melongaster genome with the high-resolution genomic nucleosome map available  <cit> . the comparative analysis is shown in additional file 1: figure s <dig>  which revealed that coverage and stiffness profiles at tss are conserved between such distant organisms like yeast and fruit fly  <cit> . extension of conclusions to vertebrates is more complex, due to the higher impacts of epigenetic factors. nevertheless unusual physical properties are also remarkable in human promoters  <cit> . all these findings prompt us to believe in the general conclusion that nucleosome-depleted and enriched regions are signalled by unusual physical properties, which define the core of an evolutionarily conserved mechanism of gene regulation.

