BACKGROUND
although the composition of the human intestinal microbiota is a major factor in the health status of both adults and infants, the process of initial colonization of the neonatal gut and the origin of the first colonizers are aspects that remain unclear.

although the colonization pattern seems to be host-specific, this is generally accepted that, initially, the infant gut would contain facultative anaerobes which would create a reduced environment favourable to the establishment of obligate anaerobes, such as bacteroides, clostridium and bifidobacterium species  <cit> .

traditionally, it has been widely accepted that the development of the gut microbiota starts at birth and is greatly influenced by the type of feeding  <cit> . the bacterial spectrum of breast-fed infants feces is narrower than that of formula-fed ones although, in the formers, the counts of fecal bifidobacteria and lactic acid bacteria are usually notably higher than those found in formula-fed infants  <cit> . once weaning starts, differences between breast-fed and formula-fed infants disappear rapidly and the gut ecosystem evolves into a stable host-specific community predominated by obligate anaerobes  <cit> .

human milk is a major factor in the initiation and development of neonatal gut microbiota, not only because it contains prebiotic substances that promote the growth of selected bacterial groups in the infant gut  <cit> , but also because this substrate represents a continuous source of microorganisms to the infant gut during several weeks after birth  <cit> . the presence of a few predominant bacterial species in breast milk  <cit>  may explain why gut microbiota of breast-fed infants is composed of a narrow spectrum of species, and a more diverse microbiota develops only after weaning.

however, few studies on the factors influencing the composition of the intestinal microbiota in early infancy have had into account the influence of the bacteria naturally present in human milk  <cit> . staphylococci, and particularly staphylococcus epidermidis, seems to be the most predominant bacteria both in fresh and stored human milk  <cit> , but paradoxically they have received a marginal attention regarding their role in the early colonization of the infant gut. additionally, the few studies that report the detection of staphylococci in neonatal and infant feces are controversial since their presence has been rated from low  <cit>  to high  <cit> . in this context, the objective of this study was to compare the bacterial diversity of breast milk, feces of breast-fed infants and feces of formula-fed ones by culture-based methods, with particular attention to those species belonging to the genus staphylococcus. additionally, we investigated the role of breast milk as a source of staphylococci to the infant gut and characterized the s. epidermidis strains isolated from the feces of the breast-fed infants. finally, since enterococci seems to be another predominant bacterial group in the gut of both breast- and formula-fed infants, the characterization of the enterococcal strains isolated from infant feces constituted another objective of this study.

RESULTS
bacterial counts in fecal and milk samples
inoculation of suitable dilutions of the different fecal samples  led to bacterial growth in all the culture media tested. globally, the values oscillated between  <dig>  and  <dig>  log <dig> cfu/g . a two-way anova, with feeding practice and infant age as factors, revealed that the feeding practice had a significant effect on bacterial counts in infant feces  but the influence of infant age was irrelevant. the mean bacterial counts in the feces of breast-fed infants were almost  <dig> log <dig> cfu/g lower than the values corresponding to feces of the formula-fed ones as revealed by duncan's test . a second analysis with the culture medium used for enumeration and the feeding practice as factors in a two-way anova showed important influence of the culture media  on the fecal bacterial counts . aerobic bacterial counts  were significantly lower than anaerobic bacterial counts . mean bacterial counts on bhi medium had intermediate values. furthermore, in this second analysis, the interaction between the culture medium employed and the feeding practice was also significant , suggesting a differential influence of the feeding practice on the bacterial groups present in infant feces .

aprobability value f test: significant when p <  <dig> .

bduncan's tests: groups within the same effect with the same letter do not differ significantly .

n = 320

a more detailed comparison of the mean bacterial counts in feces from breast-fed and formula-fed infants considering the results obtained in the different culture media for each infant age revealed significant differences  in the bacterial counts corresponding to the culture media that were incubated aerobically  for the samples obtained from 1- and 2-week old infants, but not after  <dig> weeks . in contrast, no significant differences were observed on bacterial counts at any infant age assayed in those media  that were incubated anaerobically.

statistical significance between the breast-fed group and the formula-fed group . ns, not significant difference.

the average bacterial count in milk samples was  <dig>  log <dig> cfu/ml when they were inoculated in bhi, cna, wch and mrs media . the cna means decreased significantly  from day  <dig> to  <dig> . in the rest of the media, there were no statistically significant differences between the mean bacterial counts through the period studied. when the samples were inoculated in vrba agar, no colonies could be isolated in  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> milk samples at days  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig>  respectively . globally, vrba bacterial growth was not detected in any of the three samples provided by  <dig> of the women that participated in the study. the mean of the vrba in the rest of the samples oscillated between  <dig>  and  <dig>  log cfu/ml. a relationship  could be observed between the bacterial counts from breast milk and from infant feces in cna , mrs  and wch .

af <dig>  value from a repeated measures anova testing the effect of sampling occasion on bacterial counts of breast milk for each culture media used 

bnd, not detected

identification of the isolates
a total of  <dig> isolates were randomly selected from cna, bhi, mrs and wch agar plates corresponding to feces of the breast-fed  and formula-fed  infants. subsequently, they were identified by classical morphological and biochemical tests, species-specific pcr and/or 16s rdna sequencing.

s. epidermidis was the predominant species in feces of breast-fed infants since it could be isolated from  <dig> % of the samples . in this group, a slight decrease in the number of s. epidermidis positive samples was observed from day  <dig>  to day  <dig> . in contrast, this species was only present in  <dig> % of the samples obtained from formula-fed infants. the difference in the number of s. epidermidis-positive samples between breast- and formula-fed infants was statistically significant . presence of s. aureus and other staphylococcus species was similar in both groups.

a statistical significance between the breast-fed group and the formula-fed group .

bns, not significant .

cnd, not detected.

enterococcus faecalis was the second gram-positive bacterial species more widespread among the samples of the breast-fed group . however, since it was present in 100% of the samples from the formula-fed one, there was a significant difference between both groups regarding this microorganism . other enterococcal species were also more widespread among feces of the formula-fed infants but the differences were not statistically different . in contrast, streptococci could only be isolated from feces of breast-fed infants. the percentage of samples containing other gram-positive bacteria  and gram-negative bacteria was also significantly higher  in samples from breast-fed infants .

globally,  <dig> isolates  from the breast-fed group were identified as s. epidermidis,  <dig>  as bifidobacterium sp.  and  <dig>  as e. faecalis . interestingly, only  <dig> isolates  from the formula-fed group belonged to the s. epidermidis species while other  <dig> isolates  were identified as bifidobacterium spp. in contrast,  <dig> isolates  of this group were e. faecalis and this percentage increases to  <dig> % when having into account all the enterococcal species identified . a considerable percentage  of isolates from both breast- and formula-fed infants was identified as gram-negative bacteria although they belonged to a wide spectrum of species .

and, not detected; bother gram-positive bacteria: actinomyces spp., kocuria spp., propionibacterium spp.; cother gram-negative bacteria: kluyvera cryocescens, pseudomonas spp., shigella spp.

all the milk samples contained s. epidermidis and, in general, the percentage of samples in which staphylococci, enterococci and streptococci were isolated was more similar to that found among the feces of the breast-fed infants than to that achieved by feces of the formula-fed group . a total of  <dig> breast milk isolates were randomly isolated and  <dig>  were identified as s. epidermidis . the rest of the bacterial groups found in feces of breast-fed infants were also detected in breast milk . streptococci were isolated from some samples of milk and feces of breast-fed infants but, in contrast, they could not detected in feces of the formula-fed ones .

genotyping of the s. epidermidis isolates by random amplification of polymorphic dna 
the  <dig> s. epidermidis isolates from feces of breast-fed infants and breast milk were genetically typified by the rapd technique and the analysis of the profiles revealed the existence of  <dig> different genotypes. a representative of each rapd profile was selected for further characterization. in addition, comparison of the rapd profiles of fecal s. epidermidis with those obtained from breast milk isolates revealed that the same strain was shared by milk and infant feces in  <dig> of the  <dig> mother-infant pairs .

characterization of the s. epidermidis strains
the  <dig> s. epidermidis strains were screened for the presence of potential virulence traits . in relation to adhesin-encoding genes, a multiplex pcr assay revealed the presence of the genes embp and atle in all the strains. in contrast the fbe gene could be detected in only  <dig> strains . the biofilm-related icad gene was detected in  <dig> strains  and, in general, there was a good correlation between the presence of such gene and the results obtained using the cra assay, which determines potential for biofilm production. hemolytic activity could not be detected among the assayed strains.

among the  <dig> strains showing oxacillin resistance, the meca gene could be detected by pcr in  <dig> . in contrast, meca amplification was obtained from  <dig> oxacillin-sensitive strain. only  <dig> strains showed the simultaneous presence of meca and icad . the type of scc mec was determined in all the meca+ strains. the ccrb gene could be amplified from all the meca+ strains and, on the basis of the ccrb restriction pattern with hinfi  or with hinfi/bsmi , all were assigned to type iv, which is generally carried by community-acquired staphylococci.

the determination of the mic's of  <dig> antibiotics or antibiotics mixtures for the  <dig> s. epidermidis strains revealed that all of them were sensitive to the lower concentration of nitrofurantoin , vancomycin  and rifampin , while the results against the rest of antibiotics were variable depending on the strain . independently of their origin, most of the strains were sensitive to quinupristin/dalfopriscin , trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole , gentamicyn , linezolid , fosfomycin , ciprofloxacin , chloramphenicol , ampicillin  and teicoplanin . the percentage of susceptible strains was lower for imipenem , penicillin , and tetracycline .

characterization of the enterococcus faecium and enterococcus faecalis strains
none of the  <dig> e. faecium strains tested have the presence of any virulence determinant  while all the e. faecalis isolates tested possessed some potential virulence determinants . all the sex pheromone determinants were detected in  <dig> e. faecalis strains but the gene encoding cytolysin  couls only be detected in  <dig> strains. the results for the rest of the enterococcal genes were variable depending on the strains .

all the e. faecium and e. faecalis strains were susceptible to low concentrations of penicillin, ampicillin, ciprofloxacin, fosfomycin, nitrofurantoine, tetraciclyne, erythromycin, vancomycin, teicoplanin, chloramphenicol and rifampicin . the percentage of strains resistant to quinupristin/dalfopriscin  was  <dig> % while  <dig> % of them showed resistance to streptomycin . only one strain was resistant to gentamycin  and only another one to linezolid  .

discussion
colostrum and milk play key roles in the initiation, development and composition of the infant gut microbiota since they contain a variety of factors, such as inmunoglobulins, inmunocompetent cells, fatty acids, polyamines, oligosaccharides, lysozyme, lactoferrin, and antimicrobial peptides, that modulate bacterial growth in the intestinal ecosystem. in addition, breast milk is an important and continuous source of commensal bacteria, including staphylococci, streptococci, and lactic acid bacteria, to the infant gut  <cit> . therefore, it is not strange that the bacterial composition of the faecal flora of the breast-fed infant reflects the bacterial composition of breast milk  <cit> .

in this work, s. epidermidis was the predominant species in milk of the lactating women and in the feces of their respective infants while it was almost absent in samples from feces of formula-fed infants. previously, different studies have reported that this bacterial species is the predominant one in human milk from healthy women  <cit> . in contrast, e. faecalis was the dominant species among the isolates obtained from feces of formula-fed infants. similarly, a molecular analysis revealed that e. faecalis was present in feces of a formula-fed infant on the sixth day of life but, in contrast, s. epidermidis could not be detected  <cit> . it has been suggested that the major differences between the microbiological composition of human milk and infant formula are probably the main factor responsible for the differences observed between the gut microbiota of breast- and formula-fed infants  <cit> . other bacterial groups, such as lactobacilli were less prevalent and this fact may be due to their lower presence or to the fact that their isolation is difficult with the culture media used in this study.

interestingly, the same s. epidermidis strain  was isolated from milk and feces of several each mother-infant pairs. in the last years, it has been shown that breast milk plays an important role in the vertical mother-to-child transmission of lactic acid bacteria  <cit> . in this context, our results indicate that an abundant presence of s. epidermidis in the infant gut is a differential feature of the feces of breast-fed infants when compared to those of formula-fed infants.

studies carried  <dig> years ago already described that staphylococci were common in feces of breast-fed infants  <cit> . more recently, it has been shown that coagulase-negative staphylococci colonized 100% of breast-fed western infants from day  <dig> onwards  <cit> . such staphylococci colonized vaginally and cesarean section-delivered infants equally early. some authors suggest that, in fact, staphylococcal colonization of the infant gut has increased from the 70s to the present  <cit> . it has been speculated that this may be an effect of a highly hygienic lifestyle which leads to a delayed acquisition of "traditional" fecal bacteria, such as enterobacteria  <cit> . in their absence, staphylococci become the first gut colonizers and the results of our work suggest that breast milk could be the main source. then, the population decreased significantly from  <dig> week until  <dig> month of age. similarly, in our study the number of samples from breast-fed infants in which s. epidermidis could be isolated decreased from week  <dig> to week  <dig> 

the different s. epidermidis strains isolated from feces of the breast-fed infants were submitted to a characterization scheme that included the detection of virulence-associated determinants and the profile of antibiotic resistances in order to confirm the prevalence of non-pathogenic isolates in the healthy infant gut. among the s. epidermidis strains analyzed, the presence of adhesion-related genes was very high, independently of the sample from which they were isolated. all of them carried the embp and atle genes and 25% of the strains harbored the fbe gene. the cell surface proteins may help to explain the high prevalence of s. epidermidis in breast milk since they could contribute to the bacterial attachment to the mammary areola and ducts throughout the lactation period. in contrast, the percentage of strains carrying the biofilm-related ica operon was much lower . a potential relationship between s. epidermidis infection and the presence of such operon has been reported  <cit> . in fact, biofilm formation has been described in many cases of staphylococcal mastitis and this is the reason why such property is considered as a potential virulence factor  <cit> . a few strains showed methicillin resistance but methicillin-resistant staphylococci are being reported with increasing frequency in the community and they are commonly isolated from healthy hosts  <cit> . globally, most of the s. epidermidis strains characterized in this study harbour several adhesion factors but not antibiotic resistance or virulence determinants. since staphylococcal strains provided first by colostrum and, later, by breast milk may successfully compete with potentially pathogenic strains found in the hospital environment, their application as probiotics in neonatal units could be considered in the future if works in progress  confirm the safety of selected strains.

enterococci, and particularly e. faecium and e. faecalis, become normal components of the human gastro-intestinal soon after birth. on the other hand, enterococci are opportunistic pathogens that may cause nosocomial infections in neonates suffering underlying diseases  <cit> . however, the presence of virulence determinants and the antibiotic resistance pattern appears to be strain-specific among isolates studied so far  <cit> . in fact, it seems that human isolates involved in clinical infection fell into a well defined subgroup, which suggest that there may be a genetic basis for strains associated with human disease  <cit> . in addition, enterococci not involved in human clinical infection are generally sensitive to clinically relevant antibiotics, including vancomycin  <cit> , as happened with the enterococcal strains analyzed in this work.

CONCLUSIONS
our results indicate that the feeding practice  had a significant effect on bacterial counts and fecal microbiota composition. s. epidermidis is the most prevalent species in feces of breast-fed infants while it is practically absent in those of formula fed-infants. therefore, s. epidermidis can be considered as a differential trait of the fecal microbiota of breast-fed infants although this finding requires further confirmation in larger studies. the staphyloccal isolates only contain a low number of virulence determinants and are sensitive to most of the antibiotics tested. additionally, we have observed that e. faecalis is the second bacterial species in feces of the breast-fed group but it is also present in all the samples from the formula-fed one. the characterization of several representative enterococcal isolates revealed that none of them were resistant to vancomycin. streptococci were isolated from some samples of milk and feces of breast-fed infants but, in contrast, they could not detected in feces of the formula-fed ones.

