BACKGROUND
dahlia , a member of the asteracea family, is a popular garden flower. more than  <dig>  cultivars are available world-wide  <cit> . garden dahlias are hybrids, which are classified according to shape and size of the plant and its inflorescences. a broad spectrum of flower colours exists ranging from white and yellow to almost every imaginable hue of red, orange and magenta , but blue flower colour does not occur  <cit> . in contrast to the multitude of available red-shaded cultivars, only a handful of so-called black cultivars exist . such cultivars frequently have expressive names e.g. chat noir , magic night, arabian night and black jack.

dahlia flower colour is exclusively based on the accumulation of flavonoids and biochemically related anthochlors   <cit> . the study of pigments in dahlia started in  <dig>  when the presence of anthocyanins, flavones, flavonols, chalcones and aurones were elaborately described in dahlia species  <cit> . 6’-deoxychalcones  and the corresponding 4-deoxyaurones  are the chemical base of yellow flower colour in d. variabilis and are mixed with anthocyanins  in orange and red forms  <cit> . a screening of more than  <dig> dahlia cultivars showed that the different red tones are based on the same set of anthocyanins and that variation in the anthocyanin concentration, the modification pattern of the core structures and probably also ph is responsible for the formation of different hues  <cit> . orange, rose and lilac cultivars frequently showed lower anthocyanin contents than red and magenta cultivars. in the case of rose and lilac cultivars this seems to be primarily based on a lower chalcone synthase  activity  <cit> . yellow and white cultivars do not accumulate anthocyanins due to a bottleneck or blockage of the anthocyanin pathway. although there is no general rule, for yellow cultivars this was most frequently observed at the levels of both flavanone 3-hydroxylase  and dihydroflavonol 4-reductase   <cit> , which was recently confirmed by gene expression studies on a yellow cultivar demonstrating the absence of dfr, fht and ans expression due to the suppression of a bhlh transcription factor  <cit> . in the majority of white cultivars, in contrast, dfr alone was affected  <cit> , which was also reflected by gene expression studies of  <dig> white and star-type cultivars  <cit> .

apart from anthocyanins and 6’-deoxychalcones, flavones and flavonols can be accumulated in dahlia flowers  <cit> . despite being themselves almost colourless, they influence flower coloration as they interact with anthocyanins and thereby stabilize their structures, which are sensitive to oxidation and hydrolytic attack  <cit> . all cultivars tested showed a very high flavone synthase ii  activity, whereas flavonol synthase  activity was very low. thus it was assumed, that flavones rather than flavonols are the predominant copigments present in dahlia flowers  <cit> .

the base for the creation of black dahlia colour has not been investigated so far. we report, that the majority of black cultivars accumulate drastically decreased amounts of flavones, which is accompanied by low fns ii activities and suppressed fns ii expression. as flavone formation competes with anthocyanin biosynthesis for common intermediates, this results in the huge anthocyanin concentrations establishing the black cultivars.

RESULTS
pigment composition and enzyme activities in black cultivars
the petals of  <dig> black cultivars were analyzed for the presence of anthocyanins, flavonols and flavones in comparison to  <dig> white,  <dig> red and  <dig> yellow varieties. acidic methanolic extracts from flower petals showed anthocyanin contents between  <dig> and  <dig> μmol/g fw . thus, the contents of black cultivars were above or at the end of the range reported previously for red cultivars  <cit> . in hydrolyzed extracts, both pelargonidin and cyanidin were present with varying ratios whereas no anthocyanidins were found in the yellow flowering cv. rubens and cv. alva’s supreme or the white flowering cv. white alva. the black cultivars showed diverse anthocyanidin composition with cyanidin proportions between 9%  and 80%  . thus, black hues depend on the anthocyanin concentration rather than on the anthocyanin pattern. black colouration of fruits and flowers is not frequent but has been studied in a few cases e.g. in cherry  <cit> , lisanthus  <cit> , viola  <cit> , tulips  <cit> , poppy  <cit> , leaves of ophiopogon planiscapus <cit> , and even in grains, such as black rice  <cit> . in all cases black tissues show large amounts of anthocyanins.

extracts of yellow, white and red cultivars contained large amounts of flavones , which, in contrast, were present only in low amounts in the black cultivars. flavonols were also present in white, yellow and red cultivars but compared to flavones only in low amounts thus confirming that flavones are the prevalent copigments in dahlia flowers  <cit> . in comparison to red cultivars, the flavonol content of black cultivars was increased .

high activities of the enzymes of the anthocyanin pathway could be detected in enzyme preparations from petals of all black cultivars tested . yellow and white cultivars, in contrast, showed a low or a lack of dfr activity as expected. there was no general difference in the enzyme activities of red and black cultivars, but  <dig> of the black cultivars  showed a higher chs activity than the red cultivars, which might increase the flux into the flavonoid pathway in these lines. however,  <dig> of  <dig> black cultivars were characterized by a low fns ii activity . this was confirmed using microsomal preparations, in which membrane bound enzymes such as f3’h and fns ii are enriched. using such preparations of petals from cv. rubens, the fns ii assay was optimized with respect to ph and temperature optimum, temperature stability and linearity with time and protein. the results are summarized as standard enzyme assay for fns ii in petal preparations in the section material and methods. incubation of microsomal preparations from the yellow cv. rubens with eriodictyol in the presence of nadph led to the formation of a single product which was identified as the flavone luteolin. incubation with naringenin in the presence of nadph led to the formation of the three products eriodictyol , apigenin  and luteolin  as a result of the concerted activity of f3’h and fns ii. when microsomal preparations from black varieties were tested under the standard assay conditions, no or only a low product formation was observed when eriodictyol was used as a substrate , while naringenin was converted to eriodictyol by f3’h.

the absence of fns ii activity correlates with the absence of flavones and increases the availability of flavanones such as naringenin and eriodictyol as precursors for anthocyanin formation. thus, the low flavone formation favours the anthocyanin branch and thereby the accumulation of above-average amounts of anthocyanins found in black cultivars. parallel to the decrease of flavones, flavonol contents slightly increased. the remaining flavones together with flavonols could serve as copigments for anthocyanin stabilization and intramolecular copigmentation could also be possible  <cit> . actually, black colouration fades during petal aging and older petals appear dark red rather than black , an effect which is not observed in red cultivars. compared to red cultivars, there is a drastic decrease in the molar ratio of copigments:anthocyanins in black cultivars, which might influence the colour stability  <cit> .

cloning of cdna clones and the corresponding genomic dahlia fns ii
to investigate the reasons for the lacking fns ii activity, we tested whether it was possible to isolate an fns ii cdna clone from black cultivars. primers  were designed from conserved regions of fns ii sequences available in the ncbi database  and used for the isolation of a cdna fragment from the petals from cv. rubens. the full size cdna clone was obtained by race techniques . using specific primers, full size cdna clones were obtained from the black cultivars chat noir  and aurora’s kiss . this indicated that the fns ii was expressed in black cultivars at least to some extent and that either pivotal mutations in the structural gene leading to loss of function or post-transcriptional or post-translational regulation or a too low expression level could be responsible for the lacking fns ii activity. 

abbrev.: f: forward, r: reverse.

the sequences were highly conserved and showed 97-99% similarity at the amino acid level . from petals of cv. rubens and cv. chat noir two alleles were found showing 98% similarity at the amino acid level, respectively. further cdna clones were obtained from yellow cultivars rubens  and alva’s supreme , the red cultivar feuerschein , the white cultivar white alva . from sequence comparison, no discrimination according to flower colour could be found.

in addition, the corresponding genomic clones of fns ii of the yellow cv. rubens  and of the black cultivars arabian night , chat noir , karma choc , and tisa  were isolated. the genomic clones had one intron at the same position . however the intron length differed considerably . thus, the clones had the size of  <dig> bp ,  <dig> bp ,  <dig> ,  <dig> bp , and  <dig> bp .

functional activity and characterization of recombinant enzymes
to investigate whether the small differences in the fns ii sequence could be relevant for the establishment of black phenotypes, all cdna clones were heterologously expressed in s. cerevisiae. as assumed, the obtained recombinant proteins were functionally active and catalyzed the napdh-dependent formation of apigenin and luteolin from naringenin and eriodictyol, respectively, thus confirming that the differences in the sequence are not pivotal. recombinant fns ii of the yellow cv. rubens  and the black cv. chat noir  were characterized in more detail and largely showed the same characteristics as expected from the high sequence similarity. the optimal ph was  <dig>  for the conversion of naringenin and ph  <dig>  for eriodictyol as substrates. the enzyme was stable until 25°c and the temperature optimum was 25-30°c. the reaction was linear with time until  <dig> min and with the protein content up to  <dig> μg  or  <dig> μg  in the assay. kinetic studies showed apparent km and vmax values of  <dig>  μm and  <dig>  μmol/s*kg for naringenin as substrate and  <dig>  μm and  <dig>  μmol/s*kg for eriodictyol as substrate, resulting in a ratio of vmax/km of  <dig>  for naringenin and  <dig>  for eriodictyol, respectively. thus, the fns ii shows comparably high specificity for both substrates.

gene expression studies
the expression of structural and regulatory genes from the flavonoid pathway was measured by quantitative real-time pcr in comparison to two housekeeping genes, actin and glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase . the expected size of the amplicons was confirmed by gel electrophoresis and the specificity by melt curve analysis. fns ii was expressed in all cultivars. however, black cultivars showed a very low fns ii expression in comparison to the other cultivars , with the exception of cv. black barbara, which showed second highest fns ii expression in accordance with the relatively high fns ii activities measured . white and yellow cultivars showed higher fns ii expression than the red cv. feuerschein and highest expression was observed in the cv. white alva . this correlates well with the observed low fns ii activity in the majority of black cultivars. as d. variabilis is octoploid   <cit> , it is expected that more than one fns ii copy is present as recently shown for d. variabilis chs <cit> . the decline of fns ii activity in the majority of the black cultivars, which is unusual for dahlia  <cit> , indicates the presence of an effective regulatory mechanism, which could also include post-transcriptional or post-translational processes.

an impact of the flavone pathway on anthocyanin accumulation and flower colour was shown in several studies. gerbera lines lacking fnsii expression and fnsii activity did not accumulate flavones, while anthocyanin contents and intensity of the flower colour increased noticeably  <cit> . however, the anthocyanin concentrations obtained were not high enough to result in black flowers. vice versa, the transformation of fnsii into violets led to the accumulation of flavones at the expense of anthocyanins, which showed paler flowers than the wild type. daphne mutants of antirrhinum majus, which lack flavones, develop dull reddish-brown flowers in contrast to red wild type flowers  <cit> .

to investigate the possible involvement of transcription factors from d. variabilis on the fns ii suppression, we determined the expression of seven recently identified putative regulatory genes myb <dig>  myb <dig>  r3myb, wdr <dig>  wdr <dig> and the bhlh transcription factors del and ivs <cit> . interaction of comparable proteins resulted in the formation of a regulatory complex that controls cellular identity of epidermal cells including anthocyanin formation  <cit> . all  <dig> black cultivars showed a similar expression pattern . for a better overview and comparison between the colour types the relative expression pattern in the white cv. white alva, the yellow cv. rubens, the red cv. feuerschein and the black cv. chat noir is shown in figure  <dig>  the expression pattern of the transcription factors followed the same trend in the red and black cultivars and no general difference could be found explaining the black phenotype, although some black cultivars occasionally showed a lower expression e.g. cv. chat noir for myb <dig> or cv. mythos for myb <dig>  the only difference related to colour was the suppressed ivs expression in the yellow and white cultivars as previously reported  <cit> . thus, the suppression of fns ii expression must be influenced by other so far unknown factors. changes in the promoter regions are unlikely to play a particular role because several alleles must be affected at the same time.

ohno et al.  <cit>  have shown the presence of two different chalcone synthases in dahlia with several alleles of each type. chs  <dig> seems to be specifically involved into anthocyanin formation because it shows a similar expression pattern as fht, dfr and ans as a result of ivs expression and is suppressed in white and yellow cultivars. chs  <dig> in contrast was expressed independently from the flower colour  <cit> . this was also confirmed in our study. chs  <dig> was expressed in the red and all black cultivars but not in the white and yellow ones, where chs  <dig> was expressed in all cultivars . it may be speculated that the two chs types were introduced into the d. variabilis genome by the two different wild species which are the parent plants of the garden dahlia  <cit> . so far the presence of isoenzymes in d. variabilis was only observed for chs. however, our data suggest that also more than one fht gene exists, because the fht enzyme activity measured in the yellow cv. rubens and the white cv. white alva was higher than expected from the fht suppression observed in the white and yellow cultivars . in addition, other dioxygenases from the flavonoid pathway such as fls, which has been shown to accept a broad range of substrates  <cit> , could contribute to the observed fht activity in these lines.

the relative expression of the structural genes from the flavonoid pathway was largely comparable and sometimes even lower than those of the red cultivars. this underpins that the increased anthocyanin formation in the majority of black cultivars is not based on an induced anthocyanin pathway, but exclusively the result of the promoted flux of flavanone intermediates into anthocyanins due to the reduced flavone formation. only in the case of cv. black barbara, there is huge anthocyanin formation despite unhampered flavone formation. on the other hand, this cultivar shows highest total expression of chs genes  and is also very high for all the other genes. this could be an explanation for the high anthocyanin formation, but we cannot exclude that there are further, so far unknown relevant factors. expression of malonyl-coenzyme a:anthocyanidin 3-o-glucoside-6”-o-malonyltrans-ferase  varied largely within the black cultivars and no correlation with flower colour was found . thus, increased anthocyanin stability by malonylation of anthocyanins does not seem to be play a role for the establishment of the black phenotypes. interestingly, malonyltransferase showed a similar suppression as chs  <dig>  fht, dfr and ans in yellow and white varieties indicating that the gene could be coregulated with the other genes distinctly involved in the formation of red pigmentation.

CONCLUSIONS
continuous dahlia breeding worldwide has led to the availability of a countless number of cultivars, many of them showing red hues. however, black hues of dahlia flowers seem to occur only occasionally. we have shown for the first time that the distinct impression of black colour in dahlia is based on the accumulation of huge amounts of anthocyanins. in the majority of the black cultivars, this seems to be a result of increased channelling of flavanones towards anthocyanins at the expense of flavone formation . this seems to be based on the low fns ii activity and fns ii expression which is not influenced by any transcription factor of the flavonoid pathway known so far. whereas the flavonoid pathway offers a large spectrum of possibilities for the establishment of white, yellow, orange, pink and red tones,  <dig> of  <dig> cultivars showed an identical biochemical and molecular background establishing the phenotype. the cv. black barabara’, however, showed a generally high expression of genes from the anthocyanin pathway, which could provide an explanation for the high amounts of anthocyanins found despite high flavone formation. a higher substrate supply due to changes in the phenylpropanoid pathway could also result in enhanced anthocyanin formation. further investigations will be required to understand the establishment of the black colour in the special case of cv. black barbara. the molecular explanation for the specific suppression of flavone formation in the majority of black dahlia will be of particular interest. as dahlia is an octoploid plant and the presence of several alleles is expected, the simultaneous suppression of all fns ii isoenzymes indicates an effective mechanism, which could be used for engineering plants with tailor-made flavone contents.

