BACKGROUND
it is widely recognized that hybridization between genetically differentiated natural plant populations may cause structural genomic changes  as well as perturbation of epigenetic state of the recipient genome , and both may result in heritable phenotypic novelties  <cit> . these findings are consistent with barbara mcclintock's insight of "genome shock", which proposed that crossing of different organismal species may cause restructuring of the resultant hybrid genome, and which may represent a facet of adaptive response by plants under specific circumstances  <cit> . a major cause underlying the genomic shock symptom is transcriptional and transpositional reactivation of otherwise cryptic transposable elements  in the hybrid genome. the reactivation of tes is often coupled with disruption of chromatin-based epigenetic controlling mechanisms in the hybrid genome, like loss or re-patterning of cytosine methylation and compromised targeting by small interference  rnas  <cit> . indeed, several studies in both animals and plants have provided compelling empirical evidence in support of the "te-epigenetic" basis of genome shock  <cit> .

at least circumstantial evidence has indicated that for the hybridization- associated genomic shock to occur, a symmetric hybrid genome is not a prerequisite; instead, introgression or integration of "foreign" chromatin or dna segments via introgressive hybridization or other means  might as well produce the "shocking" effects on the recipient genome  <cit> . for example, it was shown in cultured animal cells that random integration of pieces of foreign dna can cause the host genome to undergo extensive and genome-wide alterations in cytosine methylation of both cellular genes and te-related dna repeats  <cit> . we have demonstrated that introgression of small amount of chromatin of zizania latifolia  into rice has caused an array of genetic and epigenetic instabilities in the recipient rice genome  <cit> , and in particular, rampant mobilization of a copia retrotransposon tos <dig> and a mite   <cit> . given the recent finding that the cellular controlling mechanisms for te activity are likely individualized  <cit> , it is interesting to explore whether te reactivation in the rice-zizania introgressants was confined to these two elements or other tes also experienced reactivation.

the rice dart transposon family belongs to the hat superfamily of class ii tes, and which was first characterized by fujino and colleagues  <cit> . dart was found as transcriptionally active in several rice tissues  <cit> . moreover, both dart and its deletion-derivative called ndart can be transpositionally active in certain rice genotypes that harbour active dart, even under normal growing conditions  <cit> . in addition, the element's activity was correlated with its cytosine methylation state, and epigenetically silenced dart copies can be reactivated by 5-azacytidine treatment  <cit> . apparently, except for tos <dig> and mping, the dart/ndart represents another family of highly active tes endogenous to the rice genome.

the aim of this study was to investigate  whether the dart te family was transpositionally reactivated in the same set of rice-zizania introgressants that showed rampant mobilization of tos <dig> and mping  <cit> ;  whether the element's activity was correlated with its cytosine methylation state; and  whether excision and reinsertion of the element copies impacted expression of their adjacent genes under normal or various abiotic stress conditions.

RESULTS
the dart transposon family was transpositionally reactivated in the rice-zizania introgressants
based on the sequence of a full-length copy of dart <dig>  <cit> , we used the same pair of primers that should be specific to all conserved dart-related elements to amplify a  <dig> bp fragment within the orf region, designed by fujino et al.  <cit> . the fragment was verified by sequencing, and then used as a probe for southern blotting on hindiii-digested genomic dnas of the three representative introgressants of rice-zizania  together with their recipient rice parental line  and the donor species z. latifolia. since there are only two restriction site of hindiii within the full-length dart , southern blotting with this enzyme-digest and a probe residing on one side of both of the restriction sites should enable a conservative estimation on the copy number of all conserved dart-related elements and their possible transpositions or rearrangements. because in certain rice genotypes that harbour intrinsically active dart copies, the elements can be spontaneously transposing even under normal growing conditions  <cit> , it was important to determine whether this was the case for cultivar matsumae, the rice parental line for the introgressants. we thus first tested this possibility in  <dig> randomly selected individuals of three successive selfed-generations of matsumae, and subjected the plants to the southern blot analysis probed by the dart-specific fragment. we found a uniform hybridization pattern for all the  <dig> plants , indicating that matsumae, as in most rice cultivars  <cit> , did not contain an active dart. in contrast, each of the three introgressants showed a dramatically changed hybridization pattern, and all were substantially different from that of their rice parental line matsumae . because the donor species, z. latifolia, did not contain a homologue of dart-related element , the southern blotting results suggest that most of the dart copies were likely transpositionally reactivated in the rice-zizania introgressants, and produced an array of excisions and reinsertions in the introgressants . nonetheless, it should be noted that an alternative explanation that the changed hybridization patterns in the introgressants resulted from genomic rearrangements involving the dart-related tes could not be ruled out at this stage solely based on the southern blot analysis.

to distinguish the two possibilities between transposition and rearrangement as a cause for the changed southern blotting patterns of dart-related tes in the rice-zizania introgressants, we resorted to the dart-specific transposon-display  developed by tsugan et al.   <cit>  to isolate possible excision and reinsertion events that likely had occurred in the introgressants relative to their rice parental line. the results of the td profiles showed that both the patterns and total numbers of amplified bands were very similar between the idart1-51/ndart1- <dig> and idart1s/ndart1-101s subgroups with the primer pairs used, indicating they were mainly targeting to overlapping genomic regions . an unexpected observation was that many bands were also amplified from the donor species, z. latifolia . because there was no homologue for the dart-related tes in the zizania genome both based on the southern blotting results  and on the dart-specific pcr amplification using z. latifolia genomic dna as a template , we suspect that these bands were not resulted from td, but from the homo-amplification by the msei-adaptor primers in the silver-stained profiles, in which all amplicons were visible . to test this, we sequenced  <dig> bands isolated from the z. latifolia lanes; mainly those bands the positions of which were either identical or proximal to bands existing in the introgressant but not in the rice parent were selected to maximize the likelihood of detecting possible zizania introgression. we found that all the sequenced bands contained the same msei-adaptor primer at both ends, and none contained the terminus of dart-related te that should be expected for a bona fide td band. this suggested that  the novel bands in the introgressant were not likely due to direct introgression from the donor species, z. latifolia;  there was probably no homologue of dart-related tes in z. latifolia, consistent with the southern blotting and dart-specific pcr amplification results . the tabulated dart-td results by the  <dig> primer pairs  enabled an gross estimate of the putative excision  and reinsertion  frequencies of 9% and 24% for rz <dig>  26% and 35% for rz <dig>  and 1% and 5% for rz <dig>  respectively . these results indicated that, first, more insertions than excisions had occurred in all three introgressants; second, there was marked difference in the transpositional activity of the dart-related tes among the three introgressants, with rz <dig> showed the most and rz <dig> the least activities.

next, we cloned and sequenced a subset of  <dig> bands, each of which was variable in one or more of the introgressants relative to the corresponding position in the rice parental line  in the td profiles. these variant bands included  <dig> putative excisions  and  <dig> putative insertions . we found that for each of the clones sequenced, the expected terminus encompassing the 19-bp terminal inverted repeat  of dart was identified, indicating that these isolated bands were resulting from real td rather than from homo-amplification by the adaptor primers. further sequence analysis identified  <dig> and  <dig> of the variant td bands as most likely resulted from excision and insertion events, respectively, because these bands contained the typical 8-bp target-site duplication  of dart . nonetheless, their authenticity as bona fide excisions and insertions rather than rearrangements entails further validation, as detailed below.

position:11650578
position: 2633169
position: 20137929
rz <dig> 
position:16475838
position:18387453
position:18893612
position:22507932
position: 15326441
position: 20176647
position: 21368076
position: 7832680
position: 7910449
position: 16720991
position: 6273602
position: 26631010
§excisions refer to events occurred in one or more of the three introgressants . naturally, the corresponding loci in matsumae all contain a copy of dart-related te, whereas in nipponbare only some of the loci contain the element, pointing to genotypic polymorphism with regard to presence/absence of the dart-related tes for a given genomic locus.

validation and chromosomal location of the dart excisions and insertions by locus-specific pcr amplification and sequencing in the rice-zizania introgressants
for each of the putative excised and inserted loci, we designed locus-specific primer pairs specific to the flanks of the dart elements based on the whole genome sequence of nipponbare http://rgp.dna.affrc.go.jp . note that the design of primers targeting the flanks did not entail that nipponbare contains a copy of the dart-related te at each of the loci. pcr amplification by these locus-specific primers  and sequencing of the amplicons verified that all the  <dig> excisions and  <dig> insertions were authentic, because the immediate contiguous flanks were intact for all the excisions and typical tsds were identified for all the insertions . this locus-specific pcr amplification and sequencing results thus validated transpositional reactivation of the dart-related elements in the rice-zizania introgressants.

we mapped all the  <dig> excisions and  <dig> insertions of dart that occurred in the introgressants by aligning the identified flanking regions of each of the events against the whole genome sequence of nipponbare. we found that the mobilized dart-related elements mapped throughout the rice genome involving all the  <dig> chromosomes , suggesting that these seemingly random excisions and insertions by the dart-related elements probably had not imposed an adverse effect on fitness of the introgressants, and hence, being selected for or neutrally retained during propagation of the plants via self-fertilization.

cytosine methylation states of the dart-related elements in the rice-zizania introgressants and their rice parental line
given our previous results that cytosine methylation of these rice-zizania introgressants were substantially re-patterned relative to their rice parental line matsumae  <cit> , and the established frequent causal links between te activity and its methylation state by numerous studies  <cit> , it was interesting to test whether the transposition of dart in the introgressants was accompanied with alteration in this epigenetic marker. thus, we investigated the methylation state of the dart-related elements in the introgressants vs. that in matsumae. we first delineated the dart-related elements by digestion with bamhi, which had two restriction sites within dart <dig>  at positions  <dig> nt and  <dig> nt, respectively, and hence, in theory digestion with this enzyme would produce three fragments for each of the conserved dart copies: the delineated internal body-region  and the 5'- and 3'-terminus together with their contiguous flanks . we noted however that several major hybridization bands above the delineated  <dig> bp body-region band were detected by the region-specific probe , indicating that either some of the dart-related elements were not conserved at the bamhi restriction site, or there had been insertions by related or unrelated sequences within the two restriction sites, and hence producing larger-sized fragments after the enzyme restriction. nonetheless, those dart-related elements that gave rise to the  <dig> bp band were amenable to methylation analysis of the body-region, because there had been no apparent internal truncations, as detailed below.

we next performed the second round restriction by adding each of the pair of isoschizomers, hpaii and mspi, to the bamhi-digests, and using probes specific to each of the three regions to assess their cytosine methylation state in the introgressants relative to matsumae. we obtained the following results:  there had been no detectable internal truncations between the two bamhi sites, as no clear, smaller-sized bands than the expected  <dig> bp were detected in this enzyme digest ;  the body-region of the conserved, dart-related elements was heavily methylated particularly by mcg in all the rice lines, introgressants and parental, as evidenced by the very similar hybridization patterns between bamhi-digest and bamhi+hapii-digest , albeit there were  <dig> 5'-ccgg sites within this region of dart-related elements, and hence several smaller-sized bands would have been detected if the relevant 5'-ccgg sites were hypomethylated ;  the only clear difference in the methylation state of the introgressants relative to matsumae was that one introgressant  showed hypermethylation as evidenced by the disappearance of several smaller-sized bands ;  the 5' region of the dart-related elements was also heavily methylated by both mcg and mcng in the all the lines because multiple bands were detected , as otherwise we would have predominantly detected a band < <dig> bp in length  ;  compared with matsumae, cg demethylation in rz <dig> and concomitant cg hypermethylation and cng hypomethylation in rz <dig> occurred in the 5'-region of dart-related elements ;  similar to the situation of 5'-region, the 3'-region of the dart-related elements was also heavily methylated by both mcg and mcng in all the lines , as otherwise we would have predominantly detected a band < <dig> bp in length  ;  compared with matsumae, cg demethylation in rz <dig> and cng demethylation in rz <dig> occurred in the 3'-region of the dart-related elements ;  with regard to the methylation state of the 5' and 3' flanks of the dart-related elements, it was deducible that they had a substantially lower methylation level relative to the dart-related elements per se, as evidenced by the multiple small-sized bands detected by the dart 5'- and 3'-region-specific probes . taken together the southern blotting data of all three region-specific probes, it can be concluded that  the dart-related tes are heavily methylated throughout the entire length, but with their 5' and 3' flanks being relatively less methylated compared with the internal body-region, in all the rice lines studied;  to a moderate extent, methylation alteration including both hypo- and hypermethylation occurred in the introgressants relative to their rice parental line matsumae.

limited impact by mobility of the dart-related tes on expression of their adjacent genes under normal and abiotic stress conditions
the seemingly random distribution of the excisions and insertions of the dart-related tes in the introgressants  raised the question as to whether their mobility had imposed any effect on expression of their neighbouring genes. to address this question, it was important to identify genes residing at unique-copy regions  neighbouring the newly mobilized insertion/excision sites of the dart-related tes; in addition, because we were interested in possible regulatory alterations rather than changes in the nucleotide sequence of the genes, we needed to select genes that would show identical amplification between the introgressants and their rice parental line if genomic dna was used as templates. we thus extracted  <dig> kb of flanking genomic sequences  from the whole genome sequence of nipponbare and used them as queries for similarity search against the full-length cdna database of rice http://cdna <dig> dna.affrc.go.jp/cdna. we identified six genes meeting the criteria of unique-copy, encoding either known-function or hypothetical proteins, and identical amplification among all lines on genomic dna templates . real-time qrt-pcr analysis was performed with primers specific to each of the six genes on cdnas derived respectively from the leaf and root tissues from 21-day-old seedlings of the three introgressants and their rice parental line that were grown under normal growing conditions . the results showed that all six genes exhibited significant difference in the transcript abundance in at least one tissue and one introgressant relative to matsumae . specifically,  gene  <dig>  to which a dart copy being inserted  <dig> bp downstream in one introgressant , showed significant down- and up-regulation, respectively, in the root tissue of rz <dig> and rz2;  gene  <dig>  to which a dart copy being inserted  <dig> bp upstream in one introgressant , showed significant up-regulation in both the leaf and root tissues  of all three introgressants though at variable degrees;  gene  <dig>  to which a dart copy being inserted  <dig> bp downstream in one introgressant , showed significant up-regulation in the leaf tissue of introgressants rz <dig> and rz <dig>  and in the root tissue of all three introgressants at variable degrees;  gene  <dig>  for which a dart copy residing  <dig> bp upstream being excised from all three introgressants , showed significant up-regulation in the leaf tissue of all three introgressants, and in the root tissue of introgressants rz <dig> and rz <dig> at variable degrees;  gene  <dig>  to which a dart copy being inserted into the 9th exon in all three introgressants , showed significant up-regulation only in the root tissue of introgressant 35;  gene  <dig>  to which a dart copy being inserted into the 2nd intron in two introgressants , showed significant up-regulation only in the root tissue of introgressant  <dig>  albeit the dramatic changes  in transcription of all six studied genes in the introgressants relative to in the rice parental line, we noted that the changes were not associated with the presence or absence of the newly transposed dart-related tes under normal growing conditions.

we further investigated possible alteration in expression patterns of these six genes between the introgressants and their rice parental line under three kinds of abiotic stress conditions, salinity, alkaline, heavy metal  and cold, which have been widely studied in rice  <cit> . we also included 5-azacytidine  treatment to test for possible relevance of alteration in gene expression to changes in cytosine methylation of these genes. a general conclusion we were able to formulate based on the results was that four of the six genes  showed sharply differential response, both with regard to the kinds of treatments and to the extent of response, to each of the abiotic stresses as well as to 5-ac in the introgressants relative to their rice parental line in both tissues, but the rest two genes  showed grossly similar trend of responses to the treatments between the introgressants and their rice parental line in both tissues . for example, for gene <dig>  significant alteration in its expression was detected only in one  of the stress treatments in the leaf tissue and two treatments  in the root tissue, and 5-ac did not exert an effect, in matsumae; in contrast, in the introgressants, this gene was responsive to most or all the stress treatments and also to 5-ac, and being predominantly up-regulated . an opposite situation was observed for gene  <dig> in the leaf tissue in that four of the five stress treatments  as well as 5-ac induced significant up-regulation of this gene in matsumae; in contrast, two of the introgressants  did not respond to any of the treatments at all, and one introgressant  responded to four of the five stress treatments and to 5-ac, but all responses were of lower extents  relative to those in matsumae . gene  <dig> and gene  <dig> also exhibited sharply differential responses to at least some of the treatments between matsumae and the introgressants for each of the tissues. thus, a general conclusion for the first four genes  was that, in spite of the sharp difference between the introgressants and their rice parental line, they all represented up-regulation in response to the stresses and to 5-ac, probably because the basal expression level of these genes was relatively low in rice , and which often belonged to genes with intrinsic methylation modifications  <cit> . in contrast, the rest two genes  showed relatively smaller difference between the introgressants and their rice parental line, and all were predominantly down-regulated in response to the stress treatments, and either no change or also down-regulation in response to 5-ac treatments, probably because the basal expression level of these two genes was relatively high in rice, and hence they were probably belong to intrinsically unmethylated genes  <cit> . taken the data of all six genes together, it could be concluded that, similar to the situation of under normal growing condition, the expression patterns of theses genes in the introgressant vs. their rice parental line under the various stress conditions and 5-ac treatment, though were substantially different, were again not coupled with the presence or absence of the newly mobilized dart-related tes. however, the fact that at least in one of the studied rice lines, expression of each of the four genes  was up-regulated by 5-ac treatment  suggests that these genes are likely relevant to cytosine methylation modification; the differential response to 5-ac among the lines might be due to their variable methylation patterns of these genes.

discussion
hybridization is prevalent in plants, which plays important roles in genome evolution, and may lead to speciation at both the homoploid level and followed by genome doubling   <cit> . apart from direct transfer and recombinatory generation of genetic variations by hybridization, de novo genetic and epigenetic instabilities can be induced by the process per se, including transcriptional activation and mobilization of cryptic transposable elements   <cit> . several lines of circumstantial evidence have indicated that introgression of dna or chromatin fragments from an alien species into a recipient genome may also produce similar effects in causing genetic and epigenetic instabilities and generate novel phenotypes  <cit> . we have reported previously that introgressive hybridization between rice  and z. latifolia had induced rampant mobilization of two tes, a copia-like ltr retrotransposon tos <dig> and a mite mping  <cit> . in this study, we extended the earlier findings and found that the dart-related tes were also transpositionally reactivated in the introgressants, although the elements were totally quiescent in the parental rice cultivar matsumae. we validated the excisions and insertions by transposon-display  and sequencing, which ruled out genomic rearrangements as the major cause for the dramatically altered hybridization patterns detected by southern blotting in the introgressants.

although numerous studies have established correlative or causal links between te activation and alteration in the element's cytosine methylation state  <cit> , we found that the dart-related tes were similarly hypermethylated along their entire length in the introgressants and their rice parental line matsumae. nonetheless, moderate alteration in the methylation patterns was discernible in the introgressants. furthermore, given that the introgressants were at the 9th-selfed generation and stabilized in both phenotype and dna fingerprinting patterns  <cit> , we could not rule out the possibility that in earlier generations of the introgressants , more marked methylation remodelling might have occurred in the dart-related tes, which however were either largely reverted to the original pattern and/or those individuals with more drastically altered patterns had been purged out during the sexual reproduction, probably due to reduced fitness. therefore, it remains a formal possibility that alteration in cytosine methylation had been associated with mobility of the dart-related tes in the introgressants, a scenario gaining increased empirical support in a vast range of tes and organisms  <cit> .

an array of studies in both plants and animals has established that activity of tes, particularly ltr retrotransposons, may significantly impact expression and function of their adjacent genes  <cit> . nonetheless, other studies have indicated that the majority of newly transposed tes particularly those with small-sizes like mites tended to insert into functionally neutral genomic regions and impose minor effects on their adjacent genes  <cit> . we found in this study that the six single-copy protein-coding genes adjacent to the newly excised or inserted dart-related tes exhibited significantly altered expression in the introgressants relative to their rice parental line under both normal and several abiotic-stress conditions. however, the altered gene expression in the introgressants was not coupled with the te excisions or insertions, suggesting that other regulatory mechanisms were responsible for the altered gene expression in the introgressants. because unbiased amplifications between the introgressants and their rice parental line were observed when their genomic dna was used as templates, it is likely that epigenetic regulation was involved. the observation that for most of the genes, these rice lines exhibited sharply differential response to 5-ac treatment corroborated this possibility, which also accords with our previous results showing that substantial re-patterning of cytosine methylation occurred in the introgressants for amny genomic loci  <cit> . further study is required to elucidate the exact molecular basis underlying the dramatically altered gene expression and their phenotypic consequence in these novel rice lines as a result of introgressive hybridization.

CONCLUSIONS
results of this study have extended our previous findings by documenting that introgressive hybridization between rice and z. latifolia has induced transpositional reactivation of another distinct family of cryptic tes in the parental rice genome, namely, the dart-related tes, suggesting that introgression of chromatin from a realted alien species might have caused a general breakdown of the host cellular machinery responsible for repressive control of te activity. transposition of the dart-related tes was accompanied with a moderate alteration in the element's cytosine methylation in the introgressants. in addition, results of this study showed that extensive alteration in expression of a set of dart-adjacent, protein-coding genes occurred in the introgressants relative to their rice parental line, under both normal and various abiotic stress conditions. nonetheless, the alteration in gene expression was not coupled with excision or insertion of the dart-related tes, implicating other regulatory mechanism was underpinning the changes in gene expression in these novel rice introgressants.

