BACKGROUND
male traits that have evolved under sexual selection, e.g. ornaments to attract potential mates, and their exaggeration have been intensely investigated in many taxa  <cit> . however, in many species females show conspicuous ornaments as well  <cit> . although female ornamentation has long been considered as non-adaptive, solely being a result of a genetic correlation to male ornaments  <cit> , theoretical work and empirical studies suggest that trait expression in females could be promoted by male mate choice in species in which paternal investment and variance in female quality are high  <cit> . studies addressing the adaptive significance of sexual selection in females have gained ground recently  <cit> . nevertheless, evidence that male choice scales the exaggeration of a female trait is still lacking in many taxa.

individual shape, such as morphology of ornaments or other sexual traits, is defined by the dimensions of the respective body part in relation to body size, with the scale relating trait size to body size known as allometry  <cit> . allometric relationships are usually calculated by log-transformed allometric linear equations, y = axb, b representing the allometric slope and x and y representing the indices of body size and trait size, respectively. allometric relationships are classified in  isometry , where the ratio of trait:body size remains constant,  negative allometry , where larger individuals have relatively smaller traits, and  positive allometry , where larger individuals show relatively larger traits. allometry is suspected to evolve by three main forces:  evolutionary constraints,  natural selection, and  sexual selection  <cit> . traditionally, traits under directional sexual selection are expected to show positive allometry  <cit> . striking examples for positive allometry are extraordinarily exaggerated structures, such as antlers of the irish elk, megaloceros giganteos  <cit>  or the horns of different beetles species . in contrast to the traditional view, bonduriansky  <cit>  suggested that both sexual and natural selection may produce a range of allometric relationships depending on net selection on body size and traits. for example, dedicated secondary sexual traits may indeed show positive allometry, but sexually selected modifications to structures with important viability-related functions may exhibit isometric or even negative allometric scaling due to conflicting sexual and viability selection. consequently, the absence of positive allometry does not necessarily imply that a trait is not affected by sexual selection.

allometric relationships of male traits and their homologous expressions in females have been investigated in a wide range of species . however, this aspect is less well examined in species in which females show distinct sexual traits that are not expressed by males, for example many  fish species. whereas empirical studies now repeatedly have shown that female ornamentation is subject to male sexual selection even in species with conventional sex-roles  knowledge about the impact of male choice on female trait allometry and the extent to which female ornamentation signals benefits to males and is still scarce. lebas et al.  <cit>  provided one of the few examples that allometry of a female ornament in the dance fly, rhamphomyia tarsata, might signal fecundity to males.

in general, surprisingly few studies deal with trait allometry in fishes but see  <cit> , although in many fishes the sexes show exaggerated ornaments like elongated, colorful fins, which are assumed to have resulted from sexual selection  <cit> . for example in swordtail fish, xiphophorus helleri, females prefer males that show a sword-shaped fin  <cit> . in cichlids, the role of either male or female fin size in mate choice is largely unknown. moreover, potential sexual ornaments in female cichlids, such as the size of the female pelvic fin, are solely considered to be important for comfort movements  or egg placement  <cit> , and thus assumed to be not socially significant.

in the present study we examined the allometry and sexual selection of a female sexual trait in the biparental, socially monogamous cichlid fish, pelvicachromis taeniatus, in which the female pelvic fin is a conspicuous sexual ornament. both sexes of p. taeniatus show such ornaments, as well as other sexual traits. females develop exceedingly large pelvic fins, which also differ from male fins in shape and color: females exhibit a triangular fan-shaped fin, whereas males develop a long thread-shaped fin. during courtship, both sexes present their nuptially colored ventral body region by arching it towards the partner, while intensely quivering the whole body. simultaneously, females fan out their violet pelvic fin, thereby enlarging their violet ventral nuptial projection area, suggesting that the fin is actively used during mate choice. the female pelvic fin might function as an exaggeration of the female's ventral nuptial coloration area, which acts as a quality signal in intersexual communication .

recent studies have shown that both sexes of p. taeniatus are choosy during mate choice: close kin are preferred over non-kin  <cit>  and larger mating partners over smaller ones  <cit> . furthermore, females of p. taeniatus prefer yellow nuptially colored males over dull males  <cit> , and males prefer females that show a larger extent of violet nuptial coloration. thus, p. taeniatus seems to be a well-suited model system concerning male choice and its impact on female trait allometry.

first, we investigated the allometric relationship of the pelvic in comparison to the other fins, i.e. anal, caudal, dorsal, and pectoral fin. estimates of body and fin sizes were based on measurements of bony structures. for this purpose, x-ray images of females  that greatly differed in body size were analyzed. second, we experimentally tested male preferences for females that showed larger or smaller pelvic fin size in order to test whether it is currently influencing male mate choice. to achieve this we conducted a series of mate choice experiments using computer animations of females that artificially differed in the size of the pelvic fin. a striking advantage of computer-manipulated stimuli is a high degree of standardization between the stimuli, thus minimizing the effects of confounding variables like rapid changes in coloration or different responses in stimuli fish  <cit> . although computer systems and their visual displays are tailored to human vision they have been shown to be an appropriate method to investigate preferences in our study species concerning the perception of movement, shape and coloration  <cit> .

RESULTS
fin allometry
the size of each fin group was highly significantly related to body size . however, allometry significantly differed between fin groups . post-hoc tests revealed that the pelvic fin differed significantly in allometry from the anal fin , and highly significantly from the dorsal fin . pelvic fin's allometry tended to be different from that of the pectoral fin , however, was not significantly different from that of the caudal fin . the size of the pelvic fin was significantly related to individual body condition .

the pelvic and the caudal fin were both isometric because their allometric slopes did not significantly differ from  <dig> . in contrast, the relationship between fin size and body size was negatively allometric for of the anal, dorsal and pectoral fin  because their slopes were significantly smaller than  <dig> 

allometric slope with standard error  of  <dig> female fish and statistical test  whether the allometric relationship between fin size and standard length deviated from  <dig>  *** p <  <dig> , ** p <  <dig> .

male mate choice experiment
males significantly preferred the female stimulus showing a larger pelvic fin . neither body size of males  nor differences in stimulus size  had any significant effects.

discussion and 
CONCLUSIONS
our study is one of the first to investigate the allometry of a conspicuous female ornament, in this case the size of the female pelvic fin in a cichlid fish. the results demonstrate that the allometry of the female sexual ornament  is scaled more positively than that of the other fins. male preference for a larger female pelvic fin size in p. taeniatus suggests that sexual selection in females might have influenced female trait allometry.

fin allometry
the pelvic and caudal fins show isometry in relation to body size, whereas the anal, dorsal and pectoral fins show negative allometry: females exhibit a constant ratio of pelvic or caudal fin size to body size, whereas the other fins are relatively smaller in larger females. furthermore, significant differences between the slopes of log-log regressions of the female fins support differences in their allometric relationships. the strongest differences in slopes occur between the pelvic fin in comparison to the anal, dorsal, and to a lesser extent to the pectoral fin. the caudal fin showed a similar relative growth in relation to body size. thus, the size of the pelvic and caudal fin is more positively related to body size than the other fins. these results imply that the female pelvic, as well as the female caudal fin, underlie other selective pressures than the other fins. the result of the male choice experiment suggests that the female pelvic fin size might have been exaggerated by male choice.

negative allometric relationships  are usually thought to be characteristic for non-sexually selected traits  <cit> , whereas sexually selected traits should exhibit positive allometry . thus our finding of an isometric relationship in a sexually selected trait contradicts these traditional views on the effect of sexual selection on trait allometry . however, bonduriansky and day  <cit>  specify a more complex relationship between selection on body size and traits by incorporating viability selection. natural and sexual selection could have synergistic effects on the evolution of traits, thus sexually selected traits may be scaled into isometry or even negative allometry. recent studies have demonstrated that sexually selected characters do not need to exhibit positive allometry  <cit> . furthermore, house and simmons  <cit>  suggested that the amount of variation in traits under directional sexual selection may be limited by natural selection. such constraints might explain the absence of positive allometry in a trait that is related to locomotion or other viability related functions. in p. taeniatus natural selection might constrain the pelvic fin size because oversized pelvic fins may lower the predator escape response of this fish. thus, the isometric growth might be a result of sexual selection constrained by natural selection acting on the size of the pelvic fin.

the caudal fin allometry was not significantly different from that of the pelvic fin. the selective pressures acting on caudal fin size were not object of the present study. in other fishes a range from negative to positive allometric relationships of the caudal fin size has been reported  <cit> . recent work in other fish species suggests that natural selection, e.g. predation, influences caudal fin morphology  <cit> . for example, in western mosquitofish, gambusia affinis, fish originating from populations which are subject to high levels of predation exhibit a larger caudal fin than those from predator-free populations, resulting in greater maximum burst-swimming  <cit> . nevertheless, sexual selection cannot be ruled out as a selective force that might scale the size of the caudal fin as well like in guppies, poecilia reticulata  <cit> . although the disentanglement of natural and sexual selection acting on different fins is difficult, future studies could address whether changes in allometry between fins might appear, for example under different environmental conditions. artificial selection experiments or measurements of phenotypic plasticity could address whether environmental conditions, such as predation regime or water-flow speed, might have different impacts on fin allometry. on the other hand, mate choice experiments could elucidate the role of sexual selection acting on the size and allometry of different fins.

male mate choice experiment
males associated more often with female stimuli showing a larger pelvic fin size. why are male p. taeniatus sensitive to female pelvic fin size? female ornaments could act as indicators of female quality  <cit> . males may benefit from being choosy through  direct benefits, for example deriving from female fertility, fecundity or the amount of maternal care, or  from indirect, genetic benefits for their offspring  <cit> , deriving from enhanced viability or parasite resistance or enhanced attractiveness of daughters  <cit> . our results show that pelvic fin size of female p. taeniatus is positively related to body condition, thus suggesting that the size of the female pelvic fin reveals individual quality: females with high body condition may show a decreased mortality risk through disease or starvation during brood care  <cit> , and sire daughters that are more attractive to males of the following generation. thus, male p. taeniatus may get both direct as well as indirect benefits when choosing females that show pronounced expression of the quality signal.

the pelvic fins are colored similar to the ventral violet nuptial belly coloration of a female. the extent of the violet ventral coloration is associated with female quality revealing female fecundity, readiness to spawn, maternal quality and offspring-survival . consequently, the pelvic fin could honestly enhance the transfer of quality information about an individual, and males could expect direct fitness benefits when choosing a female that shows a larger pelvic fin. however, the trait might be used to exploit male preferences, especially when the expression of the trait may imply low costs. nevertheless, the positive correlation between pelvic fin size and individual condition contradicts the exploitation hypothesis, but future studies need to address whether the pelvic fin as well as its coloration honestly signals female quality and the heritability of the trait.

in addition to male choice, intrasexual female-female competition may be important for the evolution of females' pelvic fin size. in p. taeniatus, like in many other cichlids  <cit> , females show sequential aggressive behavioral patterns towards other conspecific females. before a fight escalates females form their body into an s-shape to threaten a potential rival. here, the female pelvic fin is fanned out to enlarge the lateral projection area. hence, a larger pelvic fin size might imply advantages during female-female competition, for example when the decision whether to attack or escape from a rival is estimated by a larger lateral display area. thus, the size of the pelvic may evolve by both inter- and intrasexual selection.

female showiness expressed by morphological traits, such as conspicuous ornaments, is widespread in many taxa. moreover, recent research suggests that male choice occurs far more often than expected  <cit> . our study is, to our knowledge, the first to show that male choice might scale the allometry of a female sexual trait, and therefore has implications for the understanding of the scaling relationship of female traits with body size.

