BACKGROUND
multiple sclerosis  is the prototypic autoimmune disease with relapsing-remitting behaviour  <cit> . clinical relapses are the defining feature of ms and act as the basis for categorizing different forms of the disease, as a marker to define the disease's natural history and to measure the success of new therapies . a relapse in ms is a reflection of acute focal inflammatory event in the central nervous system  that disrupts neural conduction by damaging myelinated axons. it is now known from natural history studies performed using frequent mri scanning that clinical relapses represent only a small proportion  of cns inflammatory events, indicated by the presence of contrast enhancing lesions  <cit> . the clinical relapse rate during the relapsing-remitting phase of ms is around one per year and decreases as the disease advances  <cit> . in ms, clinical relapses generally last for a month with spontaneous partial or full recovery afterwards. their distributions along time have not been associated with any specific pattern or precipitator  <cit>  although it has been estimated that the presences of such relapses are preceded in one third of cases by either infections or stressful events  <cit> . in any case, a clear understanding of environmental factors driving the presence of relapses as well as the cellular and molecular mechanisms governing the relapse onset and resolution is still lacking.

although pathogenesis of ms is still unknown, it is proposed as a t-cell-mediated autoimmune disease, since its characteristic activity pattern, including relapses, is related to the temporally and spatially segregated effects of activated t cells  <cit> . healthy animals and humans contain auto-reactive effector t cells in the peripheral repertoire  <cit> . although the activity and function of auto-reactive t cells in humans is not well understood, studies in non-human primates have shown that these cells can be activated, and may occasionally trigger a t-cell-mediated attack against the cns  <cit> . however, the activation and clonal expansion of these effector t cells  is believed to be inhibited by peripheral tolerance mechanisms, among other factors by the presence of active regulatory t cells   <cit> . as a matter of fact, deficiency in treg results in a fatal autoimmune syndrome affecting multiple organs in mice  <cit>  and humans  <cit> . moreover, several reports suggest ms and type  <dig> diabetic patients may have an impaired treg function and an imbalance in teff-treg homeostasis  <cit> . on the other hand therapeutic ctla- <dig> blocking with monoclonal antibodies  in cancer patients induces autoimmunity  <cit> . in the periphery, for a given age and genetic background, the treg population represents a stable proportion of the cd4+ t cells in the steady state , suggesting that the homeostasis of teff and treg are tightly co-regulated  <cit> . thus, homeostasis of treg is likely to be an important process in the proper functioning of the immune system as well for controlling self-reacting teff cells and preventing autoimmunity  <cit> .

in order to gain insights in the cellular events leading to the relapsing dynamics, we develop a computational model of the adaptive immune system. we hypothesize that the cross-regulation between teff and treg cells that works as a negative feedback, coupled with stochastic processes such as common infections , is able to buffer oscillations in the functioning of the immune system, allowing at the same time to create an immune response when it is required  <cit> . however, under certain circumstances, such as in autoimmune diseases, the system is able to create a stable oscillatory behaviour that allows the activation and expansion of self-reacting teff cells. activation of teff will induce tissue damage, the counterpart of clinical relapse. in this study we attempt to explain what conditions are necessary for triggering the relapsing-remitting autoimmune response in ms and why in most cases it is not a chronic-progressive process from the beginning. given the key role of relapses in the study and management of ms and other autoimmune diseases, a broad understanding of relapsing dynamics is important to promote accurate diagnosis, patient management and treatment decisions.

RESULTS
modelling the adaptive immune system reveals the cross-regulation between teff-treg populations a control mechanism that maintains immune tolerance
we aimed to probe by means of a mathematical model  whether the relapsing-remitting dynamics in ms can emerge as a result of the intrinsic control properties of the immune system that allow it to oscillate   <cit> . we observed two different kinds of dynamics: healthy regime and autoimmune regime . working under a healthy configuration, activated teff-treg populations remain in a dynamic  balance without producing immune responses , the equivalent of immune homeostasis. such activated teff dynamics does not produce tissue damage . however, by decreasing the maximum activation and proliferation rate of treg  and without changing the production or activation rate of self-reacting resting t-cells, immune homeostasis was lost and spontaneous immune responses emerged in the absence of infectious agents, mimicking the relapsing dynamics of autoimmune diseases . the presence of activated teff cell peaks produces both reversible and irreversible damage. the sum of both represents the clinical relapses equivalent to the one observed in ms patients . the presence of the teff-treg loop restores the homeostatic levels providing an explanation for why relapses recover and the disease does not become chronic-progressive.

a significant breakdown of central immune tolerance might be expected to produce an autoimmune phenotype, since the frequency of self-reactive lymphocytes would be increased, as occurs in the ipex or apeced syndromes that are caused by mutations in the foxp <dig> or aire genes, respectively  <cit> . however, performing a sensitivity analysis by increasing the generation of self-reactive t cells, we found that if the teff-treg loop parameters are maintained within homeostatic values , this module can cope with such increase of self-reacting teff, even if the amount  is drastically augmented . thus, immune tolerance is maintained and the appearance of autoimmunity is prevented. in order to observe the induction of autoimmune diseases in this context, it was necessary to tune down the teff-treg regulatory loop. therefore our model indicates that genetic mutations affecting central tolerance are not sufficient to develop autoimmune diseases but require an impaired teff-treg cross-regulation. this is in agreement with the experimental finding that treg function is impaired in such hereditary autoimmune diseases  <cit> . finally, we observed in our simulations, using same parameters but different seeds, that the distribution of activated teff cells peaks  are produced at different intensities and moments, indicating spontaneous heterogeneity in the temporal distribution of relapses . such differences account for a different behavior of the reversible and irreversible damage, indicating clinical heterogeneity.

decreasing the strength of the teff-treg cross-regulation favours autoimmunity
we explored the autoimmune dynamics in the parameter space that controls the teff-treg regulatory loop, repeating the procedure with different input seeds  in order to reproduce the stochasticity in the activation of the immune system by pathogens. although other parameters can influence in the outcome dynamic , it was αr which provokes the characteristic relapsing-remitting peaks. as we will see αe turned out to be an important parameter as well. because of that we performed a sensitivity analysis of both parameters running simulations over  <dig>  days  for each pair of proliferation rate values in the range of αe =  and αr = , with  <dig>  as step value  . since we are dealing with stochastic differential equations,  <dig> different realizations were performed for each pair of values of the scanned parameters. peaks of activated teff cells were only observed when there was a reduction in the strength of the teff-treg regulatory loop, and mainly when the treg response was slower . we observed that the simulations only produced high peaks of teff activity in a small region of the parameter space. as expected, the highest peaks of activated teff cells were observed when treg activity and proliferation was minimal. however, the highest peaks did not always occur when teff proliferation rate was at its highest. a decrease in the teff proliferation rate for a given seed does not necessarily imply less severe relapses and, as a matter of fact, it could produce an increase in relapse intensity. such apparently counterintuitive consequences are due to the strong interaction between the time dynamics of the system and the time at which the noise input occurs, as we will see further on. for average results , the population median tends to grow as the maximum teff proliferation rate increases, as well as when the maximum treg proliferation rate decreases.

the previous model can be further simplified in order to keep the dynamically relevant compartments influencing the time behavior. in the reduced model, the t-cell population system is represented by just two variables, namely e and r, representing the size of activated t cell populations and the stochastic effects were eliminated substituting re, rr respectively by their expected values Λe, Λr . in absence of stochastic events, the system has a stable point . this point is an attractive point and the system oscillates with decreasing amplitude until reaching the equilibrium point . the value of teff and treg cells reached in the equilibrium depends on the specific values of every parameter of the model and does not depend on the initial conditions of the levels of activated teff and treg cells. we observed that when αr decreases, the equilibrium point moves to higher numbers of teff cells, while treg cells remain practically the same point . moreover as αr decreases the shape of the spirals gets longer along the y axis, corresponding to teff cells, and becomes radically narrower in the x axis, which corresponds to treg cells . the sensitivity analysis of the system showed that the shape of the spirals do not significantly change when the maximum teff proliferation rate αe changes, although the value of the equilibrium point increases in the treg axis. if we carry the system to extreme values, αr  >  <dig>  this latter dynamic might represent a hypersensitive treg response, which could be beneficial to prevent autoimmunity, although perhaps at the cost of not being able to control infections or even, inducing immunodeficiency. this mechanism could speed up the treg response, allowing a pathogen to establish a chronic infection. as an example, it has been proposed that many pathogens responsible for persistent chronic infections highjack immunological regulatory mechanisms  <cit> . in summary, our analysis suggests that the teff-treg regulatory loop is critical for the outcome of the system .

predicting relapses in ms
in order to evaluate and validate our model, we compared computational simulations of the reversible damage  with the contrast enhancing lesion  time series from  <dig> patients with ms. the model was able to partially forecast the cel time series , with correlation distributions centered on coefficient values of  <dig>  and in some cases up to  <dig>  . these results indicate that teff-treg cross-regulation is a key element in governing the oscillatory behavior of the immune system and drive the presence of relapses in ms, but at the same time indicate a significant component of stochasticity in the generation of clinical relapses, limiting our predictive ability.

dynamics of the teff-treg regulatory loop after perturbation: implications for immunotherapy
the effects of treg and teff perturbations on the system were studied in order to gain insight into the dynamics of the immune system, mainly on the effect of noise, as well as to predict the effect of immunotherapies targeting either effector or regulatory t cell populations. by analyzing the e-r state-space before and after the perturbation, we identified the different outcomes in the system. in the absence of perturbations, the trajectory of the state-space of both populations is a spiral that moves clockwise until reaching the equilibrium point, and the change of the initial conditions produces a new trajectory that also moved clockwise towards the same equilibrium point . the effect of introducing an impulse of either naïve teff or treg cells produced a jump to another trajectory. this is equivalent to restarting the model under different initial conditions, the equilibrium point remaining the same.

from the therapeutic point of view, modulating the levels of teff and treg populations as possible immunotherapies has several implications that a priori cannot be intuitive. the time at which the therapy is introduced may be important, since depending on this factor the effect can be beneficial or deleterious . thus, if a therapy increasing the levels or activity of treg is administered when the dynamic of the effector population is decreasing, the effect of the treg immunotherapy would be deleterious. in the same way, although an immunotherapy with teff cells would be deleterious for autoimmunity, depending on the dose timing could be protective. if a dose with teff cells is administered when the dynamic of the regulatory population is decreasing, the effect of the teff immunotherapy would be beneficial although it can seem paradoxical. this prediction can explain why targeting il-17a, an interleukin with pro-inflammatory functions, might not have beneficial effects if they are administered at the wrong time or dosage  <cit> .

for example, for modeling cell therapy with treg cells, we compared the sensitivity to a treg perturbation under health  and autoimmunity  using the same conditions by analyzing the changes in the trajectory of the phase-space between teff and treg cell populations after treg perturbation and the effect in the dynamics of reversible an irreversible damage . under healthy configurations and after the perturbation , the system jumps to a new trajectory  where the new maximum value reached by activated teff is higher than in the initial trajectory. however, in the autoimmune condition and after the treg impulse, the system also jumps to a new more distant trajectory . the model was more sensitive in this autoimmune regime and while the maximum value of activated teff cells was less than  <dig> cells in the healthy regime, it reached more than  <dig> activated teff cells in the autoimmune regime. in consequence, the damage both reversible and irreversible produced is very noticeable during an autoimmune regime  while it remains insignificant during a healthy regime .

discussion
the study of the relapsing-remitting dynamics of ms and other autoimmune diseases can have practical benefits for patient management. the unpredictability of relapses in ms is one of the most disturbing aspects of the diseases reported by patients. given the key role of relapses in the management of the disease, a broad understanding of relapsing dynamics is important to perform an accurate prognosis, improving patient's management and therapeutic decisions. in order to gain insights in the mechanistic basis of this relapsing dynamics we developed a mathematical model of the adaptive immune system. we aimed to assess the hypothesis that the characteristic relapsing-remitting dynamics of autoimmune disease emerges as a result of the intrinsic control properties of the immune system. based on our simulations, we found that immune tolerance, defined in our model as the capacity to cope the activation of effectors t cells, is an emergent property of the teff-treg cross-regulation. this indicates that the teff-treg loop is a powerful control module that regulates the adaptive immune system when activated by stochastic environmental factors. a pathological dynamic regime of the teff-treg loop created a pulsing dynamics in which the expansion of the teff population transiently escapes the control of treg population, creating the relapses typical of autoimmune diseases such as ms. in our model, relapses mainly arise upon the failure in the treg response and were mainly driven by stochastic process that might correspond either to thymic production of new self-reacting t cells or from random sporadic infections. interestingly, the frequency of such stochastic events where not the main factor producing relapses, but the severity in the dysfunction of the teff-treg cross-regulation was the main responsible of relapse frequency and severity. this finding can explain why the relapse activity in patients with ms is quite stable during the relapsing-remitting phase, because it would mainly depend on the dysfunction of the immune system, but make relapses very difficult to predict.

our model shows that the pathologic dynamic regime in autoimmune conditions become stationary and makes the autoimmune process chronic but relapsing instead of progressive. in this scenario, autoimmunity can be considered as a dynamic disease  <cit> , in which the pathological state arises through the emergence of stationary stochastic dynamics in the immune system that overcomes immune homeostasis. although our study was mainly inspired in the dynamics of ms, we believe it can provide insights about the dynamic of other autoimmune diseases, since many of them also have relapses  but also chronic, non-relapsing autoimmune diseases such as type  <dig> diabetes might also display relapsing inflammatory bursts  <cit> . thus, our study supports the view of autoimmune diseases as complex disease produced not by a single molecular or cellular event or governed by environmental challenges, but rather by the combination of many factors that deregulate the control mechanisms in the immune system  <cit> .

our study highlights the critical role of the cross-regulation of t cell populations in peripheral tolerance and in the generation of autoimmune diseases. although both the loss of the central tolerance and the impairment of the teff-treg loop can contribute to the generation of autoimmunity, our model suggests that the breakdown of cross-regulation and not central tolerance leads to this kind of relapsing autoimmune dynamics. this result is in agreement with the fact that the majority of autoimmune diseases are sporadic and not related with mutations in genes controlling central tolerance, such as in the ipex or apeced syndromes  <cit> , and that impairment of teff-treg population is also required even in monogenic autoimmune diseases  <cit> . another conclusion from our study is that the autoimmune diseases can result from the weakening of the peripheral tolerance, particularly the control exerted by treg over effector/auto-reactive t cells. there is already experimental evidence supporting a role of such control loop on the prevention of some autoimmune disease. particularly there is evidence of several genetics defects weakening this loop that are clearly associated with autoimmunity  <cit>  as well as previous mathematical models supporting this idea  <cit> . our results show that defects on central tolerance  might not be sufficient to induce autoimmunity. there is already experimental evidence proving this fact in animal models. particularly, transgenic mouse model have shown that a thymus generating more than 90% of its total output of a single anti-mbp auto-reactive t cell clones without causing autoimmunity, because of the peripheral control exerted by the remaining 10% of the t cell repertoire that happens to contain treg  <cit> .

previous models of cross-regulation between effector and regulatory cells have shown bi-stable regimes  <cit> . in one of the stable points, corresponding to the healthy states, the treg population controls the effector population, while in the second stable point, interpreted as the autoimmune state, effector cells outcompete or predominate over regulatory cells. these models provide an explanation for the etiology and natural history of chronic-progressive autoimmune diseases such as type i diabetes or the progressive subtypes  of lupus or ms, as the result of a switch to the pathology stable attractor. however, relapsing-remitting dynamics of autoimmune diseases such as those found typically in ms, rheumatoid arthritis or lupus still lack of a theoretical framework. the major contribution of the model introduced in this paper is a dynamical explanation for such relapsing-remitting dynamics. even though the cross-regulation makes that both populations always stay within the basin of attraction of a unique steady stable point, there are configurations whose trajectories produce temporal relapses in presence of environmental stochastic events. one basic assumption of our model is that the oscillatory dynamics of the immune systems will depend the prey-predator model with stochasticity  <cit> . however, in our model the stochastic environmental factors were modeled as a train of impulses influencing the teff growth  rate and the treg death rate . for this reason, our model differs from previous predator-prey models because the stochasticity component come from introducing either teff or treg randomly using a train of impulses, independently of the t cell population density used in other models  <cit> .

our results also show that the onset of the relapse is triggered by stochastic events such as the random thymic generation of auto-reactive teff or treg cells or sporadic common infections that activate the immune system. however, the duration of each relapse and the overall relapsing frequency are under the control of the dynamics of teff-treg loop. this result might help to explain why previous attempts to identify external factors triggering relapses failed to provide clear explanations  <cit> . moreover, predicting the appearance of new relapses will be difficult, not only because we would lack sufficient knowledge about the dynamics of the immune system in a given individual at a given time, but also due to the influence of the stochastic events.

in our study we model the reversible tissue damage in order to provide a comprehensible link to the active lesions in cns observed in patients with ms. therefore, we compared long-term simulations of reversible tissue damage with the cel dataset from patients with ms. the simulations obtained closely reproduced the oscillatory behavior of the cel dataset, obtaining moderate to high correlations and reproduced the two-phase behavior . in this way, this model explains dynamics of autoimmunity with a basic cyclic nature. this is important, since several human autoimmune diseases are documented to have a cyclic behavior, although this is not the only class of dynamics observed for autoimmunity . moreover, mathematical models of t cell vaccination have explored the dynamics of the immune system after generating anti-idiotipic treg for switching-off the autoimmune response, explaining the cyclic dynamics of autoimmune disease  <cit> . however, the limited predictive ability suggest that either other biological factors not include in the model or, more probably, the stochasticity of t-cell activation due to random infections might account for a significant proportion of the temporal distribution of relapses. also, although our model is able to reproduce the relapsing dynamics of ms, other models considering other factors might also be able to provide similar explanations.

from the therapeutic point of view, our results may have several implications. first, our analysis indicates that autoimmunity is a dynamic phenomenon. thus, perturbing the teff and treg populations might produce different outcomes depending on the control parameters of the immune system in a given patient and the timing of the intervention, but without modifying the underlying dynamics. accordingly, therapeutic approaches to treat autoimmune diseases that involve either decreasing teff populations  or increasing treg populations  will not cure the disease, since they are aimed to keep the values of both populations in the range observed in healthy state but without restoring the control of the immune system to that of the healthy state. from a systems biology perspective, therapeutic interventions should be designed to restore the dynamics of the system to the healthy state or at least to a less deleterious dynamic  <cit> . in order to efficiently modulate the dynamics of the immune system it is necessary to know in which region of parameter space the immune system of a given patient is acting at any time, as well as to identify which control mechanism can be targeted  <cit> . as we found in the perturbation analysis, considering the outcome of increasing the treg population or decreasing the teff population to treat autoimmune diseases, intervening at different times and with different perturbations, might be beneficial. the timing and dose will be specific for a given patient or subgroup of patients, implying the need for personalized medicine. nevertheless, it will be necessary to translate the critical parameters to specific molecular and cellular markers of the immune system in order to be able to apply it to human immunotherapy  <cit> .

our study has several limitations. as commented before, despite the emerging importance of treg in the immune system, fundamental parameters of the biology and homeostasis of these cells, such as their lifespan, turnover, and recirculation properties remain unknown. also, while we analyze the cross-regulation of teff and treg populations from a systemic point of view, many other aspects of the immune response that may also be important, were not contemplated, such as the innate immune systems activity, regulation of the effector response in the tissue, the role of the t-cell immune repertoire or the control of the immune response on t-cell activation  <cit> . however even with this simplified model of the immune system, we were able to show that autoimmune diseases can arise as a dynamic phenomenon and we could identify the critical contribution of the teff-treg loop in the control of the immune response, providing a theoretical framework for the understanding of the relapsing dynamics in autoimmunity. also, the induction of an autoimmune response in our model requires some minimal changes in the parameter values. this may represent the accumulation of the genetic background , il2r or il7r for ms)  <cit> , in conjunction with the shaping of the immune repertoire during ontogeny and the presence of stochastic infectious challenges for generating individuals susceptible to develop autoimmune diseases.

CONCLUSIONS
the relapsing dynamic in ms may derive from the emergent properties of the immune system running in a pathological state, a fact that has implications for predicting disease course and developing new therapies for ms. this pathological state might be produced by the combination of many factors that deregulate the control mechanisms in the immune system . due to the fact that the results of this study are qualitative rather than quantitative, the conclusions must be considered as highly plausible conjectures, which have to be experimentally tested.

