BACKGROUND
adoptive cell therapy using cytotoxic t lymphocytes  has emerged as a new approach to treat patients with various types of cancers and viral infections, and its effectiveness has been demonstrated in phase i/ii studies  <cit> . ctls play an important role in controlling viral infection and eliminating cells with malignant potential. in clinical trials involving the adoptive transfer of antigen-specific ctls, ctl doses of 107- <dig> cells per kilogram of body mass are required to achieve efficacy  <cit> . thus, there has been considerable interest in developing an in vitro system to expand human ctls for use in the implementation of adoptive immune therapies.

in general, the culture medium for in vitro expansion of ctls is supplemented with serum, usually of human or fetal calf origin  <cit> . the serum supplement, however, significantly affects experimental results, because a large number of poorly defined components including growth factors, antibodies, and other immunologically active substances vary in concentration between batches  <cit> . accordingly, a serum-free medium  needs to be developed for standardization of in vitro expansion of ctls. however, despite the importance of sfm, its development for in vitro expansion of ctls has not been fully substantiated.

based on the findings of previous studies of sfm for human lymphocytes  <cit> , we prepared a basal sfm for human ctls through several culture experiments. to achieve better cell growth, growth-enhancing candidates lacking basal sfm for ctls were identified by a literature search. cholesterol, phospholipids, and polyamines, which are principal components in serum, were selected on the basis of their positive roles in cell growth of many mammalian cell lines  <cit> . antioxidants, which are known to exert a synergistic effect on cell growth with polyamines  <cit> , were also included as candidates. in order to assess the effects of these candidate components on the growth of ctls, a fractional factorial design was employed to screen active factors for cell growth, followed by response surface designs to optimize their concentration.

the cellular functions of ctls grown in the newly developed sfm were also characterized by a cytotoxicity assay and an enzyme-linked immunospot  assay. to generate antigen-specific ctls, we used cytomegalovirus  peptide epitope nlvpmvatv as an antigen. derived from the immunodominant cmv matrix protein pp <dig>  it is one of the most widely studied antigens in clinical studies  <cit> .

RESULTS
sfm designed by a fractional factorial method
the basal sfm for in vitro expansion of t lymphocytes, the components of which are listed in table  <dig>  was formulated through a literature search and confirmed via culture experiments . in order to further improve the sfm,  <dig> supplements, phosphatidylcholine, polyamine supplement, antioxidant supplement, and cholesterol, were selected as potential growth enhancers, based on their growth promoting abilities reported in previous studies with other cells. due to a limited cell number, a statistical approach based on a fractional factorial design was applied for efficient testing of selected active supplements. as shown in the matrix presented in table  <dig>  kinds  <dig> of sfm were prepared. the first row of  elements in table  <dig> is a basic assembly referring to the basal sfm. since the culture performance of pbmcs in these sfm may depend on the donors, three sets of experiments were carried out independently with pbmcs prepared from three different donors. cell cultures were performed with il- <dig> supplementation, as described in the materials and methods section.

 no addition;  addition of the indicated amount of additives.

pbmcs were obtained from three different donors . the seeding density was  <dig> ×  <dig> cells/ml.

to determine positive factors for cell growth from among the  <dig> supplements tested, the maximum viable cell concentrations in each culture were evaluated in the normal probability plot.

the main effect of phosphatidylcholine, located in the lower left-hand portion of the plot, was always negative with regard to cell growth, consistent with the previous assumption. cholesterol, located in the upper right-hand of the plot, always showed a positive effect on cell growth. in the case of the polyamine supplement, a positive effect was shown in two out of the three tests. as for the antioxidant supplement, a negative effect was observed in two out of the three tests. accordingly, among the four candidates, excluding the clearly negative candidate  and one possibly negative candidate , cholesterol and polyamine supplement were chosen as active factors on cell growth.

determination of optimal concentrations of supplements using a statistical analysis
in order to optimize the concentration of cholesterol and polyamine supplement,  <dig> kinds of sfm were designed by the response surface method. cell cultures were performed with il- <dig> supplementation, as described in the materials and methods section.

concentrations of cholesterol and polyamine supplement in each sfm are shown in figure 3a. three sets of cultures were performed independently with pbmcs obtained from the three different donors. the seeding density was  <dig> ×  <dig> cells/ml.

to confirm cell growth in the optimized sfm, pbmcs were cultivated with il- <dig> supplementation in  <dig> kinds of sfm, including the optimized sfm and the  <dig> designed sfm shown in figure 3a.

phenotypical analysis of cells cultured in developed sfm
pbmcs comprise monocytes and lymphocytes including t cells , b cells, and nk cells. to determine the possible changes in cell population of pbmcs cultured in the developed sfm with il- <dig> supplementation, subsets of the population at the maximum viable cell concentration in sfm as well as scm, as shown in figure 4b, were analyzed by flow cytometry with fluorochrome-conjugated monoclonal antibodies .

initially, the major cell population was t lymphocytes, while 13-27% of pbmcs were monocytes and b cells. regardless of the culture media, most of the viable cells, after cultivation with il- <dig> supplementation, were t lymphocytes, while monocytes and b lymphocytes were not detected. the percentage of cd3+ t lymphocyte population was similar between sfm and scm . the results of the phenotypical analysis are summarized in table  <dig> 

a freshly thawed pbmcs, before cultivation, were analyzed.

b cell samples in the three independent cultures were taken at a maximum viable cell concentration .

c not detected.

functional assays of cells cultured in developed sfm
to determine the effector function of ctls cultivated in the developed sfm, antigen-specific ctls were first generated from pbmcs, cultured in both the developed sfm and scm, by stimulation of peptide-presenting dcs. the effector function of ctls was then characterized by a cytotoxicity assay and an elispot assay. functional assays were duplicated independently.

discussion
in developing sfm for in vitro expansion of human ctls, a limitation of cell number from the same donor thwarted the employment of a full factorial design. in this study, a simple approach to screen media supplements that enhance the growth of t lymphocytes was described. the approach combined elements of statistical experimental design with maximum cell concentration to identify potent growth responses of t lymphocytes. the use of normal probability plots confirmed the experimental results in a statistical sense which provided a simple means of analyzing and prioritizing the consequences of our experimental results.

although serum has previously been replaced by several supplements in lymphocyte cultures  <cit> , the sfm developed in this study showed a more enhanced effect on the growth of lymphocytes. we adopted a basal sfm with the serum-free components listed in table  <dig>  transferrin, a widely used but expensive growth factor, was also successfully replaced by ferric citrate which could deliver iron to cells. in addition, 2-mercaptoethanol and 1-thioglycerol were used because they were reported as positive factors on proliferation and activation of lymphocytes  <cit> .

among four candidates chosen to further enhance the growth of lymphocytes, cholesterol and polyamine supplement were selected as active factors on cell growth by analysis of design-expert®. cholesterol, one of the major lipid constituents in serum, is a major lipid component of the plasma membrane in most cells, and polyamines including putrescine and spermidine are commonly used to supplement sfm for a variety of cell types  <cit> . the optimal concentrations of these two supplements were  <dig> × of cholesterol and  <dig> × of polyamine supplement. the optimal concentration of polyamine supplement was quite low, compared to that of cholesterol. in three independent cultures, cholesterol always showed a positive effect on cell growth. however, in the case of polyamine supplement, a negative effect on growth was observed in one case. polyamine supplement, similar to antioxidant supplement, which showed inconsistent responses in repeated experiments, displayed a marginal effect on cell growth.

on the other hand, although being universally used in sfm as a lipid source, phosphatidylcholine showed a significantly negative effect on the growth of lymphocytes. phosphatidylcholine is one of the phospholipids that constitute serum, and it is known as an active factor on cell growth  <cit> . the effect of phosphatidylcholine, however, could be affected by the kinds of cells cultured and the concentration of phosphatidylcholine used  <cit> . in addition, the effects of phosphatidylcholine on cell growth were influenced by the lipids present in serum  <cit> . therefore, it is assumed that lymphocyte culture can be negatively affected by phosphatidylcholine, especially when fatty acids are supplemented as a lipid replacement.

for the rapid generation of large numbers of ctls, different strategies have been employed, each having respective, and debatable, pros and cons. in some cases, cd8+ t cells are initially separated from pbmcs, and the process of expansion is then completed  <cit> . such a strategy would yield a greater number of ctls at the end of the culture. however, in this study, since the focus was on developing a sfm, culture strategy was not emphasized.

as expected, growth profiles of pbmcs, which are not a continuous cell line, varied depending on the donors. in some cases, when cells were cultured in scm, they did not grow . furthermore, with regard to the % of cd8+ lymphocytes in the cultured cells, variation between donors in scm was more significant than that in sfm . therefore, use of sfm can reduce the variation that can be generated from many causes during the culture period. furthermore, cytotoxicity and elispot assays revealed that the effector function of ctls cultivated in the developed sfm was retained or even better than that in scm.

CONCLUSIONS
sfm with cholesterol and polyamine supplement for human lymphocyte culture was developed efficiently using a statistical method. this sfm provides better or at least equivalent performance with respect to cell growth, variation in cell population, and cytotoxicity, compared to scm.

