BACKGROUND
promoters have guided evolution for millions of years. it appears that they were the main engine responsible for the integration of different mutations favorable for the environmental conditions
 <cit> . promoters are critical regions for gene regulation in complex genomes and are located upstream of tss . a typical promoter region is composed of a core promoter and regulatory domains
 <cit> . the structure of a promoter is recognized by the presence of known promoter elements, such as tata box, gc-box, ccaat-box, bre and inr box
 <cit> . therefore, accurate recognition of a promoter structure relies on a comprehensive list of promoter elements. nevertheless, using these promoter elements for classification has proven to be difficult and perhaps even disadvantageous for different functional correlations between promoter sequences. from an evolutionary standpoint, within non-coding regulatory regions, nucleotides can change their order more frequently and these binding sites often become very small and instable
 <cit> . previously, approaches towards promoter classification include motif sequences and other structural parameters, such as dna curvature, bendability, stability, nucleosome positioning or comparison of various dna sequences
 <cit> . currently, promoters from vertebrates are classified into two major classes, namely tata and cpg types while in mammals there is a subclassification in tata box–enriched and cpg-rich promoters
 <cit> . in order to investigate possible interactions between different biological processes, we found that an overall correlation between dna sequence features among promoter regions may be an alternative method. in this context, we have chosen a different approach to classify promoter sequences by using two-dimensional patterns obtained through kappa index of coincidence  and % values
 <cit> . this classification it is mainly done by considering the shape and density of these promoter patterns. in this study, we explore the structural properties of these patterns and we search for correlations between promoter sequences of several different species. genome sequencing has led to the development of many bioinformatic methods for accurate recognition and extraction of promoter sequences. a number of experimental approaches to compile tsss on a genome-wide scale have been developed including the eukaryotic promoter database
 <cit>  and plantprom database
 <cit> . we used these databases and focused our attention on  <dig>  promoter sequences from arabidopsis thaliana, drosophila melanogaster, homo sapiens and oryza sativa. in humans we were also interested in promoters of genes that are expressed preferentially in certain tissues. several studies converged on characterizing patterns of tissue specific gene expression, including tiger  database
 <cit> , which contains comprehensive information about human tissue-specific gene expression profiles. we have used tiger database list of tissue-specific genes to determine the proportion of each promoter class in  <dig> tissues. this allowed us to identify certain relations between promoter sequences and different biological processes.

RESULTS
we first investigated if some promoter patterns occur more often then others. secondly we determined which of these patterns are more common in certain species and whether their distribution may have some evolutionary implications. in the third analysis we examined the distribution of these promoter classes among human tissues.

promoter classification
when promoter patterns are generated, some initial general conclusions can be drawn. although these promoter sequences are less conserved between species they exhibit similar patterns. each pattern is composed of vertically aligned clusters of kappa ic  and %  values. vertical positions of these clusters form a promoter pattern which has a specific form for each promoter sequence. we have been able to classify promoters according to their patterns and noticed ten general types of promoters . although the overall shape and density seems to be conserved across different classes of promoters, they do differ in finer details. this may indicate a further possible organization of promoter classes in several subclasses. their shape is explained by the presence of different structures such as simple sequence repeats  or short tandem repeats . among these structures we found an interesting distribution of short and long homopolymer tracts or di- and tri-nucleotides formations, many of which are consistent with other studies previously done
 <cit> . we have been able to partition these patterns into ten classes on the basis of clear visual distinctions between their shape and their cluster density. the name of each promoter class has been chosen by the average nucleotide content and kappa ic values, as follows:

1) at-based promoters. at-based representative patterns are distinguished by high % and kappa ic values. the left side of the pattern is predominant, while the right side is significantly less pronounced. the shape of this pattern exhibits various different lengths of short poly homopolymer tracts . at-based patterns are characteristic for gene promoters from drosophila melanogaster and arabidopsis thaliana and are less common in humans.

2) cg-based promoters. these promoters are represented by patterns containing a high percentage of c + g and high kappa ic values. cg-based promoters show a high cpg content. the right side of the pattern is predominant while the left side is significantly less pronounced . the shape of this pattern exhibits various different lengths of short poly homopolymer tracts. in addition, the average frequency of occurrence between at-based and cg-based promoters appears to differ completely in these species, but curiously, these promoters tend to be in a relative opposition in each species . this observation suggests that these species have different preferences for allocation of certain fundamental functions. patterns of this class are particulary characteristic for genes from homo sapiens.

3) atcg-compact promoters. atcg-compact patterns characterize promoters with centrally disposed clusters, leading to the formation of a round shaped pattern . the middle-lower region of the pattern contains evenly interspersed nucleotides  and the middle-upper area shows different lengths of short homopolymer tracts , poly, poly, poly) disposed in tandem in any order. atcg-compact patterns are characteristic for gene promoters from arabidopsis thaliana.

4) atcg-balanced promoters. promoter sequences belonging to atcg-balanced class show an almost balanced g + c and a + t content. the right and the left side of the pattern tend to share a relative 2-fold rotational symmetry. these patterns are generally composed of equally distributed short poly and poly homopolymer tracts . atcg-balanced and cg-spike promoters tend to occur in the same proportion in each species and appear to have almost similar average frequencies between species . this observation indicates that for some specific functions the same classes of promoters are preferred between species. these patterns are characteristic for gene promoters from homo sapiens and oryza sativa.

5) atcg-middle promoters. atcg-middle patterns are characterized mainly by promoter sequences containing a + t and c + g balanced values and higher than average kappa ic values. the right side and the left side of the pattern are equally distributed. however, the central part is pronounced. they are similar to atcg-balanced class in that they also have a relative 2-fold rotational symmetry, but contain additional short homopolymer tracts , poly, poly, poly) disposed in tandem in any order . these patterns are rare and are almost equally distributed in all four species.

6) atcg-less promoters. promoters from this class are represented by an abrupt transition between two c + g threshold levels. similar to atcg-balanced promoters, the right side and the left side of the pattern is equally distributed, however, some sequences around the central region are missing or have a lower density. typically, these central regions lack of tandem short homopolymer tracts and short sequences consisting of equally interspersed nucleotides , or short sequences showing small variations over 50% in favor of a + t or c + g nucleotides . based on the promoter sequence features, these promoter patterns seem to be complementary with atcg-middle promoters. atcg-less patterns are significantly rare  and are characteristic for promoters from homo sapiens and oryza sativa but are almost absent in drosophila melanogaster and arabidopsis thaliana.

7) at-less promoters. promoter sequences belonging to at-less class exhibit a high frequency of short cg-rich sequences. although both sides of the pattern show a relative 2-fold rotational symmetry, the clusters from the left side of the pattern exhibit a lower density than those on the right. these patterns are characterized by a large number of short poly tracts and a lower number of short poly tracts . short poly tracts typically occur as a consequence of an abrupt depletion of c + g nucleotides on short distances  inside the promoter sequence. such a depletion is accompanied by high kappa ic values and is typically present near tss , suggesting a regular expression of their genes. at-less patterns are generally rare and are found equally in all four species, but are slightly more frequent in homo sapiens.

8) cg-less promoters. in contrast, cg-less promoters are distinguished by a high frequency of short at-rich sequences and are more common in oryza sativa and arabidopsis thaliana. the right and left side of the pattern tend to be equally distributed, however, the clusters from the right side of the pattern exhibit a lower density than those on the left. at-less and cg-less promoters seem to be characterized by an imbalance between the number of short poly tracts and short poly tracts. complementary to at-less promoter characteristics, these patterns are characterized by a large number of short poly tracts and a much lower number of short poly tracts . compared with at-less promoters, the overall preference for cg-less promoters is very high between species. however, in homo sapiens the number of at-less promoters slightly exceeds the number cg-less promoters .

9) at-spike promoters. promoter sequences belonging to at-spike class are represented by long repetitive sequences with a high content of a or t nucleotides. these patterns exhibit a central part and an elongated left side containing small density clusters. the shape of at-spike representative patterns is explained by the presence of long poly or long poly homopolymer tracts or tandem short poly or short poly tracts . these promoters are prevalent in arabidopsis thaliana.

10) cg-spike promoters. in contrast to at-spike promoter architecture, these promoters are represented by long repetitive sequences with a high content of c or g nucleotides. cg-spike patterns exhibit a central part and an elongated right side containing small density clusters. these patterns contain long poly or long poly homopolymer tracts or tandem short poly or short poly tracts . at-spike and cg-spike promoters seem to be complementary considering the fact that both promoter classes are differentiated by two opposite types of homopolymer tracts. at-spike and cg-spike classes appear to be equally preferred between species, nevertheless, their promoters tend to be in opposition in each species . this observation suggests a possible conservation of their antagonist role between these species, yet a different preference for certain functions. these patterns are common in oryza sativa and homo sapiens.

promoter distribution
our comparative analyses have revealed similarities and differences in the promoter architecture between arabidopsis thaliana, drosophila melanogaster, homo sapiens and oryza sativa. we have plotted the center of weight from  <dig>  promoter patterns according with each species in order to highlight the distribution of these regulatory sequences . the center of weight of each promoter pattern indicates an average between all ssr and str sequences. atcg-middle patterns contain almost all types of ssr and str sequences and can reveal some visual insights into different promoter regions . although the phylogenetic relationships are usualy based on sequence alignment algorithms, kappa ic approach is based on a frequency/content comparison. a superposition between promoter distributions from each species shows the shared surfaces, representing conserved promoter sequences . promoter sequences from arabidopsis thaliana and rice were notably differentiated, and only a small part of promoters were shared . moreover, arabidopsis thaliana promoters seem to have more structural features in common with those from drosophila melanogaster . promoters from arabidopsis thaliana exhibit higher kappa ic values than promoters from drosophila melanogaster, while variations of c + g content are relatively the same. curiously, the highest rate of conserved promoters was encountered between homo sapiens and oryza sativa  and the lowest rate of conservation was observed between arabidopsis thaliana and homo sapiens . promoter sequences from homo sapiens show both a wider distribution of c + g content and the highest values of kappa ic . the superposition of promoter distributions of the four species shows that promoters do not reflect distant phylogenetic relationships . we have also noticed the directions and the angles of these promoter distributions which may suggest an evolutionary tendency for each species.

tata-less and tata-containing correlations
several reports regarding homo sapiens tata-containing promoters seem to vary in different studies, depending on the number of promoters used
 <cit> . an earlier study found 32% tata-containing promoters from a set of ~ <dig>  genes
 <cit> . more recent genome-wide studies show that only ~10% of human genes contain tata-dependent promoters
 <cit> . however, the epd dataset  has been cleared of redundant promoters that shared the same tss. accordingly, their promoter set has a much higher presence of known promoter elements, such as tata or gc boxes. using the epd collection of  <dig>  homo sapiens promoters, we searched for tata motifs in a sample of  <dig> promoter sequences. of this collection, we found that ~41% were tata-containing promoters . tata-containing promoter levels were higher in at-based, at-less, atcg-compact, atcg-balanced and atcg-middle classes, whereas tata-less promoter levels were higher in cg-based, at-spike, cg-less and atcg-less classes . more extreme differences between tata-containing and tata-less promoters were observed in cg-based , tata-less  and at-based , tata-less  classes .

transitional states
previous studies suggested that tata-less and tata-containing promoters have different chromatin structure
 <cit> . evolutionary, chromatin structure may influence the distribution of point mutations or other mutational events in the promoter sequence. a chromatin-dependent distribution of point mutations can lead to a gradual shift from a promoter class to another promoter class  or poly tracts in shorter elements), thus changing the predisposition for low or high levels of gene expression. promoter patterns “trapped” in transitional states between classes may also perhaps indicate a change of their gene relationship towards other biological pathways. we have found intermediate states between these patterns which may suggest an evolutionary transition mechanism . initially, the transition states were observed by our neural network . all promoter patterns have been classified by the highest percentage of recognition for each class. certain promoter patterns present similar percentages for two separate classes of promoters, indicating a potential inclusion in two classes simultaneously. exact intermediate patterns are rare  and differ drastically from the majority of patterns . for instance, atcg-balanced class appears to have several patterns with a transitional tendency to atcg-compact class or vice versa . these transitions are based on successive elimination/insertion of short poly and poly tracts. another example is represented by a systematic reduction of short poly tracts, which lead to a transition of at-less promoters to cg-based class . in contrast, a systematic reduction of short poly tracts leads to a class transition from cg-less promoters to at-based promoters . from what we have witnessed, neither of these classes represent “end of the line” for these transitions since we observed intermediate patterns between all classes. furthermore, we have observed varying degrees of difficulty of transition from one class to another. this difficulty is reflected in the number of promoters belonging to each class . for example, cg-based and at-based, at-spike and cg-spike or at-less and cg-less classes tend to form mirror pairs. these pairs of classes have the lowest probability to transit directly from one to another. the evidence for this claim is supported by a small number of intermediate patterns that we have found between these alleged pairs of classes. for instance, intermediate patterns between at-spike and cg-spike promoters can have both long poly and long poly tracts, a sequence arrangement that is rarely encountered . consequently, we suggest that these direct transitions of promoters between pairs of classes may be caused by strong selection pressures conditioned by radical changes in the environment.

tissue-specificity in humans
our general classification criterion allowed us to demonstrate compelling biological correlates between  <dig>  tissue-specific genes . some of our observations are also based on previous studies that suggest direct correlations between short or long homopolymer tracts and certain levels of gene expression
 <cit> . indeed, we have also observed a constant presence of different homopolymer elements in these patterns, suggesting that different promoter classes  indicate a predisposition for various levels of gene expression as well as for a distinct number of factors which trigger gene expression. specific interaction clusters have been reported in the past, such as muscle and heart or kidney and liver clusters
 <cit> . we show some additional interaction groups, both between promoter classes and within each promoter class. in addition to these groups, the tissue order from each class further reflects the significance of the observed interactions . the highlights of our observations include:

 <dig>  cg-based promoters have the highest percentage of occurrence  and appear to be tata-less class correspondents which tend to be associated with “housekeeping” genes. cg-based promoters are not only the most common but as expected they show the highest levels in all tissues. the first six tissues in which cg-based promoters have the highest percentages are cervix, skin, stomach, ovary, mammary gland and tongue .

 <dig>  at-based promoters  are present in all tissues but are absent from the mammary gland. the first six tissues in which at-based promoters have the highest percentages are liver, heart, kidney, lymph node, soft tissue and muscle. this order coincides with the first six tissues in which atcg-compact promoters have the highest percentages, namely in prostate, liver, kidney, muscle, heart and lymph node. equally curious, the last six tissues in which cg-based promoters have the lowest percentages are liver, uterus, kidney, heart, lung and brain . this implies a special relationship between cg-based and at-based promoters because their proportions seem to indicate an almost antagonistic activity which may suggests an involvement of these promoters in some metabolic processes. nevertheless, the relationship between cg-based promoters and other classes of promoters in these tissues seems to conceal more than a simplistic association with the housekeeping genes.

 <dig>  at-less promoters  are overestimated in uterus while cg-less and atcg-balanced promoters are overestimated in testis .

 <dig>  cg-less promoters have an occurrence of  <dig> % and are present in all tissues but they are absent from spleen .

 <dig>  there was no clear correlation regarding tissue order between at-less and cg-less promoters. nevertheless, we noticed that some tissues have a tendency to stay grouped, such as muscle and heart, stomach and soft tissue, larynx and colon, lymph node and liver or bone marrow and peripheral nervous system . these groups may suggest a role of these promoters in simple feedback mechanisms among tissues responsible for maintaining homeostasis. furthermore, the occurrence of short poly tracts on short distances near tss could also indicate an involvement of at-less  promoters in short term non-critical gene expression, which may strengthen our hypothesis regarding their physiological role. moreover, in different tissues at-less and cg-less percentages show a combined relationship of complementarity and proportionality .

 <dig>  at-spike promoters are found especially in tissues that require high levels of gene expression such as lung, eye, pancreas, uterus, liver, soft tissue, brain, kidney, prostate and blood. this tissue order and the presence of long poly or long poly tracts suggests an involvement of these promoters in survival mechanisms, possibly responsible for interactions with the environment.

 <dig>  cg-spike promoters also appear to be involved in survival mechanisms. these promoters are found in large numbers especially in tissues that need a short-term critical gene expression. this is supported by the order of the first seven tissues in which these promoters are most common, such as lung, eye, brain, peripheral nervous system, spleen, heart and blood, which also tend to have a high interaction with the environment .

 <dig>  the proportions of cg-spike and at-spike promoters seem to be similar in the first two tissues, namely in lung and eye. the occurrence of long poly or tandem short poly tracts on short distances  near tss, could also indicate an involvement of at-spike and cg-spike promoters in short term critical gene expression.

 the frequency of at-spike promoters  exceeds that of gc-spike promoters  but indicate proportional relative values in most tissues. exceptions are tissues from cervix and muscle where the number of cg-spike promoters surpasses the number of at-spike promoters .

 <dig>  the percentage of occurrences between cg-based and at-spike promoters appears to be relative and nearly complementary in all tissues . interestingly, the last two tissues in which at-spike promoters have the lowest percentages and the first two tissues in which cg-based promoters have the highest percentages are cervix and skin .

 <dig>  the proportion of atcg-compact and at-less promoters seems to have similar values in tissues from kidney and lymph node whereas atcg-compact and at-based promoters appear to have similar values in bladder, skin and uterus . atcg-compact promoters tend to exhibit equal values in some tissues such as liver and kidney, brain and bone, heart and muscle. interestingly, at-based promoters show also equal values in these tissues but different than those found for atcg-compact promoters .

 <dig>  there was no clear correlation regarding the tissue order between atcg-balanced and atcg-compact promoters. however, atcg-balanced and atcg-compact promoters seem to have almost equal percentages in about  <dig> tissues. both of these classes have the closest values in blood, bone, brain, cervix, colon, heart, muscle, skin and uterus .

 <dig>  atcg-less promoters are rare  and are even more enigmatic since they are mainly represented in cervix and tongue . in humans, from a total of  <dig>  promoter sequences the percentage of atcg-less promoters it is close to  <dig> % whereas their appearances among  <dig>  promoters of tissue-specific genes it is almost  <dig> %. these results are not consistent with atcg-less expected frequency of  <dig> %, which may suggest that most of their genes are silent .

 <dig>  atcg-middle promoters are present only in nine of the thirty tissues, namely in soft tissue, eye, pancreas, liver, placenta, bladder, muscle, larynx and bone marrow . however, in humans, from a total of  <dig>  promoter sequences the percentage of atcg-middle promoters it is close to  <dig> %. nevertheless, from  <dig>  promoters of tissue-specific genes the observed frequency is close to  <dig> % whereas their expected frequency is  <dig> %, which suggests that some of their genes are also silent. the difference between expected and observed frequencies and an overall low occurrence of genes containing atcg-middle and atcg-less promoters may suggest their involvement in anatomical development and in some other cell-related cycles. this observation is supported by several tests performed on promoters from hox gene family, namely hoxa and hoxb. these genes are represented mostly by patterns showing atcg-middle characteristics. . a more broad analysis involving expected and observed frequencies for all classes of promoters is presented in our additional file
 <dig> 

discussion
generally, both epd and plantprom db define the tss as the furthest  <dig> position in the genome which can be aligned with the  <dig> end of a cdna from the corresponding gene
 <cit> . however, many human genes are transcribed from multiple promoters, often involving alternative first exons. epd considers the most frequent cdna  <dig> end as the tss and applies a specialized algorithm to discover multiple promoters for a given gene, whereas plantprom db contains plant promoters based on published tss mapping data
 <cit> . using a smaller number of promoters from epd, we have also made an analysis for bos taurus, gallus gallus, mus musculus, rattus norvegicus and xenopus laevis which showed a distribution close to that of homo sapiens . therefore, promoter distributions  seem to be characteristic for all vertebrates rather than a special property of human promoters. however, more significant differences were especially observed in gallus gallus, where the average kappa ic values exceed that of other vertebrates . on a visual inspection, promoter patterns from arabidopsis thaliana and drosophila melanogaster have a more narrow shape than those from oryza sativa and homo sapiens, which suggests a different distribution of point mutations between these species, resulting perhaps from a difference in nucleosome organization. furthermore, in our experiments we have found that an even distribution of mutations across different promoter sequences fails to change the shape of their patterns, which strengthened our hypothesis . we also noticed that even for shorter promoter sequences , promoter patterns retain their properties. curiously, sliding windows situated at greater distances from tss do not seem to make a crucial difference in the pattern shape. the majority of defining characteristics seem to be close to tss. we further made a distribution across promoters of known orthologous genes . we used homologene
 <cit>  to extract  <dig> bp genomic regions upstream of ins orthologous genes from  <dig> species, his <dig> orthologous genes from  <dig> species and cnot <dig> orthologous genes from  <dig> species . we confronted these genomic regions with epd promoters in order to ensure their accuracy. as expected, their distribution  retained the same species-specific boundaries  and their promoter patterns comply with existing phylogenetic relationships . for tests performed on human tissues we used a list of genes from tiger . for each gene in this list we searched the corresponding promoter in the eukaryotic promoter database. it was shown that these classes of promoters are preferentially present in certain tissues while other classes of promoters are present in all tissues . only six out of ten classes of promoters are present in all  <dig> tissues . moreover, it was noted that in certain tissues some classes of promoters can occur in a complementary manner, whereas other classes of promoters can appear in competition . on comparisons made between three promoter classes, other types of promoter relations can unfold. for instance, in tissues from brain, eye or lung, the values for at-less and at-spike promoters appear to exhibit a relative complementarity to those from muscle, whereas the number of cg-spike promoters remains proportional to their relative values . these parallel behaviors and the tissue-preferential distribution of these promoters suggest that certain promoter classes are preferred for specific biological functions. therefore, these promoter patterns seem to explain the relationship between their genes in certain biological pathways rather than their gene-specific function. this observation implies that promoters located in transitional states may perhaps reflect signatures of some of the latest evolutionary changes of a species. biological tissues are complex structures, containing different cell types. accordingly, ‘tissue specific’ stands as a relative term and does not imply that a particular gene is expressed only in a specific tissue or cell type. to determine whether a gene is predominantly expressed in a certain tissue, tiger defined the expression enrichment  as the ratio between observed expression level in that tissue versus averaged expression level across  <dig> tissues. they further defined a gene as ‘tissue specific’ if it had an ee in a particular tissue larger than  <dig> and a p-value <10- <dig>  <cit> . although “tissue specific” is a relative term and refers to genes predominantly expressed in different tissues, the fundamental tissue-tissue interactions are reflected in our promoter pattern analysis .

CONCLUSIONS
a comparative analysis was undertaken for  <dig>  promoters from the arabidopsis thaliana, drosophila melanogaster, homo sapiens and oryza sativa , and an analysis based on tissue-specific gene expression profiles in humans . following the analysis,  <dig> general classes of promoters have emerged. we used promoter sequences from two databases - the eukaryotic promoter database and plantprom database. we showed that existing methods used in cryptography, such as kappa index of coincidence, can be adapted for many types of analysis in molecular genetics, perhaps to highlight certain new features of dna sequences. our supplemental data files allow re-analysis of our data. we also provide an animation that displays several hundred promoter patterns in succession and ordered according to their class . we consider a possible subdivision of these promoter patterns in subclasses, between  <dig> up to  <dig> subclasses for each major class. furthermore, our observations suggest the existence of a network between these promoter classes. in the near future we wish to merge the information related to these classes of promoters with other available data in gene regulatory networks, in order to form a better understanding of the relationship between some genetic factors and their pathological implications.

