BACKGROUND
sampling of saliva or via buccal cell extractions is a widely employed, non-invasive
method of collecting human dna for both biomedical and ancestry experiments. dna
extracted from saliva fluid has been used on single nucleotide polymorphism chip
arrays, methylation arrays, targeted resequencing, exome, and whole genome
sequencing  <cit> . however, the low total yield of dna from a single sample and the
presence of many non-human dna fragments make next-generation sequencing of saliva
samples impractical for some applications. targeted enrichment strategies, such as
hybridization methods designed to capture the exons of annotated genes  prior to sequencing, offer a way to circumvent some of the
limitations posed by saliva-derived dna samples. we demonstrate the successful
sequencing of multiple human exomes from saliva-derived samples using commercially
available reagents for exome capture.

exome sequencing and other capture methods permit the high-coverage sequencing of a
small portion of the genome. this approach represents a trade off between depth of
coverage vs. breadth of the genome that is interrogated, and has the potential to
revolutionize genomic medicine  <cit> . in addition to direct applications to human disease, exome sequencing of
a modest number of individuals can reveal important aspects of human evolution  <cit> . the capability to apply these approaches to dna derived from saliva,
which is more easily obtained and less invasive than blood or other tissue
collection, will greatly facilitate the detailed examination of genetic variants
that may be associated with specific traits or have experienced adaptive evolution  <cit> .

we focus on a unique set of dna samples from the ≠khomani khoesan of south
africa to illustrate the utility of exome sequencing via saliva. african genetic
diversity remains poorly understood, in part because many regions of the continent
lack adequate healthcare infrastructure, which can make blood collection
impractical. the indigenous khoesan peoples of southern africa are a collection of
hunter-gatherer and pastoralist groups who speak “click languages”,
classified into three distinct language families. the genetic diversity of these,
and related populations, remains under-ascertained. the genome of one tuu-speaking
san  has been fully sequenced and found to contain over  <dig> 
novel polymorphisms  <cit> . gronau et al. showed that this san genome was highly divergent among
known genomes, even compared to other african individuals  <cit> . they estimated the population divergence between western african
individuals and the san to be about  <dig> - <dig>  years ago, over twice as
old as the divergence between western africans and eurasians. additionally, single
nucleotide polymorphism  array data demonstrated that the ≠khomani san
population had the lowest levels of linkage disequilbrium  of any population
surveyed and thus the largest effective population size  <cit> . however, in order to test hypotheses regarding population sub-structure,
natural selection and biomedically relevant variants in africa, it is essential to
have both large sample sizes and genomic data that are un-biased with regard to
ascertainment schemes.

RESULTS
fifteen human saliva samples were selected for exome sequencing. samples were split
into two batches , representing
samples enriched using the agilent sureselect 50 mb human all-exon design and
sequenced with the illumina gaii machine and a replication batch enriched using the
agilent sureselect 44 mb human all-exon design and sequenced using illumina
hiseq. we included a familial quartet with two daughters , an extended
pedigree of first cousins and half-siblings , and eight purportedly
unrelated individuals .
family  <dig> displayed complex ancestry from khoesan, european and both eastern and
western african populations . family  <dig> and the un-related individuals self-reported their ancestry as
being from only khoesan populations . we obtained 3-25ug
total dna from each saliva sample. each aliquot was processed using the agilent
sureselectxt library preparation kit followed by enrichment with the sureselect
44 mb or sureselect 50 mb human all-exon capture probes. using standard
illumina post capture barcodes, libraries were sequenced on either an illumina gaii
or hiseq machine. aliquots from two samples  were also sequenced
without exome capture, using the illumina truseq library preparation kit 
and the illumina nextera library preparation kit . the whole genome sequence
 libraries were then sequenced on two lanes of an illumina hiseq.

sequencing statistics
an average of  <dig>  million 75 bp paired reads and  <dig>  million 100 bp
paired reads were obtained for each individual in the pilot  <dig> gaii and pilot 2
hiseq exome experiments . across all
samples,  <dig> %- <dig> % of the reads mapped to the human genome reference 
. on average, ~70-75% of non-duplicate,
mapped reads fell in the specified target regions. this on-target percentage is
similar to previous on-target percentages  for standard blood or cell
line-derived human dna with agilent sureselect exon designs  <cit> .

a
b
c
d
e
atotal number of dna fragments including: mapped,
unmapped and duplicate reads.

blimited to non-duplicate reads on autosomes, as
calculated by gatk unified genotype.

climited to xx autosomal snps identified at the 99% vqsr
threshold.

dconcordance at heterozygous and homozygous non-reference
positions as compared to illumina omniexpress or 550k.v <dig> snp
arrays.

efewer average singletons as a result of including
closely related individuals in pilot  <dig>  see additional file 1: table s <dig> for individual data.
the data and data format used for each step of the human exome and
microbiome mapping/calling pipelines. the pipeline begins with
next-generation sequencing raw reads obtained from exome sequencing of
saliva-derived dna and ends in finalized exome variant calls and
microbiome taxonomic abundances. arrows indicate analysis methods used
to process the human and saliva microbiome data .

two samples  displayed a high percentage of duplicate reads  . to understand whether sa <dig> and sa035
had high duplicate rates due to low human dna input or whether there were other
issues with read data, we examined the distribution of mapping quality for all
uniquely mapped reads for each sample. these two samples had the lowest numbers
of mapped reads and the lowest proportion of reads with mapping
qualities ≥  <dig> . the remaining pilot  <dig> samples had
higher effective coverage and ~80% of reads with mapping qualities ≥ <dig> 
this difference is unlikely to be due to divergence from the reference because
we observed no systematic differences in mapping quality metrics between the
european- and bantu- admixed family  <dig> and the khoesan family  <dig>  due to lower
mapping rates, sa <dig> and sa <dig> displayed overall lower mapped coverage than the
other samples. however, 90% of target sites were covered at a depth of at least
10x for all individuals except sa <dig> and sa <dig> . the average percent of unmapped reads was higher
for saliva-derived exomes compared to six hgdp san samples sequenced using dna
obtained from cell lines . however, the primary difference in sequencing efficiency between saliva-
and cell-line derived dna results from differences in the mean rate of duplicate
reads: pilot  <dig>   <dig> %; pilot  <dig>   <dig> %; hgdp,  <dig> %. pilot  <dig> likely has a higher
duplicate rate due to lower dna quality .

read quality
we hypothesized that the difference in mapping quality among samples could be due
to different levels of dna damage. to test this hypothesis, we analyzed the
distribution of mismatches along the reads by comparing each read to the human
reference sequence after mapping. if the genomic dna had been degraded before
shearing, for example due to variable storage conditions, one would expect an
increase in mismatches at the ends of the reads; specifically, an excess of
thymines at the 5′ end of the read and an excess of cytosines at the
3′ end of the read, similar to what is seen in ancient dna  <cit> . however, for sa <dig> and sa <dig> we observe an increased rate for all
types of substitutions at the beginning of the reads, with the highest rates for
those towards the purines g and a . reads
from sa <dig> in particular show a pronounced increase, for example a ~ <dig> fold
increase in the rate of a - > g substitutions in the first
position compared to positions further along the read. this pattern is absent
from all other samples in pilot  <dig>  with the exception of sa <dig>  which also shows
a slight increase at the first base . we also observe an overall increase in substitution
rates towards the end of the reads, which is shared across all samples and
consistent with the increased rate in sequencing error with increasing number of
sequencing cycles. the pattern of mismatch rates does not support a hypothesis
of simple degradation.
read was compared to the genome reference sequence to assess patterns
consistent with dna degradation. at each of the  <dig> positions along a
read, we plot the frequency of substitution types, for both the forward
 and reverse  reads from each read-pair. analysis was
limited to  <dig> million reads from chromosome 1; all raw reads are plotted.
three individuals with varying levels of substitution errors are shown:
 sa <dig> with overall higher substitution rate and an excess
of purines at the start of the first read,  sa <dig> with a
slightly elevated substitution rate and excess of purines at the start
of the first read, and  sa <dig> with a low substitution rate and
no bias at the beginning of the first read. the additional five pilot 1
individuals tended to resemble sa <dig> . removal of reads with any soft-clipping
substantively reduced the mis-incorporation rate for sa <dig> and
sa <dig> 

genotype and variant statistics
variants were called using the genome analysis tool kit  and selected using
the variant quality score recalibration  procedure with cutoffs set such
that 99% of variants also found in the  <dig> genomes omni <dig>  and hapmap <dig> snp
training set were retained  <cit> . we identified  <dig>  variants, with a transition/transversion ratio
of  <dig> . on average, within the target regions, each individual had a genotype
call at 98% of sites variable in the  <dig> sample dataset . singleton counts varied from  <dig> to  <dig>  autosomal
sites, excluding the two daughters in family  <dig> . we computed genotype concordance for  <dig> individuals  based on data from the illumina
omniexpress or 550 k.v <dig> snp arrays  <cit> . non-reference  concordance, that is concordance only at
heterozygous or non-reference homozygous genotypes, was calculated using gatk  <cit>  and concordance exceeded 98% for all individuals genotyped.

novelty compared to  <dig> genomes project
we compared  <dig> khoesan exomes from our study , to exomes sequenced as part of the  <dig> genomes project   <cit> , hgdp namibian san, and san nimblegen exomes from schuster et al.  <cit> . we chose three populations of african ancestry for comparison: asw,
african-americans from the southwestern united states; lwk, luhya from kenya;
yri, yoruba from nigeria; and gbr, from great britain to represent european
ancestry. since the 1000g dataset contained many more individuals than our
khoesan dataset, these populations were randomly down-sampled to  <dig> individuals
for comparison. we note that these disparate datasets were processed using
different pipelines, in some cases involving multiple-sample calling and
imputation with a large number of other exomes, with varying degrees of coverage
and sample relatedness. between  <dig> - <dig>  variants appear to be common to
all  <dig> populations 
. the south african ≠khomani san
appear comparable to the yoruba and luhya populations in terms of the number of
private snps yet share slightly more variants with gbr than either other
sub-saharan african population. this reflects the degree of recent european
admixture in the ≠khomani. in order to compare two khoesan populations, we
used  <dig> namibian hgdp san exomes sequenced on the same agilent platform to
>70x coverage  and included african-americans
in an attempt to control for recent gene flow from bantu-speaking and european
groups . the namibian and south african
populations share only  <dig>  unique variants that are not also found in the asw.
this may reflect the small sample size, or that the khoesan populations in the
north vs. south kalahari remain highly differentiated  <cit> . given the high concordance between our exome sequence data and the
illumina snp array, we believe that the high genetic diversity of the south
african exomes is not an artifact caused by high false positive rates.
of nonreference variants in the south african khoesan  with
  <dig> genomes yoruba samples ,  eastern
african luhya , and  namibian san from hgdp and
african-americans . sites that were included in this analysis
required the presence of genotype information for at least 95% of the
individuals in the joint dataset. the exome data from asw and lwk was
derived from  <dig> genomes project, phase  <dig> – march  <dig>  2012
release, from which  <dig> individuals were randomly sampled. the venn
diagram illustrates the number of shared and unique nonreference
variants among populations. the vennerable package in r was utilized for
plotting purposes.

population differentiation of the khoesan
we performed principal component analysis  on the unrelated ≠khomani
khoesan , schuster et
al.  <cit>  namibian san, and hgdp namibian san exomes, along with several
different populations from the  <dig> genomes project using smartpca from the
eigensoft software package  <cit>  . pca clearly differentiates the populations
included in this study. pc <dig> separates the african populations from the european
population . pc <dig> separates the populations of western african ancestry  from the southern african populations . pc3
separates the northern from the southern kalahari khoesan populations,
suggesting there is substantial substructure among these groups. pc <dig> separates a
single ssan individual from both the hgdp san and the rest of the ≠khomani
khoesan individuals. this individual belongs to family  <dig>  so the pca was revised
to include the remaining two family  <dig> individuals  in order to assess whether sa <dig> was an outlier, however pc <dig> still
strongly separated all family  <dig> individuals from other ≠khomani
.
≠khomani san and other african populations. exomes from
 <dig> genomes phase  <dig>  schuster et al.  <cit> , and hgdp san were combined with the ≠khomani san
.  <dig> % of the
variance is explained by pc <dig>   <dig> % by pc <dig>   <dig> % by pc <dig>  and  <dig> % by
pc <dig>  pc <dig> and pc <dig> separate africans from europeans, and western africans
from southern africans, respectively . the three khoesan
populations drive pc <dig> and pc <dig> , supporting prior
descriptions of strong differentiation among kalahari khoesan groups  <cit> , and indicating even sub-structure within the ≠khomani
san samples.

hla and kir
the hla and kir loci include some of the most polymorphic genes
in the human genome and are functionally involved in the immune system and
reproduction  <cit> . contributing to hla and kir polymorphism are
inter-locus recombination and gene duplication, factors rendering these loci
difficult to analyze with genomic-scale data, but among the most stringent for
assessing its validity. we analyzed the three highly polymorphic hla class
i genes, hla-a, -b and -c , and the
kir locus , which has variable content of four to thirteen
polymorphic genes. despite using a highly conservative strategy to remove
read-pairs that did not map exclusively to one of the targeted loci, genotypes
were obtained for  <dig>  hla class i and kir snps for the
fifteen individuals studied . sufficient read-depth
 was
obtained for determination of all the hla class i and kir
alleles present, with exception of hla-a and -b from
individual sa <dig>  fourteen of the individuals were genotyped using standard
methods for hla class i and eight for all of the kir. when
comparison of the methods was restricted to the individuals with high
genome-wide coverage, all but ten snps were concordant with standard genotyping
from these samples , validating the sensitivity and specificity of our analytical
approach . moreover, all  <dig> discordant snp genotypes from the two
low-coverage individuals  occurred in clusters of low read
depth where only one or neither allele was represented. thus, following
stringent filtering there were no false positive genotypes for any of the
hla class i or kir snps. in total, there were  <dig> distinct
hla class i and  <dig> kir alleles present, including
thirty-one previously unknown kir alleles that were discovered by
analysis of the exome-sequencing data and independently verified by standard
cloning, sequencing and family study.

a
b 
anon-reference single nucleotide polymorphisms.

bunique coding sequences.

a
ait was not possible to obtain the hla-a and -b genotypes
from exome data of sa <dig> 

saliva metagenomes
although exome capture proved an efficient method of sequencing primarily human
dna, each sample also contained more than a million unmapped reads
. we hypothesized that these unmapped
reads might represent non-human dna carried through the saliva extraction.
although we obtained useful results, with high concordance to snp genotyping
arrays, such microbial contamination may contribute to lower effective coverage
levels. we therefore subjected these unmapped reads to an independent quality
control procedure and used a fragment recruitment approach described by rusch et
al.  <cit>  to identify homologs of non-human reference genomes among a combined
pool of  <dig> , <dig> high-quality unmapped reads . to estimate the number of species that are detected, we applied
a recruitment threshold based on the 95% average nucleotide identity threshold
that is commonly used to define microbial species  <cit> .

across all  <dig> sequenced exomes, we identified  <dig> , <dig> high-quality reads 
that map to the genomes of  <dig>  non-human species. the distribution of the
number of recruited reads per genome indicates that a small number of genomes
recruit a large number of reads with most genomes recruiting an insignificant
fraction of the reads. for example, after normalizing the number of reads
recruited per genome by reference genome size, the  <dig> most abundant genomes
recruit  <dig> % of the reads. generally, the genomes that recruit the most reads
are well-described oral commensal microbiota , such as neisseria subflava, rothia mucilaginosa,
neisseria flavescens, veillonella dispar, and
prevotella veroralis. the recruitment of reads across the length of
these genomes suggests that their detection is not an artifact of a genomic
subsequence that shares similarity with the human genome  we verified this by comparing the
per genome relative abundance distribution estimated through analysis of these
exome-captured metagenomes to the corresponding distribution estimated through
analysis of non-capture metagenomes for two of the samples subjected to
additional sequencing without exome capture . specifically,
we find a significant, positive correlation  between
the relative abundance estimates calculated with the two sequencing approaches
for both samples , indicating that analysis
of exome-captured metagenomes produces saliva community structure and abundance
estimates that are surprisingly consistent with estimates from traditional
shotgun metagenomic sequencing of saliva communities.

1
2
1the genome-length-corrected relative abundance
calculated using a 50% identity fragment recruitment threshold.

2the genome-length-corrected relative abundance
calculated using fragment recruitment thresholds of 80% or 95%
identity across at least 75% of the read.
exome-capture sequencing. estimates of the relative abundance of
saliva microbiota obtained via exome capture  strongly correlate
with those obtained from shotgun metagenomes produced from the same
sample . the above dot plots illustrate this result for two
khoesan individuals involved in our study: a) sa <dig> and
b) sa <dig>  each dot represents a genome. a linear model
representing the relationship between exome-capture and non-capture
estimates of relative abundance is shown in blue; the variance in the
predictions from the model are shaded in grey. a spearman correlation
test indicates that this relationship is very strong
.

some of the abundant khoesan saliva microbiota are known contributors to oral
disease. for example, prevotella melaninogencia  is associated with rapidly
progressing periodontitis lesions  <cit> . similarly, streptococcus parasanguinis  is a primary
colonizer of human teeth and contributes to dental plaque formation  <cit> . granulicatella elegans , an oral commensal associated
with infective endocarditis  <cit> , is also found in high abundance among the khoesan. we also
specifically ascertained the presence of several biomedically important
organisms, some of which may exist at relatively low abundance. for example, the
porphyromonas gingivalis genome, which represents organisms
implicated in periodontal disease and has been linked to rheumatoid arthritis  <cit>  and heart disease  <cit> , recruits a relatively large fraction of reads from all individuals
. conversely the campylobacter rectus genome, which is also
associated with periodontitis  <cit> , recruits a relatively small fraction of reads . only  <dig> reads
 were recruited with high fidelity to the genome of
mycobacterium tuberculosis, the causative agent of tuberculosis, a
disease that is common in the northern cape region of south africa  <cit> . these reads map with equally high fidelity to the genomes of other
actinobacteria, suggesting that they may be homologs of ancient and highly
conserved actinobacteria sequences and are not necessarily representatives of
the m. tuberculosis genome. robust detection of m.
tuberculosis from saliva-derived exome capture sequence data requires
additional experimentation and validation.

the predominant saliva microbiota differ in their relative abundance across the
khoesan . to assess whether population
structure based on saliva microbiome diversity exists among the khoesan, we
clustered individuals based on their phylum-, genus-, or species-level relative
abundances. we find only moderate support for the existence of discrete clusters
among the khoesan, with a maximum average silhouette width of  <dig>  . following  <cit> , this suggests that saliva microbiome diversity varies among the
khoesan along a gradient. we subjected the microbiome abundances of the khoesan
samples to principal components analysis  to identify those taxonomic
groups that most strongly differentiate the samples along this gradient . at the phylum-level, khoesan saliva samples are
principally separated by their relative composition of proteobacteria,
firmicutes and bacteroidetes . the relative abundance of neisseria,
streptococcus, prevotella, and veillonella primarily
differentiate samples at the genus-level ,
while rothia mucilaginosa, neisseria subflava,
veillonella spp., and streptococcus mitis are some of the
most variable species amongst the khoesan .
microbiome project. a, b) oral microbiome structure varies among
the khoesan. each of the above stacked bar plots illustrates the
relative abundance  of the most abundant oral microbiota at the
a) genus, and b) species levels for each of the 15
khoesan individuals . relative abundance was measured as the
fraction of high-quality reads that were recruited to a microbial genome
of a particular taxonomic rank using conservative recruitment settings
. only the nine most abundant groups for each taxonomic level
are illustrated for visualization purposes, with the remaining taxa
being grouped into the ‘other’ category. c) khoesan
 and healthy north american  saliva microbiomes differ in
their community structure. in this bar plot, the normalized relative
abundance, which is a taxon’s median relative abundance detected
within a population divided by the maximum relative abundance detected
within a population, is shown for bacterial genera that are detected in
either of the two populations. genera are ordered by their median
relative abundance across the khoesan. notable differences between the
populations are those where the taxon is abundant in the khoesan and
effectively undetected in the north americans, especially
rothia.

north american versus south african oral microbiomes
we then compared the diversity of the khoesan oral microbiome to the diversity
observed in a recent and extensive survey of healthy north americans in the
human microbiome project   <cit> . this prior hmp work was conducted through analysis of small subunit
ribosomal rna  gene sequences that were taxonomically annotated
to the genus level. we used these sequences to calculate genus-level, genome
length-normalized relative abundances for each north american microbiome. we
used the taxonomy associated with each genome in our fragment recruitment
database to calculate genus-level, length-normalized relative abundances for
each khoesan microbiome. comparing each population’s median relative
abundance for each genus, we find that most taxa exist at similar abundance
levels in the two populations . however, there are five genera that are
present in relatively high abundance  in the khoesan and effectively undetected among
the north americans given the level of discovery in the hmp : rothia, granulicatella,
haemophilus, eubacterium, and filifactor. most
notable among these is rothia, which is the third most abundant genus
in the khoesan and contains rothia mucilaginosa, a known oral
opportunistic pathogen that has been linked to systemic diseases  <cit> .

discussion
population history
the extremely high genetic diversity in the khoesan, estimated from genome-wide
snp arrays and the “bushman” genome, has renewed interest in
understanding the population history of southern africans  <cit> . comparatively few genomic sequences are publicly available  from the khoesan, and ascertainment bias on many of the
standard snp arrays may strongly skew estimates of genetic diversity in these
populations. we have generated  <dig> exomes and  <dig> genomes from the south african
≠khomani san greatly expanding the number of genomic sequences available.
estimates of genetic diversity from these south african individuals are
comparable to genetic diversity from the yoruba from nigeria or luhya from kenya
. while we do not find a higher number
of private snps in the khoesan, this may be biased due to endogamy among the
≠khomani san and differences in coverage or snp calling/imputation
pipelines between  <dig> genomes and our procedure . heterozygosity and singleton identification remain highly
sensitive to coverage and calling pipelines thus making direct cross-study
comparisons difficult. however, for common snps, we show that the khoesan
strongly differentiate from all other human populations in structure analyses;
the khoesan and europeans fall at opposite ends of the 1st principal
component, while western and eastern africans fall at intermediate points on
this axis. furthermore, we find substantial sub-structure among the south
african and namibian khoesan, despite recent gene flow from bantu-speaking
groups and europeans into the ≠khomani, !kung and tuu populations.

sample quality
two of our samples had demonstrably lower mapping quality and coverage, sa <dig> and
sa <dig>  we consider three possibilities for these characteristics. first, it is
difficult to identify the proportion of human dna versus microbial or other
non-human dna in a saliva aliquot. if these two samples had by chance a lower
volume of human dna input for the exome capture reaction, then there would be
fewer opportunities for human dna to bind to the specific probes and the library
would likely result in a higher number of duplicate read pairs. sa <dig> and sa035
do display an increased duplicate rate , but sa <dig> also
displays high duplicate rate with minimal effect on mapping quality.
additionally, poorer mapping quality might be expected if the microbial reads
map to the human genome, perhaps due to near sequence identity between some
portion of the human and microbial genomes  <cit> .

a second possibility is that the total amount and quality of the human dna input
initially may have been sufficient, but the presence of non-human substances
such as residual tobacco or bacterial dna may have acted as inhibitors,
preventing normal binding to human probes. third, the dna in these two samples
may have been more degraded than the other six pilot  <dig> samples. however,
although we do observe an increase in substitutions at the start of the reads
for sa <dig> and sa <dig>  we find no evidence of an ancient dna degradation pattern
in the post-capture sequence data. while the listed possibilities appear
unlikely, it is possible other patterns of degradation occur, in relatively
young dna extractions, which have not been reported in the literature.

oral microbiome from exome sequencing
approximately  <dig> % of the sequence data generated did not map to the human
genome. using a phylogenetically diverse set of reference genomes and a fragment
recruitment approach, we identified those unmapped reads that are homologs of
regions in non-human genomes. we find that most of the reads map to genomes of
well-described commensal microorganisms of the human mouth, suggesting that this
sequencing platform produces relevant information about the human oral
microbiome. we also find that analysis of exome-capture metagenomes produces
microbiome diversity estimates consistent with those obtained from
non-exome-capture metagenomes, indicating that this platform can be used to
reliably quantify microbiome diversity and abundance. we note that other capture
technologies or probe designs may result in fewer off-target reads, and a
corresponding reduction in the ability to analyze the microbiome  <cit> . additionally, different saliva collection kits or the use of
pre-collection mouth washes may effect the yield of microbial-derived
sequences.

the large fraction of non-human sequences that do not map to our reference
genomes are likely low quality and degraded sequences or are reads from
organisms that are outside of the bounds of the phylogenetic diversity sampled
in our reference database, such as viral genomes. the size of this fraction may
be exacerbated by the relatively conservative alignment thresholds applied
during our analysis. our ability to detect oral commensals indicates that this
human exome sequencing platform provides the added benefit of being able to
assay biogeographic patters of oral microbiome diversity. given that many of the
non-human reads can be mapped with high stringency to genomes of known
pathogens, we hypothesize that this sequencing platform may be useful as a
diagnostic tool for the detection of disease and that the data obtained may be
used for inferring cryptic phenotypes of the sampled individuals . future studies that focus on the sensitivity and
specificity of pathogen detection will be required to test this hypothesis.

as a cautionary note, one genome that recruits a substantial number of reads
 is beggiatoa sp. ps. beggiatoa have been found in
sulphur springs, sewage contaminated water, and hydrothermal vents  <cit> ; to date, no one has described the presence of beggiatoa in
the human mouth. we found that the beggiatoa-recruited reads map to
short, unassembled contigs that exhibit significant similarity to clone
libraries of the human genome. thus, we suspect that our detection of
beggiatoa is the result of low quality human reads that fail to
align to the human genome reference sequence but do align to regions of the
beggiatoa genome. this observation highlights the importance of
considering the effect of human genome contamination when using fragment
recruitment to study the human microbiome.

khoesan microbiome diversity
understanding khoesan microbiome diversity and structure provides insight into
the co-evolution of the human microbiome, given the ancient divergence of
khoesan from other african populations. it additionally clarifies the effect of
lifestyle on microbiome composition as most studies focus on individuals living
contemporary western lifestyles. similar to studies conducted in western
populations  <cit> , we find that the khoesan salivary microbiome is dominated by a small
number of taxa, with the firmicutes or proteobacteria predominating, and
exhibits high diversity within and between individuals. these observations
suggest that the general structure of the khoesan salivary microbiome is
generally similar to that found in western individuals.

however, when evaluating differences in the relative abundance of genera
associated with the khoesan and a population of healthy americans, we identified
several abundant taxa in the khoesan that were at very low abundance or
undetected among the americans. these differences in microbiome structure may be
due to differences in  the evolutionary history of the populations, 
demographics, or  host environment or lifestyle, including diet and access to
health care. given that we find many known pathogens among the most abundant
members of the khoesan microbiome and that many of the differentially detected
genera contain known oral pathogens , we speculate that the
relatively limited access to dental care, antibiotics and/or absence of water
fluoridation among the khoesan is driving most of the observed differences
between populations. however, the biology of several of the differentially
abundant genera is not well understood, especially in the context of the
commensal oral microbiome , or is principally limited
to the pathogenic members of the genus; such genera may contain species that
played an important role in the coevolution between the khoesan and their
salivary microbiome. this may include pathogenic organisms, such as
aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans, the causative agent of
adolescent periodontal disease, which is common in those of african descent  <cit>  and a member of a relatively abundant genus in the khoesan. further
study of the microbiomes associated with the khoesan and other diverse human
populations , the microbiomic differences between these populations , especially across a variety of host physiological conditions, and
the biology of commensal microbiota that are underrepresented in western
populations is needed to comprehensively differentiate the sources of variations
observed between populations and to understand the coevolution between humans
and their microbiome.

CONCLUSIONS
we have demonstrated the ability to obtain high quality exome sequence data from
saliva-derived human dna. we show that even samples with low human dna presence can
be successfully captured using exome in-solution target probes. additionally, after
examining some of the most diverse human loci, we find that exon-capture is able to
enrich and facilitate high-resolution analysis of highly polymorphic hla
and kir genes from dna extracted from human saliva. we also demonstrated
that exon-captured dna sequencing of saliva reveals insight into the structure and
diversity of the oral microbiome.

