BACKGROUND
control of gene expression and transcription in mammalian cells is typically achieved through a multi-layered network of protein signaling pathways containing multiple checkpoints to ensure specificity or correct transmission of external stimuli. regulation of transcriptional activation or repression is crucial for proper development, cell growth, and routine progression through the cell cycle. there is a rapidly growing body of data describing dna-protein interactions on a genome-wide scale, aided by availability of complete mammalian genome sequences and also the coupling of chromatin immunoprecipitation  experiments  <cit>  with dna microarrays analysis   <cit>  or ultra high-throughput sequencing   <cit> . while genome-wide maps of dna-protein interactions are crucial to understanding global transcriptional networks, understanding the functional consequences of these binding events is equally important. to expand existing approaches to study dna-protein interactions in living cells, we present two complementary technologies: halochip, an antibody-free alternative approach to chip, for mapping protein binding sites on dna, and high-throughput reporter assays to measure the promoter activity associated with binding events.

the success of chip relies heavily on the success of the immunoprecipitation step in the process, creating a need for alternative approaches when the antibody against the dna binding protein is either not functional or available for the chip assay  <cit> . such alternative approaches are derived from the standard chip method and include the initial formaldehyde crosslinking of protein:dna complexes, yet typically differ in the use of protein fusion tags, which allow for complexes to be isolated using either an antibody against the tag  <cit>  or direct capture on a resin that interacts with the fusion tag  <cit> . the latter is the basis for the halochip method, which utilizes the halotag protein  <cit> , a  <dig> kda protein fusion tag, that can be cloned n- or c-terminally to a dna binding protein of interest <cit>  . in the halochip method, the halotag fusion protein is expressed either transiently or stably in mammalian cells and crosslinked complexes can be directly captured from a cellular lysate via covalent binding to a halotag-specific resin, termed halolink  <cit>  . the complete covalent linkage established at this point allows for extensive washing to remove non-specific protein and dna, followed by standard reversal of the crosslinks to release the dna fragments which were bound to the dna binding protein . several controls for the halochip method are possible to show that capture is specific in this process and provide an excellent estimate of background .

both the halochip and chip method yield information about the location and timing of binding events on dna, but do not provide information as to the cellular response or consequence of the given binding event. currently, mrna and protein levels are measured to determine whether or not a gene has been activated or repressed, but a more direct measure of the transcription potential or function of bound dna sequences would be ideal. to complement these approaches and also increase sensitivity, high-throughput reporter assays can be used . high-throughput reporter assays utilize a 384-well format that enable the functional measure of thousands of endogenous human promoters. each individual promoter is fused to a luciferase reporter gene and transiently delivered to living cells. upon protein binding to the promoter region, the luciferase reporter gene is activated and the degree of this activation can be quantitatively determined before and after a stimulus by measuring the light output. this allows real-time monitoring of transcriptional activation or repression from the promoter-reporter construct after stimulus of a pathway or response to other cellular conditions.

to demonstrate the use of these approaches to further understanding of dna-protein interactions in living cells, we chose to study the creb transcription factor  <cit> . the model system of the creb signaling pathway has been elegantly studied and its binding targets have been described previously at the level of individual promoters as well as a genome-wide scale  <cit> . creb belongs to a family of transcription factors including activating transcription factor  <dig>  and the camp response element modulator , which regulate gene expression in response to changes in camp and other cellular signals  <cit> . upon activation of the protein kinase a pathway or stimulation of other kinases, creb is directly phosphorylated on several critical serines  <cit> , though phosphorylation is not required for binding to dna  <cit> . the phosphorylation events instead allow subsequent recruitment and binding of transcriptional co-activators creb binding protein /p <dig> as well as transducers of regulated creb  to the promoter region  <cit> . previous studies have shown that creb co-factors are often necessary for transcription activation and that creb binding to dna, even in its phosphorylated form, is not usually sufficient to activate transcription  <cit> .

in this paper, creb binding is mapped at a much higher resolution than previous studies and covers all known and predicted human promoters using the halochip method in conjunction with dna microarrays, . as this is a new approach for studying genome-wide protein:dna interactions, these data were compared to the standard creb chip-chip process using an antibody against the endogenous creb protein, revealing a high degree of overlap between the methods and also to previously published data  <cit> . to further correlate dna binding events to potential transcription activation or repression, a subset of creb-bound promoters were analyzed using high-throughput reporter assays in the presence or absence of protein kinase a pathway activators as well as the creb transcriptional co-activator, torc <dig>  all together these data reveal new creb-bound promoters and binding preferences on dna, interesting functional activities provided by the high-throughput reporter assays, and new insights into creb-mediated transcription regulation.

RESULTS
specific binding and enrichment of creb promoters in halochip
the significant advantages of the halochip method are the direct and covalent capture of the crosslinked dna-protein complexes on the halolink resin, eliminating the need of an antibody and preventing loss or diffusion of complexes after capture . as with the use of any fusion tag, it is important to show the tagged protein behaves similar to the endogenous protein. previous studies with halotag fusion proteins have demonstrated proper physiology, including dna binding and localization  <cit> . in order to demonstrate specific dna binding of the halotag-creb fusion protein, halochip assays were performed in triplicates using transiently expressed halotag-creb as the experimental sample and untransfected hela cells as a control. the relative abundance of three known creb-specific promoters, fos, jun, and p <dig>   <cit>  and three negative control sequences, called c <dig>  c <dig>  and c <dig>  which are non-genic regions from the human genome that lack cre sites, were then analyzed using plexor quantitative pcr . the creb-specific promoters show an average enrichment of  <dig>  fold, while the untransfected control showed an enrichment of  <dig>  fold . the negative control sequences are not enriched in either sample  similar results were obtained using the halochip blocking ligand  as a control . after this initial validation of specific binding, the halochip dna was then prepared for hybridization to a human promoter microarray to ascertain binding on a genome-wide scale.

halochip-chip dna oligo array design
to measure the genome-wide binding sites of creb and to assess specificity of binding on a global scale, creb halochip dna was hybridized to a custom dna oligo microarray. in the halochip-chip strategy, two samples, the experimental and untransfected control, were each treated with or without forskolin  and processed through halochip . similar to chip, the halochip derived dna from each sample, typically 10- <dig> ng/reaction, required subsequent amplification to obtain amounts sufficient  for microarray analysis. the whole genome amplification  method was used for amplification  <cit> , and the experimental and control samples were labelled with cy <dig> and cy <dig>  respectively . a custom dna oligo microarray was designed based upon promoter regions defined by switchgear genomics genome-wide set of predicted transcription start sites   <cit> . an average of  <dig> probes, each 50-mers, was designed to span a  <dig>  kb region of each known promoter region. the probes were chosen to sequences primarily upstream of a transcription start site, with an average of  <dig> bp spacing between probes. in total, approximately  <dig>  probes were used to cover  <dig>  promoter regions, including  <dig>  transcription start sites  .

creb halochip-chip array data analysis and cut-offs
a total of  <dig> independent creb halochip-chip experiments were conducted;  <dig> were treated with forskolin and  <dig> without. all showed significant enrichment, however very few differences were detected between the untreated and fsk treated samples, as was seen in previously published data  <cit> . the log <dig> ratios obtained for each promoter were averaged across the  <dig> independent array experiments to obtain a single value for each promoter region. to calculate the positive and negative predictive values  of the array data at different percentile thresholds, the promoters were sorted based on their average log <dig> ratio for enrichment and validated by qpcr. for the ppv determination,  <dig> sequences each were chosen from the top 1%, 5%, and 10% of the sorted list and for the npv determination,  <dig> sequences were randomly chosen from the bottom 50%. the top 1%, 5%, and 10% categories showed ppvs of 100%, 92%, and 50%, respectively , while the npv from the bottom 50% was calculated to be  <dig> % . these values indicate the high quality of the data, and based upon the ppv calculations, the cut-off for calling a promoter "creb-bound" in subsequent analyses was chosen to be the top 5% of the list, corresponding to  <dig>  promoters.

twelve promoters each from the top 1%, top 5%, and top 10% categories of the halochip-chip data were chosen to determine the positive predictive value and  <dig> promoters were chosen from the bottom 50% of the list for determination of the negative predictive value. sybr green qpcr was used to determine the presence of these promoters in triplicates samples of ht-creb experimental and untransfected control halochip dna and promoters were considered enriched if having a signal:background ratio ≥ 2-fold between the experimental and control sample. based upon these results, further analysis of the halochip-chip data was limited to promoters identified within the top 5% of the list.

comparison of creb halochip-chip and chip-chip array data
to compare the binding of halotag-creb to the physiological expected binding pattern of the endogenous creb protein, a conventional chip-chip experiment using an antibody to creb in hela cells and using the same oligo dna microarray was performed. the top 1%  and top 5%  of promoters showed significant overlap, 35% and 45% respectively, between halochip and chip-chip, representing a 44-fold and 10-fold over-representation of overlap compared to what would be predicted by chance . this degree of overlap is within the range of similarity to what is seen between biological replicates of either halochip-chip or chip-chip data sets, indicating that the two methods are yielding equivalent results within the limitations of experimental error of the overall process   <cit> .

the number of promoters found to overlap between the creb halochip-chip and standard chip-chip experiments were determined for both the top 1% and 5% of each respective list. also shown is the calculation of the fold enrichment over what is expected for a randomized comparison. the first top  <dig> and 5% overlap is between creb halochip-chip and chip-chip data obtained from the same probes and arrays, therefore the number of promoters,  <dig> and  <dig> respectively, used for comparison is the same between the two lists. the  indicates the comparison of the halochip-chip array data to previously published top  <dig> and 5% creb chip-chip data  <cit> . the top  <dig> and 5% creb chip-chip data correspond to  <dig> and  <dig> promoters respectively, and it was these which were used for the comparison to the top  <dig> and 5% of the halochip-chip array data. calculated in a similar fashion is the percentage overlap and enrichment over random between halochip-chip biological replicate sets or chip-chip biological replicate data sets.

comparisons were also performed to between halochip-chip and previously published creb chip-chip data   <cit> . as the creb chip-chip dna microarray covered approximately  <dig>  fewer number of promoters, the top 1% and top 5% of the list correspond to  <dig> and  <dig> promoters  <cit> , respectively, which were then used for the comparison . a slightly lower overlap of 26% and  <dig> %, respectively is observed, corresponding to a 5-fold over-representation for both categories compared to what would be predicted by chance . this is not surprising given the differences between these experiments including; the cell lines used, method of amplification for the array, as well as the different array design and platform  <cit> . nevertheless, given these differences it was very encouraging to see a significant overlap between these independent results.

further support that the promoters identified by the creb halochip-chip approach are specific for creb function, comes from gene ontology  analysis of the top 1% promoters. go analysis shows clusters of promoters found which are involved with histone assembly, chromatin architecture, rna and dna metabolism, and nucleic acid binding pathways, all cellular processes which creb has been shown to regulate   <cit> .

the top 1% of the creb halochip-chip promoters  was analyzed using gene ontology  and the different categories in terms of cellular function of promoters within the top1%. also shown is the number of creb halochip-chip promoters found as compared to the number of known human promoters within each category and the corresponding p-value calculated by go.

high resolution mapping of creb binding sites relative to endogenous transcription start sites
previous genome-wide creb chip-chip studies were conducted on spotted pcr product microarrays  <cit> . our use of a custom oligo array that tiles across extended promoter regions  gives us the unique ability to map creb binding events at much higher resolution that in turn allows us to determine the precise location of binding events relative to transcription start sites. first, we examined the occurrence and location of putative cres in the halochip dataset as a whole. enrichment of binding to both full and half cre consensus sites within the top 1% and 5% is observed as compared to the bottom 90% of the array list . also, full and half cre sites are highly over-represented in the region  <dig> bp upstream of the transcription start site , consistent with results seen previously studying the binding pattern of endogenous creb  <cit> .

creb halochip-chip promoters from the top 1%, top 5%, and bottom 90% categories were analyzed for the presence of the full cre or half cre consensus site and number of promoters containing these sequences are depicted. a full cre site was defined as a perfect match to the consensus tgacgtca. a half cre site was defined as a perfect match to the consensus tgacg or cgtca.

the design of the array also allowed for further in-depth analysis of binding to both unidirectional and bidirectional promoters. a striking observation was that the majority of creb-binding events were at bidirectional promoters, with  <dig> % and  <dig> % of total promoters being bidirectional in the top 1% and 5%, respectively. previous work has shown that approximately 10% of the genes in the genome are divergently transcribed and regulated by a bidirectional promoter   <cit> , suggesting a strong preference of creb for binding to divergently transcribed genes. of the  <dig>  promoters covered in this study, we estimate that 19% have evidence for oppositely transcribed transcripts initiating in that region. an example of creb binding at a unidirectional promoter, defined as a promoter associated with a single transcription start site, is shown in figure 4a. as expected for both the halotag and endogenous creb, there is enrichment of binding directly upstream of the transcription start site around the location of a putative cre site , and for our subset analyzed, this pattern of binding was observed greater than 60% of the time. analysis of binding within bidirectional promoters revealed interesting binding patterns for creb. as shown in figure 4b, two distinct peaks of high enrichment are observed just downstream of the transcription start sites of both genes within a bidirectional promoter, while no enrichment is observed in the intergenic space between the transcription start sites. as this is observed for both the halotag-creb fusion protein as well as the endogenous creb protein, it does not appear to be an artefact of either the halochip or chip methodology. it was also surprising to see that highest enrichment was not localized at the location of putative cre sites in bidirectional promoters, suggesting creb is either bound directly elsewhere on dna or crosslinking to complexes not bound to cre consensus sites .

creb high-throughput reporter assay analysis
the combination of the creb genome-wide binding events identified in this study along with those reported previously confirm creb binding events, however do not predict the transcriptional regulation of its target genes. furthermore, creb binding was measured in a limited set of conditions , and it is known that the creb pathway is activated by a wide variety of cellular and environmental stimuli  <cit> . to further characterize the creb binding events, we assembled a collection of cloned human promoters  in a luciferase reporter vector that represented a subset  of known creb targets previously identified  <cit> . as predicted from the earlier overlap calculations with the creb chip-chip data  approximately 35% of these promoters  were identified in the top 5% of the halochip-chip array data. as a control,  <dig> random promoters that were not targets of creb were also fused to luciferase reporters . utilizing our high-throughput reporter assay platform, we measured the activity of each of these fragments in hela cells in triplicate in  <dig> different conditions: no treatment, forskolin  stimulation, phorbol 12-myristate-13-acetate  stimulation, and co-transfection with a torc <dig> expression construct with and without fsk stimulation . we considered a promoter induced if the absolute activity was significantly above background, passed a t-test at p <  <dig> , and had a magnitude of change greater than 2-fold.

the promoter macroarray results are summarized in figure 5b, and the percentage of the total creb promoters tested , as well as the halochip subset , that were induced in the different conditions were determined . for both the creb set and the halochip subset, only ~10% were induced by fsk treatment alone . this is not surprising since it is known that many other factors are necessary for the transcriptional activation of creb-bound promoters and both our binding data and previously reported data did not show an appreciable difference in dna binding between +/- fsk treatment  <cit> . indeed, the torc <dig> co-transfections induced more than 50% of the constructs  and also conferred the largest fold-changes in activity  highlighting the importance of co-factors in the transcriptional activation of creb-bound promoters  <cit> . similar trends were observed between the overall creb set of promoters as compared to the halochip subset, indicating those identified by halochip respond similarly to creb-specific stimuli . the  <dig> random promoters from the human genome do not show induced activity in any of the conditions tested, indicating that the false positive rate of the reporter assay for creb activity is very low .

given the interesting creb binding patterns at bidirectional promoters , we looked specifically at the promoter activities of bidirectional promoters in our reporter assay dataset. there were a total of  <dig> bidirectional gene pairs for which we collected promoter activity data for each direction. the majority of the pairs showed very low activity in both directions in the untreated cells suggesting that creb-bound bidirectional promoters are not transcriptionally active in an un-induced state. two of the  <dig> bidirectional gene pairs, which regulate two pairs of histone genes, had constitutively high promoter activities in both directions, irrespective of stimulation conditions.

the most interesting example was seen for two of the bidirectional promoter pairs, depicted in figure 6a, b. for these bidirectional promoters, no induction was observed with either fsk or pma, but in the presence of torc <dig>  promoter activity in one direction was significantly up-regulated while promoter activity was repressed in the other direction . creb enrichment at the mrps18b promoter was observed at cre sites just upstream of the tss, while enrichment to the pp1r <dig> promoter was downstream the tss and not associated with a cre site . interestingly, only the mrps18b promoter shows transcriptional activation in the reporter assay, while the ppp1r <dig> promoter is significantly repressed in the presence of torc <dig> and fsk . these results suggest that torc <dig> plays an important role at some promoters in determining the direction of transcriptional activation.

discussion
we applied here two technologies, halochip and high-throughput promoter assays, to study and more fully characterize the creb transcription pathway than previously done. the halochip method  offers an alternative approach for the capture of intracellular dna-protein complexes and was developed to address the challenges of antibodies required for the existing chip method. the use of a robust protein tag eliminates the need for a qualified antibody and enables researchers to study highly similar paralogs, different isoforms, or point mutants of a transcription factor that may not be distinguishable by an antibody. also, due to rapid and covalent binding kinetics halotag with its ligands, protein complexes can be captured efficiently from dilute solutions without concern of loss due to diffusion off the resin, allowing for the use of a much smaller number of cells  per halochip experiment as compared to the standard chip experiment   <cit> . as with the use of any protein fusion tag for chip or halochip experiments there are concerns as to potential alteration of dna binding due to interference by the fusion tag or changes in expression level. the creb halochip-chip results show that binding to dna on a genomic-scale was specific for the creb protein and had a significant degree of overlap with conventional creb chip-chip data, suggesting the halotag-creb fusion protein is binding to dna similarly to the endogenous creb protein.

in addition to identification of new creb-bound promoters with these array studies, we extended our studies of the creb pathway by measuring the functional activity of over  <dig> creb-target promoters  <cit>  in a high-throughput reporter assay experiment . many diverse responses are regulated through the creb pathway and unique subsets of creb-bound genes may be transcriptionally activated and responsive to particular stimuli. the high-throughput reporter assays of creb-bound promoters gives the ability to stratify creb binding events based on the transcriptional activity of the fragments of dna to which they bind. analysis of the creb pathway using the functional promoter macroarrays revealed only a small percentage of promoters were responsive to fsk, correlating well with the halochip-chip data showing minimal changes in binding between untreated and fsk treated cells. interestingly, a much larger percentage of promoters were responsive to pma, and an even greater percentage to the torc proteins. these functional results provide further support for the idea that co-factors are a crucial part of the creb signaling pathway and while reporter assays lack the full chromatin context of the genome, by using extended promoters regions that are  <dig> kb in length, we were able to observe transcriptional effects by co-factors, which may interact with proximal sites. in order to analyze creb-enriched sites at a much higher resolution than was previously performed, custom oligo microarrays were used. this detailed analysis provided interesting and novel insight into the localization of creb at the promoters of genes. a simple assumption is that the experimental enrichment for creb binding would be coincident with the location of the cre. indeed this was observed for the majority of unidirectional promoters . however, a distinctly different pattern is observed for a large fraction of bidirectional promoters, where the peaks of highest enrichment are seen downstream of the closest tss, often not coinciding with the location of cres . this pattern was seen consistently for many bidirectional promoters, in both halochip-chip and chip-chip data sets, indicating this is not a phenomenon associated with a particular method.

these particular binding results suggest a number of interesting scenarios for which additional experiments will be needed. it may be the case that there is a secondary structure of the creb-dna complex at bidirectional promoters where the peaks of enrichment reflect the higher order crosslinked structure rather than the true localization of the creb protein on the linear strand of genomic dna. an alternative explanation is that creb may be a part of a paused transcription initiation complex. in this scenario, creb could initially bind upstream of the tss in the bidirectional promoters, form its known interactions with the rna polii complex, move after initiation with the complex, and then pause at particular sites downstream of the tss. recent work has shown that a paused transcriptional complex containing transcriptional regulators are more abundant than previously thought  <cit> , and this explanation would produce the enrichment pattern that we observe for creb at bidirectional promoters .

results from the promoter reporter assays for bidirectional promoters are also consistent with this scenario, since a paused transcriptional machinery would likely result in lower reporter activity as was seen for the majority of bidirectional promoters tested. perhaps most interesting is the functional behaviour of a subset of the bidirectional promoters in the presence of torc <dig>  in  <dig> out of  <dig> cases tested, the activity of a bidirectional promoter was strongly induced in one direction and strongly repressed in the opposite direction in the presence of torc <dig>  the strongly repressed promoters show creb binding which is downstream the tss, while the strongly induced promoters show expected upstream promoter binding. also, the ability of the torc <dig> protein to differentially regulate promoter activity, suggests that creb co-factors may also help to regulate the directionality of transcription. this is particularly relevant for the creb transcription factor, since over 50% of creb binding sites are located in bidirectional promoters as we have reported for the first time.

CONCLUSIONS
this broad survey of the transcriptional activity of creb-bound promoters provides a valuable layer of functional data for the creb protein. future efforts to compare the activity of these promoters in many more conditions will help to further understand creb signaling and mutational analysis of the bidirectional class of creb-bound promoters will help to dissect the mechanism of bidirectional gene regulation. the use of the new technologies presented here however is not limited to the study of the creb pathway, rather can be generalized to study any transcriptional pathway. the halochip method, like the standard chip process, can be used to study dna binding both on a small scale, as well as genome-wide scale, however follow up studies characterizing the functional consequences of these binding events have lagged much further behind. by expanding the use of high-throughput reporter assays, we hope to advance our understanding of these functional consequences. this comprehensive comparison reveals the challenges and potential pitfalls of extrapolating binding events to transcriptional activation and shows the need for both approaches, as well as other experiments to truly characterize transcriptional activity.

