BACKGROUND
the completion of the international space station , including the installation of experiment hardware and the presence of a regular crew complement, presents enormous opportunity to examine the longer term effects of spaceflight and microgravity on living systems. iss capabilities now include stable orbital environment, flexible-environment growth chambers, on orbit imaging, functional laboratory-bench areas, crew time for harvest, and a facile, reliable sample storage and return strategy
 <cit> . given these capabilities, the  <dig> nrc decadal survey, recapturing a future for space exploration: life and physical sciences research for a new era
 <cit>  strongly encouraged the application of molecular biology technologies to iss studies to address fundamental questions of plant growth and development in spaceflight, in the absence of unit gravity, which is considered a major environmental force shaping plant evolution.

plants have a long and international history in spaceflight research , and because of the relationship between gravity and plant architecture
 <cit> , plants are considered important tools for discovery of gravity-related biological phenomena
 <cit> . yet the cultivation of plants within spaceflight vehicles presented numerous physical and engineering challenges that complicated interpretation of fundamental plant responses. for example, the management of root-zone water and aeration is affected by the lack of convection and related boundary layer issues, along with the unique behavior of water and capillary action in microgravity, and the attendant engineering designed to ameliorate the impact of these issues is an important feature of spaceflight experiments
 <cit> . early experiments with plants highlighted the need for understanding and overcoming these technical limitations, while nonetheless establishing that near typical plant growth can occur in space. many studies indicated that as engineering challenges were overcome, plant growth and development approached terrestrial norms
 <cit> .

even as engineering challenges have been overcome, investigations have shown that plants in various growth systems do respond to spaceflight with modified gene expression patterns. arabidopsis seedlings in completely sealed canisters showed changes in gene expression consistent with cell wall modifications, while arabidopsis cell cultures demonstrated a very different gene expression response from that of seedlings
 <cit> . plants in a single-celled stage, such as the gravity-sensitive spores of fern ceratopteris richardii also respond to spaceflight with changes in gene expression patterns
 <cit> . conversely, wheat leaves, using limited arrays, showed few significant changes in transcriptional profiles between spaceflight and ground environments
 <cit> .

the work reported here is a biologically replicated molecular analysis of 12-day-old arabidopsis plants grown on phytagel plates within the advanced biological research system . the designation of this flight experiment was tages, which is an acronym for transgenic arabidopsis gene expression system. the use of plates within the abrs created a benign culture environment that minimized hardware-induced stress factors. with the roots coursing along the surface of the media, problems with root-zone aeration and water and nutrient delivery were eliminated while the abrs provided controlled lighting, temperature, and air quality. leaves, hypocotyls and roots all differ in their gene expression responses to spaceflight, and spaceflight appears to primarily affect several hormone signaling pathways, which may drive extensive cell wall remodeling especially in roots.

RESULTS
access to facilities on the iss allowed facile spaceflight growth, imaging, and harvest of arabidopsis
growth of arabidopsis on standard laboratory petri plates was conducted within the abrs using the gfp imaging system  , which provided straightforward crew access for harvesting . the plants exhibited robust growth , and after  <dig> days were harvested to rnalater in ksc fixation tubes . the loaded kfts were frozen for storage on orbit and eventual return to earth. after return, the spaceflight plants , together with ground control plants  , were recovered from rnalater and dissected into roots, leaves, and hypocotyls for analysis . ground control experiments were conducted using identical abrs hardware and an environmental chamber programmed to iss environmental conditions. both flight and ground control plants were harvested after  <dig> days of growth to kfts, and ground control samples were collected parallel to every spaceflight sample.

the transcriptome of arabidopsis demonstrated organ-specific changes in response to spaceflight
there were  <dig> genes that showed significant  differential expression by at least  <dig> -fold  and  <dig> by more than 7-fold  in any organ; yet leaves, hypocotyls, and roots each displayed unique patterns of gene expression in response to spaceflight. figure 
3b provides a pair of venn diagrams that illustrates the distribution patterns of differentially expressed genes among leaves , hypocotyls , and roots .
3: figure s <dig>  green indicates down-regulated genes and red indicates up-regulated genes. heat-map legend values are in log <cit> . hierarchical clustering methods used on the graphics were after
 <cit> .

there were  <dig> genes that were coordinately expressed in roots, hypocotyls, and leaves by at least  <dig> -fold in all organs;  <dig> of these genes up-regulated and  <dig> down-regulated . all but one of the coordinately up-regulated genes with known functions are associated with plant cell wall remodeling and defense response. only  <dig> of the  <dig> coordinately down-regulated genes have a known function; three are also associated with cell wall remodeling and defense response, and the other three are generally associated with signal transduction that impacts growth.

most of the genes differentially expressed in response to spaceflight are not coordinately expressed among organs ; however, in each organ there remains a strong tendency for the involvement of defense and cell remodeling genes. figure 
3d shows a subset of  <dig> genes chosen from the  <dig> shown in figure 
3a, which are genes that have been associated with various aspects of cell wall remodeling and cell expansion, pathogen and wounding responses, or growth hormone signal transduction. each cluster is annotated with a few representative genes; a fully annotated version can be found in additional file
 <dig>  as in the set of coordinately expressed genes, the down-regulated genes were largely associated with a number of factors regulating cell elongation and hormone signal transduction. the up-regulated genes were closely associated with cell wall remodeling and touch, wounding, and pathogen responses. most of the highly up-regulated genes were represented in roots, including  <dig> of the  <dig> genes induced by more than 7-fold .

selected transcriptional responses to spaceflight were shown to be consistent among distinct flight experiments
rt-qpcr data for five selected target genes were obtained from two additional, comparable flight experiments. the genes ddf <dig>  dreb2a, tch <dig>  jaz <dig> and elip <dig> were initially chosen to provide quantitative support for the run 2b array data, being selected on the basis of their high differential expression in those arrays and functional interest. this same set of genes was later used to evaluate transcriptional trends displayed by the roots of plants in the 1a and 2a flight experiments. ddf <dig>  dreb2a, tch <dig>  and jaz <dig> were all similarly induced in the three spaceflight growth time frames, while elip <dig> was similarly repressed . these data illustrated the repeatability of the spaceflight response across two separate launches and three distinct iss growth experiments conducted months apart.

changes in auxin-mediated signaling occurred over the course of plant development with the gfp reporters
a dr5r:gfp reporter gene line was imaged in run 3a over time to evaluate potential changes in auxin-related gene expression patterns through development on orbit. the three reporter gene lines shown in figure 
5a and
5b are delineated by white lines: positive control 35s:gfp plants at left, adh:gfp plants in the center, and dr5r:gfp plants at right. the constitutive expression of gfp in the 35s:gfp plants was apparent. no apparent differential gfp expression between flight and ground control was induced in the adh:gfp plants. however, the dr5r:gfp plants showed differential gfp expression in the hypocotyls in spaceflight compared with those of ground controls over the duration of the flight. in the first few days after germination on orbit, the dr5r:gfp levels were similar for flight plants and the comparable ground controls. as development progressed through day  <dig>  the relative expression of gfp in the ground controls exceeded that of the flight plants. later, beginning at day <dig>  the flight plants showed an increase of expression and exceeded expression levels of the ground controls, which remained static after day  <dig>  examples of images from these time frames, along with graphical representation of the green intensity values are shown in figure 
5b and
5c.

discussion
completion of the iss, together with operational hardware, effective experimentation strategies, and sample return protocols, has allowed for the first time a complete, replicated, organ-specific transcriptome analysis for physiological adaptation of arabidopsis to spaceflight in laboratory-typical plant growth conditions. the present experiments compare spaceflight plants to plants grown on the ground in robustly replicated conditions, using ground hardware and procedures identical to those of the iss. these experiments do not separate gravity out as single factor, but rather consider spaceflight in all of its collective inputs. a 1g centrifuge on orbit would allow experiments to begin to separate gravity from the other environmental factors of spaceflight , provided that the orbital centrifuge was large enough to eliminate gravity gradients within the plants. it is unlikely, however, that artificial gravity will be possible on any likely orbital or transit vehicles, so there is scientific and operational value in examining the collective effects of spaceflight on terrestrial biology, and especially plants if they are to be used for supplementing life support in extended orbital and long distance transit vehicles such as those envisioned for trips to mars
 <cit> .

there were  <dig> genes observed to be differentially expressed in spaceflight versus ground control plants. the observation that only  <dig> genes were affected is remarkable, given that spaceflight plants and ground controls were operationally separated by  <dig> miles of altitude,  <dig>  mph of velocity, and the other attendant potential impacts of orbital spaceflight, indicating that spaceflight environments have become extremely well controlled. yet those  <dig> genes reveal a specific, rather robust, and in some ways unexpected physiological adaptation to spaceflight.

leaves, roots, and hypocotyls engage different genes but adopt similar strategies to adapt to the spaceflight environment. although unexpected, the major thread that connects the responses in these organs is that many of the differentially expressed genes are associated with touch, wound response, and cell wall remodeling, as well as the hormone signaling pathways that govern these processes.

in leaves, genes involved with hormone signaling, such as abc transporters and auxin response factors
 <cit> , are highly repressed, as are several genes encoding cell wall associated proteins, including an endochitinase, polygalacturonase, xylan glucuronosyltransferase, an arabinogalactan precursor, and a lateral organ boundary-domain containing protein
 <cit> . the highly up-regulated genes unique to leaves are primarily associated with defense typical of leaf herbivory and pathogen response
 <cit> , and some calcium and phosphate metabolism signaling that may be associated with wounding and gravity sensing
 <cit> . at least one gene, pgp <dig>  has been associated with both light signal perception and cell wall remodeling
 <cit> . while this gene is highly up-regulated in leaves, the same pgp <dig> is highly repressed in roots.

in hypocotyls, genes associated with cell expansion are strongly represented, which is consonant with the fact that hypocotyl growth is primarily dictated by cell expansion
 <cit> . a large component of cell expansion is the remodeling of the cell wall to accommodate the change in cell shape and volume
 <cit> . auxin-regulated genes are the most abundant, with dozens of highly differentially expressed genes similarly represented in an auxin-treated hypocotyl transcriptome
 <cit>  and other auxin- and bl-induced transcriptomes
 <cit> . a morphometric feature of these spaceflight arabidopsis hypocotyls is that they are shorter than the comparable ground control plants
 <cit> . only a few of the induced representatives are regulated through the auxre element, with four saur-like genes containing auxre motifs in their promoters up-regulated by  <dig> - and 4-fold in hypocotyls. dr5r:gfp shows a differential expression profile in the spaceflight hypocotyls compared with ground controls, being repressed early but induced later in hypocotyl development, indicating a potentially complex auxin-related response in spaceflight.

in roots, cell wall remodeling dominates the tactical response to spaceflight, reflecting morphological differences that have been observed
 <cit> . the roots of flight plants are smaller than their ground control cohorts, and in the case of the col- <dig> ecotype, there are fewer lateral roots
 <cit> . one gene family that contributes to both root length and the distribution and abundance of lateral roots contains the armadillo  repeat proteins
 <cit> . in spaceflight, three members of this family are up-regulated, and one of them is up-regulated in all three organs and highly induced in roots. the flight roots also show clear signs of negative phototropism and strong skewing
 <cit> . there is likely a strong connection between this size and skewing phenomenon and the large collection of genes involved in pathways that remodel cell walls, including the highly differentially expressed ddf <dig>  caf <dig>  tch <dig>  cow <dig>  ext-like, and sp1l5
 <cit>  genes. several of the highly induced genes in roots were also identified as binding targets for hy <dig>  a transcription factor associated with numerous photoreceptors
 <cit> . the gene rhl <dig> , which is up-regulated three-fold in roots, is a well-known hy <dig> target. however, the up-regulated genes exo, xt <dig>  nudt <dig> and wrky <dig>  which are typically associated with touch and wounding, have also been identified as hy <dig> targets genes
 <cit> . it is possible that the induction of hy <dig> partners, and other light responsive genes in roots, is part of a strategy to maximize utilization of the primary tropic signals available to plants in the absence of gravity: light and touch.

CONCLUSIONS
there are four major abiotic cues involved in directing terrestrial plant growth and development: gravity, light, water, and touch . the opportunity to examine the strategies of environmental sensing in spaceflight provides a unique insight into the balance among these cues during the course of plant development. some features of root growth thought to be gravity-dependent are not
 <cit> , and some features of phototropism
 <cit>  and signal transduction
 <cit>  would not have been revealed had it not been for the ability to remove the influence of gravity from the analyses. and while spaceflight may be more complex than simply the removal of gravity, gravity is certainly largely absent during the growth of these orbital plants.

plant growth and development are governed by a vast and complex network of genes. the correlations in morphological and molecular data from spaceflight offer a unique insight into growth and development, particularly in regard to processes presumed to be affected by gravity. there is a rich history of plant biology using the spaceflight environment that may lead to a greater understanding of the role of gravity
 <cit> . additionally, the contemporary access to the iss, along with new orbital habitats and hardware for plant experiments, will enable researchers to design a new generation of replicated experiments with which to explore these phenomena. it is likely that an understanding of responses to spaceflight will be refined as specific cell types are examined, and it is likely that the specific roles of gravity in spaceflight responses will be elaborated with facile access to orbital centrifuges. the result will be a much deeper understanding of plant growth in support of human spaceflight missions, as well as a deeper appreciation of the physiological adaptations of life forms to extra-terrestrial environments.

