BACKGROUND
most verbs describe events with one or more participants  <cit> . the verb's argument structure defines the number and relationships of participants needed for a complete event. for "peter gives jim a book", linguistic theorizing  <cit>  would ascribe participants three thematic roles: the agent , the recipient  and the theme . the entry in the mental lexicon for a verb like "give" must incorporate such information in addition to phonetic and orthographic information.

the cortical processing of argument structures has been investigated mostly in designs employing entire sentences, wh-questions , or sentences including syntactic or semantic violations  <cit> . imaging studies suggest that the middle temporal gyrus  and the inferior frontal gyrus  of the left hemisphere  <cit>  play a crucial role in this processing. in particular, the left ifg  has been shown to be active when grammatically complex sentences that required working memory resources  <cit> , and when argument hierarchies were processed  <cit> . even if words were presented in the grammatically correct order in one, and out of order in another condition, activation of the left ifg and mtg was more pronounced to words in correct sentences  <cit> . complementing this research on sentence processing, the present study examined whether the verb's argument structure was already retrieved with the verb itself. for this purpose, electromagnetic brain responses to verbs of different argument structure, presented in isolation, were assessed. as an alternative, the information about argument structure might be retrieved only in context, so that the brain response discloses the relation between argument structures and their fillers. this option was examined in a second experiment by measuring the electromagnetic brain responses to verbs that varied in their argument structure and were presented in a minimal syntactic context. compared to full-sentence designs and isolated verb presentation, a minimal context should prevent influences of other words and structures within a sentence, and hence disclose the extent to which relatively small differences in the lexical entry can be traced in the brain response.

retrieval of the argument structure from the verb itself has been suggested by behavioral studies, which reported faster responses to two-compared to three-argument verbs  <cit> . but it has also been argued that context is required to activate syntactic processing  <cit> . this, too, is supported by faster responses to verbs related to nouns  relative to unrelated verbs  <cit> , by faster responses whenever two-compared to three-argument verbs had to be integrated into sentences , and by faster responses to words following verbs with one compared to three participant roles  <cit> . an impact of context can also be concluded from distinct activation including the left ifg after sentences  <cit> .

for the present study, we selected verbs with one, two, or three obligatory arguments . if isolated verbs activated the processing of their argument structure, more pronounced activation by the more complex relative to the simple argument structure were to be expected mainly in left anterior/middle temporal areas. this hypothesis was examined in a first experiment, in which isolated verbs with different argument structure were presented visually. the second experiment served to explore the impact of the verb's context. if presentation of the verb was sufficient for the retrieval of its argument structure, and if context was needed to activate syntactic processing, would the minimal context of just one noun  be sufficient to activate this processing? if so, name-verb pairs with different argument structures should evoke different cortical response patterns. we hypothesized that the minimal context should start the evaluation automatically, whether or not the verb completed a grammatically correct sentence. only for one-argument verbs, the name completes a sentence. if a minimal context would activate the same processing as an entire sentence, left ifg activation distinguishing the conditions  was to be expected.

RESULTS
experiment 1
around 250– <dig> ms, one-argument verbs led to the strongest activation in the left temporal lobe, while three-argument verbs produced the weakest activation, and activation by two-argument verbs were in between  =  <dig> , p =  <dig> ; figure 1). between  <dig> and  <dig> ms activity did not vary between verbs .

experiment 2
similar to experiment  <dig>  activity around 250– <dig> ms in the left temporal lobe was most pronounced to one-argument verbs. however, the linear trend was not significant .  =  <dig> , p =  <dig> ).

between  <dig> and  <dig> ms, activity varied in amplitude and latency in the region of the inferior frontal gyrus when a name preceded the verb . a linear trend confirmed larger amplitudes for one- than for two- and three-argument verbs  =  <dig> , p =  <dig> ) when verbs were presented in minimal syntactic contexts of names. moreover, activity peaked significantly earlier when the name-verb pair formed a complete , and thus grammatically correct sentence  compared to pairs forming incomplete sentences  =  <dig> , p =  <dig> , post-hoc comparison one- vs two-argument verbs: f =  <dig> , p =  <dig> ; for one- versus three-argument verbs: f =  <dig> , p =  <dig> ; for two- vs three-argument verbs: n.s.).

discussion
two results of the present study seem noteworthy:  verbs of different argument structure differentially activate cortical areas in the left middle temporal lobe, the distinct processing being reflected in electromagnetic response patterns as early as  <dig> ms after stimulus onset.  whenever verbs were presented in combination with a name, and were thus processed within a minimal context, an additional later  and more anterior activation in the left hemisphere showed the same differentiation by the verb's argument structure as the earlier one. from the projection of mne onto a standard anatomical brain , we may assume that the first activation involves the middle temporal gyrus, while the second activation might involve areas like the ifg and broca's area. thus, these structures may participate in this analysis of argument structure in syntax processing. further support of this anatomical relationship and the significance of the ifg is drawn from recent imaging  results obtained from a similar experimental design , which disclosed the ifg and the left mtg as primary areas distinguishing conditions.

both results suggest that the processing of a verb's argument structure is linked to the verb itself and does not require a complete sentence. moreover, the differential activation that is even evoked by the minimal context of a name suggests that a major impact of working memory can be ruled out  <cit> .

activation in the middle temporal gyrus followed a linear trend . this, too, indicates the activation of argument structure by verbs independent of any participants. mcrae and coworker  <cit>  found a priming effect even under conditions when the subject  followed the verb, which is a rare construction in every day english. thus, a verb can indeed activate the argument structure even if the filler is not provided. in the active anterior region , this linear trend was only evident when verbs were preceded by names. this suggests that the ifg is involved in keeping representations active  and in integrating them with further incoming representations . in line with this hypothesis mcdermott and colleagues  <cit>  point out that broca's area is not only active during processing of syntax but also involved in semantic tasks. there is also evidence that larger parts of the left inferior frontal gyrus are involved in syntactic processing  <cit> . activation during semantic processing has consistently been found in left inferior frontal areas  <cit> . specifically, a region in the anterior and ventral aspect of the inferior frontal gyrus  has been identified as contributing to semantic processing, in addition to the left middle temporal cortex  <cit>  . thus, we may conclude that the ifg projects back to the temporal lobe to keep representations active. such a structure would allow for lexical items to interact when coming in sequentially: the activation of typical fillers  is supposed to facilitate on-line language processing. verbs have been demonstrated to prime typical fillers of agent, patient and instrument roles and vice versa  <cit> . sentential information , structurally crucial to a verb , facilitates integration of the verb into the sentence. as a consequence, reading is accelerated when thematic roles are saturated  during comprehension  <cit> . in the present study, processing speed  distinguished the automatic evaluation of verbs requiring one argument as grammatically completing a sentence from the evaluation of verbs requiring two or three arguments as leaving an incomplete, grammatically incorrect sentence. the interplay between ifg and middle temporal gyrus may be the biological substrate for these priming effects.

the assumption that sequential processing of lexical items  is reflected in distinct spatio-temporal brain activation patterns fits with theoretical models: for instance, rappaport and colleagues  <cit>  assume that a verb activates an intermediate representation, the semantic class. the semantic class provides the list of lexical conceptual structures and associated argument structures defining different argument structures and roles. the activation of the semantic class may involve allocation of memory for the upcoming syntactic structure of the sentence. it is conceivable that the amount of memory allocation depends on the complexity of the expected sentence and, hence, on the verb's argument structure. it has been suggested that the number of thematic roles is related to the processing load which is required for the integration of single words into sentences  <cit> , and that the inferior frontal gyrus  is involved in the transient storage of information during parsing  <cit> . stromswold and colleagues  <cit>  reported increased regional cerebral blood flow  in broca's area, particularly in the pars opercularis, when subjects judged the semantic plausibility of syntactically more relative to less complex sentences. this suggests that the activation of broca's area may vary with the complexity of the sentence.

in contrast to previous evidence and our expectation, more verb arguments did not provoke more activation. instead, decreasing activation with increasing complexity in argument structure was found. a similar result was also obtained in our recent fmri study using different stimuli and a different experimental setup. this result may indicate that activation reflects integration rather than processing demands imposed by the verb. within the composition of words  into a sentence, the completeness of the compositional representation of words may vary across the parsing process, and may be accompanied by a sequence of activation . before the first word is presented, sentence processing  is 0% complete, and activation has not started. activation starts with word/verb presentation, with retrieval of the verb describing the situation being of highest impact. while the recognition of simple events is 50% complete , the recognition of complex events may be less complete . thus, we may assume that the representation of an event is more likely activated by a verb with few arguments. finally, event representation composition is complete when all parts are given. this is the case for one-argument verbs when they are presented together with names . although speculative, this model would explain the differential activation in the temporal lobe as reflecting the degree to which event retrieval is complete, with activity being higher for one- than for three-argument verbs.

semantic complexity, examined for eventive and stative verbs, has been found to affect processing time  <cit> . completion of the event's representation may have been reflected by the  peak of activity in ifg. the parser may be waiting for further input in the other cases. behavioral studies have shown that appropriate versus inappropriate syntactic context can affect a target word's naming latency or lexical decision time or both  <cit> . similar timing can be reflected prior to overt reaction, i.e. in the latency of peak amplitudes of the brain response to the word in context. many studies on word frequency effects reported shorter peak latencies of brain responses corresponding to shorter reaction times  <cit> . in the present study, the earlier amplitude in correct phrases may be a signature of a sentence's end similar to the eeg findings of a late positivity following the last word of a grammatical sentence  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
in sum, the present results suggest that sub-representations of entries in the mental lexicon are processed along a dimension of complexity. this processing evolves over time and occurs in the brain along a posterior-anterior axis: whereas recognition of the visual items activated posterior brain areas around  <dig> ms after stimulus onset without distinct processing of item features, the argument structure inherent in a verb was automatically distinguished at some  <dig> ms latency in the middle temporal lobe, followed by the automatic appraisal of the grammaticality of the verb presented in minimal context at some  <dig> ms latency in more frontal areas, presumably the ifg.

