BACKGROUND
in the last decade, the advent of high throughput technologies led to the emergence of the systems biology era and prompted the research community to systematically define the expression levels of mrnas and micro-rna  through thousands of cell and tissues under physiological and pathological conditions  <cit> . now, one of the crucial issues is to define the biological mechanisms that drives genes expression with the ultimate goal of reverse-engineering gene regulatory networks  as a whole in order to predict the system outcome under molecular perturbations.

one current limit for biologists interested in mining regulatory information or for bioinformaticians interested in creating regulatory maps for modeling, is that this information is scattered over the internet under various formats making it difficult to handle. thus one needs to create a unified database that would list known and predicted molecular interactions. this information can be obtained from different sources:  from the literature,  from large-scale experimental methods that allow genome-wide profiling of transcription factors  binding sites to dna or  from dna sequence analysis, by searching 3'utr regions for mirna specific motifs or by scanning gene promoters with transcription factor specific position weight matrices . in the latter case, the use of comparative genomics is known to greatly improve predictions of functional tf binding sites by limiting the number of false positives   <cit> . another limit of grn analysis is the intrinsic complexity of the data. in this regard, several graph-based tools have been developed to draw a global picture of the putative interactions taking place in the biological context of interest . in these, genes or proteins appear as nodes in a graph, and functional relations  are represented as edges connecting the corresponding entities. the topology of the subsequent network can later be analyzed using advanced tools such as cytoscape  <cit> . however, as data integration is a challenge that requires to map various types of evidence onto a set of stable gene ids, most applications are oriented toward a single data type   <cit>  moreover, another challenge is the development of graph-based tools producing clear, meaningful and integrated visualizations from which users can draw new hypotheses without being overwhelmed by the density of the presented graphic information. in this regard, the cytoscape plug-in "cerebral" proposes an intuitive visualization method through a "cell compartment-based layout" that shows interacting proteins on a layout resembling "traditional" signalling pathway/system diagrams  <cit> .

d
e
f
the table provides an overview of the types of molecular interactions and of the functionalities offered by representative web tools previously published. informations were obtained from latest articles describing the servers. the presence or absence of the corresponding features is denoted by + or - respectively.

a refers to bioinformatic prediction of tfbss using pwms.

b refers to results from large-scale experimental methods that profile the binding of tfs to dna at the genome-wide level .

c refers to computational methods that aggregate various informations  to infer functional interactions.

d search tool for the retrieval of interacting genes/proteins

e motifmap visualizer was not available during our tests. informations related to the visualizer were obtained from documentation.

f agile protein interaction dataanalyzer

here, we sought to create a compendium of predicted and validated molecular interactions in human and mouse. first, we used a large collection of pwms obtained from transfac , jaspar  and uniprobe  to search, in gene promoter regions, for candidate transcription factor binding sites  conserved over human, mouse, rat and dog genomes  <cit> . overall, our analysis of these pwms corresponding to  <dig> human and  <dig> mouse transcription factors  provides a systematic overview of gene regulation in the human and mouse. data generated in this study were next integrated with a large set of molecular interactions from various sources including  potential protein/dna interactions derived from chip-seq experiments ,  curated regulatory interactions obtained from the literature ,  predicted mirna/targets interactions   protein kinase-substrate interactions derived from multiple online sources  and  physical protein-protein interactions obtained from hprd, reactome and various databases of the imex consortium  <cit> . informations related to these interactions were stored as mysql tables that were integrated in the back-end database of transcriptomebrowser, our previously published microarray datamining software  <cit> . finally, we developed interactomebrowser  as a plugin for transcriptomebrowser. ibrowser was developed using the prefuse java library and can be used to translate any gene list into a meaningful graph. the specificity of the ibrowser plugin relies on a new "cell compartments-based layout" that makes use of a subset of the gene ontology to map gene products onto relevant cell compartments. this layout is particularly powerful for visual integration of heterogeneous biological information. moreover, ibrowser is integrated into the transcriptomebrowser suite, which allows an easy communication with other tools, for instance to retrieve lists of genes that are frequently coexpressed in given conditions, thus creating context-specific views of the interactome and regulome.

ibrowser is intended both for biologists and bioinformaticians. on one hand, it is a graph-based knowledge browser, that is intended to provide new insight into any user-defined gene list. on the other hand it is also intended to fill the gap between heterogeneous genomic data and gene regulatory network analysis. in this regard, graphs produced inside ibrowser may be exported into cytoscape and ginsim, a dynamic modeling software  <cit> . in the following sections we provide several examples underlying the benefits of this visualization tool for large gene set analysis.

implementation
we first used phylogenetic footprinting to predict regulatory elements in the human and mouse genomes. a dataset of  <dig>  pwms corresponding to mouse or human transcription factors was obtained from various sources . the multiz28way  and the multiz30way  cross-species multiple alignments were obtained from ucsc  <cit> . we retained for analysis alignments flanking transcription start sites on both sides  of any refseq transcript and devoid of coding sequences. sequences were scored following the commonly used formula  <cit> :

 scorep,c= ∑w=0w-1log2pseeingsp+watpositionw|pwmpseeingsp+watpositionw|backgroundmodel 

where scorep, c represents the pwm score for a pwm of length w in the dna sequence of a species c between positions p and p+w- <dig> and sp+w represents the nucleotide observed at position p+w. the probability of observing each nucleotide under the background distribution was assumed to be  <dig> . for each pwm m, a score threshold tm with p-value below  <dig> - <dig> was computed using matrix-distrib from rsat ensuring high stringency of sequence scoring  <cit> . a sequence in the reference genome was considered as a putative tfbs if its score for pwm m at position p in the alignment was found above tm in human, mouse rat and dog. each pwm was then linked to its corresponding transcription factors and putative targets. information was stored in a mysql relational database.

we also integrated several informations obtained from popular databases. protein/dna interactions  derived from various genome wide analysis  and encompassing interactions corresponding to  <dig> human tfs and  <dig> mouse tfs were obtained from the chip-x database. tfbs predictions were obtained from the present work  and tfbsconserved ucsc track . a set of regulatory interactions curated from the literature were obtained from lymphtf-db  and oreganno . protein-protein interaction datasets were obtained from hprd , reactome  and imex . protein kinase-substrate relationships were retrieved from kea . finally, mirna/target relationships were obtained from targetscan database predictions . for all datasets, all identifiers were mapped onto entrez gene ids. this compendium of molecular interactions is available as flat files at: ftp://tagc.univ-mrs.fr/public/transcriptomebrowser/db_tables/.

interactomebrowser was developed using the prefuse java library which was modified according to our needs. interactomebrowser requires java  <dig> .

RESULTS
tfbs predictions using comparative genomics
although previous works have demonstrated the power of comparative genomics in defining novel regulatory motifs in human and mouse, few of them integrate the pwms recently computed from protein binding microarray  experiments. overall, restricting our analysis to promoter regions and using a set of  <dig>  pwms, we predicted tfbss in  <dig>  position-specific motifs of the mouse genome and  <dig>  of the human genome. the median number of hits for any pwm was  <dig> in mouse  and  <dig> in human . the pwms with highest number of hits correspond to sp <dig> transcription factor  in both species . sp <dig> binds gc-rich elements  that are found in the promoter regions of a large number of genes  <cit> . as promoter regions are known to contain cpg islands we checked whether our approach could overestimate the number of targets for tf with high gc-content related pwms. as shown in figure s <dig>  this effect was essentially restricted to sp <dig> and to a lesser extend to the maz related pwm . as expected, pwms with high information content were most generally associated with fewer motifs .

genes with highly conserved promoter regions mostly encode transcription factors
we next estimated the number of predicted regulators for each gene by computing the number of non-redundant pwms associated with each gene. the number of pwms that have a significant match in gene promoter regions range from  <dig> to  <dig>  in mouse and  <dig> to  <dig> in human . genes in the top 1% considering the number of regulators  were, as expected, invariably associated with highly conserved promoter regions. moreover, functional annotation indicates that a very large proportion of these genes were transcription factors and genes related to development. indeed, in mouse, enrichment analysis of the gene list  using fisher's exact test  indicated a very strong enrichment for genes related to terms "transcription factor" , "pattern specification process"  or "neuron differentiation" . very concordant results were also observed for human   <cit> . actually, these results are in agreement with the work of bejerano and collaborators that showed that ultraconserved elements of the human genome are most often found in genes involved in the regulation of transcription and development  <cit> . as a consequence our phylogenetic footprinting analysis predicts a higher number of motifs in the promoter regions of these genes. although tfbs conservation in mammals has been previously analyzed in several papers, none of them, to our knowledge, reported this observation that may introduce a bias in the analysis. however, these ultraconserved regions may also be reminiscent of hot  regions identified using chip-seq analysis in caenorhabditis elegans and drosophila  <cit> . indeed, hot regions have been shown to be significantly associated with "essential genes"  and genes related to growth, reproduction, and larval and embryonic development. however, we cannot rule out that these ultra-conserved regions may be also related to other mechanisms than regulation by site-specific tfs

biological relevance of the tfbs predictions
one criterion to assess the reliability of our predictions is based on the hypothesis that the overall functional properties of the predicted targets can be used to infer the biological processes in which tfs are involved. to test this hypothesis, we used annotation terms obtained from go , kegg, panther, pfam, smart, prosite, and wikipathways databases and performed systematic annotation of all predicted target sets in the mouse  <cit> . for each pair of term/pwm we computed the fisher's exact test p-value f. each cell of a matrix with terms  as row and pwm  as column was filled with a score defined as -log. we then searched for biclusters inside this matrix using "the binary inclusion maximal algorithm "   <cit> . given the amount of information produced by this analysis, only some meaningful results will be presented and are summarized in figure  <dig>  sites for pwm related to ets , stat, irf and runx  transcription factor families, known to contribute to pathogen responses, were significantly over-represented in genes annotated as "immune system process" and "lymphocyte activation" . sites for pwms related to the rel/nf-κb pathway were significantly associated with targets related to "induction of apoptosis", "toll-like receptor signaling pathway" and, as expected to "nf-kappab cascade" . more subtle biclusters related to immune system were also found. as an example, rbpjk specific pwms  were statistically significantly associated with terms "notch signaling pathway". although rbpjk is already known to be crucial in notch signaling pathway, pwms related to tcf <dig>  and ap- <dig> were also found in the same bicluster . this observation is very consistent with the known role of these tfs in early b-cell differentiation, a development step for which notch pathway is decisive  <cit> . as expected, a bicluster containing almost all e2f-related pwms was also found. finally, several biclusters related to "muscle contraction", "phosphorus metabolic processes", "synaptic transmission", "protein catabolic processes" and "pre-mrna processing" were also observed and are presented in figure 2e-i. altogether, these results highlight the biological relevance of the tfbs predictions and provides a systematic overview of putative regulatory interactions in human and mouse. these predictions have been termed "tbmc"  and are available through the interactomebrowser plugin or as a bed file .

interactomebrowser: graph-based knowledge browser
the interactomebrowser application can be used to connect to our database in order to identify and analyze molecular interactions . available molecular interactions are derived from various sources: our predictions  and numerous databases including chip-x, lymphtf-db, oreganno, hprd, imex, reactome, targetscan and kea. however, interactomebrowser may also accept additional interaction datasets that users can provide through a tabulated flat file.

interactomebrowser relies on a mixed graph that contains both directed and undirected edges, depicting various types of interactions ranging from proteins complex formation to transcriptional regulation. thus nodes represent both genes and gene products.

interactomebrowser uses a subset of terms of the cellular component ontology  to map nodes onto a schematic and hierarchical view of cell compartments . as a consequence, each gene product may be represented by several instances .

the nodes placement is controlled by a force-directed placement layout: the nodes are repulsive to each other, they are attracted to their respective compartments, and edges act like springs . once a graph has been drawn, one can easily add or delete nodes. interactomebrowser provides several filters that are intended to focus on the most interesting part of the network. users can filter out orphan nodes and empty compartments. an option called "hide intercompartmental edges" allows users to remove several unlikely edges of the network, notably those involving physical interactions between distant compartments . when the mouse is over a node or an edge, corresponding information is provided in the "infos" tab on the left side of the application. right-clicking on a node opens a context menu, allowing users to  open the ncbi web page for this gene,  add regulatory interactions involving this gene and other genes of the network,  move the node to another compartment and  connect to ucsc genome browser. the action menu provides other tools to expand the network:  add all the interactors of the selected genes or  add common interactors of selected genes.

ibrowser can be used with any user-defined gene list, for examples genes of interest in a particular experiment. additionally, the integration of this tool into the transcriptomebrowser suite facilitates the analysis of lists corresponding to pre-processed clusters of co-expressed genes stored in the database.

the next part of the result and discussion section demonstrates the use of interactomebrowser for retrieving molecular interactions in the context of thymocyte differentiation analysis.

case study: early t-cell development in mouse
the development of mature t cells from lymphoid progenitor cells involves a series of cell fate choices that direct differentiation. in the context of the immunological genome project , m.w. painter et al used rigorously standardized conditions to analyze expression levels of protein-coding gene in almost all defined t-cell populations of the mouse  <cit> . using sam analysis , we selected a set of  <dig> genes repressed during the transition from thymic dn <dig> stage to dn <dig> stage. careful analysis, indicated that this gene set was highly enriched in genes previously shown to be crucially involved during the first step of thymocyte development. this includes cell surface markers such as il2ra/cd <dig>  and il7r together with several transcriptional regulators, including notch <dig>  smarca4/brg <dig>  dtx1/deltex <dig>  and hes1/hry. more recently, neilson et al identified specific mirnas enriched at distinct stages of thymocyte development by deep sequencing  <cit> . the authors showed that transcripts of the mir <dig> family are up-regulated at dn <dig> stage and thus could be involved in the repression of dn <dig> specific messenger rnas during dn <dig> to dn <dig> transition. we thus combined one member of the mir <dig> family, mirn17/mir <dig>  with the mrna gene list mentioned above. this gene list was provided as input to interactomebrowser. figure 2a shows node placement according to cellular compartment. as shown in figure 2a and 2b this layout is extremely useful to directly focus on genes of interest. indeed, the nucleus subnetwork contains several regulators  some of them colored in green, indicating available regulatory interactions for the transcription factor in our database. figure 2b shows that several genes  have been previously shown to be under the positive control of notch <dig> . according to targetscan predictions, mirn17/mir <dig> does not seem to target any component of the notch pathway. in contrast, it is predicted to affect the expression of several transcription regulators including mycn, runx <dig>  smad <dig> and the h3k <dig> methyltransferase ezh <dig> . moreover, it may also control key components of the cell cycle machinery: ccnd <dig> and cdkn1a. figure 2d shows informations available from chip-x database regarding mycn. these informations are derived from a chip-seq experiment performed on mouse embryonic stem cells by chen et al  <cit> . note that according to these results, mycn could target several transcription factors and thus play a key role during dn <dig> to dn <dig> transition. however, in this cellular context such results should be interpreted with caution since no large scale analysis of mycn targets in dn <dig> thymocytes has been reported so far. among mycn potential targets, notch <dig>  is one master switch of early to late thymocyte developmental transition. thus, one could hypothesize that mirn17/mir <dig> may indirectly affect notch <dig> by negatively regulating mycn. although, these hypotheses rely on predictions and on the assumption that mycn binding to notch promoter is effective in dn <dig> thymocyte, it clearly underlines the potential of this software in helping researchers to draw new hypotheses using data integration.

CONCLUSIONS
interactomebrowser and its underlying approach can be compared to the cerebral  plugin of cytoscape that also combines molecular interactions with a cell-compartment based layout  <cit> .

but there are qualitative differences in the conception of cerebral and interactomebrowser, which make the latest an interesting alternative for exploring networks.

on one hand, cerebral uses a layered representation of the cell to create a "pathway-like" view of the network of interacting proteins. this layout thus provides a linear organisation of the network. on the other hand, the layout of interactomebrowser is based on a schematic view of the entire cell and displays the hierarchical structure of the underlying gene ontology subset as nested zones. first, this helps visually separating different parts of the network corresponding to different cellular localisations, as in cerebral. but this is a more generic visualisation method, in the sense it does not restrict the visual message to an 'input-intermediates-output' mechanism such as in linear pathway diagrams. as a consequence it is suited for a more general study of various types of networks. moreover, since visual zones correspond to gene ontology terms, this layout handles different levels of accuracy in the localisation of proteins: for instance a precisely-annotated protein might be placed in the zone corresponding to "endoplasmic reticulum", while a less well-annotated can be placed in the more generic, higher level zone "intracellular".

in cerebral, each gene product is represented by one instance whose cell compartment may be defined by the user. in contrast, interactomebrowser displays, by default, several instances of a given gene product that may be placed in several cell-compartments according to informations provided by the go cellular-component ontology. although this may lead to a more complex graph, it provides a more exhaustive presentation of current knowledge and may draw the attention of users to unexpected locations of gene products in the cells. the user may choose to delete some of these instances hence selecting a posteriori the most representative one.

the main benefit of interactomebrowser resides in its direct interaction with the database described in this report. indeed, it provides a ready-to-use web-based service that requires only few manipulations to retrieve a network of interactions . notably, in addition to physical interactions it offers a unified access to mirna targets and results from chip-seq experiments derived from chea.

presently, the data sources associated with the interactomebrowser plug-in are restricted to human and mouse. indeed, one of the main objectives of interactomebrowser is to help users in creating regulatory maps to study human gene regulatory networks in physiological and pathological conditions. the choice of mouse as an additional organism supported by our database is a natural choice as it is a widely used model of human physiopathology. however, we are already planning to add new organisms in the near future.

as more and more experimentally validated interactions are available, we hope that this tool will prove very useful for researchers.

availability and requirements
interactomebrowser comes as a plugin for transcriptomebrowser and is available at: http://tagc.univ-mrs.fr/tbrowser/. our database is updated on a regular basis. see additional files for a video tutorial.

• project name: interactomebrowser

• project home page: http://tagc.univ-mrs.fr/tbrowser/

• operating system: platform independent 

• programming language: java

• other requirements: java >  <dig> .x

• license: no license required

• any restrictions to use by non-academics: none

list of abbreviation used
pwm: position weight matrices; grn: gene regulatory network; go: gene ontology; micro rna: mirna; tf: transcription factors; tfbs: transcription factor binding site; tbmc: transcriptomebrowser motif conservation.

competing interests
the authors declare that they have no competing interests.

authors' contributions
cl, ab, fl, cn, ji and dp conceived the project. cl, ab and fl developed the java application. ab, cl and nbp developed the database. dp performed the tfbs analysis. dp, cn and ji supervised the project. dp wrote the manuscript. all authors read and approved the final manuscript.

supplementary material
additional file 1
"number of predicted motifs versus gc content of pwms". each point corresponds to the results obtained using one pwm on mouse genome. the name of a representative transcription factor for each pwm is displayed together with the pwm identifier . the size of the point is correlated with info content of the corresponding matrix).

click here for file

 additional file 2
"summary of functional enrichment analysis using cluego cytoscape plugin". we estimated the number of predicted regulators for each gene of the human genome by computing the number of non-redundant position-specific motifs associated with each genes. genes in the top 1% regards to the number of regulators were used as input for the cluego plugin.

click here for file

 additional file 3
"summary of functional enrichment analysis using cluego cytoscape plugin". we estimated the number of predicted regulators for each gene of the mouse genome by computing the number of non- redundant position-specific motifs associated with each genes. genes in the top 1% regards to the number of regulators were used as input for the cluego plugin.

click here for file

 additional file 4
"tfbs predictions in the mouse genome". a bed file containing tfbs predictions in the mouse genome.  <dig> - chrom - the name of the chromosome. fields contain the following informations: chromstart - the starting position of the feature in the chromosome; chromend - the ending position of the feature in the chromosome; name - pwm identifier and representative names; score - a score for the pwm hit; strand - defines the strand - either '+' or '-'; gene id - the gene id of the target gene; genesymbol- the genesymbol of the target gene.

click here for file

 additional file 5
"tfbs predictions in the human genome". a bed file containing tfbs predictions in the human genome.  <dig> - chrom - the name of the chromosome. fields contain the following informations: chromstart - the starting position of the feature in the chromosome; chromend - the ending position of the feature in the chromosome; name - pwm identifier and representative names; score - a score for the pwm hit; strand - defines the strand - either '+' or '-'; gene id - the gene id of the target gene; genesymbol- the genesymbol of the target gene.

click here for file

 additional file 6
"interactomebrowser functionalities". contains a web link to a screencast showing basic use of interactomebrowser plugin.

click here for file

 additional file 7
"subset of gene ontology used for the cell compartment-based layout". hierarchical structure of the subset of gene ontology used in interactomebrowser for the cell compartment-based layout. colors highlight the main compartments.

click here for file

 acknowledgements
this work was supported by the institut national de la santé et de la recherche médicale , the canceropôle paca and marseille-nice genopole®. authors acknowledge financial support from the eu erasysbio plus modheart project. fabrice lopez was supported by a fellowship from the eu strep grant diamonds and through funding from the integratcell project . the funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript. the authors would like to thanks the staff from the tagc laboratory for helpful discussions and gratefully acknowledge francois-xavier theodule for technical assistance.
