BACKGROUND
during the construction of neural circuits, growing axons of developing neurons extend long distances en route to the appropriate synaptic targets. new membrane and materials are added to extending axons and increase the plasma membrane surface area by  <dig> to  <dig> -fold  <cit> . a typical 1-μm-diameter axon extends at the rate of  <dig>  mm per day, necessitating the insertion of new membrane at the rate of  <dig>  μm <dig> per minute. the body of evidence indicates that new membrane is incorporated primarily at the motile tip of the axon, the nerve growth cone  <cit> . cytoplasmic vesicles, derived in the neuronal cell body, undergo anterograde transport along the length of the axon and are added by local exocytosis within the growth cone  <cit> .

in addition to a role in axon extension, numerous studies have demonstrated that regulated membrane trafficking is intricately involved in growth cone chemotaxis. axon pathfinding toward the synaptic target requires dynamic interactions with the extracellular matrix  and the detection of spatial guidance cues within the local environment. the ability of growth cones to adapt to a wide range of guidance cue concentrations may involve regulated vesicle trafficking  <cit> . moreover, attractive growth cone turning toward a locally applied gradient of nerve growth factor requires asymmetric membrane insertion at the attractant side, or leading edge  <cit> . in contrast, repulsive growth cone turning requires endocytic pathways and correlates with asymmetric endocytosis  <cit> . these findings have led to the notion that the balance of exocytic and endocytic activities across the growth cone serves to control local membrane protrusion versus membrane removal and drives bidirectional axon guidance  <cit> . further support for this idea comes from the finding that growth cone collapse is associated with regulated membrane retrieval  <cit> .

during axon extension, the growth cone surface membrane is also retrieved at rates sufficient to turn over completely within  <dig> minutes  <cit> . at first glance, these energetically demanding processes appear to counteract the substantial membrane addition that must occur in order to drive axon extension. numerous reports indicate that local membrane retrieval and recycling play important roles in axonal growth  <cit> . the precise regulators of these endocytic routes are incompletely understood, but likely include actin, cholesterol, pincher, phosphoinositide 3-kinase  and rac <dig>  <cit> . despite these functional insights, the mechanisms by which local membrane retrieval and recycling facilitate nerve growth and guidance are relatively unknown  <cit> . in chemotaxing cells, mounting evidence indicates that regulated vesicle trafficking, both endocytic and exocytic, is critical for directed migration  <cit> . the emerging view from multiple studies suggests that polarized endocytosis and exocytic recycling can spatially polarize receptor signaling, cytoskeletal regulators, and focal adhesion turnover in order to drive cell motility  <cit> .

how endocytic processes regulate membrane dynamics and remodel the growth cone surface membrane to support nerve growth remain outstanding issues that await further characterization of the membrane retrieval processes in the growth cone. previous ultrastructural studies have provided high-resolution snapshots, revealing coated and noncoated vesicles, membrane-contiguous vacuoles, elongated tubules and stacks of lumenless membrane disks with largely unknown functions  <cit> . however, the identification and discrimination of parallel structures in live growth cones by fluorescence and dic microscopy has been unyielding  <cit> . this may reflect the temporal limitations of pulse-chase endocytic assays, which effectively track the fate of endosomes minutes after internalization but fail to capture early events. here, we have overcome these limitations by local and transient application of lipophilic membrane dyes to single growth cones, combined with high-speed confocal microscopy, in order to monitor the initial formation of single nascent endocytic vesicles. this approach provides high spatiotemporal resolution and has revealed individual modes of rapid endocytic membrane retrieval with distinct spatial distribution and temporal dynamics in actively extending xenopus spinal neuron growth cones. we discovered hot-spots of concentrated single vesicle membrane retrieval events in the growth cone that are actin-dependent, and internalization by much larger endocytic tubules. furthermore, we have uncovered evidence for unexpectedly rapid recycling of endocytic compartments, where nascent vesicles and tubules disappear within seconds of forming. finally, we provide evidence that substrate-stimulated outgrowth enhances the rate of bulk endocytosis in the growth cone and requires the function of rho gtpases. this set of findings and the optical imaging approach may serve as an important foundation for future studies aimed at elucidating the molecular regulators, specific cargo and functional significance of distinct membrane retrieval and recycling pathways in axonal growth and guidance.

RESULTS
detection of single-vesicle retrieval events
to visualize membrane retrieval by endocytic vesicles in actively extending growth cones, we transiently labeled the plasma membrane of individual xenopus spinal neuron growth cones with the lipophilic membrane dye fm 5- <dig> while performing time-lapse confocal microscopy. a micropipette positioned directly in front of the growth cone trajectory delivered a focal dye pulse to label the surface membrane. local dye diffusion and the fast destaining properties of fm 5- <dig> quickly decreased the fluorescence intensity of surface-bound dye to levels below that of nascent dye-labeled vesicles. as a result, rapid confocal imaging allowed the detection of single endocytic vesicle retrieval events that formed within  <dig> to  <dig> s of the initial dye pulse . imaging fluorescent beads of various known sizes confirmed the ability to optically resolve individual spheres to at least  <dig> nm in diameter with the apparent point resolution limited to  <dig> nm .

a similar focal labeling approach applied fluorescent dextran, which is taken up with fluid into the lumen of endocytic vesicles during membrane retrieval . after the dextran labeling, a second micropipette delivered buffered saline to wash away uninternalized dextran. this attenuated the background fluorescence significantly while leaving the internalized signal unaffected. the consequent increased signal to noise ratio permitted the detection of nascent endocytic vesicles and tubules by time-lapse confocal imaging. when co-applied from the same micropipette, both fm 5- <dig> and fluorescent dextran revealed numerous nascent vesicles in the growth cone following the brief application period . these findings highlight the rapid kinetics of membrane retrieval in the growth cone by single endocytic vesicles.

hot-spots of rapid membrane retrieval in the growth cone
to determine the spatial and temporal dynamics of membrane retrieval during growth cone migration, we used high-resolution confocal microscopy and collected images at  <dig> hz in real time during the focal endocytic assay after fm dye labeling. remarkably, we discovered that single vesicle membrane retrieval events often clustered at hot-spots, defined as focal regions of the growth cone where multiple vesicles formed in near synchrony. the frequency of vesicle formation concentrated within endocytic hot-spots greatly exceeded that seen in surrounding regions of the growth cone surface membrane. by carefully observing endocytic events in multiple growth cones, we were able to identify discrete endocytic modes based on the spatial distribution and temporal dynamics . the nascent endocytic vesicles associated with hot-spots were small . temporally, the initiation of hot-spots was stochastic. furthermore, single endocytic vesicles formed at hot-spots during only a short time period lasting up to several seconds following initiation, after which endocytic activity abruptly terminated. in many instances, the induction of endocytic hot-spots correlated with regions of self-contact or occurred at regions undergoing rapid membrane remodeling.

membrane retrieval at dorsal ridges and lamellipodial margins
we frequently observed hot-spots of small endocytic vesicles at dorsal ridges of the growth cone . in all cases, endocytic vesicle formation at dorsal ridges originated at the central-most region of the ridge and proceeded radially into the growth cone periphery . these endocytic "waves" resulted in a streak of nascent vesicles analogous to beads on a string. in total, 65% of the growth cones tested demonstrated endocytosis at dorsal ridges during the brief  <dig> to  <dig> s endocytic assay. notably, dye labeling of the surface membrane was sometimes non-uniform and dorsal ridges showed specific dye enrichment. this may reflect membrane processes extending into the z-plane, or alternatively that fm 5- <dig> preferentially incorporates into specific membrane domains. we observed endocytosis at most, but not all  of the labeled dorsal ridges, suggesting that endocytic activity is most likely not induced by the fm dye in this assay. the high frequency of endocytic activity within dorsal ridges observed during the brief endocytic assay suggests that dorsal ridges are specialized regions of the growth cone that undergo rapid membrane turnover.

confocal microscopy also revealed hot-spots of labeled small vesicles at the lateral margins of lamellipodia . lamellipodial sheets, which were initially uniformly labeled with fm 5- <dig>  generated brightly labeled membrane ridges at the outer-most margins of growth cones. waves of small endocytic vesicles immediately followed this membrane remodeling while membrane ridges disappeared . in comparison to dorsal ridges, membrane retrieval at lamellipodial margins was relatively infrequent and was observed in 15% of the growth cones tested. this may reflect the peripheral composition of individual growth cones, which have varying amounts of lamellipodia and filopodia at any given time-point. among the growth cones tested, only 65% had appreciable lamellipodia at lateral margins where endocytosis could have occurred. time-lapse dic microscopy revealed remarkably similar membrane dynamics at the lateral margins of lamellipodia . the prevalence of these events varied between growth cones and we routinely observed undulating waves of ridge formation and collapse at lateral margins. these waves were transient and recurred every one to two minutes . because the fm dye labeling assay was carried out for <  <dig> s, it is inherently improbable for transient waves of this frequency to be captured during this short optical imaging window. this may explain why membrane retrieval at lamallipodial margins was detected in only 15% of the growth cones tested.

membrane retrieval at sites of cell-cell contact
the initiation of small vesicle hot-spots as detected by fm dye labeling was commonly associated with self-contact between peripheral extensions of the growth cone. figure  <dig> shows endocytic hot-spots that were triggered when a single filopodium contacted the growth cone dorsal surface. the filopodium that had lost substrate attachment momentarily left the focal plane . continuing this trajectory, the filopodium then rapidly collapsed atop the growth cone body, triggering the formation of numerous small vesicles along the length of this cell-cell contact . we observed membrane retrieval that was initiated at sites of filopodial - lamellipodial contact in 55% of the growth cones tested. correspondingly, time-lapse dic microscopy revealed a similar disappearance of detached filopodia after making contact with the growth cone body .

contact between adjacent filopodia also triggered small vesicle endocytic hot-spots, as revealed by fm dye labeling . in some instances, these self-interactions resulted in the apparent fusion of multiple filopodia into a single filopodium. meanwhile, we observed numerous small vesicles that formed near the proximal base of the new filopodium . in the  <dig> growth cones tested, we observed  <dig> filopodial fusions,  <dig> of which  were associated with simultaneous vesicle formation. filopodial-filopodial fusions were also evident by time-lapse dic imaging , although by this method we cannot rule out the possibility that what appears to be one new filopodium may actually be two tightly bundled filopodia.

the fm dye labeling assay revealed frequent hot-spots of small endocytic vesicles at cell-cell contact sites between adjacent lamellipodial processes . these interactions commonly occurred near the base of filopodia where adjacent sheets of plasma membrane fused together. numerous nascent vesicles formed concomitantly with membrane remodeling . endocytic hot-spots at lamellipodial contacts occurred in 60% of the growth cones tested. furthermore, we commonly observed lamellipodial contact-induced endocytic hot-spots at multiple locations of the same growth cone during the focal endocytic assay . similar membrane rearrangements at lamellipodial-lamellipodial contacts were also evident by time-lapse dic imaging .

the mechanisms driving the membrane rearrangements and vesicle formation at sites of self-membrane contact are unknown. we detected a high rate of membrane retrieval events in actin-rich lamellipodia and at the base of filopodia in the growth cone transitional domain, which is characterized by intense f-actin remodeling and membrane ruffling  <cit> . the formation of f-actin rich membrane ruffles correlates highly with endocytic activity in many cell systems, including phagocytosis in leukocytes  <cit> , rac1-dependent pinocytosis in fibroblasts  <cit> , membrane retrieval in the growth cone by endocytic vacuoles during basal outgrowth  <cit> , and growth cone collapse induced by outgrowth inhibitory factors  <cit> . conversely, f-actin depolymerization is necessary for ca2+-induced macropinocytosis in the growth cone  <cit> . we, therefore, tested whether rapid membrane retrieval requires f-actin or, alternatively, is stimulated by f-actin disassembly. treatment with cytochalasin d, which binds with high affinity to the barbed ends of f-actin and prevents filament elongation while allowing depolymeration from the pointed end  <cit> , inhibited axon outgrowth in a dose-dependent manner  as has been shown previously  <cit> . treatment with lower dose cytochalasin d  permitted a relatively normal rate of axon extension and growth cone motility yet significantly disrupted f-actin in the growth cone, as assessed by phalloidin staining . we used this same condition to test how depolymerizing f-actin affected vesicle formation at sites of self-membrane contact in the growth cone, by utilizing the focal membrane labeling assay. treatment with cytochalasin d  reduced the formation of nascent endocytic vesicles at sites of cell-cell contact . significantly, both the percentage of self-membrane contact sites associated with the formation of nascent endocytic vesicles  and the frequency of membrane retrieval at self-membrane contact sites were reduced upon treatment with cytochalasin d compared to non-treated controls . the overall number of self-membrane contacts observed during the focal membrane labeling assay tended to be lower after the cytochalasin d treatment but was statistically insignificant from the non-treated controls . taken together, these findings indicate that actin polymerization plays an important role in dynamic membrane retrieval by endocytic vesicles at sites of self-membrane contact in the growth cone.

do endocytic hot-spots occur repeatedly at the same spatial locations or are they triggered within new areas of the same growth cone over time? to address this we developed a dual fm-dye labeling assay capable of monitoring the spatial profile of rapid membrane retrieval in the same growth cone at two different time-points . the distinct emission wavelengths of fm 2- <dig>  and fm 5- <dig>  allowed for spectral separation during the sequential dye application in this assay. an initial pulse of fm 2- <dig> labeled nascent endocytic vesicles with similar spatial and temporal characteristics to that seen previously with fm 5- <dig>  although fm 2- <dig> labeling was less efficient than fm 5- <dig> labeling . a focal pulse of fm 5- <dig> from a second pipette, applied  <dig> s later, labeled a new set of nascent vesicles . significantly, the endocytic hot-spots labeled by the second dye pulse  were concentrated in distinct subdomains from the fm 2-10-positive vesicles that had formed just seconds prior . thus, small vesicle endocytic hot-spots appear spatially and temporally stochastic in nature.

membrane retrieval by tubules and vacuoles
in stark contrast to the small vesicles at endocytic hot-spots, we also observed elongated endocytic tubules in the growth cone periphery by the fm dye labeling assay. endocytic tubules formed within or near the base of filopodia  and ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig>  μm in length . incorporation of fm dye into endocytic tubules corresponded temporally with surface membrane labeling, suggesting that these structures were contiguous with the plasma membrane at the time of focal dye application. we observed at least one dye-labeled endocytic tubule in 30% of the growth cones tested. remarkably similar elongated tubules were also seen by the focal fluid-phase endocytosis assay , validating the endocytic nature of these compartments. endocytic tubules in the growth cone periphery underwent processive retrograde movement toward the growth cone central domain at a rate of  <dig> μm/minute, consistent with reported rates for actin retrograde flow .

focal application of fm 5- <dig> also labeled elongated tubules in the growth cone central domain . like the peripheral tubules, fm dye incorporated into the central tubules concomitantly with surface membrane labeling . the central tubules varied in length, in some instances extending as long as  <dig> μm through the growth cone body and into the axonal shaft. whereas most central tubules were stationary, we occasionally observed rapid transport at rates exceeding  <dig> μm/minute . in some instances central tubules interacted with other fm dye containing compartments such as large vacuoles. dye-labeled vacuoles were predominantly found in the central domain and were stationary with few exceptions. the labeled vacuoles ranged in size from  <dig>  to  <dig>  μm in diameter and had a visible lumen by confocal microscopy. like the endocytic tubules, fm dye incorporation into vacuoles corresponded temporally with surface labeling, suggesting that these compartments were also contiguous with the plasma membrane at the time of focal dye application. by comparing multiple confocal z-sections, we found that vacuoles could be associated with either the ventral or dorsal surface membrane of the growth cone . in total, central tubules and stationary vacuoles were observed in 50% and 85% of growth cones, respectively, during the brief focal endocytic assay.

might fm dye-labeled vacuoles represent distinct endocytic compartments within the growth cone cytoplasm or are they contiguous with the plasma membrane? by performing the sequential fm dye membrane labeling assay, we found that in all instances , vacuoles immediately labeled by the initial fm 2- <dig> pulse also incorporated dye upon a subsequent fm 5- <dig> pulse . in contrast, small endocytic vesicles labeled by the initial dye pulse were rarely labeled by the second dye pulse. these findings illuminate an important distinction between small endocytic vesicles and vacuolar structures. small vesicles, which can incorporate both lipophilic and fluid-phase markers and exclude subsequent dye pulses, are rapidly internalized endocytic compartments. in contrast, vacuoles appear to be contiguous with the plasma membrane for extended durations that can be 10s of seconds to minutes. although membrane-contiguous vacuoles may eventually undergo endocytosis, it is likely that the dye-labeled vacuoles seen by our membrane labeling assay rarely represent internalized compartments.

rapid recycling of internalized membrane
what is the fate of internalized membrane? most dye-labeled vacuoles were stationary and persisted in the growth cone for the duration of the focal endocytic assays. however, we observed the occasional constriction and rapid disappearance of dye labeled vacuoles in < 6% of all cases . to further monitor the subsequent transport and fate of nascent endocytic compartments, we performed the focal fluid-phase endocytic assay while extending the duration of time-lapse confocal imaging. as represented in figure 9b, most of the labeled peripheral tubules and vesicles underwent centripetal retrograde transport toward the central domain of the growth cone. within one to two minutes, tubules and vesicles fused with other dye-labeled compartments and constricted into small circular endosomes . however, we also observed rapid dye unloading by peripheral tubules and smaller vesicles that occurred as early as  <dig> s after the initial endocytic internalization . the disappearance of endocytic vesicles, vacuoles and tubules may reflect rapid exocytic recycling of these compartments. alternatively, the dye-labeled organelles may have fused with other non-labeled internal compartments, which could dilute the dye content below the level of fluorescence detection.

rates of membrane retrieval in central and peripheral regions of the growth cone
we tested whether membrane retrieval is most prevalent in the peripheral or central regions of the growth cone by quantitating the number of fm dye-labeled structures that formed in each respective region . this comparison revealed a similar number of total endocytic vesicles that form within central and peripheral regions . however, we found that the density of vesicle formation differed between the central and peripheral domains . taken together, these data suggest that the spatial properties of the described endocytic modes collectively specify the peripheral domain as the primary region of membrane retrieval. to gain further insight into membrane retrieval rates within central and peripheral domains, we next compared the frequency of individual endocytic modes . altogether, membrane retrieval at sites of self-membrane contact account for a large proportion of overall membrane retrieval . these retrieval events, associated with growth cone peripheral processes, appear to be a driving force for the rapid membrane retrieval in the growth cone.

positive correlation between the rate of endocytosis and axon outgrowth
to gain insight into the functional role of endocytosis in growth cone motility, we next asked whether stimulating axon outgrowth with an extracellular matrix ligand could influence the rate of endocytosis in the growth cone. plating embryonic xenopus spinal neurons on a fibronectin substrate  dramatically increased the rate of axon extension in comparison to poly-d-lysine  alone in an overnight outgrowth assay . to determine whether substrate-stimulated growth cone motility affected the rate of membrane retrieval, we measured fluorescent dextran internalization in growth cones migrating on pdl or pdl+fn substrates. positively correlating with the effects on axon outgrowth, fibronectin also stimulated the rate of fluid-phase endocytosis in the growth cone .

to further probe the relationship between axonal growth rate and membrane retrieval, we next asked whether inhibiting rho gtpases, which attenuates axon outgrowth, could affect the endocytic rate in the growth cone. treatment of spinal neuron cultures with toxin b, a general inhibitor of rho gtpases  <cit> , caused a modest but significant decrease in the rate of axon outgrowth . higher concentrations had a dramatic effect on substrate attachment and neurite formation that precluded their use . importantly, fluid-phase endocytosis was also inhibited significantly by toxin b treatment . collectively, these findings provide further support for a positive correlation between the rate of axonal growth and membrane retrieval in the growth cone.

discussion
comparison of spatial endocytic modes: potential regulators and functions
the use of focal endocytic assays in this study has revealed the spatial dynamics of endocytic vesicle formation in actively extending growth cones for the first time. using this approach, we have discovered several distinct modes of rapid membrane retrieval based on the spatial and temporal characteristics of vesicle formation, as summarized in figure  <dig>  collectively, endocytic hot-spots elicited by self-contact between peripheral processes were the most frequent means of membrane retrieval. these include contacts among adjacent filopodia, lamellipodia, or between a filopodium and nearby lamellipodium. the disappearance of filopodia upon contact with the growth cone body or with other filopodia correlated with hot-spots of endocytic membrane retrieval. we found that vesicle formation at self-contact sites was sensitive to cytochalasin d treatment, implicating a role for f-actin polymerization in this process. although the precise nature of these membrane remodeling events awaits further investigation, these observations suggest that membrane fusion and endocytic retrieval may represent additional mechanisms for removing filopodia and reshaping growth cone morphology. furthermore, it is possible that these processes may allow spatially distant environmental information, at the tips of filopodia, to be rapidly transmitted to the growth cone body. for instance, receptor activation and second messenger signals in the filopodia may be relayed to the growth cone, cooperating with previously reported means for spatial transmission of second messenger signals  <cit> .

small-vesicle hot-spots at membrane ridges were the second most frequently observed endocytic route. this includes vesicle formation at dorsal ridges, as well as ridges that form at the lateral margins of lamellipodia as the growth cone changes shape. these regions undergo considerable membrane remodeling and are very transient in nature, forming and disappearing within seconds. it is likely that actin dynamics and membrane curvature are integrally involved in ridge formation, ruffling and vesicle formation. the actin regulator rac <dig> and the wave complex have been closely linked with forms of macropinocytosis  <cit> . furthermore, bar-domain proteins, which facilitate membrane curvature, also participate in membrane ruffling and macropinocytosis  <cit> . endocytic hot-spots within membrane ridges at the dorsal surface and lateral margins of the growth cone may be regulated by these same effectors.

we observed an abundance of large stationary vacuoles in the growth cone central domain. most vacuoles incorporated fm dye immediately upon surface membrane labeling, suggesting that these structures were pre-existing and continuous with the plasma membrane at the time of labeling. this conclusion was further supported by our sequential fm dye labeling experiments, which showed that the same vacuolar structures could be labeled by dual dye pulses separated by  <dig> seconds. it is likely that the vacuoles seen in this study are synonymous to reverse shadow-cast vacuoles previously observed by correlative dic and electron microscopy, which often contained an orifice that contacted the plasma membrane  <cit> . by tracking vacuoles with dic video microscopy, dailey and bridgman also found that vacuoles in the growth cone central domain were much more stable  than endocytic compartments that formed in the peripheral domain.

finally, we also found evidence for internalization and rapid recycling of elongated tubules in both the central and peripheral regions of the growth cone. although tubule formation was relatively infrequent, the size of these compartments  suggests that tubules account for the majority of bulk membrane retrieval by surface area. this process may be similar to the high-capacity membrane retrieval system described in non-neuronal cells, which is regulated by cdc <dig> and graf <dig> and may facilitate adhesion receptor recycling  <cit> . the focal endocytic assays used in the present study provided direct observation of endocytic tubules within seconds after internalization. this rapid detection was critical, because peripheral tubules typically fused with other compartments or were recycled within one to two minutes. in all instances, nascent peripheral tubules were processively transported toward the central domain of the growth cone at rates near  <dig> μm/minute. this is comparable to the reported rates for actin retrograde flow, measured at  <dig> to  <dig> μm/minute in cultured neurons isolated from other species  <cit> . in contrast, central tubules and vacuoles were most often stationary, but the infrequent transport of these structures proceeded at more rapid rates consistent with microtubule-based axonal transport  <cit> .

use of fm dyes to monitor endocytosis in the growth cone
the use of fm dyes to monitor vesicle dynamics in neurons was pioneered by betz and colleagues in the 1990s and has since been utilized by numerous studies that have greatly advanced our understanding of synaptic function  <cit> . membrane labeling with fm dyes has also been used in the growth cone in order to track the fate of endocytic compartments  <cit> . in this study, we have optimized an approach to rapidly image the initial formation and early trafficking of nascent endocytic structures locally within the growth cone. the ability of this technique to reveal single vesicle formation with high spatial and temporal resolution is likely due to three main attributes of this assay. first, the fluorescence emission of fm dyes is at least two orders of magnitude brighter when bound to the plasma membrane than in aqueous solution. second, the brief focal dye pulse allows the free fm dye that remains non-bound to the surface membrane to be rapidly diluted into the surrounding buffered saline. furthermore, fm 5- <dig> and fm 2- <dig> are slightly less lipophilic than the more commonly used fm 1- <dig> and fm 4- <dig>  and consequently de-stain from the plasma membrane in a relatively quick manner  <cit> , allowing the transient labeling and imaging of rapid membrane retrieval events. in our hands, fm 2- <dig> de-stained even more rapidly than fm 5- <dig> 

the amphiphilic nature of fm dyes implies that they bind to the plasma membrane, are internalized by vesicular processes, and become trapped in nascent cytoplasmic vesicles as the dye is unable to cross the lipid bilayer. recent studies have validated the ability of fm dyes to selectively label endocytic vesicles. first, fluorescence resonance energy transfer  studies detected no interaction between membrane-bound fm dyes and a cytoplasmic-gfp under physiological conditions  <cit> . furthermore, fm dyes microinjected into the cytoplasm of cells fail to label intracellular organelles and vesicles  <cit> . thus, the dye labeling emanating from intracellular membranes is unlikely to come from dye that was somehow able to traverse the plasma membrane.

our use of the focal membrane labeling assay, combined with confocal microscopy, demonstrates that structures associated with both the dorsal and ventral  surface membranes can be labeled . however, due to the close apposition of the ventral membrane with the underlying substrate, it is possible that dye labeling is non-uniform. our own findings, combining the focal labeling assay with total internal reflection microscopy , support this notion, as ventral membrane labeling lags slightly behind the dorsal surface . therefore, this assay may be inherently biased toward measuring membrane retrieval at the apical surface of the growth cone. this property, which could be a potential advantage or impediment depending on the assay, should be considered by investigators utilizing the focal membrane labeling assay in future studies.

functions for high-capacity membrane retrieval and recycling systems
taken together, the present findings provide further insight into rapid and high capacity membrane retrieval and recycling systems in the growth cone. although the functions of these energetically demanding processes are yet to be understood, similar membrane recycling systems in non-neuronal cells appear to be driving factors for cell polarization. for example, in migrating fibroblasts, clathrin-independent carriers  internalize the vast majority of membrane and extracellular fluid at the leading edge. this recently defined endocytic mechanism, previously considered macropinocytotic, is now recognized to enrich specific molecular cargo such as the adhesion proteins β1-integrin, thy- <dig> and cd <dig>  and is critical for optimal cell migration  <cit> . furthermore, clathrin-mediated endocytosis of specific cargo is also polarized to the front of migrating cells. for instance, the endocytic adaptor proteins numb, dab <dig>  and arh cooperatively facilitate endocytosis of integrin receptors, which need to be subsequently recycled in order to polarize focal adhesion turnover to the leading edge  <cit> . similar vesicular processes can spatially localize cytoskeletal activity  and receptor- and nonreceptor- tyrosine kinase signaling to the leading edge of migrating cells  <cit> .

in the growth cone, cytoskeletal protrusion, adhesion complex turnover, and tyrosine kinase signaling are all polarized to the leading edge  <cit> . it is possible that one or more of the endocytic modes described in this study contribute to these processes in order to optimize axon extension. in an over-simplified model, membrane addition  would facilitate axon extension, whereas membrane retrieval  would attenuate extension by removing bulk membrane. however, this model is contradicted by recent findings that show the rate of endocytic membrane retrieval positively correlates with the dynamic remodeling of growth cone shape  <cit> . the results of the present study further extend this notion by showing that substrate-stimulated outgrowth also correlates positively with increased endocytic membrane retrieval. local modes of endocytosis may promote axon outgrowth by polarizing signaling, cytoskeletal dynamics or adhesion turnover to the leading edge. further characterization of endocytic routes in the growth cone will enable the rigorous testing of these models in future studies.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study, we have utilized live-cell confocal microscopy and a transient membrane-labeling assay to reveal the spatiotemporal dynamics of rapid membrane retrieval and turnover in extending spinal neuron growth cones. this approach demonstrated that endocytic events are stochastic and occur at hot-spots initiated at sites of active membrane remodeling or self-contact between peripheral extensions of the growth cone, with unique spatial and temporal properties. the rate of these bulk endocytic processes correlates with the rate of axon outgrowth and requires the function of rho-family gtpases, suggesting that one or more distinct endocytic modes has important roles in growth cone motility. future characterization of the molecular regulators and functional cargo associated with these endocytic modes will uncover the functional contributions of these processes to growth cone motility and chemotactic guidance.

