BACKGROUND
comparative sequence analysis has become an essential component for studying genome function. genome-wide comparison of human and rodents dna sequences discovered more than  <dig>  ultraconserved elements  of absolute identity and > <dig> bp in length  <cit> , of which  <dig> percent were located outside annotated exons, and long-range comparison between man and pufferfish also identified high numbers of similar genomic elements  <cit> . a common characteristic of these highly conserved elements is their strong tendency to occur in clusters along the mammalian chromosomes  <cit>  with their relative order as conserved as that of protein coding genes  <cit> . a relative distance difference  measure was defined to evaluate the genomic distance change ratio of pairs of uces found at adjacent positions in the human, mouse and dog genomes, showing that the genomic distance between such elements is significantly more conserved than corresponding genomic distance between orthologous protein coding genes  <cit> . an intriguing observation is that the conservation of the genomic distance between pairs of uces  <cit>  also exists in the preliminary analyses of evolutionarily more distant vertebrates, and displayed a distinct pattern with a fraction of uce pairs displaying nearly unaltered genomic distances over long evolutionary distances and a second fraction of uce pairs with less conserved genomic distances  <cit> . it is hard to imagine that such genomic distance profile could arise by random as it was consistently found in comparisons between several genomes, and suggests that the genomic distance conservation may take on different characteristics corresponding to different genomic regions.

genomic sequences have been divided into functional blocks based on various characteristics, e.g. biological roles or sequence conservation. early research works mainly focused on synteny blocks defined according to conserved dna sequences or orthologous genes to study the evolutionary history of rearrangements in entire genomes  <cit> . concordant higher-order patterns from functional genomic studies suggest that the human genome and other large genomes are organized into higher-order functional domains  <cit> . for example, genomic regulatory blocks  spanned by highly conserved noncoding elements, developmental regulatory target gene, and phylogenetically and functionally unrelated "bystander" genes, are conserved between mammal and fishes  <cit> . the identification and study of these higher-order functional domains within the human genome is of great importance. our early observation of distinct two-peak distribution profiles in genomic distance conservation suggested that some other aspect of the dna sequences adjacent to the uce pairs may likewise be different, and might thus be treated as two distinct genomic regions or blocks  <cit> .

different sets of highly conserved elements  vary somewhat with respect to their locations in the human genome, some are exclusively found in non-protein-coding sequence  and others contain exons of protein-coding genes . though it has been suggested that exonic uces represent a distinct subset  <cit> , no satisfactory explanations for the extreme degree of sequence conservation of exonic uces have been presented. in our previous study  <cit> , we have shown that with respect to distance conservation there were no substantial differences between different data sets  or between uce pairs with exonic and non-exonic locations. we have therefore integrated the three datasets  <cit>  and undertaken an analysis of the human genomic regions confined by hce pairs common to eight genomes .

RESULTS
in our previous work, we calculated a relative distance difference  value to assess whether the genomic distances between consecutive uces show less change than that between other adjacent genomic elements  in the human, mouse and dog genomes. the analysis showed that in addition to an extreme level of sequence conservation, uces also display strong conservation of mutual genomic distances among mammalian species  <cit> . the conservation of distance between pairs of uces  <cit>  is also found between evolutionarily more distant vertebrates, but the distributions of rdd values show a persistent nature of distinct two-peak profiles in all mammal – non-mammal comparisons, with one peak close to zero, and another at a more negative value  <cit> . low number of uces  <cit>  was used in the previous analysis therefore a large data set is warranted to validate these findings.

to facilitate this investigation, we constructed a dataset integrated from three independent works  <cit> . a direct element by element comparison shows that two-thirds of the non-exonic uces from data set  <cit>  do not overlap with hces from any of the two other data sets . the smallest data set of ~ <dig>  conserved non-coding elements   <cit>  had the highest fraction of overlaps  to data set  <cit>  and  <cit> , whereas the set of ultraconserved regions   <cit>  has ~50% overlaps with others. we combined these three published data sets  <cit>  to form an integrated data set consisting of  <dig>  distinct highly conserved elements  in the human genome. we used blastn with non-stringent parameters and criteria for order and genomic distance conservation to locate all occurrences of the same hces in the mouse, rat, chicken, frog, zebrafish, fugu and tetraodon genomes . the resulted number of orthologous hces that can be located uniquely in the different genomes is variable: more than  <dig> percent of human hces could be anchored to the rodent genomes,  <dig> percent to the chicken genome, and around  <dig> to  <dig> percent in fish . from the comparisons with the human genome more than  <dig> percent of hces were found linked with at least one other hce/hces in all other genomes, including the linkage relationship with quite a number of hces in the fish genomes. more than sixty percent of hces were found ordered together with at least  <dig> individual elements , which indicates the tendency for hces to preserve order conservation among vertebrate species.

we calculated rdd values between pairs of hces and compared them with rdd values for pairs of genes and exons of these genes. similar to what has been reported for mammalian comparisons  <cit> , the absolute relative distance difference  were significantly lower for hce pairs than for pairs of genes or exons . calculated as absolute values , the median distance difference for hce pairs in the human-chicken comparisons was  <dig> , which is about half that for gene pairs  and exons  . the difference between distance conservation of hce pairs and gene pairs is most pronounced for the human – zebrafish comparison; median |rdd|hce being only  <dig> percent of median |rdd|gene. hce-hce absolute distance differences are also significantly less than exon-exon distance differences ; the latter being only slightly different from the gene-gene relative distance differences.

the rdd distribution profiles were also markedly different for the three different pair comparisons . the rdd distributions for hce pairs show distinct two-peak profiles, with one peak close to zero and another at a more negative value. rdd values for gene pairs, in contrast, show only one peak skewed toward more negative values. the distributions of exon rdd values are wider than for both hce and gene pairs. the distributions of all three data show a peak at relatively low rdd values  for all four human – chicken/fish comparisons . however, the distribution of hce rdd values consistently show an additional, dominant peak around zero, indicating the existence of a subset of hce-hce pairs whose distances have been conserved across vertebrate evolution. even for fugu and tetraodon, whose genome sizes are only around  <dig> percent of the human genome, the result indicates that around  <dig> percent of the analyzed hce pairs have largely unaltered distances  compared to the human genome .

a total of  <dig> hce pairs are shared by the five non-mammalian species and human genome. the two-peak distribution profiles of rdd values still persist, with one peak close to zero and another peak  at a more negative value, as shown by mapping this integrated data set of hces onto the five non-mammalian genomes . most of these common hce pairs are unique and linked with each other in the query genomes as they do in the human genome . hces have been reported to be unique and clustered in the human genome  <cit> , here we see a similar tendency in the non-mammalian genomes.

inter-hce regions with distinctive distance conservation patterns
in addition to the persistent nature of the two-peak distribution profiles, a remaining question is whether there exist any other characteristics pertaining to the regions confined by the hce pairs common to the human and five non-mammalian genomes. to test this, we divided the  <dig> hce pairs into two groups by using a partitioning clustering method based on the matrix of absolute rdd  values for the human – non-mammalian comparisons . rdd values of group one hce pairs are centered around zero , whereas those of group two are more widely scattered around a more negative value . the distances between group two pairs  are significantly longer than the distances between group one pairs  . the |rdd| value of two consecutive hces has been reported to be positively correlated with the distance between the pair  <cit> , we see here a reflection of the same correlation. we call the inter-hce regions ihrs and subsequently classify the ihrs into two types based on the  partitioning result . we obtained  <dig> ihrs , and  <dig> ihrs . all these  <dig> hce pairs are also detected in the rodents. an intriguing observation is that for any pair-wise comparisons among the eight genomes, the median |rdd| values for hce pairs of ihr2s are constantly much higher than those values of ihr1s . given the persistent nature of distinct distance conservation of the two groups of ihrs, it is difficult to assume that such profile was the result of a random assortment. rather, it seems more likely that subsets of hce pairs may undergo different evolutionary paths in the sense of genomic distance conservation.

we subsequently defined the subset of intergenic ihrs when their flanking hces are intergenic in the human genome with no genes in between. for both ihr <dig> and ihr <dig> groups, there are more intergenic ihrs than other categories, with  <dig> percent intergenic ihr1s and  <dig> percent intergenic ihr2s, respectively . we further calculated genomic distances between intergenic ihrs and their closest neighboring genes. using the distance to the closest gene for statistical analysis, the average distance is  <dig> kb for intergenic ihr1s and  <dig> kb for intergenic ihr2s . a high percentage of intergenic ihrs are more than  <dig> kb away from the nearest genes .

we also identified a few human genomic regions that are spanned by the same type of ihrs, indicating that the distance variation of hces in these regions is probably associated . an intriguing observation is that ten ihr1s are clustered in a region close to  <dig> mb, and the corresponding eight hce pairs are all located in intergenic regions.

enrichment of dna repeat sequences
human genome has a much greater portion of repeat sequences and it is believed there is a correlation between genome size and repeat content. we therefore asked whether there are any differences in the enrichment of human dna repeat sequences between ihrs and random genomic regions. as both the number and length of the two groups of ihrs are different, we used randomly selected regions to test the significance. repeat sequences appear more frequently in ihr2s than in ihr1s. compared with the sets of corresponding random regions, repeat sequences are significantly less frequent in ihr1s , but more in ihr2s . here, we found a correlation between repeat sequences and the length expansion of ihrs. fewer ihr1s containing repeat sequences may reflect evolutionary pressure against either transposon-derived sequence in these regions or the distance-distorting effects of inclusion of longer repeat sequences between the bordering hces to maintain the shorter ihr <dig> length.

randomly selected human genomic regions were used to test the significance, the fraction of times in which the random sample set scored lower average scores than those of the ihrs provided the basis for the statistical significance. p value was given in the bracket.

we also found that both types of ihrs contain significantly less sequences of sine , line  and ltr  compared to the random backgrounds ; however, both types of ihrs are significantly enriched in low complexity dna sequences  . we also tested the enrichment of long transposon-free regions  in ihr1s and ihr2s. tfrs have been reported to be associated with both protein coding genes and uces  <cit> . of the  <dig> ihr1s,  <dig> percent are intersected with tfrs ; and  <dig> percent of the  <dig> ihr2s are intersected with tfrs . both groups of ihrs show a significant enrichment of tfrs compared with random selected regions, indicating a complex relationship between tfrs and distance conservation.

unexpected enrichment of indel variation
since hces are highly conserved at not only sequence level but also their genomic organization , we suspected that ihrs might not tolerate any large extent of rearrangements. we therefore asked whether there are any differences in the distribution of human indel  polymorphisms in the ihrs.

mills et al.  <cit>  recently identified a set of small indels from three different human populations. as a negative control, we used randomly selected genomic regions with the same number and length of corresponding ihr1s and ihr2s, respectively. the frequency of which the random samples had higher average scores than those of the ihrs provided the basis for the statistical significance. none of the ihr types are deleted in small indels, and ihr2s are actually significantly enriched. we found that  <dig> percent of ihr1s  versus  <dig> percent of ihr2s  contain small indels . both results are not in accordance with the expected. considering the highly conserved length of ihr1s, less ihr1s are expected to contain indels than random background; and as many ihr2s as random selected regions are expected to contain indels. for the regions with indels, we calculated the percentage of insertion/deletion base pairs over the whole length of corresponding ihrs, and found no significant differences in both types of ihrs compared with the randomly selected human genomic regions . previous works have suggested that the genome-wide indel rates are not uniform and that indel events are not neutral  <cit> . investigations of human indels indicated that most indels have arisen from the most recent variation events  <cit> . in spite of the observation of overrepresentation of indels in human ihrs, the fact that the length of ihrs remains highly conserved among vertebrate genomes than the distance of gene or exon pairs suggests that the distance between consecutive hces is under high selection pressure and is important for hces to exert their biological function.

randomly selected human genomic regions provided the background to test the significance, p value was given in the bracket.

conserved sequences within ihrs
a previous observation is that |rdd| and sequence conservation are to some extent positively correlated  <cit> . we used the datasets of phastcons elements provided by the ucsc online server to test the conservation characteristic within the ihrs. as for tetraodon and fugu, there are presently no phastcons data from the ucsc online service, so these two genomes were excluded from the sequence conservation analysis.

the correlation between the percentage of conserved sequence and human ihr length is stronger for ihr <dig> than for ihr <dig>  the conservation percentage is below  <dig> percent in almost all ihr2s, even in short ihr2s with length close to ihr1s . among the ihr1s, some have a high percentage of conserved dna sequence, whereas others not. considering the generally high degree of distance conservation of the ihr1s, their length might have been under a higher level of evolutionary constraint than the dna sequences within the regions.

in the human genome, the average length of conserved elements is nearly the same in ihr1s and ihr2s . however, the average inter-distance between two consecutive conserved elements of ihr2s is almost  <dig>  times longer than the ihr1s , thus resulting a lower average sequence conservation for ihr2s. the same tendency was found for the other three genomes. the phastcons element data were derived by a multiple species alignment algorithm  <cit> , and the length of the same conserved fraction vary little across the compared species and therefore contribute little to the distance differences between species. no significant differences was observed in the length distribution of conserved fractions between the two groups of ihrs in the human genome , indicating that the same length of potential functional sequences with lower sequence conservation occupying the space of both groups of ihrs.

two samples wilcoxon test was used to test the significance.

ihrs and cpg islands
both groups of ihrs are significantly enriched for cpg islands compared with the corresponding random backgrounds in the human genome: about  <dig> percent of ihr1s  and  <dig> percent of ihr2s  were found to contain cpg islands . we further tested the percentage length of cpg islands and observed the difference: average 45% for ihr1s and 7% for ihr2s. the percentage length of cpg islands between ihr1s and ihr2s is significantly different .

for both ihr1s and ihr2s with cpg islands, the pair-wise genomic loci of hces are only significantly sparse in the "intronic-intronic" class , which can easily be understood that there are exonic sequences residing in between the hces and that promoter elements  are less likely to be located in the exonic regions. we next checked the environment of those intergenic-intergenic ihrs with cpg islands, eleven/fifteen intergenic ihr1s/ihr2s were found with cpg islands, respectively . eight intergenic ihr1s with cpg islands are more than  <dig> kb away from the closest gene. fifteen ihr2s with cpg islands are located in the intergenic regions; only three reside in the regions less than  <dig> kb away from the nearest gene. a high percentage of intergenic ihrs are more than  <dig> kb away from the nearest genes.

hces are frequently found in relatively gene poor regions  <cit> , and their distances are conserved among the mammalian genomes  <cit> . our data show that ihrs shared by the six vertebrates are also enriched in gene poor regions of their genomes. cpg islands are generally associated with human promoters  <cit>  and most promoter-associated cpg islands that have been reported are located within  <dig> kb regions around transcription start sites  <cit> . the enrichment of cpg islands in the ihrs over the random background genomic regions suggests the possibility of the existence of potential target genes, and the long distance between the ihrs and the nearest gene indicates that putative targets might be located in a wider genomic range, or that the cpg islands residing in the ihrs along with the two side hces could together perform important roles either as regulatory blocks or other unknown functions.

discussion
out data suggests that subsets of hce pairs may undergo different evolutionary paths for their genomic distance conservation. we also examined a few features for the functional regions constituted by hces and their interior or adjacent sequences, and found that the precise spacing of hces to be an important aspect of the hce structures. highly conserved structural relationship of hces among genomes  <cit>  indicates the feasibility that hces are not independent and that two or more hces may function together with adjacent sequences as a combined unit. we are not the first to propose the viewpoint that a portion of genomic region function as a united block. chromosomal segments termed "genomic regulatory blocks " have been annotated in the human genome, formed by conserved relationships between hces and their assumed target genes  <cit> . higher-order functional architecture also illuminates functional domain structure of the encode regions  <cit> .

early observations of hces strongly suggested their function as acting on vertebrate cis-regulatory elements  of early developmental genes  <cit> , however cres are not necessarily strongly conserved but have been regarded as more 'evolvable' than coding sequences  <cit> . highly complex correlations between hces and their putative target genes also question the idea that the primary function of hces is as cis-regulatory elements  <cit> . recently, function as "counting units" has been suggested to be associated with such elements  <cit> . overlapping, multiple functions have been suggested by several studies to account for the extreme sequence conservation of hces  <cit> . hce-rich regions are reported to be associated with histone methylation  <cit> . increasing evidence suggested their functional association with chromatin remodeling accompanying the involvement of hces in other functions like cres. most intergenic ihrs are located far away from annotated protein coding genes. both long distance and relatively close related associations between hces and genes were identified  <cit> . if the ihrs contain elements for chromatin structure and thus perform epigenetic regulation of gene transcription, this would either indicate a form of long distance regulatory action, or that other functional elements  are associated with these ihrs, or that the ihrs are per se functional units independent of target genes.

we detected  <dig> ihr1s with extremely conserved distances among deeply divergent species. distance conservation between highly divergent organisms implies the extreme constraint on the evolution of the ihr <dig> lengths, which strongly suggests that their distances are functionally important. one possible interpretation for the less conservation of ihr <dig> lengths would be that some functional elements were inserted or deleted in the ihr2s, or alternatively, the expanded distance is indeed the requirement of difference in their potential biological function among genomes.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study, the bimodal distribution profiles of rdd values still persisted when mapping the integrated data set of hces onto the five non-mammalian genomes. we detected two groups of genomic regions confined by hce pairs with distinct distance conservation pattern in vertebrate genomes. the data suggests these ihrs may function as combined unit, and that subsets of ihrs with distinct space conservation should be treated differently.

