BACKGROUND
"in this branch house of ours, handel, we must have a –"

i saw that his delicacy was avoiding the right word, so i said, "a clerk."

"a clerk. and i hope it is not at all unlikely that he may expand into a partner. "



in this short exchange, we can see that pip, the main character of the novel , generates not only great expectations but small ones as well. the expectation at hand does not refer to his hopes and plans for the future. pip merely anticipates how the sentence that his friend is hesitantly uttering will end. this form of prediction – the temptation to finish a slow speaker's sentence- is one we are probably all familiar with in everyday life. recent event related potential  studies have shown that predictive processes in language comprehension are not limited to instantiations where the speaker falters. predictions about the continuation of a sentence or story are actually made regularly and on the fly  <cit> . one important issue is whether these predictions are initiated by a relatively simple automatic activation process, based on  individual words in the discourse, or whether they are based on a more thorough understanding of the message of the discourse. in this spoken language erp experiment we explored which of these constraints actually trigger specific lexical predictions.

although strong and influential arguments have been made against anticipation in language processing based on the inherent open-ended character of language , a multitude of psycholinguistic experiments suggests that people do use context to form expectations about the language utterance that is still to follow. these predictive processes pertain to the grammatical role of words  <cit>  but also to inferences about the general syntactic  <cit>  and semantic  <cit>  content of the utterance . recent erp studies have shown that people furthermore use their rapid syntactic and semantic analysis of the discourse to anticipate specific words, in spoken  <cit>  as well as written language  <cit> .

delong and colleagues  <cit>  have shown that these specific lexical predictions are stronger as the context is more constraining. this contextual constraint, however, can have its predictive effect at two different levels. predictions could arise from a relatively simple priming process, by which individual words activate lexical-semantic and world knowledge in semantic memory  <cit> . on the other hand, it is well known that our understanding of spoken or written language does not rely on a compilation of disjoint words: we form a comprehensive structured model of the discourse  <cit> , combining contextual information through rapid syntactic and semantic analysis  <cit> , which includes not only the local but also the wider context  <cit> . van berkum and colleagues  <cit>  have therefore suggested that it is more likely that specific lexical predictions are based on an extensive, message-level representation of the discourse than on automatic activation by  individual words.

to test whether specific lexical predictions are based on the actual message of the discourse or related to some simpler form of word-based priming, we designed predictive stories as well as so-called prime control stories. the predictive stories had a message-level content that supported the prediction of a specific dutch noun. in the predictive story in table  <dig>  for example, the word "cross" would indeed be the most sensible and 'expected' continuation at that point, . however, note that words like "religious" and "grandparents" are themselves also  related to "cross", via simple lexical associations  and possibly also scenario-mediated associations .

 grote en nogal dramatische crucifix 
 bigcom and rather dramatic crucifix
example story in the original dutch version and an approximate english translation, across all four conditions. critical adjectives are printed in bold face, and critical nouns are printed in italics  or regular letters . the word between brackets indicates the predictable word at that point in the story.

to uncover the potential contribution of such simpler priming mechanisms to discourse-based lexical prediction, the prime control stories contained the same potential prime words as the predictive stories but had a completely different and much less predictive message-level representation. as illustrated in the prime control example in table  <dig>  neither the previously expected noun  nor the previously less expected noun  is particularly expected  but the possible prime words  are still present in the preceding context sentence. thus the message-level constraint of the context is low for the prime control context, but the prime-based constraint is identical for the predictive and the prime control context.

to probe whether readers actually predicted the expected noun before it came along, we first presented a gender-inflected adjective, with a gender that was consistent or inconsistent with the discourse-predictable noun. in dutch, adjectives in indefinite noun phrases have a suffix that depends on the arbitrary, lexically memorized gender  <cit>  of the noun they precede. adjectives that modify a common-gender noun carry an -e suffix , whereas adjectives modifying a neuter-gender noun are not inflected .

if listeners strongly anticipate a specific noun, an adjective with a mismatching gender suffix will come as an 'unpleasant' surprise compared to the prediction-consistent adjective. as in previous studies that have employed probes  to test for prediction, we expected that adjectives with an inconsistent adjective inflection would elicit a different erp effect compared to consistent adjectives. the exact electrophysiological consequences of a prediction mismatch, however, have not been clearly established. phonological or gender-related information that mismatches a prediction can elicit an increase in n <dig> amplitude  <cit> . however, prediction mismatches can also elicit negative erp effects with a timing and scalp distribution that clearly differs from a standard n <dig>  <cit> , as well as positive erp effects  <cit> . because the sources of this variability are as yet not understood, the exact nature of the erp effect to a prediction mismatch was difficult to predict. however, since the majority of the experiments have yielded negative erp effects as a response to information that  contradicts a prediction, it seemed most likely that unexpectedly inflected adjectives would also elicit a more negative erp. if the differential erp effect elicited by a prediction-inconsistent adjective inflection in the predictive condition is solely based on word-word priming, we should observe the same effect in the prime control condition. on the other hand, if the lexical prediction effect in predictive stories critically hinged on the entire message conveyed by the discourse up to that point, no such effect should be observed in prime control stories.

RESULTS
the message-level impact of the discourse on the electrophysiological consequences of the implicit mismatch with the gender of the predicted word is reflected by a significant interaction between consistency, context type and electrode quadrant  =  <dig> ; p = .02) between  <dig> and  <dig> ms. post-hoc tests for this time-interval show that the interaction between context and consistency is only present in the right frontal quadrant, with the unexpectedly inflected adjectives differing from the expected adjectives in the predictive context  =  <dig> ; p = .04) and not in the prime control context  =  <dig> ; p = .76)

for completeness, figure  <dig> shows the erps elicited by the nouns that follow the critical adjectives in both types of context. unexpected nouns that follow a predictive context evoke a larger n <dig> between  <dig> and  <dig> ms, as well as a positivity that emerges at around  <dig> ms, and remains until  <dig> ms after word onset. when the same nouns follow a prime control context the n <dig> effect is still present, but this effect is not followed by a later positive deflection.

the amplitude of the n <dig> differs significantly for expected and unexpected nouns between  <dig> and  <dig> ms  =  <dig> ; p = .01). the effect does not reliably differ between predictive and prime control context  =  <dig> ; p = .22). the later widespread positive component elicited by unexpected nouns is reflected in a significant interaction between expectedness and context-type  =  <dig> ; p = .04) between  <dig> and  <dig> ms. post-hoc tests show that this positive shift is only present in the predictive stories  =  <dig> ; p = .003), and not in the prime control stories  =  <dig> ; p = .82).

discussion
after listening to a constraining discourse whose message suggests a plausible upcoming noun, an adjective with an inflection that is not in line with the gender of the predictable noun elicits a differential erp effect compared to the adjectives that are consistent with the gender of this noun. importantly, at this point in the story both gender-inflections are semantically and syntactically correct, since no noun has been shown yet. this erp effect can therefore only be attributed to a mismatch of the observed gender with the gender of the predictable noun, indicating that listeners have already activated  the word they think will follow. this finding thus confirms earlier claims that people use the cues provided by the sentential context or wider discourse to anticipate upcoming words  <cit> .

crucially, the effect of prediction mismatch was absent in the prime control context, which contained the same prime words but did not support a lexical prediction at the message level. this shows that specific lexical predictions of the type observed here are not based on a simple word-based automatic priming process, but critically rely on the precise message-level content. in other words, it is the exact message that counts here, and not the compilation of individual words. note that we did not specifically include strong primes into the discourse. we therefore can not exclude that in the presence of such primes, prime-induced predictions can also arise independently of the message of the surrounding discourse. the present results, however, clearly show that stories of the type used here induce predictions that are based on the actual message of the preceding context.

the observed electrophysiological consequence of a prediction mismatch resembles other effects of prediction mismatch that have been reported in previous studies in polarity and timing and, to a lesser extent, scalp distribution  <cit> . although our effect resembles the standard n <dig> effect in timing and polarity, the scalp distribution of the prediction mismatch effect does not resemble the standard distribution of the centro-parietal n <dig> effect. therefore, we are reluctant to interpret the present effect as a canonical n <dig> effect. at the same time, though, the timing of the erp effect and the critical involvement of high-level meaning are consistent with the idea that at least some of the neural generators that underlie the canonical n <dig> effect might also be activated when people hear something that  mismatches their prediction.

in addition to these central results, figure  <dig> shows that unexpected nouns evoked a larger n <dig> followed by a relatively long-lasting positive shift in the predictive context, compared to expected nouns. in the prime control condition the n <dig> effect was also present, whereas the late positive shift disappeared.

within the domain of language processing, late positive components are often related to syntax-based reanalysis  <cit> . however, since the unexpected nouns in the present experiment are not incongruous at any level, they are not very likely to induce re-analysis of earlier syntactic assignments. an alternative possibility might be that the observed positivity reflects the processing of improbable events  <cit> . what this leaves to be explained, however, is why a similar late positivity was not observed in other studies with semantically unexpected words .

in contrast to the late positivity, the n <dig> is present in both predictive and prime control context. this pattern of results seems to suggest that the n <dig> does not reflect message-level expectancy or integration, but rather integrative or predictive processes related to word-based priming. however, results from a recent experiment where participants were presented the same stories without the critical preceding adjectives  <cit>  suggest that the discourse-based n <dig> effect cannot be solely attributed to processes reflecting automatic activation.

a possible explanation for the currently equivalent n <dig> effects in predictive and prime control stories might lie in the design of the stimuli. in the present experiment the unexpected nouns differ not only from the expected nouns in their level of expectancy and contextual fit, but also in their length and frequency. hence, the larger n <dig> for unexpected nouns in both predictive and prime control context could to some extent be attributed to other factors than message-level expectancy.

furthermore, the cloze values used in this experiment reflect the expectancies that readers or listeners have right at the indefinite article. the adjectives, however, contain additional cues to the nature of the noun that might follow, which will critically alter expectations. as a result, the interpretation of the erp effects evoked by the nouns is necessarily tentative.

CONCLUSIONS
we have shown that listeners use the information from the context to make predictions about what is to come next, confirming previous research on specific lexical prediction. furthermore, in a natural discourse these predictions are not based on simple automatic activation processes, but on the exact message of the discourse. people are thus not only capable of rapidly extracting the full meaning of a discourse, but they can also use this knowledge to anticipate what might come next in the story, down to the level of specific upcoming words.

