BACKGROUND
completion of the human genome sequence has made it possible to study expression of the entire complement of  <dig> – <dig>  genes in a single assay. the two most common array platforms are based on collections of cdna clones  <cit>  or short  oligonucleotides synthesized in situ by photolithographic methods   <cit> . partly because they are easy to use, microarrays are the most extensively used technology for studying gene expression on a global scale  <cit> . thousands of expression studies employ one or the other microarray platform, but comparison of results between platforms has been difficult because of inherent differences in the array technologies. the situation became more complex as investigators began using long oligonucleotide arrays for expression profiling  <cit> .

because long oligonucleotide arrays for expression profiling are relatively new, we wished to validate them in relation to the cdna and short oligonucleotide platforms, both of which have been used extensively in our laboratories over a number of years. the three platforms were evaluated using rnas isolated from six cell lines and tested against a universal reference rna. sufficient rna was isolated in a single harvest to supply labeling template for all experiments, so variability of rna isolation was not an issue. however, no attempt was made to eliminate other sources of variation such as differences between lots of fluorescent dye label, microarray batch, operator, etc. we conducted these experiments under "normal" laboratory conditions so that one would not need to go to extreme lengths to reproduce the results. in almost all cases, results from the three platforms correlated reasonably well with each other. the pearson correlation coefficients  ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig> . because of different labeling methods and analysis algorithms, comparison of the cdna and long oligonucleotide platforms with the short oligonucleotide system was not as straightforward, but in general all of the platforms were in reasonable agreement.

RESULTS
this study was carried out to compare cdna , long oligonucleotide , and short 25-mer  array platforms, with the goal of qualifying the 70-mer arrays for general use at the national cancer institute. more specifically, we compared the incyte unigem <dig> set of human cdnas , the operon human version  <dig>  set of long oligonucleotides , and affymetrix hg-u133a arrays . rna preparations from cell lines mcf10a, lncap, jurkat, l <dig>  sudhl <dig>  and oci-ly <dig> were used as probe templates, and the expression of each gene was compared directly with that of the same gene in the human universal reference  rna from stratagene.

genes in common across platforms
only genes common to all three platforms were used in the comparison. genes were matched by unigene cluster , and unique cluster memberships were determined for each array type, as listed in table  <dig> and enumerated in the venn diagram in figure  <dig>  the intersection for the three platforms consisted of  <dig> unigene clusters, and all analyses were carried out with all of these genes or a subset of them.

comparison of expression ratios
an estimate of the concordance of the platforms was provided by the percentage of genes that showed expression ratios "in the same direction." all matched gene sets that had expression ratios  greater than  <dig> , irrespective of magnitude, were considered to be in the same direction, and the same for expression ratios less than  <dig> . as seen in table  <dig>  the agreement was reasonably good, ranging from 74% to 82%. for comparison, ~50% concordance would be expected by chance. many of the discordant values were at what might be considered "trivial" levels because a large proportion of ratios are near unity. for example, approximately 48%, 28% and 13% of the genes from incyte, operon and affymetrix respectively, exhibit expression ratios within the range of  <dig>  to  <dig> . thus, a ratio difference of only  <dig>  versus  <dig>  is designated a mismatch, which normally would be considered very concordant in the biological sense.

statistical tests and thresholds on fold change are commonly used for the identification of altered gene expression by microarray assays. hence, we estimated the statistical significance of differential expression of each rna from the hur by one sample student-t test for a change from ratio of  <dig>  comparison between platforms using expression values significant at p <  <dig>  shows concordance in direction of 93%–98% . at the  <dig>  and 2-fold threshold level, the agreement between platforms approaches 100% indicating that for reproducible data all three platforms are highly concordant in direction.

1gem2: incyte gem <dig> arrays; operon: operon v <dig> arrays; u133a: affymetrix human genome u 133a genechip arrays.

2comparisons between two platforms were done only when the expressions of both platforms met the p-value and threshold criteria.

3fraction of common expressions between two platforms to the total number of expressions found at p <  <dig>  in both platforms.

correlation between platforms
the scatter plots shown in figures 2a–c indicate graphically the correlation between the platforms for jurkat rna. values of r for all platforms and all cell lines are given in table  <dig>  the values ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig> . operon and affymetrix were better correlated than were operon and incyte. the values were intermediate for the relationship between incyte and affymetrix. figures 2d–f and table  <dig> indicate that the correlation coefficients between replicates within the same platform are closer, as expected, when compared to the correlations between platforms. in general, however, there was reasonably good concordance among the platforms.

principal component analysis 
a projection on the first three principal components, which together explain  <dig>  %  of the total variance, is shown in figure  <dig>  close clustering of the cell samples is observed in this projection, indicating appreciable agreement among array platforms.

"correlation of correlations" analysis
the global concordance of the three platforms across all of the cell lines was estimated by calculating the "correlation of correlations" coefficient  <cit> . as seen in figure 4a–c, the correlations for the three platforms across all cells lines were quite good. the pearson correlation of correlation coefficients was  <dig>  between operon and incyte,  <dig>  between affymetrix and incyte, and  <dig>  between operon and affymetrix.

clustered image map  visualization and analysis  <cit> 
we used hierarchical clustering to demonstrate graphically the relationships among platforms, among cell lines, and among genes.  <dig> genes expressed at two times background or more in at least two of the six cell lines were included in the analysis. the resulting cim  is shown in figure 5a–b. all three platforms cluster together for all six cell lines, as one would wish to find, and almost all of the gene expression values show reasonable concordance. only a few exceptions can be seen in the cluster shown in figure 5b. some of the mismatches may be due to simple errors in gene identification, rather than to the technologies of the platforms. the incyte library is guaranteed by the manufacturer to be only 90% correct, and an unknown percentage of the operon and affymetrix oligonucleotides may have been designed on the basis of incorrect sequences in the public databases. indeed, we found one oligonucleotide in the operon set that was apparently designed from an est sequence that has since been withdrawn from the unigene database . in any case, the concordance is quite high across all platforms with this method of analysis as well as with the others.

quantitative real-time rt-pcr
in a pilot study with the three platforms, we compared and contrasted gene expression values for only the cell lines mcf10a and lncap. rt-pcr data for twelve genes are shown in figure  <dig>  most of the values are in reasonable agreement except that there are differences in the magnitudes of the expression ratios. as found in other studies, the rt-pcr values are generally higher, probably because ratios are "flattened" with the microarray platforms. affymetrix ratios are sometimes higher, but that may simply reflect the method of quantitation used in their analysis. the cdna array ratios are generally lower than those from other platforms. because the cdna fragments are longer and double-stranded, they are more prone to non-specific hybridization and can cross-hybridize more easily to related sequences. these characteristics of the probes may result in higher background signal and concomitant reduction in dynamic range of the ratios. in general, we have found that the long oligonucleotide arrays have a larger dynamic range than the do the cdna arrays.

for further rt-pcr analysis, we chose a set of ten genes to test the accuracy of the three array platforms for all six cell lines. those genes were chosen because there appeared to be a discrepancy among platforms in the direction of their ratios . the results are shown in figures 7a–f. of special interest was gene etr <dig>  in which the operon array was in disagreement across all cell lines. further inquiry revealed that the sequence had been found to be incorrect and had been removed from the unigene database. since the oligonucleotide had been designed from the incorrect sequence, it is not surprising that it gave a different value. other discrepancies may be due to similar sequence errors, as even the most up-to-date databases are still being corrected and modified. in the case of agl, the rt-pcr assay is in disagreement in several cases with two out of three of the array platforms; it appears to demonstrate an upregulation of the mrna, whereas the arrays, with the exception of incyte, point to a downregulation. although rt-pcr is supposed to be the "gold standard" for measuring gene expression, this result shows that caution is indicated in interpreting results with even the pcr technology.

discussion
the purpose of this study was to compare and contrast the three major microarray platforms, with the goal of qualifying the long oligonucleotide platform for general use in our laboratories. our principal findings were that the magnitude of any particular expression ratio may differ from one platform to the other but that the "direction" of gene expression difference for genes with sufficient intensity of signal appears to be well correlated across platforms. the differences in apparent magnitude of expression were not unexpected. the platforms differ widely in many characteristics, including size of targets, number of targets, concentration of targets, labeling protocol, and quantitation algorithms. nevertheless, the overall concordance of the three platforms was reasonably good, and one should be able to compare experimental data between and among the different array types. that is perhaps not surprising if one considers microarrays simply as miniaturized, multiplexed dot blots.

a survey of the literature on platform comparisons reveals a mix of results. several studies suggest disagreement in expression between platforms  <cit> , and several demonstrate agreement  <cit> . the explanation for the discrepancies among these reports is not altogether clear. however, we think the following points should be remembered when designing such studies:

the same rna templates should be used throughout the entire experiment
rna preparations from similar, but non-identical, biopsy samples can yield dissimilar results  <cit> , and rna from different versions of the same cell line can yield widely different expression profiles  <cit> .

only genes common to all platforms should be used in the analysis
that may seem an obvious requirement, but it is not always easy to meet in practice. for example, careful study of sequences present in various cdna arrays indicates that 20–30% of spots may contain the wrong clone or a misidentified one  <cit> . a similar situation exists for the short oligonucleotide platform  because more than 19% of the sequences have been reported not to correspond to the appropriate mrna reference sequence  <cit> . in these studies, measurements of cross-platform consistency were significantly improved when only sequence-matched genes were used. similarly, discrepant results in studies using cdna and affymetrix platforms could be explained by errors in gene sequences  <cit> . the percentage of incorrect or misidentified sequences in the long oligonucleotide libraries is unknown, but we appear to have found one sequence in error during our own rt-pcr studies. overall, then, significant disagreement in expression ratios among platforms may be due to sequence errors, not to intrinsic differences among array systems.

only spots with signals significantly above background  should be used in the comparisons
with most high-density arrays, a large proportion of the genes can be expected to have signals near background, as probably fewer than half of all human transcripts are expressed in any particular cell type or tissue  <cit> . although stringent filtering decreases the number of measurements included in the analysis, the outcome will be more meaningful.

when comparing results from the three platforms, the magnitudes of ratios were often quite different, but there was generally good agreement in the direction of differences in expression . thus, it may be less productive to correlate absolute changes in expression than it is to look for agreement in direction.

overall, the two oligonucleotide platforms were the most concordant pair. possible reasons are  that the array targets are single stranded, all of the same size , with approximately the same melting temperature;  the array elements have a much higher molarity of gene-specific sequences than do the cdna arrays;  that oligonucleotides tend to be more specific in terms of sequence and less prone to cross-hybridization than are cdnas.

CONCLUSIONS
as the efficiency and economy of oligonucleotide arrays improves, they will probably become the platforms of choice for gene expression analysis, replacing the cdna type entirely. long-oligonucleotide arrays are being produced by ink-jet  <cit>  and pin-spotting methods  <cit> . in these studies, where experiments specifically compared long-oligonucleotide arrays with the more "standard" platforms, correlations were good, and the long-oligonucleotide arrays performed as well as, or better than, the cdna or short oligonucleotide variety. the data reported here confirm and extend those results, with the added advantage of comparing all three major platforms at one time and in the same place – something that, to our knowledge, has not been done before. as a note of caution, however, we have used materials from three commercial array platforms, and our results and conclusions may not necessarily translate to other platforms and manufacturers.

since this study began, many articles have appeared reporting the "meta-analysis" of microarray data from unrelated laboratories using several different array platforms  <cit> . those studies have reported useful clinical and diagnostic findings when the data were stringently filtered before analysis. eventually, standardization and simplification of the systems may lead to a situation in which only one or two robust methods are used in all laboratories, with a concomitant improvement in the accuracy of gene expression data.

