BACKGROUND
the basal forebrain  cholinergic cells play an important role in cortical activation and arousal . recently recorded and labeled using the juxtacellular technique, the cholinergic neurons discharge maximally in association with cortical activation during active waking and rapid eye movement  sleep  <cit> . they cease firing in association with cortical slow wave activity during quiet, non-rem  sleep. the cholinergic cells also express c-fos following continuous waking imposed by sleep deprivation , whereas they do not express c-fos following sleep in control  or recovery  conditions, comprised of >75% sleep of which ~90% is quiet, nrem sleep  <cit> . their inactivity during nrem sleep could be imposed through inhibition by gaba  <cit>  that can be released from co-distributed bf gabaergic neurons which discharge in association with slow wave activity  <cit>  and express c-fos in association with sleep  <cit> .

as evidenced by increases in the amount of sleep and in the power of slow wave activity that occur following deprivation, sleep is considered to be under homeostatic control  <cit> . such control could be determined by similar processes that serve to maintain long term stability in the excitability and activity of neurons and their circuits  <cit> . according to this homeostatic process, prolonged activity results in decreased excitability, whereas prolonged inactivity results in increased excitability. although these changes are mediated by plastic changes in excitatory transmission  <cit> , they are also importantly mediated by reciprocal, plastic changes in inhibitory transmission  <cit> . in cultured neurons, increased activity  results in increases in the density of gabaars  <cit> . conversely, abolition of activity  results in decreases in density of gabaars and parallel decreases in amplitude of miniature inhibitory postsynaptic currents   <cit> . we thus envisaged that the changes in activity that occur in specific cell groups during waking and sleep could be similarly associated with dynamic changes in gabaars and resulting inhibition.

with the knowledge that bf cholinergic neurons are active and express c-fos during continuous waking with sleep deprivation  and are inactive and do not express c-fos during sleep with sleep control or recovery  , we investigated whether these changes in activity might be associated with changes in gabaars. we examined immunohistochemical staining for the β2– <dig> subunits of gabaars because immunostaining for the β2– <dig> subunits was previously shown to be present on rat cholinergic basal forebrain neurons  <cit>  and to be altered in density or distribution on cortical neurons as a function of activity in previous in vitro and in vivo studies  <cit> . moreover, mrna for the β <dig> subunit gabaar in hypothalamus was also reported to change in hypothalamus as a result of sleep deprivation in a preliminary study  <cit> . across conditions of sc, sd and sr, we first examined in triple-immunostained material whether c-fos expressing and non-expressing, choline acetyltransferase -immunopositive  cells in the magnocellular preoptic nucleus  were immunostained for β2– <dig> gabaars. we subsequently employed dual-immunostained material to measure the luminance of immunofluorescent staining for β2– <dig> gabaars on chat+ cells across conditions.

RESULTS
sleep in sc, sd and sr conditions
as in our previous experiments  <cit> , rats in the sleep control group , which had undisturbed sleep or waking for  <dig> hours before sacrifice , slept the majority of time ; rats in the deprived group  did not sleep  and remained quietly awake; and rats in the sr group that were allowed to recover sleep in the afternoon after  <dig> hours deprivation in the morning, slept >90%  of the time prior to sacrifice . the major proportion of time for the sc and sr groups was spent in nrem sleep  and a minor proportion in rem sleep .

c-fos and gabaar immunostaining in cholinergic cells across conditions
within sections triple-immunostained for c-fos, chat and β2–3gabaars, chat immunopositive  cells which expressed c-fos were present in sd brains within the mcpo in small numbers and virtually absent in sc and sr brains, as previously reported for all bf cholinergic nuclei  <cit> . in the sd brains, c-fos+/chat+ cells appeared positively immunostained for the β2– <dig> gabaar, which was concentrated over the plasma membrane of the cell . in c-fos-negative/chat+ cells in the sd and other groups, the gabaar labeling was variable and particularly in the sc and sr groups not always visible, and thus presumably below the threshold for immunohistochemical detection. using stereological random sampling and judging whether the sampled chat+ cells appeared either immuno-positive or -negative for β2– <dig> gabaar immunostaining irrespective of c-fos staining across groups, the double-labeled chat+/gabaar+ cells were found to be more prevalent in the sd brains than in sc and sr brains . from stereological samples and counts, the proportions of chat+ cells which were judged to be gabaar+ differed significantly across groups  and were significantly higher in the sd group  than in the sc group . the proportions in the sr group  were intermediate between the sc and sd groups. this difference in receptor labeling was then assessed quantitatively in material dual-immunostained for chat and the β2– <dig> gabaar in order to maximize the gabaar staining, which was partially attenuated by the triple-immunostaining procedure used for c-fos.

intensity of gabaar membrane staining over cholinergic cells across conditions
in dual-immunostained material, the β2– <dig> gabaar immunostaining was prominent over the membrane of the soma and proximal dendrites of numerous chat+ cells, particularly in brains from the sd group . as described in previous in vivo studies of gabaar labeling for β2– <dig>  as well as other, subunits  <cit> , the fluorescent staining was commonly distributed along the full membrane of the cell body and proximal dendrites. to determine if the intensity of gabaar labeling on cholinergic cells was different across sc, sd and sr conditions, luminance measures of the gabaar immunofluorescence over the membrane were performed and corrected for nonspecific background fluorescence by subtracting the luminance measured over the nucleus of each cell in the acquired images . in randomly sampled chat+ cells  obtained by stereological sampling within the mcpo , the intensity of the membrane gabaar labeling was found to differ significantly across conditions . it was significantly higher in the sd group than in both the sc and sr groups .

the quantitative changes in the intensity of membrane β2–3gabaar immunostaining were evident in the images  taken from chat+ cells having intensity measures near the average values for the sc, sd and sr groups . the images illustrate how under control conditions , the gabaar labeling was on average very low and under the threshold for immunohistochemical detection , how under deprived conditions , it was on average very intense , and how under recovery conditions  following deprivation, it was also on average relatively low .

discussion
the present results show that gabaar labeling on bf cholinergic neurons increases during periods of waking when the cells are active and decreases during periods of sleep when they are inactive. they suggest that as with neurons in culture, the cholinergic neurons in the brain might undergo homeostatic regulation of their excitability as a function of prior activity through changes in gabaars and associated inhibition across the sleep-waking cycle.

we first noted here that cholinergic cells which express c-fos and are thus particularly active during sd  <cit>  show membrane immunostaining for the β2– <dig> gabaar. such labeling was variable on cholinergic cells which did not express c-fos in the sd brains and often undetectable on such cells in sc and sr brains. across groups, gabaar labeling was judged to be positive on the majority of cholinergic cells in the sd group, and only on the minority in the sc and sr groups. this labeling was considered to reflect different numbers or concentrations of gabaars which accordingly would or would not reach threshold for immunohistochemical detection. we presume that the presence of c-fos along with gabaar labeling in neurons in the sd condition is a reflection of their prolonged activity during continuous waking. we also presume that the lack of c-fos expression and parallel paucity of gabaar labeling in the sc and sr conditions are commonly due to the amount of time spent in quiet, nrem sleep , during which the cholinergic cells would be silent  <cit> , and not significantly affected by the amount of time spent in active, rem sleep , during which the cholinergic neurons would be firing  <cit> . we accordingly assume that the changes in gabaar labeling in the different groups reflect different levels of activity by the cholinergic neurons as predominantly high during waking in sd vs. predominantly low during sleeping in sc and sr conditions.

according to luminance measures of β2– <dig> gabaar immunostaining across groups in dual-immunostained material, we found that the intensity of membrane gabaar labeling was significantly greater in the sd, waking rats than in the sc, sleeping rats, suggesting that the labeling was a function of the preceding activity by the cholinergic cells. these in vivo results are similar to those in culture showing that prolonged increases in activity result in increased density of gabaars along with increased inhibitory currents on hippocampal neurons  <cit> . previous in vivo studies in the hippocampus also showed parallel increases in gabaars and inhibitory currents following increased activity through experimentally induced seizures  <cit> . here, the presumed increased activity of the cholinergic cells during  <dig> hours continuous waking imposed by sleep deprivation during the day would be neither as prolonged nor as extreme as that evoked in the in vitro and in vivo models, however could represent a more natural condition and resulting homeostatic adjustment to sustained activity that could occur during the natural sleep-waking cycle or disturbances to that cycle.

we also found that the intensity of membrane β2– <dig> gabaar immunostaining on the cholinergic cells was significantly decreased following recovery sleep in the sr condition as compared to the sd condition. in view of the virtual silence of cholinergic neurons during nrem, slow wave sleep  <cit> , these in vivo results are parallel to results in culture showing decreases in gabaar labeling and inhibitory currents following abolition of activity in cortical neurons  <cit> . although not statistically significantly different, the intensity of gabaar labeling in the sr condition was not as low as that in the sc condition, possibly due to a variably incomplete return to control levels during recovery following the increase which would have occurred with the preceding  <dig> hour deprivation.

in the immunofluorescent images, we found that the β2– <dig> gabaar immunostaining was concentrated over the plasma membrane of the cell, often distributed along the entire membrane of the soma and proximal dendrites and altered in intensity over the membrane as a function of condition. this relatively continuous, though neither homogeneous nor clustered, pattern of in vivo staining for the β2– <dig>  as well as other, subunit gabaars has been described previously for in vivo staining of basal forebrain as well as other neurons in the brain  <cit> . such membrane staining is presumed to reflect functional receptors, which would contain β subunits  <cit> . the continuous distribution likely reflects the presence of many, including the β2– <dig> subunit, gabaars in the extrasynaptic as well as synaptic membrane of the cells  <cit> . both extrasynaptic and synaptic membrane receptors nonetheless reflect functional gabaars, which respectively mediate tonic and phasic currents  <cit> . accordingly, the changes in intensity of the β2– <dig> gabaar immunostaining over the membrane observed in the present study could reflect changes in functional receptors. increases in membrane gabaars would be associated with marked enhancement of inhibition since the gabaars in the central nervous system are believed to be commonly fully saturated by the release of gaba from one synaptic vesicle  <cit> . indeed, the number of surface β2– <dig> subunit gabaars has been shown to be directly correlated with the amplitude of inhibitory currents  <cit> . although it cannot be surmised how the changes in membrane gabaars occurred in the present study, it is known that rapid increases in cell surface gabaars can occur by their recruitment to the membrane from intracellular stores  <cit> . reciprocally, rapid decreases can occur by internalization or endocytosis of the receptors  <cit> . given preliminary reports of increases in mrna for β3gabaars following  <dig> hours of sleep deprivation and varying levels of the mrna in relation to the sleep cycle  <cit> , it is also possible that the changes in membrane gabaars involve changes in protein synthesis. indeed, increases or decreases in membrane gabaars can occur through multiple mechanisms involving differential intracellular trafficking along with changes in protein synthesis, phosphorylation and degradation  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
according to our results and interpretations, membrane gabaars on the bf cholinergic neurons would progressively increase as a function of activity during waking and progressively decrease as a function of inactivity during nrem, slow wave sleep. since the cholinergic neurons stimulate fast gamma activity and attenuate slow delta activity on the cortex  <cit> , an increase in gaba-mediated inhibition of the cholinergic cells following waking would be associated with decreases in fast and increases in slow cortical activity, and a decrease in gaba-mediated inhibition during sleep would be associated with reciprocal increases in fast and decreases in slow cortical activity. such hypothetical changes parallel those measured in slow, delta activity which varies as a function of prior waking, being maximal at the onset of sleep and decreasing progressively during sleep  <cit> . the dynamic changes in gabaars on cholinergic bf neurons would thus reflect as well as participate in the homeostatic regulation of cerebral activity across the sleep-waking cycle.

