BACKGROUND
staphylococcus aureus is a pathogen that frequently causes mastitis in bovine herds worldwide. in brazil, which is considered by the food and agriculture organization  as the fourth largest milk producer in the world  <cit> , s. aureus infections are also a major concern with respect to the welfare of dairy cattle. the presence of this pathogen in a dairy herd was first reported in brazil in  <dig> by muller et al.  <cit> ; since then, the pathogen has been found in herds distributed throughout the country  <cit> . in minas gerais state, over  <dig>  farms are engaged in milk production, indicating the supremacy of this region in the milk production sector  <cit> . however, subclinical mastitis accounts for a high percentage of the disease manifestations in minas gerais  <cit> , and epidemiological studies have shown that the prevalence of s. aureus can reach nearly 50%.

veterinarians describe intramammary infections caused by s. aureus as a subclinical manifestation that usually evolves into a chronic state  <cit> . one possible reason for the persistence of the pathogen in the udder is the formation of biofilms, which are bacterial communities attached to surfaces that are embedded in matrices mainly composed of polysaccharides  <cit> . the correlation between biofilms and the persistence of s. aureus of bovine origin has been previously described  <cit> . however, simojoki et al.  <cit>  evaluated nearly  <dig> coagulase-negative staphylococci associated with bovine mastitis and found that neither biofilm nor slime production are correlated with persistent infection. another complaint by veterinarians is the low efficacy of antimicrobial treatments for infections caused by s. aureus  <cit> , although it has been reported that inhibiting bacterial biofilm production reduces bacterial resistance in in vivo assays  <cit> . recently, beenken et al.  <cit>  demonstrated that reduced biofilm production by s. aureus in a murine model was correlated with increased susceptibility to daptomycin.

the production of biofilm depends on the ability of bacteria to attach to abiotic/biotic surfaces, proliferate, and produce an extracellular matrix, which is mainly formed by polysaccharide intercellular adhesion  in s. aureus  <cit> . pia is the major component of the extra-polysaccharide matrix, also known as slime, and is encoded by the ica operon . deletion of this operon results in impairment of biofilm formation and the production of pia in vitro  <cit> . an indirect relationship between the ica locus and the accessory gene regulator  locus, a quorum-sensing system that regulates the expression of several virulence traits in s. aureus, has been found. some reports have shown that low agr activity is needed to support biofilm development but that the dispersion of bacterial cells relies on the secretion of proteases, which is stimulated by agr activation  <cit> .

the agr system can be used to divide s. aureus into four groups. buzzola et al.  <cit>  found a high prevalence  of agr group i in bovine mastitis isolates from argentina, and this group was also prevalent  in the studies of gilot and van leeuwen  <cit> , which describe the analysis of isolates from different countries. in contrast, 81% of the field strains collected by melchior et al.  <cit>  in the netherlands belonged to agr type ii, while 9% belonged to agr i. in this last report, the authors showed that agr ii strains produce more biofilm in milk serum than agr i strains and suggested clinical implications for these observations, such as the adaptation of agr ii to the extracellular niche.

in this study, we evaluated the ability of brazilian isolates to produce slime and biofilm and classified them according to their agr type. our results show that milk and slime production are two factors that have a positive effect on biofilm production by bovine isolates of s. aureus, regardless of their agr type.

RESULTS
fifty-four bovine isolates of s. aureus were screened for their ability to produce slime and biofilm in two different media. streptococcus agalactiae was used as a negative control for slime and biofilm production due to the phenotype of its colonies on congo red agar  and because it showed the same optical density  value as the medium without bacteria in microplate assays. nineteen  and thirty-five  isolates were classified as slime producers and non-slime producers, respectively, according to the phenotype of the colonies on cra. the majority of the isolates  produced biofilm in tsbg , a medium that is known to stimulate biofilm production  <cit> . skim milk also promoted the production of biofilm by  <dig> %  of the isolates. however, the average production of biofilm by the  <dig> isolates in tsbg was lower when compared with their average biofilm production in skim-milk medium  . the difference was also significant  when skim milk was used as the growth medium for the slime-producing strains . conversely, milk did not have a positive effect on the non-slime producers.figure  <dig> 
skim milk and slime increase the production of biofilm by bovine
staphylococcus aureus
strains. bacteria were grown in polystyrene microtiter plates in tsb supplemented with  <dig> % glucose or skim-milk medium, and biofilm production was visualized by crystal violet staining. isolates cultivated in skim-milk medium  and isolates with a slime-positive phenotype grown in skim-milk medium  showed increases in biofilm production. the horizontal bar represents the average biofilm production. the experiments were performed in triplicate. * p <  <dig> .



according to the agr type, the strains were classified as follows: agr i , agr ii , agr iii , and agr iv . biofilm production by agr group i did not differ significantly regardless of the medium used   . nevertheless, skim milk promoted biofilm production by agr group ii.figure  <dig> 
biofilm formation by
agr
type i and ii
staphylococcus aureus
strains. bacteria grown in skim-milk medium  and slime-positive strains cultivated in skim-milk medium  showed increases in biofilm production. the crystal violet staining method was used to detect biofilm production in polystyrene microplates. the experiments were performed in triplicate. * p <  <dig> .



an effect of the culture medium on the amount of biofilm formed by the slime-positive agr i strains was observed , suggesting that slime also exerted an influence on the production of biofilm . the same result was not observed in strains that were classified as non-slime producers. the results for agr group ii were similar; again, only the slime-positive group showed an increase in biofilm production in milk . no significant difference between the slime-positive or slime-negative strains was detected in tsbg . there was a significant difference in biofilm production between slime-positives from agr i and agr ii groups when grown in skim-milk medium  compared to growth in tsbg .

despite the small number of agr iii isolates, milk had a positive effect  on biofilm production  regardless of slime production. it should be noted that the average biofilm production of agr iii  was higher than that of the other groups  in milk. all isolates  tested positive for the presence of the icaad genes .figure  <dig> 
biofilm production by
agr
group iii
staphylococcus aureus
strains is significantly increased in skim-milk medium. bacteria were grown in polystyrene microtiter plates in tsb supplemented with  <dig> % glucose  or skim-milk medium . the crystal violet staining method was used to detect biofilm production in the polystyrene microplates. the experiments were performed in triplicate. * p <  <dig> .



discussion
in this study, the production of biofilm and slime by s. aureus isolated from mastitic cows was investigated. although other authors have used biofilm and slime synonymously  <cit> , slime is in fact a component of biofilm. “slime formation” was once the term used for biofilm formation  <cit> ; however, if we revisit the review published by hall-stoodley et al.  <cit> , slime is defined as the extracellular polymeric substance, also known as eps, that is mainly formed by pia in s. epidermidis and s. aureus, although dna and proteins can also be found in this material. biofilm was defined by costerton et al.  <cit>  as a population of cells that is attached to a surface and enclosed by a matrix. in contrast, slime is the protective matrix that surrounds this population and has a fundamental role in the biofilm structure, as it maintains adhesion between the cells and acts as a protective barrier against the host immune system and biocides  <cit> .

among the s. aureus isolates tested in the present study, a minority  were found to be slime-positive, even though the majority  were considered to be biofilm producer. only two slime-positive isolates  did not produce biofilm in tsbg, yet biofilm was observed when they were grown in skim milk. this low correlation between biofilm and slime may be due to limitations of the cra method, a qualitative test used to categorize bacterial strains as slime producers or non-slime producers based on the appearance of the colonies. a positive result is indicated by black colonies. the black color supposedly manifests due to a greater association between the thick layer of exopolysaccharides and the congo red stain; this association is decreased in slime-negative strains, resulting in a lighter color . it is known that the thickness of the polysaccharide layer that surrounds the bacterial cell wall differs among s. aureus strains  <cit> . thus, it is plausible that the cra test lacks the appropriate sensitivity needed to discriminate strains that form thinner extracellular layers from those that do not produce the layer, instead placing both phenotypes in the same category . if we consider that a thinner layer still allows cell adhesion and promotes biofilm formation, the results from the cra test would be similar those obtained in the crystal violet staining assay .

the slime-producing abilities of bovine isolates of s. aureus have been reported to range from  <dig> % to  <dig> %  <cit> , and differences in the criteria used for the interpretation of the cra test  could explain this discrepancy  <cit> . a low correlation between the cra test and the crystal violet assay was found by some authors, who attributed these findings to differences in the culture conditions used  <cit> .

biofilm production was increased in a skim-milk medium. lactose and milk whey also contribute to capsule polysaccharide and biofilm formation in s. aureus  <cit> . recently, varhimo et al.  <cit>  reported that milk components stimulated biofilm formation in streptococcus uberis. when added at a low concentration into tsb medium, milk or lactose was also found to upregulate ica operon genes in two strains of s. aureus associated with bovine mastitis  <cit> ; in one strain, milk also promoted an increase in the transcription of surface proteins such as bap, the biofilm-associated protein. these studies suggest that bovine isolates of s. aureus adapt to the milieu found in the udder, with milk influencing biofilm production and hence promoting bacterial survival.

milk had a positive effect on the agr group ii and iii strains but not on the agr i strains. it was previously shown that strains belonging to agr group i have an increased ability to invade and persist in mac-t cells  <cit> ; unlike other agr groups that might be more adapted for survival outside mammary gland cells, biofilm production might not be an important factor for the persistence of agr i bacteria in the udder. strong biofilm producers were observed among other strains growing in extracellular niches, such as those isolated from catheter-associated infections, and found to belong to agr genotype ii  <cit> . in our study, the few isolates from agr group iii were considered to be strong biofilm producers in milk. however, this analysis should be extended to more isolates to confirm this pattern. indeed, agr group iii is always less prevalent in s. aureus isolated from bovine mastitis compared to agr groups i and ii  <cit> , and this may explain why agr group iii is less studied. similar to agr ii, agr iii isolates are less likely to be internalized by mac-t cells  <cit> . this feature, combined with the high biofilm production observed in the present study, can suggest a better adaptation of these isolates to the extracellular milieu.

biofilm formation is a protective mechanism used by bacteria to avoid antimicrobials, and this could contribute to mastitis treatment failure. field isolates of s. aureus found to be susceptible to several antibiotics based on clsi testing methods were considered highly resistant when grown in biofilms  <cit> . according to raza et al.  <cit> , the eps secreted by the bacteria acts as a barrier that may play a role in this resistance, preventing the adsorption and penetration of antimicrobials. alternatively, the eps matrix could neutralize or bind these compounds, promoting their dilution to subinhibitory concentrations before they reach the cells  <cit> . biofilms are composed of dormant and active cell subpopulations, and this difference in bacterial physiology can also influence the efficacy of antibiotics  <cit>  and hence the outcome of mastitis therapy.

an interesting observation was the significant increase in biofilm formation by slime-producing bacteria in skim-milk medium, indicating a potential association between slime and milk. if we consider the invasive potential of agr i isolates  <cit> , the presence of slime and milk could promote a change in the bacterial lifestyle that increases the chances of survival in the extracellular medium. slime-producing strains of agr ii also showed improved biofilm formation following growth in skim-milk medium. as another role of the eps matrix is to increase adherence to the cell surface  <cit> , this could stimulate the formation of biofilm by bovine isolates and, consequently, bacterial resistance to antimicrobials.

in this study, we showed that  <dig> %  of the bovine isolates that were analyzed produced biofilm, which was well above the values that were found in herds from the usa   <cit> , india   <cit> , portugal   <cit> , and poland   <cit> . however, unlike the study in poland  <cit> , which analyzed a population representing different genotypes with diverse abilities to form biofilms, the genetic background of the strains was not assessed in our study, which may have influenced the outcome. the ability of some genotypes to produce more biofilm than others has been demonstrated elsewhere  <cit> . our results showed that all of the isolates carried the icaa and icad genes, which was also reported for the s. aureus isolates from american herds  <cit> . thus, the presence of these two genes in our isolates and in the american isolates could explain why our values were similar to those in the american study. in contrast, only  <dig> %  of the strains harbored both genes in the study carried out in india  <cit> . because the ica operon is responsible for the production of pia, it is expected that ica-positive isolates are more likely to produce biofilm. the expression of these genes should be assessed in future studies to evaluate their actual contribution to biofilm production. coexpression of the icaa and icad genes is related to high activity of n-acetylglucosaminyltransferase, which is involved in pia biosynthesis in staphylococcus epidermidis  <cit> . in coagulase-negative staphylococci, there was concordance between the expression of icaad and biofilm production  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
the present study demonstrated that slime-producing strains can produce more biofilm when grown in a skim-milk medium, suggesting an association between milk and slime. a predominance of bacteria belonging to agr group ii was observed, and bacteria from agr group iii were the best biofilm producers. all isolates were icaad-positive, and most of them formed biofilm in milk. considering the large number of biofilm-producing bacteria found in this work, it is suggested that biofilm production represents a challenge in the control of bovine mastitis in minas gerais.

