BACKGROUND
microbial symbionts are being increasingly recognised as deeply integral components of multicellular organisms that affect core host functions such as development, immunity, nutrition, and reproduction  <cit> . the holobiont   <cit>  is thus considered a biological unit of natural selection   <cit> . however, the molecular mechanisms  that have resulted in these symbiotic partnerships are poorly understood.

sponges  represent one of the oldest, still extant animal phyla. fossil evidence dating back  <dig> million years ago shows their existence in the precambrian long before the radiation of all other animal phyla  <cit> . sponges are globally distributed in all aquatic habitats from warm tropical reefs to the cold deep sea and are even present in freshwater lakes and streams. as sessile filter feeders, they pump many thousands liters of water per day through the aquiferous canal system that is embedded within the sponge body and are constantly exposed to a plethora of microorganisms from the environment  <cit> . many species are colonised by dense and diverse microbial consortia that are contained extracellularly within the mesohyl matrix ), while other species are nearly devoid of microorganisms ) .

to investigate factors involved in sponge-microbe interactions, we herein sequenced and analysed hologenome data including genome, transcriptome, and metatranscriptome of s. carteri  and x. testudinaria  . these two sponges were collected from the same habitat, which ensured systematic comparison by minimizing environmental effect such as different planktons and temperature. sc is the first species in the order halichondrida to have its genome sequenced while xt  is the first hma sponge to have its genome sequenced  <cit> . thus, our work provides a unique and valuable resource for future studies.fig.  <dig> sponge species. underwater images of stylissa carteri  and xestospongia testudinaria  taken by michael l. berumen



RESULTS
genome assembly and gene annotation
our assemblies of the sc and xt genomes yielded  <dig>  and  <dig>  scaffolds with base-level coverages of  <dig> x and  <dig> x, respectively . the estimated genome sizes obtained from our assemblies were comparable to experimentally determined genome sizes measured by flow cytometry .  <dig>  and  <dig>  gene models of high quality were predicted covering  <dig>  and  <dig>  % of the core eukaryotic genes for sc and xt, respectively . comparison to publicly available sponge gene models from draft genomes or transcriptomes  shows that our gene models have reasonable quality in terms of the number of coding sequences , the representation of core eukaryotic gene set  <cit> , the number of genes with protein domains, and the number of protein domains .

expansion of innate immunological domains in sponge hosts
we checked for protein domains that were unusually over- or under-represented in the studied sponges compared to other eukaryotes compiled in the superfamily database  <cit> . most protein domains were neither over- nor under-represented, indicating that our gene models are comparable to those of other eukaryotes . both sponges  showed substantial expansions of immunological and receptor domains   <cit> . we focused our analysis on protein domains relevant to host-microbe interactions by using four keywords  in functional annotations of the superfamily database  <cit>  . we also included amphimedon queenslandica  in this analysis because its genome has been stably annotated  <cit>  and also because its status with respect to microbial load is well known . furthermore, overall gene contents of aq are comparable to our studied sponges: among  <dig>  gene models for aq,  <dig>  genes contained  <dig>  superfamily domains . other sponges with public transcript models were excluded due to incompleteness of gene models as shown in additional file  <dig> and lack of exact status of lma and hma.fig.  <dig> domain expansion and contraction in lma vs. hma sponges. innate immune- and symbiosis-related protein domains were selected from the functional annotation. a the number of times a domain occurs in each genome. shown are domains found ≥  <dig>  times more in sc compared to xt, or vice versa. aq is included for comparison. the domain occurrence is highly correlated in the lma sponges . the numbers of genes containing the domains are shown in the bracket. b the co-occurrence of innate immune domains in sponges. nodes represent domains, while the numbers above the edges indicate the number of proteins in which the two domains co-occur for each sponge . each node size is proportional to the number of outgoing edges. edges are shown only when the domain pairs were observed ≥  <dig> times in ≥  <dig> species



our results revealed that there had been a striking expansion of the scavenger receptor cysteine-rich -like domain in the three tested sponges compared to all other eukaryotes compiled in the superfamily database . one known function of srcr-like domains is recognition of large and diverse patterns of macromolecules  on microbial surfaces and enhancement of the phagocytic clearance of microbes  <cit> . in mammals, malfunctions in srcr-like-domain-containing proteins have been linked to diseases and bacterial/viral infections  <cit> . it has been suggested that a protein containing this domain in the mediterranean sponge  may function in the recognition of photosymbionts  <cit> . we found that the sc genome contains  <dig> srcr-like domains, which is the highest number found among the  <dig> eukaryotes compiled in the superfamily database . interestingly, the next-highest known copy number for this domain family is found in aq, followed closely by the sea urchin, strongylocentrotus purpuratus . in contrast, xt was found to have  <dig> copies.

the srcr-like domains also show unique combinations with other immune system domains in sponges . for example, srcr-like domains co-occur with ldl receptor-related domains  only in sc. srcr-like domains are also associated with a broad collection of immunoglobulin-like beta-sandwich-folds in the three sponges, but most prominently in sc; these associated domains include the fibronectin type iii and immunoglobulin domains, which are involved in cell surface recognition  <cit> . compared to xt, aq and more notably sc have undergone considerable expansions in combinations of the srcr-like and abovementioned domains. in the srcr-like domains, most of the amino acid residues are highly variable except for certain key residues including specific cysteine residues that enable the srcr-like domains to recognise a vast array of ligands  <cit> . clustering of the srcr-like domain sequences from the three sponges yielded a large number of groups  whose members showed distinct patterns in their cysteine residues and levels of sequence conservation . thus, these domains are characterised by great diversity at the sequence level. the clusters were also distinct from one another in terms of their species compositions and expansion levels . the largest clusters contained the srcr-like domains of sc and aq, indicating that these domains are diversified to a greater extent in these species than in xt.fig.  <dig> diversity of sponge srcr-like domains. a clustering and sequence alignments revealed diverse primary structures of the sponge srcr-like domains. the conservation levels of cysteine residues are shown in red, while those of other amino acids are shown in gray. only the top ten largest clusters are shown. b lineage-specific expansions of each cluster in . this analysis suggests that the srcr-like domains had expanded in lma sponges, possibly enabling the recognition of various microbial ligands



additionally, we observed the expansions of other innate immune domains in sc and aq . among the selected examples are bactericidal permeability-increasing proteins. these host-defending antibiotic molecules, which selectively kill gram-negative bacteria  <cit> , were found only in aq and sc. high-mobility group -box domains were also found to be expanded in sc and aq over xt. hmg proteins are primarily nucleosome-binding proteins, but some members are released extracellular milieu and propagate danger signal upon infection and tissue damage to active innate and adaptive immune responses in higher eukaryotes , which is known as “alarmin” functions which sense exogenous microbe- or pathogen-associated molecular patterns  or endogenous danger-associated molecular patterns  and then modulate downstream immune responses. although not listed in fig.  <dig> due to our superfamily-based annotation scheme  <cit> , another set of alarmins, the nacht domains , were also found to be enriched in aq  and sc  compared to xt . this domain is a component of the nucleotide-binding domain and leucine-rich repeat  proteins, which are major intracellular pattern recognition receptors   <cit> . death domains, which are often found in myd <dig> and nlr proteins, and the traf domain-like domains, which functions downstream of the classic toll/toll-like receptor pathway, were also found to be enriched in sc and aq  <cit>  . notably, however, the copy number of the toll/interleukin receptor domain, which is a component of another set of prr proteins  <cit> , did not follow the above-described pattern, with  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> copies found in aq, sc, and xt, respectively .

interestingly, consistent with its symbiont-containing status , xt was enriched over sc and aq in protein domains that contribute to controlling symbiosis in some eukaryotes . these include gbp <dig>  which has been associated with the parasitophorous vacuole   <cit> , and aquaporin, which controls ph and the salt concentration in the symbiosome compartment in legumes, corals, and sponges  .

we observed further strong correlations in the patterns of protein domain expansion between the lma sponges, aq and sc. in contrast, fewer similarities were found between the protein domains of aq and xt, even though these two species belong to the same order . analyses of antimicrobial peptides on the sponge genomes  and evolutionary rates of protein domains  also provided consistent results.

host-interaction factors in microbial symbionts
previous studies showed that sc and xt harbor distinct microbial symbionts encompassing about  <dig> bacterial and archaeal phyla , but it is unclear how the unique microbiomes of lma and hma sponges are shaped in the context of the holobiont. we therefore analysed the metatranscriptomes of the microbial consortia in sc and xt. since the metatranscriptome of aq is not available, it could not be included in the present study. although most well-known protein domains for symbiosis or pathogenesis  were not over-represented in any of the sponge symbionts, the fibronectin type iii domain was among the most abundant domains in both sponge microbiomes, suggesting that this eukaryotic-like domain  <cit>  may be a major contributor for the maintenance of host-microbe interactions . differential expression analysis of the microbiome genes identified several intriguing protein domains that were significantly over-represented in xt over sc , including: the “xylose isomerase-like tim barrel” domain , which is thought to be involved in the symbiosis of microbes with leguminous plants and the termite hindgut  <cit> ; the “hicb family” domain , which is related to pilus formation and required for niche invasion  <cit> ; the “pin domain” , which is found in the toxin-antitoxin operons of prokaryotes  <cit> ; and the “mycoplasma protein of unknown function” domain , which has been detected in many pathogenic bacteria  <cit> .fig.  <dig> comparison of the enriched protein domains in the sponge symbionts. significantly enriched pfam domains among the genes found to be differentially expressed in the studied sponges  are shown for  sc and  xt, along with the expression levels of the domain-containing genes. colors in the heatmap represent log2-normalised expression levels



the sponge microbiomes also showed distinct community functions . consistent with our previous findings  <cit> , light-harvesting functions were significantly enriched in the sc metatranscriptome, implying that photosynthesis is a major source of nutrients for the symbionts of sc. additionally, virus-related functions were significantly enriched in the sc metatranscriptome, corroborating the idea that defence mechanisms against viruses, which are abundant in seawater, may be relevant to this community  <cit> . on the other hand, the xt metatranscriptome was enriched for transposases, which may ensure the exchange of mobile genetic elements and help distribute selectable traits across diverse species  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
sponges serve as important organisms for the study of host-microbe interactions in lower marine invertebrates. our present work identified expansion of potential immune system components especially srcr-like domains in marine sponges compared to other eukaryotes probably as a result of coevolution with residing microbes. we also identified that sponge genomes expanded protein domains to a different extent by the microbiome contents. our findings on the putative molecular underpinnings of sponge-microbe interactions provide a foundation for a better understanding of the mechanisms of host-microbe interactions in early branching metazoans  <cit> .

