BACKGROUND
direct-to-consumer  genetic testing has made it possible for the general public to access personal genomics information. a new sector has thus arisen in the biotechnological industry capitalising on selling genomic tests directly to the public, circumventing the need for consulting with a clinician before taking a test. this has encouraged the growth of p <dig> medicine   whereby patients can take control of their own health and may be empowered to understand potential health problems even before symptoms arise. the personal genomes project  <cit>  also supports participation of healthy individuals in genomics research by providing a robust framework for sharing their data publicly with a unique consent process. the rapid development of the field, initially fuelled by companies such as 23andme, decode genetics, and navigenics, has enabled sharing of data and development of methods for personal genomics analysis. however, this has come at the price of ever increasing demands on the breadth of knowledge and skills needed to interpret genetic risks and the consequent burden on dtc providers to keep up to date with scientific research. the value of dtc predictions has recently been questioned by the fda, which has prohibited 23andme from providing clinically related inferences based on their customers’ genotype. dtc providers cannot offer all available methods and scientific insights for any given set of genetic markers. this can be particularly frustrating for users who may want to explore further the raw data from which dtc predictions are made or simply apply third party tools to the analysis of their personal genomes themselves.

the power of family-based genomic analysis has been established . dtc companies currently offer very limited support for genetic analyses involving more than one individual, e.g., whole families  <cit> . privacy considerations present additional challenges in family analyses, since different individuals of a family may have different comfort levels about sharing some or all of their personal genetic risks and data. in addition, this type of information might have consequences for offspring and children. since members of a same family share much of their genetic sequence , decisions made by one individual may affect the whole family. hence, family-based personal genomics analyses may necessitate the re-evaluation of pre-established notions of identity and privacy, and of data ownership.

here we present the personal genomics analysis of a set of exomes from a family , and a microbiome analysis of an individual of this family. we build from our crowdsourcing on the previously published analysis of five samples of the corpas family using 23andme snp chips  <cit> . we use dtc genetic testing with the goal of exploring the process of participatory medicine performed at the family level with current technology. one of the family members is a scientist – the bioinformatician leading this study . after discussing privacy issues, the family made a group decision to make their personal genomics data publicly accessible and shareable. the family made their genome data available under a creative commons  <dig>  license waiver, with the underlying assumption that, by making their genomic data freely available, the chances of receiving analysis results from scientists and companies would be increased. publicly sharing personal genomes has been reported as one of the driving factors for participants in open data projects for dtc genetic testing . they thus started a crowdsourcing project  <cit>  to attract the attention of potential collaborators who might be able to analyse the data and return results that could complement their existing knowledge about their personal genomes. to emulate the principles of participatory medicine, the current study was designed to follow these principles: 1) all experiments must be carried out with private funds and as a private effort ; 2) all individuals involved need to provide informed consent; 3) analyses are to be carried out by combining results from personal investigation and crowdsourcing efforts and 4) whenever possible, advice is to be taken from professional genetic counsellors and clinicians should any predicted risk require it. once consent was provided, saliva samples were extracted using free sample oragene kits and shipped to the beijing genomics institute  at shenzhen, china, for sequencing. with very limited financial resources and the simple proposition of sharing personal genomics data widely on the internet, different sets of raw data and results were posted through blogging and social networks, describing the shared data, and reporting how results affected the family  <cit> .

all the personal genome data were made available via figshare  <cit>  with a public domain license , which means that companies and scientists can use the data without having to acknowledge or return any results to the family. this decision to put the personal genomics data in the public domain sped the process of adoption and collection of data by third parties, motivating several companies and scientists to contribute to the analysis. the companies included oxford gene technology, insilico genomics, diploid genomics, biobase, orion integrated biosciences, and genetalk. qiagen ingenuity variant analysis was performed by a contributing scientist. scientists or students who joined the crowdsourcing project at different stages added the remaining contributions. the combined crowdsourcing analyses have allowed the family to compile results from many different genome and metagenome tools.

the exomes have been used in a variety of tutorials, some of them in the usa, e.g., national institute of allergy and infectious disease, and some others in europe, such as the clinical genomics module at the university of navarra’s, msc course in biomedical research taught by m.c. or an exome analysis module developed by p.n.r. for the bioinformatics curriculum at the free university of berlin. some of the results from research assignment in taught courses have been fed back to the family, constituting new research additions .

in this article we present the experiences, results and a discussion of this whole process, which has been ongoing since  <dig>  in a previous publication  <cit>  we presented findings and results derived from the analysis of the 23andme genotypes from five members of the corpas family using only snp chip data as well as one exome and comparing extracted snps with snpedia annotations. we now extend the study and analysis to the personal exomes of four members of the family and a metagenome of one of them . we call members of this family mother, father, aunt, daughter and son . we contextualise the exome sequence analysis for the quartet comparing 23andme snp chip data with exome-derived variations, extending snp chip data analyses with new methodologies to provide the most complete possible overview of genotype-phenotype associations making use of all crowdsourced results to date. in addition, we also delve into the ethical hurdles and barriers encountered by the family and the lead scientist of this work, who is also a member of the family.fig.  <dig> family tree of the five individuals and the dtc tests carried out using crowdfunding and private funds. females are represented as circles and males as squares. the genealogic tree represents the relations among the family members



RESULTS
comparison of exome and 23andme data
in order to assess the quality of the data, we first compared the variant calls from the exomes to those of the previously analysed 23andme snps from the same family members. snps were matched by id  in both the vcf exome and the 23andme files. the scripts and data used are available via figshare. we found that exome variant calls and 23andme snp chips share  <dig>  snps for daughter,  <dig>  for father,  <dig>  for mother and  <dig>  for son. son was genotyped using the 23andme snp chip version  <dig> and the remaining family members with version  <dig>  hence son has substantially fewer variants common to the exome and snp results than the other family members. next, we analysed the snp calling quality for the exomes. we found that most ‘non-concordant’ snps  have low coverage . figure  <dig> shows the distribution graphs for coverage in the quartet.fig.  <dig> distribution of coverage for all non-concordant snps between exome calls and 23andme chips



among the filtered non-concordant snps, opposite strand snps and haploid predictions were included. for most errors it was not possible to establish whether the snp calls by 23andme or by exome analysis were erroneous. in some cases, no clear mendelian inheritance error was found because both inferred genotypes could result in the observed family tree. for instance, rs <dig> in father's exome genotype was ga and in 23andme it was gt. according to dbsnp  <cit> , rs <dig> has the alleles a/g/t.

hair colour in the corpas family
the main reason for focusing on the hair colour genetics of the family is because son has three offspring, all of them with red hair, despite his black hair colour. therefore, the objective of this section is to explain hair colour in the corpas family using different snp variants and comparing the genotypes of the family with other european populations. snp data for this analysis were collected from the 23andme snp chips for  <dig> members of the corpas family . figure  <dig> shows the distribution of red hair in europe and the region where the corpas family is originally from .fig.  <dig> distribution of red hair among contemporary european populations. the arrow  indicates the origin of the corpas family. 



we characterised  <dig> snps from  <dig> genes associated with hair colour from the corpas family: slc45a <dig> ; irf <dig> ; tyrp <dig> ; tpcn <dig> ; tyr ; slc24a <dig> ; oca <dig> ; herc <dig> ; mc1r  and asip . significant differences  in the genotype distribution were sought. genotypes with significant differences between the corpas family and a reference population are shown in fig.  <dig> fig.  <dig> genotype frequency of snps with significant differences between the corpas family  and a polish reference population . see methods for details on how the reference population was obtained. a rs122203592; b rs7183877; c rs2402130; d rs12913832; e rs11635884; f rs916977; g rs1800407; h rs11547464; i rs1015362



principal component analysis  was performed to analyse the distribution of variants in members of the corpas family. this analysis showed a clear difference between the family member with red hair  and those with dark brown hair . this difference could be explained due to variants in the mc1r gene  <cit> . in addition, aunt was found to have a different genotype for rs <dig>  rs <dig> and rs <dig> in the her <dig> gene.fig.  <dig> score plots generated from the principal component analysis of corpas family genotypes for hair colour. red and grey shaded areas show red and dark-brown hair respectively



both populations  have similar genotype pattern and significant differences are only present in variants of  <dig> snps. according to previous studies  <cit> , genotype of hair colour snp variants are different between the two european populations. nevertheless, few differences have been found between these two cohorts, which may be due to the polish population of the reference study having red hair preferably  <cit>  and red hair being present in the corpas family. in addition, we have been able to successfully conclude that son is indeed a red hair carrier, explaining why all his offspring has red hair.

analysis of exomes from four different platforms
the vcf file for the exome quartet was analysed using a crowdsourced approach. figure  <dig> displays the summary of main findings for associations between observed variants  and their predicted phenotype. each of the methods uses different pipelines offered by four different platforms, including genome trax of biobase , ingenuity variant analysis , diploid genome interpretation service , and genetalk . one of the main observations from this combined analysis is that each platform provides a substantially different set of results.fig.  <dig> comparison of most significant exome results from the crowdsourced analyses of the corpas family quartet by four different platforms: genome trax, ingenuity variant analysis, diploid and genetalk. the different predicted phenotypes and their evidence are represented as present  or absent  for each of the family individuals. we find that there is no overlap among reported top results from the four companies



within the different analyses, there are common trends for most members of the family. for example, genome trax predicted that all members of the family are susceptible to preeclampsia. it also predicted a deleterious mutation in the fanconi anaemia fanca gene in all quartet members except mother. the ingenuity variant analysis, based on a dominant genetic model, predicted pathogenic variants in ectonucleotide pyrophosphatase/phosphodiesterase  <dig> and a likely pathogenic variant for the melanocortin  <dig> receptor  in the three family members except father, associated with red hair and non-tanning skin.

diploid reported two main findings for all family members: a) they all carry a variant that has been associated with an increased resistance to the common hiv strain infection and b) they all are predicted to have wet type earwax. genetalk did not predict any trait that is common to all members of the family. for son, it predicted a greater risk of renal colic from kidney stones. our additional files  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> document provides the complete reports from analysis platforms. on the whole, the results have not revealed any clear genetic risk factors that would necessitate substantial changes in lifestyle or medical management.

interpretation and relevance
an important question for dtc genomics analysis is whether consumers will be able to interpret the findings without genetic counselling or other medical advice. one of the authors  is active in the field of medical genetics, and has attempted to assess the understanding of the family before and after discussions with son about the findings. son , who is himself a scientist and bioinformatician, has no medical background but is still likely to be much better able to interpret the relevance of the findings than a member of the general public without either medical, bioinformatics, or scientific training. we have held several discussions about the reports of the four dtc providers. perhaps one of the most striking observations about the reports is the sheer number of findings predicted to be deleterious. a typical exome displays tens of thousands of variants compared with the genomic reference sequence, up to roughly  <dig>  of which are predicted to lead to nonsynonymous amino acid substitutions, alterations of conserved splice site residues, or small insertions or deletions. even after filtering out common variants, hundreds of variants of suspected medical relevance may remain. in fact, each genome is thought to harbour about  <dig> genuine loss-of-function variants with about  <dig> genes completely inactivated  <cit> .

son reported that the list of potentially relevant variants conveyed by the dtc providers were simply too copious to evaluate in detail in discussions within his family. genome trax reported  <dig> variants in candidate genes as deleterious. these included homozygous variants calls in genes related to cancer , congenital malformation syndromes , metabolic deficiencies , and neurological diseases . “major variants”, included the lyz gene that was homozygous in son and heterozygous in each parent. mutations in this gene are associated with familial visceral amyloidosis , a disease characterized by chronic nephropathy, arterial hypertension, and hepatosplenomegaly. the report notes that the allele is rare in the general population and is predicted deleterious by a bioinformatics tool. the variant in question is listed in dbsnp with id rs <dig>  which is reported to have a minor allele frequency of  <dig> . since familial visceral amyloidosis has an autosomal dominant mode of inheritance, and none of the family members show signs of this serious disease, the variant can confidently be classified as non-pathogenic.

another variant flagged by the genome trax analysis involved the p2rx <dig> gene. it is noted that each parent is heterozygous for a frameshift deletion, but the son is homozygous wild type. the variant was highlighted because it is associated with “allogenic cytotoxic t lymphocyte response”. however, the publication that reports this finding was referring to an allogeneic cytotoxic t lymphocyte response in a patient with chronic myeloid leukemia after donor lymphocyte infusion. this patient was found to have the frameshift mutation in homozygous state  <cit> . since parents are heterozygous, and son is homozygous wild type at this position, and since no family member has been diagnosed with chronic myeloid leukemia, from a medical standpoint this finding is irrelevant.

the variant c.2562t > g was reported to cause altered splicing in cftr, the cystic fibrosis gene. mother is reported heterozygous for the variant, and son is reported as being homozygous for the wild type, with the interpretation that this is just a disease-associated polymorphism. the variant was initially reported to be associated with increased cftr exon skipping in healthy individuals and was thought to disrupt an exonic splicing enhancer, although no experimental proof was provided for this assertion. the variant is listed in dbsnp under rs <dig> with a minor allele frequency of 44 %, and is interpreted as “benign/likely benign” in clinvar  <cit> . medical interpretation would classify this as irrelevant, again especially in light of cystic fibrosis being an autosomal recessive disease and the lack of any convincing evidence of pathogenicity.

a predicted pathogenic variant in the gene stox <dig> was found to be homozygous in son. some mutations in this gene are associated with preeclampsia, which is noted to be a condition only relevant in pregnancy and thus not applicable to son. while this interpretation is reasonable, the fact that this variant  has a population minor allele frequency of  <dig>  %, makes it unlikely that it is a large-effect mutation that would be a major risk factor.

the ingenuity variant analysis software predicted a number of single nucleotide variants as pathogenic . for instance, nm_ <dig> :c.2230 + 1g > a in the enpp <dig> gene has been associated with metabolic syndrome in obese childhood  <cit>  and is observed in mother, son and daughter. a variant in mc1r  has also been predicted to be likely pathogenic, was observed in mother, son and daughter, and has been reported to be associated with increased risk of developing melanoma  <cit> . in fact aunt  sadly passed away in  <dig> as a consequence of malignant melanoma  <cit> . further, a variant in the set binding factor  <dig>  gene  is observed in all samples except father. sbf <dig> is associated with demyelinating peripheral neuropathy and charcot-marie-tooth disease type 4b <dig> . certain variants that occur in father, son and daughter  are in the excision repair cross-complementation group  <dig>  gene and the zinc finger protein  <dig> . a mutation in the ercc <dig> gene can be observed with prostate cancer  <cit>  and breast cancer  <cit> .

the report from genetalk was prepared by the coordinator of the project, peter krawitz, who is a medical doctor. genetalk provides a consideration of variants in a number of genes and rules out medical relevance for almost all of them, but does discuss the possibility that a de novo variant in slc26a <dig>  which codes for an anion exchanger, might limit the rate of intestinal oxalate reabsorption  <cit> . this is a risk factor for oxalate kidney stones and renal colic, even though mutations in this gene have not previously been found to be causative of human disease. it should also be noted that the evaluation of peter krawitz was part of the crowdsourcing project described here, but that users of genetalk by default do not receive a medical evaluation of the variants.

the exome analysis by diploid genomics, yet again, emphasised a different set of variants. the heterozygous presence of a variant of the tpmt gene  was detected in both father and daughter. given this is an extremely rare allele, its exact functional status and pharmacological implications are still preliminary, but carrying this allele has been suggested to have possible implications for thiopurine toxicity . father was shown to carry one normal and one defective allele of the cyp2c <dig> gene, denoted as cyp2c19* <dig>  this intermediate metaboliser status can impact the efficacy of drugs metabolised by the cyp2c <dig> enzyme, such as clopidogrel.

analysis of son’s metagenome
to date only one individual from the corpas family has undergone metagenome sequencing. hence here we report the crowdsourced analysis from this individual only. taxonomical composition analysis of more than  <dig> million  <dig> nucleotide reads was performed using a library of microbial genomic signatures and motif fingerprints based on  <cit> . figure  <dig> shows the percentage of microbial species for whose dna is present in the sample. approximately 39 % of the dna belonged to genomic signatures of the species faecalibacterium prausnitzii, excluding all known strains, 18 % to uncultured bacteria and rest to ~ <dig> bacterial species belonging to the bacteroides and firmicutes phyla. these include the genera megasphaera spp., bacteroides spp., coprococcus spp., and clostridiales spp. less than 1 % of dna was mapped to lytic bacteriophages, members of genera i3likevirus, t4likevirus and phikzlikevirus of the family myoviridae. no motif fingerprints corresponding to known viruses infecting eukaryotic cells were detected.fig.  <dig> metagenomics analysis of dna in faeces of son. the taxonomic composition based on dna matching genomic signatures and motif fingerprints of different bacterial and phage genomes is shown



discussion
we have presented the results of the crowdsourcing of the analysis of a genomic dataset for a family. the current lack of whole-family personal genomics data available for public use has been a significant factor in the success of this family’s crowdsourcing enterprise, attracting the attention of scientists and companies to contribute results. we have contributions from scientists who wanted to carry out an experiment to analyse a cohort of individuals or test data for development of new tools  or for demonstrating new products to prospective customers and clients .

the main goal of this family study has been to explore the utility of dtc genomic analysis in a family setting with a data derived from personal genotypes, exomes and metagenomes. in order to achieve this objective, many obstacles had to be dealt with . we expect this study to pave the way for other families who might wish to actively engage in participatory medicine and share their experiences.

some individuals have already made their genome sequences public  and many more individuals have done so with their 23andme data . the corpas family decided to take the unprecedented move of publishing their exome and microbiome data and analyses on the internet under a cc <dig> license waiver, the least restrictive type of license. to our knowledge, this is the first reported family to engage independently in genomic citizen science by publishing their identities and personal genomes on the internet. this does not mean that the family encourages everybody to follow this example; the family does request, however, other researchers and the general public not to censure this decision. this has allowed them to explore their personal genomes to an extent it would have been impossible at this time otherwise.

it has been argued that individuals have more control due to participatory nature of research enabled by having access to personal genomic data. however, it might be also the case that by letting individuals share their data and accept more responsibility about potential consequences, they lose their control on their data and results they might receive. in addition, posting data in such an identified way would make personal genomic data sharing an irreversible decision in nature, given the fact that withdrawing yet shared data from the web is not a feasible option.

in order to satisfy established ethical conventions by the community, ethical research and advice were sought to create the appropriate framework in which to share and report data and findings. although the internet and private test providers rendered the personal genomic data sharing a plausible practice, it is hard to perceive that this is immediately translated to more power to individuals. there are significant limitations on controllability of data which has to be taken into consideration while promoting participant-centric approaches to research. participant centric research and in this case personal data sharing is often coupled with presuming a higher level of responsibility and awareness for the participants. publicly sharing data will put third parties’ access to data under no limit whatsoever. as a result, third party researchers are not obliged to sign any contract or abide by “terms and conditions” that normally set in other research settings. this might raise concerns that in case of any harmful uses by third party researchers, there are no grounds for making researchers legally responsible. to this end, it is imperative to assure those who engage in such initiatives are sufficiently informed about implications and prepared to embrace the associated risks. it is not the objective of this research to ignore current practice and established ethical procedures in the data sharing of personal genomes .

a primary objective was to probe the extent to which dtc genetic testing can provide meaningful results to people who decide to purchase those tests privately. by lowering the barriers for scientists and companies to access these data, the family could increase the chances of successfully crowdsourcing their analysis and receiving results back. these data have been used for testing and educational purposes.

the health care implications of the exome and metagenome data obtained in our study are at best uncertain. it was remarkable that there was no overlap of the sets of variants reported as significant by the four dtc analysis providers. this is reminiscent of recent reports on the low concordance of dtc analysis of snp-based testing, with substantial differences in the predicted disease risks . the lack of concordance between the results of the dtc analyses of the family’s exomes illustrates the difficulties in using this kind of analysis for participatory medicine at present, and it is not clear if any of the findings have relevance for the clinical care of the family at present. a further limitation of our study is the fact that for economic reasons, whole exome sequencing was performed at a relatively low average coverage of about 30×. it has been noted that different bioinformatic pipelines lead to different sets of called variants  <cit> . we were limited to one pipeline provided online by insilicodb  <cit> , and did not explore the effects of different computational analysis strategies, since this would not normally be available in a dtc context.

we note that our results were not intended to compare the ability of the dtc companies to identify disease-causing mutations in the setting of human genetics or oncology, which are the primary use cases for exome sequencing. we provide the same starting point, a vcf file, and the same starting end, the predicted phenotypes based on snp variations from the vcf file. the analyses that were conducted at a particular point in time will have their own software versions and configurations. it is thus almost impossible to have a 100 % reproducibility of results due to the difficulty posed by the various formats presented from the different providers and the dynamics of the evolution of methods or the businesses themselves.

the metagenomic analysis of son’s fecal microbiome did not identify any actionable findings. the most abundant bacterium in the sample, faecalibacterium prausnitzii, is thought to be protective  <cit> , but there is currently no accepted analysis strategy that would allow one to make certain conclusions about the medical relevance of the results.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study we have confined ourselves to the evidence given by dtc companies and applied different software for interpretation. one of our main aims was to simulate what it will be for a family of the future to analyse their personal genomes privately. at current costs, however, this type of analysis could hardly be afforded by most families globally as genetic testing and counselling would have been too expensive. this may change in the future as the cost of analysis drops.

we have shown the extent to which private efforts in participatory medicine can enhance knowledge or a family of committed members wishing to analyse their personal genomes. we have also shown how current technologies allow entire families to engage in participatory research with the help of the internet without having to consult a clinician beforehand. while carefully pondering risks and seeking appropriate ethical framework, the corpas family decided to publish all their genetic data on the internet to crowdsource their analysis. it is our belief that the risks of unintended uses of this family’s genomic data have far been outweighed by the amount of information received from the contributors to the crowdsourcing of data analysis. the results of the analysis provided an explanation for the “surprising” hair colour of son’s children, and indicated the possibility that father may be an intermediate metaboliser of the antiplatelet medication clopidogrel .

combining the results of four providers, we have offered an initial survey into the amount of knowledge that can be gathered by a family using solely dtc means. results from the dtc providers vary widely between them and no consensus seems to come up in terms of actionable knowledge derived from the analyses. in spite of the limited amount of information gained, this study offers an initial survey on what is possible for any ordinary family to learn about their own personal exomes with current sequencing technology.

