BACKGROUND
biological overview
alzheimer’s disease  and parkinson’s disease  are two age-related neurodegenerative diseases of the central nervous system characterized by dysfunction and death of specific neuronal populations  <cit> .

neurological disorders exhibit a huge number of molecular alterations due to a complex interplay between genetic and environmental factors  <cit> . classical reductionist approaches are focused on a few elements, providing a narrow overview of the etiopathogenic complexity of multifactorial diseases  <cit> . on the other hand, high-throughput technologies such as transcriptomics, proteomics, metabolomics and computational approaches allow the evaluation of many components of biological systems and their behaviors  <cit> , thus allowing for system-level investigations.

ad is the most common cause of dementia and it is characterized by progressive cognitive decline and neuronal loss accompanied by the formation of extracellular plaques of amyloid- β  aggregates and intracellular neurofibrillary tangles  of hyperphosphorylated tau. it is also related to biochemical mechanisms, such as the unfolded protein response , mitochondrial dysfunction, neuroinflammation and vascular alterations  <cit> .

pd is characterized by a progressive degeneration of the nigrostriatial system with loss of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra pars compacta. several environmental and genetic factors are correlated with pd. among them, mutated or overexpressed α-synuclein aggregates impair synaptic function, affect the proteasome system and promote mitochondrial dysfunction and ros production  <cit> .

computational overview
algori one possible way of representing interaction data is using graphs . a graph g= is a mathematical object defined as a pair of sets: one set of vertices v  and one set of edges e . e contains pairs , where v <dig> and v <dig> are contained in v. for instance, protein interactions can be represented as graphs, interactions between two proteins form a link between two vertices, and a whole collection of proteins and interactions forms a graph. these structures of linked entities exhibit several recurring properties and characteristics that can be used to analyze different phenomena from an holistic level, instead of using the classical reductionist approach.

network community discovery is a procedure used to identify groups of nodes from large networks of interacting entities. these communities consist of elements connected one another that share common characteristics or features. due to its complexity, the problem of finding communities of interconnected entities is an open problem in several disciplines varying from computer science, mathematics, and bioinformatics. these communities of interconnected entities are present in natural and, in particular, in biological networks where they represent functional modules  <cit> . since it is known that the characteristics of one protein are related to the proteins sitting in its neighborhood  <cit> , community analysis can represent a valid tool to analyze protein functions.

generally speaking, network analysis is used to analyze biochemical pathways in larger networks  <cit> . as an example, the girvan-newman  edge betweenness  <cit>  algorithm is one possible approach to identify communities of nodes. this algorithm was applied to investigate how calculated communities can be used to analyze mass-spectrometry data, confirming that the community structure identified by the gn algorithm was biologically meaningful  <cit> . unfortunately, since the complexity of the gn algorithm is o, this algorithm does not scale well for large networks, implying that different algorithms need to be used.

community discovery algorithms performances were recently compared against networks with known structure showing that a better algorithm, which outperforms gn algorithm  <cit> , is the infomap  <cit>  algorithm based on information theory principles. this algorithm is both fast and accurate for large networks with heterogeneous community sizes.

without taking into account a network structure among interacting entities, lists of proteins or genes can be analyzed to extract common processes. more in general, comparing two pathologies exploiting lists of involved genes extracted, for instance, with some high-throughput experimental methods, is a complex and time consuming task that requires a lot of research. entities need to be analyzed and compared, often one by one, in order to understand common and different characteristics. alternatively, the analysis of large lists of genes can be done automatically using david, which also assigns a significance value  to characteristic terms  <cit> .

comparative approaches were also useful to identify cancer-specific gene signatures  <cit>  and the relevance of metabolism in human cancer  <cit> , as well as to investigate networks and genes linking sleep and stress disturbances in neuropsychiatric disorders  <cit> .

strategy description
in this work we propose a new strategy that exploits network community structure identified with infomap in order to compare two similar and yet different pathologies ad  <cit>  and pd  <cit> . we introduce a graph-communities-based similarity matrix that can be used to cross-compare two pathologies in order to highlight similarities and differences in terms of functions and network topology. communities present in both pathologies can be analyzed to highlight common biological processes. conversely, communities without any counterpart are used to investigate processes that are characteristic of each of the two pathologies separately. figure  <dig> summarizes the entire approach. datasets supporting the results of this article are included in additional file  <dig> 
fig.  <dig> experimental design. a starting from the two induced networks, communities were calculated  and for each of them a list of gene ontology terms was retrieved. b communities term lists were compared calculating jaccard similarity, which was then reported in a similarity matrix . c the similarity matrix consists of communities that contain significant terms . a clustering algorithm revealed areas  that represent common processes, while communities without any high overlap counterpart  were analyzed to find specific processes of the two pathologies d) network topology was analyzed to assess structure overlap between pairs  of communities concluding that topology implies biological process but not vice-versa. clustered green areas were further analyzed by assigning to terms in the clusters a significance p-value



RESULTS
to compare ad and pd from a network perspective, we took the two starting lists of ad  <cit>  and pd  <cit>  proteins without considering network structure and we enriched them with gene ontology terms describing biological processes. we obtained  <dig> significant gene ontology terms from ad list, and  <dig> terms from pd list. the simple intersection between these two lists resulted in  <dig> common terms, which was large and hard to evaluate. despite this richness of terms, known processes involved in both pathologies, such as rna splicing, histone modification, dna repair and others, either were missing or had not significant p-values, suggesting that a more refined analysis was needed.

using the two starting lists, we derived two networks from the human interactome  <cit> . we found that both networks were compliant with what are proposed to be natural networks  <cit> . both starting networks were small-world, scale-free  <cit>  and ultra small  <cit>  with an average path length in the order of ln), where n is the number of nodes in the network. table  <dig> summarizes this analysis.

small-world
 <dig> 
 <dig> 
 <dig> 
 <dig> 

ultra small
 <dig> 
 <dig> 
 <dig> 
 <dig> 


preliminary networks comparison
as shown in table 2a, this preliminary analysis confirmed that ad and pd networks have good similarities both in terms of entities involved , and in terms of links contained in the induced graphs . indeed, by observing these measurements , we concluded that ad and pd are more similar to each other in terms of networks structure , than they are to influenza . a greater distance would not be reasonable, as both neuropathologies and influenza share inflammatory responses. likewise, table 2a and b show that both ad and pd share entities  and interactions  with the mtor pathway, because of the central role of mtor in regulating neuronal homeostasis in response metabolic and energy requirements, as well as in influencing neuronal function and synaptic plasticity  <cit> . moreover, inhibition of mtor signaling plays an essential role in neuroprotection by clearing aggregated proteins and dysfunctional mitochondria in these and other neurodegenerative conditions  <cit> . these considerations were also confirmed by data in table 2c, where we calculated the amount of common communities with go terms similarity within the first and fifth quintile. not surprisingly, all networks overlapped and, as expected, mtor had a good overlap with both the neurodegenerative diseases at study. this result is also a consequence of the vastness of the mtor map analyzed, which contained more than  <dig> different proteins resulting in an induced graph with more than  <dig> nodes and more than  <dig>  edges . on the other hand, it would be very difficult to find a biological network without overlaps with ad/pd, as these neuropathologies are often associated with co-morbidities. moreover, neuronal degeneration also involves activation of cell cycle events , which might be considered as peculiar of cancer growth.
a) shows the percentage of common entities among the four lists analyzed calculated with jaccard distance. b) shows the overlap in terms of links between the four induced networks analyzed calculated with hamming similarity. c) shows results obtained counting overlapping community pairs that have a functional similarity that falls in the fifth quintile.  values calculated by averaging the results obtained against  <dig> randomly generated sets of comparable sizes



considerations about signaling networks
signaling networks, despite being different from ppi networks, may provide useful information to analyze communities that exert signaling functions. even though ppi imply physical contacts while signaling interactions are often “long range” interactions, which hampers the automatic merge of these two kinds of networks, we partially analyzed the largest published signaling networks  <cit> .
table  <dig> comparison with signaling networks. protein-protein interaction networks currently have an higher coverage than signaling networks



these considerations do not rule out that an analysis similar to the one proposed in our work might be performed again in the near future, as these networks grown in coverage and curation detail, hopefully with the aid of a common curation policy that might also help data integration, like it happened for protein interaction networks  <cit> .

we refined the basic gene ontology analysis by subdividing the starting network into communities obtaining  <dig> communities for ad and  <dig> communities for pd. we used these communities to analyze similarities in terms of biological processes and network topology. by enriching each community with gene ontology terms, we created lists of biological processes that describe each identified group. only communities containing terms with a significant benjamini corrected p-value  were retained, thus reducing the number of analyzed communities from  <dig> to  <dig> in ad, and from  <dig> to  <dig> in pd.

instead of manually going through 186× <dig> pairs to find relevant terms, we used a similarity matrix to perform a clustering algorithm in order to identify areas to investigate.

starting from the results obtained from the computational strategy, we performed two analyses. first, we investigated pairs of communities that had a similarity within the fifth quintile of the similarity distribution and well clustered areas identified on the similarity matrix . this findings allowed us to conclude that most of the biological processes involved in ad and pd are similar, which is in compliance with the fact that ad and pd are both neurodegenerative diseases. furthermore, we were able to identify processes such as dna repair, rna metabolism and glucose metabolism that were not detected by simple gene ontology enrichment analysis. second, by analyzing communities with similarity within the first quintile, we identified  <dig> communities in pd and  <dig> communities in ad that contained specific processes for the two pathologies . it is worth mentioning that this approach also highlighted not yet clarified phenomena that will be considered for our future studies and promote new working hypotheses.
fig.  <dig> similarity matrix. this matrix shows statistically significant communities found in alzheimer’s and parkinson’s diseases protein-protein interaction networks clustered according to their gene ontology overlap. green areas are clusters that might reveal strong significance. single red dots are communities that are almost exclusively overlapped between the two pathologies



for instance, we found that community  <dig> of ad includes enzymes catalyzing the synthesis of tetrahydropterin . in addition to its role as a cofactor in the biosynthesis of monoamine neurotransmitters  and in the balance of nitric oxide, bh <dig> is also an important regulator of the cellular redox state by shuttling reducing equivalents from nadph to specific substrates. more studies will be also needed to elucidate the significance of pdgf or collagen  in ad, as well as the relevance of fgf  in pd, most likely for their role in neurogenesis and angiogenesis. finally, community  <dig> in ad is particularly interesting as its terms are related to the biosynthesis of purine and pyrimidine, which is something poorly investigated. the entire list of identified communities is available in supplementary data .

using significantly functional communities, we also investigated which communities actually had a similar topology and which communities, despite their functional similarity, had different topologies. in accordance with the known relationship between communities and biological functions, we did not find any community with high topological similarity and low gene ontology similarity, suggesting that topology implies biological processes but not vice-versa. this is not surprising as various sets of proteins can exert similar biological processes, such as transcription regulation, stress response and so on.

our infomap based computational strategy, while confirming the relevance of the pd-map by fujita  <cit> , provided a new tool to capture the potential connection between neuronal mitochondrial dysfunction, glucose metabolism and glutamate/glutamine cycle , as recently implemented in the on-line pd map  <cit> . this finding strengthens the need for detailed metabolomic studies.

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, understanding neurodegenerative diseases is a task that requires different strategies and approaches. by using a community discovery algorithm based on information theory principles and by using two community-wise similarity measurements, we were able to identify communities of proteins that describe processes involved in two distinctive and yet similar pathologies. overall, our approach can be used to compare any pair of biological networks. in particular, we identified similarities and differences between ad and pd, which can in turn promote cross-seeding between groups working on the two pathologies separately.

