BACKGROUND
rna interference, or rnai, is a conserved mechanism whereby double-stranded rnas  silence protein-coding genes that contain sequence fragments complementary to those on the dsrnas  <cit> . in rnai, the rnase iii family enzyme, called dicer, cleaves the dsrna into small interfering rnas  of ~ <dig> nt  <cit> . these small rnas guide the silencing activities within the rna-induced silencing complex . proteins in the argonaute family are critical to the risc complex, playing essential roles in substrate selection and mrna cleavage .

argonaute proteins are multi-domain proteins and contain both paz and piwi modules  <cit> . structures of paz domains complexed with rna demonstrated that sirna recognition entails binding of the 3'-end by highly conserved aromatic residues  <cit> .

recently two atomic structures of intact, prokaryotic argonaute proteins were obtained using x-ray crystallography, with the pyrococcus furiosus  protein determined to  <dig>  Å  <cit>  and the aquifex aeolicus  protein determined to  <dig>  Å  <cit> . although the precise role of argonaute proteins in prokaryotes is currently unknown, these crystal structures have yielded significant insight into mechanisms of eukaryotic argonaute proteins; in addition, aa-ago has been shown to be capable of ssdna- or ssrna-directed cleavage of rna  <cit> .

the overall structure of pf-ago is composed of a 'crescent-shaped' base made up of the n-terminal, mid- and piwi- domains, with the paz domain mounted above the base by a 'stalk'-like region   <cit> . a ddh motif  with a divalent metal ion mn2+ has been identified as the mrna cleavage activity site in the piwi domain from the pf-ago-mn2+ complex  <cit> . structure-directed mutagenesis experiments have demonstrated that the piwi domain of argonaute is the catalytic unit of the risc  <cit> . later crystal structures of rna-associated piwi proteins from diverse species support the similarity of piwi to rnase h and confirm its mrna-cleavage-related catalytic function  <cit> .

the structure of the aa-ago protein is similar to that of the pf-ago protein in that it has the same domain ordering. however, its overall architecture is better described as a  bi-lobal protein with paz-containing  and piwi-containing  lobes and the so-called "piwi box" close to a hinge linking the two lobes   <cit> . in contrast, the pf-ago protein's architecture has been described as a  structure with the paz domain connected to the n-piwi-mid crescent base  <cit> .

insights from crystal structures of prokaryotic argonaute proteins have led to recently proposed models of the rnai reaction cycle in eukaryotes  <cit> . for the purposes of discussion, we refer to this cycle as the patel model, which includes guide rna-directed mrna loading, cleavage, and product release. in the patel model, argonaute assumes four different conformations . large-scale motions of argonaute are required to step through the different conformations of the model.

the conformational changes in the patel model suggest that large-scale flexibility and domain motions might play a critical role in the risc machinery. although the debye-waller factors  provide insight into the argonaute's flexibility within the crystalline environment, due to crystal packing constraints, the crystallographic data cannot provide direct observations of the large-scale motions. therefore, to gain insight into the internal flexibility and accessible conformations of argonaute, we have used an empirical, molecular-mechanics force field to perform all-atom normal mode analysis   <cit>  on pf-ago and aa-ago. we wished to perform normal-modes analysis using a molecular-mechanics force field instead of an elastic network model  <cit>  because we were specifically interested in learning what local and global motions are favored within the context of an all-atom molecular mechanics model that includes explicit terms for electrostatic, van der waals, and local geometry potentials; the analysis was performed using the charmm  <cit>  molecular simulation program . the normal modes show hinge motions, torsional motions, and breathing motions which are relevant to specific mechanisms proposed in the patel model: the biological processes of mrna/sirna association and disassociation; and the shift of the 3'end of the guide strand rna between the paz domain and the n/paz domain channel.

RESULTS
overall fluctuations
correlated motions
to explore the correlated motions among the four domains in the proteins, we calculated the covariance matrices whose elements are defined by equation . figure  <dig> shows the contour plots of these matrices. in the contour plot, the diagonal line depicts the self-correlation of the each residue while the off-diagonal points depict the correlations between different residues. the isolated off-diagonal points are associated with higher-frequency and less-collective motions.

the numerous isolated off-diagonal regions of small-to-medium size  in figure  <dig> indicate that complex interactions exist among the four domains in aa-ago; in pf-ago, the isolated islands indicate simpler mutual interactions. this observation is consistent with the structural difference between aa-ago and pf-ago , i.e., aa-ago's 2+ <dig> bi-lobal architecture and pf-ago's 1+ <dig> architecture  <cit> . thus, closer coupling is expected among the four domains in aa-ago than in pf-ago. for aa-ago, the strongest correlated motions occur between the paz and mid domains. although the paz domain has more contacts with the piwi and n-terminal domains than the mid domain, the long-range correlation between the paz and mid domains is consistent with the collective torsional modes discussed below. smaller correlated motions exist between the mid and n domains and the mid and piwi domains. for pf-ago, the strongest coupled motions occur for the mid and piwi domains, followed by motions of the paz and n-terminal domains. a weaker interaction between the mid and paz domains was also observed.

domain motions of pf-ago
hinge motion opens and closes gate between n and paz domains in pf-ago
the lowest-frequency  mode in pf-ago is a hinge-motion between the n-terminal and paz domains. in this mode, the mid and piwi domains are relatively immobile . a hinge-locating program was used to determine the hinge region  <cit> . the hinge region is located between the paz and n-terminal domains, including residues  <dig> , <dig> , <dig> of the n-terminal domain and residues 169– <dig> of the paz domain. in the "open" state, there is a large gap between the paz and n-terminal domains, which minimizes the interaction between the paz domain and the rest of protein. this motion separates the paz domain from the crescent base, making the nucleotide-binding pocket of the paz domain freely accessible for the binding of the 3' end of the sirna template. the mode is consistent with instantaneous gating, where motion of the paz domain controls the entrance of sirnas into the groove formed between the paz and piwi domains. cooperation with other modes  is also necessary to accommodate and align the sirna into the groove between paz and piwi. in the "closed" state, the distance between paz and n-terminal domains is dramatically reduced, closing the gate.

torsional motion of pf-ago
the second-lowest frequency mode of pf-ago involves a torsional motion, referred to as the primary rotation, where the n-terminal and paz domains rotate with respect to the mid and piwi domains with a frequency of  <dig>  cm- <dig> . in this mode, the mid and piwi domains move rigidly while the n-terminal domain, together with the paz domain, adopts a reverse rotation. the rotation-axis has the direction from the connection portion between the mid and piwi domains to the linker between the n-terminal and paz domains. this direction roughly coincides with the extension of the groove  defined in in pf-ago structure . interestingly, a second torsional mode  involving the paz domain was observed with a different rotational axis. the secondary rotation has its axis directed from the paz domain to the piwi domain, which is almost perpendicular to the primary rotation-axis. of the four domains, the n-terminal domain has the smallest amplitude of motion in this mode.

breathing motion of pf-ago
the next most interesting motion observed for pf-ago is a "breathing" mode characterized by the piwi domain moving towards and away from the paz domain . this mode has a higher frequency of  <dig>  cm- <dig> and ranked the 14th lowest in the normal mode frequency spectrum, indicating that the corresponding conformational change may require ~11– <dig> times more energy than that associated with the above torsion and hinge modes. an important effect of the breathing mode is to change the volume of the cavity enclosed by the protein, in particular, the space between piwi and paz domains. this mode also involves torsional motions between the n-terminal domain and the mid domain, which appear to work in conjunction with the breathing motion to increase or decrease the volume of the cavity enclosed by the protein.

domain motions of aa-ago
hinge motion between paz-containing lobe and piwi-containing lobe in aa-ago
the lowest-frequency  mode of aa-ago protein is a hinge motion with the mid and piwi domains  constituting one arm, and the paz and n-terminal domains  constituting the other . the rotational-axis was defined using vmd  <cit>  and the hingefinder program  <cit> . ten residues have cα's within  <dig> Å of the hinge rotation-axis. these residues are  <dig> , 253– <dig> in the paz domain and residues  <dig> , <dig>  in piwi domain and piwi box .

torsional motion of aa-ago
similar to pf -ago, the second-lowest frequency mode  in aa-ago involves a major torsion between the piwi-containing lobe and the n-terminal domain . the torsional axis extends from the n-terminal domain to the mid domain . in contrast with the torsional motion in pf-ago, the aa-ago paz domain does not involve a major rotation, but adopts an additional torsion motion with respect to the n-terminal domain. this secondary movement has a rotational axis extending from the paz domain to the n-terminal domain. superposition of the two torsional modes produces a conformational change that allows the protein to change between "locked" and "unlocked" states. in the "locking" process, the paz domain rotates outwards, while the n-terminal domain and linker regions move towards the piwi-containing lobe. in the "unlocking" process, the paz domain moves inwards and the n-terminal domain and the linker region moves away from the piwi domain. of the four domains in aa-ago, the piwi domain has the smallest displacement.

breathing motion of aa-ago
the third-lowest-frequency  mode in aa-ago is a breathing-motion involving the piwi-domain and the paz-containing lobes. similar to pf-ago, the breathing mode in aa-ago can significantly change the volume inside the protein . however compared with that of pf-ago, the aa-ago breathing mode has a negligible torsional component. the aa-ago breathing motion enlarges or reduces the distance between the paz and mid domains, as well as the distance between the piwi domain and paz-containing lobe. this motion opens and closes the channel formed by two structural gates  as well as the groove between the paz and piwi domains. this single-mode gating motion is to be contrasted with the gating motions in pf-ago, which require a combination of the hinge and breathing modes.

normal modes required for aa-ago-sirna structural model of patel
in their paper  <cit> , yuan et al. presented a structural model  of the aa-ago protein complexed with a hybrid dna/rna duplex . in this model, the rna strand represents the target mrna and the dna strand represents the guide strand. a conformational change involving large motions in the paz domain and linker  was proposed for the insertion of the hybrid duplex into the aa-ago protein; the conformational change also involves smaller motions of the piwi domain and n-terminal domain. to understand the yuan et al. structural model in terms of normal modes, we used equation  to calculate the overlap between the proposed conformational change and individual normal modes. figure 7b shows the contribution of each mode to the conformational change proposed by yuan et al. the largest contributions come from mode  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig>  these modes involve 1) hinge motion between the piwi-containing lobe and paz-containing lobe and 2) extensive paz domain torsion and mid domain torsion. the torsional axis of one of the modes  required for the accommodation by aa-ago of the hybrid duplex is represented by the blue bar in figure 7a. this axis is approximately parallel to the duplex axis, yielding a projection along this axis of  <dig> . the inset shows  the cumulative contribution for the first  <dig> modes, showing that first  <dig> positive modes account for 70% of the cα displacement. therefore, these low-frequency normal modes account for most of the proposed conformational change. on the other hand, 30% of the change is not accounted for by the lowest-frequency modes, indicating that significant additional structural rearrangements are involved in modeling the interaction between dna-mrna duplex and aa-ago protein. for comparison, we also performed calculations based on elastic network model  <cit> , and found similar overlaps .

the accommodation of the hybrid duplex by argonaute requires a change in the enclosed volume. to determine the normal mode that produces the greatest change in volume that is relevant to duplex accommodation, for each normal mode, we calculated the change in volume of a cylinder defined by the cα atoms on argonaute in the vicinity of the model duplex . figure 7c shows the change in volume occupied by the duplex as a function of normal mode. the most effective mode for changing the duplex space is the breathing mode, with a few other slightly higher frequency modes  that are similar to the breathing mode, with more local motion at the interface between the two lobes.

discussion and 
CONCLUSIONS
in the case of pf-ago, it was previously suggested that residues 317– <dig> might constitute a hinge region, enabling the paz domain to move towards and away from the crescent base  <cit> . in this hinge motion, the paz domain, stalk, and linker region  would move as a unit. it was suggested that this motion could allow risc loading and mrna binding between the paz/n-terminal cleft and the n-terminal/piwi cleft. the normal mode analysis lends support to this suggestion, with a low-frequency mode involving a hinge motion between the paz and n-terminal domains. in this mode, both the paz and n-terminal domains flex, resulting in hinges through the stalk, linker and connecting regions of the paz and n-terminal domains. this motion is also consistent with risc loading and mrna binding in the paz/n and n/piwi clefts.

in the case of aa-ago, the normal mode calculations show more collective motion between the paz-containing and piwi-containing lobes, entailing the entire argonaute protein, with hinging in both the paz and piwi domains, including the piwi box, as suggested by patel and co-workers  <cit> . compared to pf-ago motions, aa-ago motions are more collective in nature, as reflected by the analysis of correlated motions in figure  <dig> 

patel and co-workers described a 4-step model for rnai target cleavage, which included  sirna:mrna duplex nucleation, where 2– <dig> base pairs are formed between the guide sirna and the target mrna;  sirna:mrna duplex propagation, where the duplex zippers to completion;  target cleavage, where the piwi domain active site cleaves the phosphodiester bond between positions  <dig> and  <dig> of the mrna target; and  mrna release, where the cleaved mrna dissociates from risc  <cit> . the normal mode analysis enhances steps  and  of the model in several interesting ways.

step , nucleation of the sirna:mrna duplex, is complex and poorly understood, involving many substeps. in one substep, argonaute must first bind to the mrna. however, because target mrnas often contain secondary and tertiary structure, it is likely that binding of argonaute to its target requires helicase activity to melt mrna structure. the low-frequency hinge modes may aid in exposing the guide sirna to the mrna target. binding entails the nucleation between the guide sirna strand and the target mrna. it is not clear exactly how many base pairs form during the nucleation step; however, it is thought that nucleation begins at the 5' end of the sirna  <cit> .

once mrna binding is achieved, another substep requires that argonaute distinguish between correct and incorrect target sequences. this may occur by repeated binding and dissociation events, or by binding and scanning along the mrna, in a manner similar to a polymerase, or even using mechanisms similar to those used by the ribosome, which detects the geometry of the codon-anticodon base pairs  <cit> . for example, song et al. <cit>  suggested that pf-ago is able to sense the minor groove width of the dsrna in a manner similar to rnase h.

squeezing of the base pairs by hinge modes or breathing modes might increase the fidelity of target recognition, enhancing the stability of cognate base pairs and destabilizing non-cognate base pairs. as described above, the breathing mode is the most effective mode for increasing and decreasing the volume available for duplex accommodation. furthermore, in the double-stranded rna association mechanism, breathing motions might facilitate sampling of low-energy states of the sirna:mrna duplex inside the argonaute cavity, enabling tighter binding between the mrna strand and the single-stranded sirna.

similarly, the hinge motion between the paz-containing and piwi-containing lobes , or the hinge motion between the paz and n-terminal domains , might facilitate target recognition by enhancing thermal sampling of high-affinity binding-site conformations. we note that the aa-ago n-domain is closely related to the catalytic domain of the replication initiator protein  <cit> .

during step , sirna:mrna duplex propagation, zippering of the full sirna:mrna target duplex occurs. if the target is cognate, the process culminates with the transfer of the 3'-end of the guide sirna strand from its paz binding site to the n-terminal domain. even though the present simulations were performed without the duplex, the primary torsion mode bears an interesting relationship to zippering activity: the axis of the n-terminal/piwi domain torsional mode is approximately parallel to the model hybrid duplex axis. if significant in the presence of the duplex, this torsional motion might act to test the stability of sirna:mrna base pairs in a more precise fashion than the hinge or breathing modes. in addition, the hinge motion between the paz and n-terminal domains in the case of pf-ago might facilitate the transfer of the 3'-end of the guide sirna from the paz domain to the n-terminal domain described in the patel model.

finally, we note that although target recognition might naively be expected to be similar during rnai, rna-dependent rna polymerase  activity, and transcription, there are dramatic differences in structure and dynamics among argonaute, rdrps, and rna polymerases. these differences are almost certainly driven by differences in detailed functional requirements. for example, during rnai, once the target is recognized, there is no need for translocation along the mrna. during rdrp activity and transcription, however, the polymerase must move along the template one nucleotide at a time. in addition, the biological role of argonaute in prokaryotes is currently unclear. as more is learned about the relations among the structure, dynamics, mechanisms, and biological functions of these proteins, it will be interesting to consider the implications for their evolutionary history, which will not only tell a rich and interesting story in its own right, but will also yield general insight into how complex and exquisitely scripted behaviors evolve in macromolecular systems.

