BACKGROUND
massively parallel sequencing by next generation sequencing  technology has been rapidly introduced into basic and translational research in oncology, due to the ability of identifying the complete landscape of genetic alterations in many tumor types .

most genotyping studies have been performed using fresh frozen  tissues, and have provided great insights into the cancer molecular biology. however, the higher quality of dna extracted from ff tissue is offset by the reduced availability of the samples, which does not allow to perform large-scale retrospective studies. therefore in the recent years, many efforts have been addressed to set up strategies to apply massively parallel sequencing technology to formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded  specimens. while ffpe specimens are now frequently analyzed by amplicon-based or targeted-capture ngs panels , the possibility to reliably perform whole genome or whole exome sequencing  in archival tumor samples still represents a challenge, both from the technical and bioinformatic point of view .

gastrointestinal stromal tumors  are mesenchymal tumors that most frequently arise in the gastrointestinal tract. gist are characterized by mutually exclusive kit  or platelet-derived growth factor receptor alpha   gain of function mutations, leading to constitutive ligand-independent activation of receptor signalling . the knowledge about the oncogenic mechanisms responsible for gist onset paved the way for the effective introduction of tyrosine-kinase inhibitors  in the standard treatment protocols and the recognition of the clinical impact and predictive significance of molecularly-defined subtypes  <cit> . up to now, about 10-15 % of gist do not exhibit neither kit or pdgfra mutations and have been defined as kit/pdgfra wild type , which represent an extremely heterogeneous subgroup, characterized by different subsets with distinct molecular hallmarks  <cit> .

in this complex scenario, in which the molecular biology plays a certain relevant role, but the ff specimens are often not available, the feasibility of high-throughput genomic studies on ffpe tissue would allow to perform larger prospective and retrospective studies on all these small subsets of gist, expanding the reproducibility and the reliability of the data.

this study is aimed to develop a reliable approach to perform wes on archival tumor samples from gist patients, in order to evaluate how data generated from ffpe material can be generated and potentially used in routine clinical settings. herein we reported the first pivotal study on the comparison between data obtained by whole exome analysis on four ffpe and ff gist samples, showing an high degree of concordance for all the variants found, including common polymorphism and novel somatic variants.

RESULTS
ffpe-dna integrity analysis
to be able to produce clinically relevant and reliable data from ffpe samples it is necessary to quantify the degree of dna degradation of ffpe-derived dna. we used two different pcr-based methods, that produce a qualitative and quantitative assessment of dna integrity. the first is a modification of the random amplified polymorphic dna assay , that uses degenerated primers to amplify multiple fragments, of different length on the genome. dna derived from ff samples amplifies a prevalent pool of fragments of around 500 bp, with multiple bands of higher size, while ffpe-derived dna is either of high quality  and shows the 500 bp band as the longest amplifiable fragment , or of low quality , thus showing only shorter amplified fragments of no more than 300–400 bp  . these two categories of ffpe-derived dna are identifiable in a larger panel of samples, where we detected hq-ffpe dna in approximately 40-50 % of samples .fig.  <dig> quality control of dna extracted from ffpe samples. a rapd pcr performed on ff tumors and ffpe –derived dna. b-c. kapa hgdna quantitative pcr qc kit, summarized as q-score of the 129 bp vs the control 41 bp amplicon  and as the 305 bp vs the 41 bp 




the other method is a quantitative-pcr that amplifies fragments of 41 bp, 129 bp and 305 bp of a highly conserved single copy gene. dna quality is assessed by normalizing the concentration obtained with the  <dig> and 305 bp amplicon against the 41 bp amplicon , where a q-ratio of  <dig> represents intact dna. this assay shows results in agreement with rapd assay, where hq-ffpe have a q129/q <dig> ratio above  <dig> , and lq-ffpe below  <dig>  . similarly, q301/q <dig> ratio of hq-ffpe is a measurable value , while in lq-ffpe the amplification of the 301 bp fragment is almost undetectable  .

exome enrichment and sequencing of ffpe samples
dna library preparation and exome enrichment with nextera rapid capture exome enrichment kit  was then performed for three hq-ffpe and one lq-ffpe, for the paired ff tumor samples and normal counterpart from peripheral blood dna. tagmentation was performed on 100 ng of dna, thus reaching an optimal library yield and size distribution for all the samples, except for the lq-ffpe dna . all the samples, including those derived from hq-ffpe, yielded between  <dig>  and  <dig>  ug of dna libraries, while the one derived from lq-dna reached the necessary  <dig>  ug only with two independent reactions that were pooled. average library size for ff- and pb-derived dna was 295 ± 5 bp, while hq-ffpe dna yielded libraries of 230–240 bp, and lq-ffpe did not exceed 190 bp .

libraries were then indexed, pooled and enriched for the exonic component, and then sequenced at 100 bp in paired – end. lane-specific sequencing quality parameters  were similar for ff and ffpe tumor samples, and for pb-derived dna . in particular, the average q-score and the % of bases with q-score ≥ q <dig> were comparable for all the samples analyzed .

despite similar performance of clustering and sequencing the lq-ffpe sample  showed a much lower data yield , while hq-ffpe produced the same amount of reads as ff samples  . the percentage of pcr duplicates was approximately the same for all the samples, while the percentage of bases trimmed due to sequencing falling into adapters, primers and indexes was low for ff, pb and hq-ffpe, while it was relevant in the gist127_ffpe sample . this result was expected, since dna library dimension of the lq-ffpe sample was below 200 bp. this is reflected also by the value of the average insert size, that is proportional to dna integrity, with values proportionally decreasing from pb to ff, to hq-ffpe and lastly to lq-ffpe samples .table  <dig> sequencing quality and statistical parameters in ff, ffpe and pb samples



almost all the sequences after adaptor trimming and pcr duplicate removal mapped on the human genome hg <dig>  since the percentage of mapped reads exceeded 98 % .

average coverage of the target exome region was comparable for ff- and ffpe-derived samples , except for the lq-ffpe, that reached an average coverage of 17x . similarly, the percentage of the target region covered at least 10x was very high for both ff and ffpe-derived samples , while it was below 60 % for gist127_ffpe .table  <dig> average coverage and percentage of target enriched region covered at least 1x and 10x



off-target sequencing is related to the amount of reads mapping outside the region targeted by the exonic capture, that is of 37 mb with the nextera rapid capture assay. the amount of off-target sequencing was from  <dig> to 53 %, the smaller value related to the lq-ffpe sample .

comparison of wes results of ffpe and ff samples
sequencing data was analyzed with the pipeline described in the methods section. first of all the degree of concordance between ffpe and fresh samples was computed considering all the variants called, including common polymorphism and novel variants mapping on the 37 mb exome target region.

as shown in fig.  <dig> the percentage of shared variants, called both in ff and ffpe samples, is very high in hq-ffpe, reaching 94-96 % of the total number of called variants. conversely, in gist <dig> sample the ffpe samples loses almost half of the variants called in the ff sample, since the number of variants not determined in ffpe is up to 45 % of the total number.fig.  <dig> concordance between ff and ffpe data. all the variants called, including common polymorphism and novel variants mapping on the 37 mb exome target region were classified as shared if called in both ff and ffpe samples, as false negative  if called only in ff sample, as false positive  if detected only in ffpe, or nd if not sufficiently covered in either type of sample



we selected only the somatic single nucleotide variants  and then classified them based on the type of nucleotide substitution . in all the hq-ffpe the number of mutations falling in the different classes are comparable to the corresponding ff sample while in the gist <dig> ffpe the total number of putative somatic snvs is higher than the corresponding ff sample and in particular the most enriched class of mutation is the c > t/g > a as expected by cytosine deamination due to formalin fixation.fig.  <dig> total number of somatic snvs detected in ff and ffpe samples, stratified based on the type of nucleotide substitution



to identify the disease-related variants, we further restricted the dataset to the somatic non-synonimous  snvs and indels located in the coding region and splicing sites.

by this we highlighted  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> somatic mutations in the four ff samples . these mutations were defined as shared variants if present also in ffpe . we confirmed the presence of known kit and pdgfra mutations also in ffpe samples , and also the presence of truncating sdha mutation in gist <dig>  even if not reported in the list of somatic variants, being a germinal mutation with loh in the tumor sample . overall wes, both performed on ff and ffpe samples, allowed the discovery of other somatic variants in gist samples, apart from the known oncogenic driver mutations. it is worth noting that the number of mutations carried by sdha-driven tumors is almost negligible with respect all other gist molecular subgroups; moreover, wes analysis proved to be informative even for tumors driven by well-known molecular alterations, being able to identify clinically relevant mutations, as in the case of pten r233x mutation in gist <dig>  evidenced both in ff and ffpe sample .table  <dig> detection of known pathogenic mutations carried by the gist samples analyzed as evidenced by exome sequencing in ff and ffpe samples


ref reference, alt alternative, cov coverage

fig.  <dig> validation of selected somatic mutations by sanger sequencing on ff and ffpe tumor dna and on pb-derived dna. a pdgfra p.d842v mutation detected in gist <dig> tumor dna from ff and ffpe samples. b kit p.l576p mutation present in gist <dig> patient, both in ff and ffpe. c sdha p.s384x detected in patient gist <dig> in heterozygosis in the germline, and in homozygosis in tumor dna . d
false negative lats <dig> p.q937x somatic stop-gain mutation. this mutation is present in both ff and ffpe samples, but fails to be detected by wes of ffpe due to low coverage. e
false positive gpr <dig> p.v203m missense variant. this putative mutation is a present only in ffpe and not in ff sample from gist <dig>  probably due to cytosine deamination induced by formalin fixation



false negative variants, meaning those not called in the ffpe sample, were very few in hq-ffpe , while very frequent in lq-ffpe sample . anyway false negative calls were mostly due to low coverage in ffpe samples . conversely false positive variants, i.e., present only in the ffpe samples, were negligible in hq-ffpe , but are particularly enriched in lq-ffpe where they represented more than 60 % of the variants identified in ffpe . most of the false positive calls in the low quality ffpe were c > t and g > a substitutions . these events were real artifacts introduced by formalin fixation and not sequencing errors, since they were confirmed by sanger sequencing .

it is well known that gist represent an heterogeneous set of different clinical and biological entities, each of which characterized by a unique molecular profile, highlighting the relevant role of molecular biology in this disease, both in research settings and in clinical practice. in this contest, massively parallel sequencing emerged as a promising tool, allowing a complete picture of genetic alterations in many tumor types, including gist  <cit> . however, up to now this technology has been severely limited by the lack of ff tissue banks, needful for conducting large-scale studies, which are required in a rare tumor as gist, in order to obtain reliable and transferable data into clinical practice.

some evidences have been already reported on the feasibility of genome sequencing on ffpe specimens, representing the widest archive of tumor samples . herein we reported the first pivotal study on the comparison between data obtained by whole exome analysis on four ffpe and ff gist samples, showing an high degree of concordance for all the variants found, including common polymorphism and novel somatic variants.

indeed we know that targeted sequencing of clinically relevant mutation panels has become a feasible approach, that is increasingly applied in clinical practice to aid diagnosis and treatment choice  <cit> . however there are many advantages to wes over targeted ngs approaches: first of all, given that the list of clinically actionable or informative mutations is increasing, the targeted panels become progressively less beneficial for clinical application; at the same time clinical wes is slowly turning into a rapid, cost-efficient, and straightforward technique, that can be amenable to routine application in clinical settings. thus, given that the number of informative cancer mutations is rising, the application of wes analysis on archived tumor samples will definitely become an urgent need. therefore, our results demonstrate that this analysis is not only feasible on at least a significant proportion of ffpe tumor samples, but also that the results are reliable, and almost superimposable to ff samples.

there are very few other reports on this topic; in particular, hedegaard et al. achieved only partially positive results, with a poor percentage of successful exome library preparation and sequencing from ffpe  and an overly high representation of pcr duplicates , highlighting some reproducible issues of wes sequencing from ffpe, as the shorter insert sizes and the presence of longer adapter sequences in the reads  <cit> . our approach has solved these technical issues, since we were able to produce dna libraries from all the ffpe samples, and keep the pcr duplicates at levels comparable to ff samples.

conversely, kerick et al. and van allen et al., both using a different approach than ours for exome library prep , have reported an high reproducibility of snv detection between ff and ffpe, only slightly lower than ours, but both authors did not take into account of clinically relevant somatic mutations and did not correlate the sequencing performance with ffpe quality  <cit> . here we show that not only it is possible to achieve results comparable to ff when performing exome sequencing on ffpe tumor samples, but also that there are ways to score the quality of ffpe dna that predict the reliability of sequencing results, with a degree of concordance with ff sample that is over 94 %. actually, as the predominant errors introduced by wes on ffpe are the false positives due to cytosine deamination , that can represent up to 60 % of the called variants in ffpe samples, we also show that by selecting only high quality ffpe this bias becomes negligible. in fact we also showed that low quality ffpe carries a higher mutational burden, that is explained in part by cytosine deamination and also by the overall extent of dna damage, thus explaining why all categories of base substitutions are enriched in lq-ffpe, anyway with a marked predominance of transitions  versus transversions .

the study results have important implications in gist’s translational research. the high degree of concordance of the data would allow to expand the ngs analysis to all archived gist specimens, thus enlarging the sample size analyzed. in a rare disease as gist, where it is methodologically difficult designing prospective studies due to their very low incidence, the possibility to open up the analysis to the all archived specimens, may offer the opportunity to perform larger retrospective studies, using innovative technologies, without the limit of availability of ff tumor tissue. moreover, it may also allow applying these more recent tools on the wide case series of the historical conducted clinical trials, that represent the main available source of well-selected gist patients, providing novel and more reliable interpretations of these historic data  <cit> . finally, the possibility to perform genomic studies on a large number of samples would also improve the knowledge on the biological background of many kinds of tumor, including gist, allowing to better define the real prognostic and predictive value of several biological markers, not yet transferred into clinical practice because of their role still uncertain. this aspect is even more relevant for rare cancers, as gist, for which it is extremely difficult to make studies with prognostic and predictive purpose, for the need of an adequate number of patients to analyze and follow for a long time.

CONCLUSIONS
given the preliminary but promising results above-reported, it is mandatory to confirm and validate all technical steps, and all analytical processes, raising the challenge of optimize and transfer this assay into clinical practice  <cit> . firstly, robust dna extraction and sequencing library construction protocols are required. secondly, analytical protocols that can be applicable on limited amounts of tissue and extracted dna are mandatory especially when the samples available for testing come from small-core needle biopsies and fine-needle aspirations. finally, the analytical process should be standardized, and validated in order to let this technology feasible for a clinical use.

in conclusion, wes on ffpe specimens may represent an important and innovative source for gist research, and further investigations are required in order to better assess the assay.

