BACKGROUND
a large number of nucleases have been described in the literature. among these are restriction endonucleases that target specific dna sequences, as well as dna-rna non-specific endonucleases that hydrolyze nucleic acids and nucleoside monophosphates  <cit> . these enzymes are key components of many biologically important processes, including dna replication, repair and recombination , and antiviral defense, apoptosis and digestion. because of their versatility and specificity, these enzymes have revolutionized molecular biology, making possible a host of modern techniques, including molecular cloning, studies of dna-protein interaction and determination of nucleic acid structures. because the discovery of nucleases with unique properties has often led to the development of new molecular biology methods, the search for novel nucleases remains an important scientific endeavor.

here we present the results of our investigations on duplex-specific nuclease  isolated from the hepatopancreas of the kamchatka crab . we cloned the gene encoding this enzyme, developed an enzyme purification method and determined some of the salient properties of the purified protein. dsn is thermostable, exhibiting a high optimal temperature, and specifically hydrolyzes double-stranded  dna or the dna strand of dna-rna hybrids. these unique properties make this enzyme useful for a number of molecular biology applications, including full-length cdna library normalization  <cit>  or subtraction  <cit> , genomic single-nucleotide polymorphism detection  <cit>  and quantitative telomeric overhang determination  <cit> . the primary structure of dsn is homologous to that of serratia-like non-specific dna-rna endonucleases, which hydrolyze both rna and single-stranded  and ds dna. these results provide the first evidence that enzymes belonging to this family of non-specific dna-rna endonucleases may specifically target ds dna-containing substrates.

RESULTS
cloning and expression of the dsn gene
to clone the dsn gene, we used degenerate oligonucleotides corresponding to the most conserved region of the kuruma shrimp  nuclease amino acid sequence . applying the rapid amplification of cdna ends  procedure, we amplified the 3'-terminus of dsn cdna to obtain a 600-base-pairs  pcr product. this cdna fragment was cloned and sequenced. using the resulting nucleotide sequence, we synthesized several specific oligonucleotides for rapid amplification of dsn cdna 5' ends. amplification proceeded in three stages, leading to the isolation of a full-length dsn cdna comprising  <dig> nucleotides, excluding the poly tail . analysis of this sequence revealed a 1221-nucleotide open reading frame  that encoded a 407-amino acid protein . the kamchatka crab dsn was very similar to the kuruma shrimp nuclease, exhibiting 67% amino-acid identity and 82% overall homology, taking conservative substitutions into account.

according to the smart program  <cit> , residues 1– <dig> of dsn form a signal sequence that allows for secretion, whereas residues 195– <dig> form a nuc domain characteristic of serratia dna-rna non-specific endonucleases . the predicted mature protein had a molecular mass of  <dig>  kda and an isoelectric point of  <dig> .

we cloned dsn into the pet22b expression vector, which is typically used to express secretory or toxic proteins. this vector promotes expression of recombinant proteins with an e. coli-specific n-terminal signal sequence that initiates protein secretion into the periplasmic space, and contains a c-terminal hexa-histidine sequence that allows purification of the enzyme using metal-affinity chromatography. the cloned dsn cdna lacked non-translated regions and was also likely missing the region that encoded the signal peptide. based on sds-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis  the recombinant protein was present only in inclusion bodies of e. coli, and as isolated, was inactive . we subsequently dissolved inclusion bodies in  <dig> m urea and isolated recombinant dsn using metal-affinity chromatography under denaturing conditions .

isolation of dsn from the kamchatka crab hepatopancreas
before developing a procedure for purifying dsn from the crab hepatopancreas, we first developed anti-dsn antibodies to allow us to follow dsn through the different stages of the purification process. for this purpose, we purified recombinant dsn from e. coli using denaturing metal-affinity chromatography  and used it to immunize rabbits. after a series of four injections, we collected blood and analyzed the resulting sera. using western blot hybridization, we titrated the antibody and found that at a dilution of 1/ <dig>  the anti-serum was highly specific for both natural and recombinant dsn.

a combination of different chromatographic methods was used to isolate dsn from the crab hepatopancreas. all stages of purification were followed by sds-page with coommasie staining  and immunoblotting , and the specific enzymatic activity of fractions obtained was determined by a modified kunitz method. results from a typical dsn purification procedure are presented in table  <dig>  anion-exchange chromatography on deae macroprep columns resulted in approximately a 5-fold increase in specific activity. the protein obtained at this stage was subjected to two consecutive rounds of chromatography on phenyl sepharose, resulting in approximately a 100-fold purification. at this point in the purification process, most of the pigment present in the original sample had been removed. hydroxyapatite chromatography was used to remove excess nacl present in the protein sample after hydrophobic chromatography. although this step had little effect on protein purity, it was useful for subsequent the heparin sepharose chromatography step , which was very effective, increasing dsn purification by ~5-fold . gel-filtration performed as the last stage of purification resulted in a single symmetric peak possessing high specific nuclease activity . sds-page of the protein eluting in this peak yielded a single band that reacted with the polyclonal antibody raised against recombinant dsn . the apparent molecular mass determined by size-exclusion chromatography  was in good agreement with the apparent molecular mass determined by sds-page , indicating that dsn was present in the form of a monomer.

mass-spectrometric analysis of native dsn
digestion of dsn with trypsin generated set of peptides. four of them were identified by parallel mass-spectrometry  as dietsrpsfk , yleyatr , dlaeshgsdlr , and evvpvpsltwk . individual ion scores >  <dig> indicate identity or extensive homology . each of these sequences was present in dsn, and no other proteins containing more than one of those peptides were identified in non-redundant protein databases.

some properties of kamchatka crab hepatopancreatic dsn
stability and physico-chemical properties
dsn is a highly stable enzyme, losing only part of its activity after heating at 70°c for  <dig> min. even dsn incubated for  <dig> min at 100°c retained 7% of its activity. dsn was resistant to proteinase k  and remained active over a very wide range of ph values . incubating for  <dig> hr at 37°c in the presence of 1% sds,  <dig> mm mercaptoethanol or  <dig> % hydrogen peroxide resulted in only a 10% decrease in specific activity. however, a 1-hr incubation at 60°c in the presence of 1% sds,  <dig> mm mercaptoethanol or  <dig> % hydrogen peroxide decreased specific activity by  <dig> to 90%.

effect of different reaction conditions on dsn activity
dsn requires the presence of divalent cations in the reaction mixture for activity and was completely inhibited by edta . manganese chloride  and cobalt chloride  activated dsn very effectively, whereas magnesium chloride , calcium chloride  or cadmium chloride  were significantly less effective . the optimal ion concentration was ~ <dig> mm; higher concentrations of divalent cations inhibited dsn activity.

we found that calcium chloride exerted a synergistic effect when added to reaction mixtures containing other cations. for example, simultaneous addition of  <dig> mm calcium chloride and  <dig> mm mgcl <dig> produced an increase in activity that was significantly higher than the total activity detected in the presence of any single cation . no other cations possessed such synergistic activity.

the temperature optimum of dsn was determined using calf thymus dna as a substrate. under the conditions used, the highest activity was observed at ~60°c. further increases in temperature were accompanied by a sharp decrease in enzymatic activity . this might reflect enzyme denaturation, but was more likely due to melting of the double-stranded dna substrate.

dsn has a very broad ph optimum  with maximum located at ~ph  <dig> . at ph values less than  <dig>  or higher than  <dig> , dsn was completely inactive. increases in ionic strength were accompanied by decreases in dsn enzymatic activity. for example, addition of  <dig>  m nacl decreased enzymatic activity 10-fold. it is worth noting that urea was less effective in inhibiting enzymatic activity than was nacl, requiring a concentration of  <dig> m to inhibit dsn activity by 10-fold.

as is the case with many other nucleases, dsn is sensitive to polyamines. for instance, spermidine at low concentrations  slightly activated dsn, whereas at higher concentration  significantly inhibited dsn dnase activity .

substrate specificity of dsn
we investigated the effects of dsn on ss and ds dna using m <dig> phage dna and the lambda phage genome as ss and ds dna substrates, respectively. we found that dsn hydrolyzed only ds dna; ss dna was left uncleaved . notably, all these experiments were performed at high temperature . taken together with the unusually high specificity of dsn and its thermostability we would expect that this enzyme could be used successfully for removing ds dna from ss and ds dna mixtures, for example, following hybridization.

we also evaluated dsn for dna duplex length requirements. radiolabeled oligonucleotides containing  <dig>   <dig> or  <dig> bases were hybridized with non-labeled 43-base oligonucleotide and incubated with dsn. we found that 7-bp duplexes were not cut, 8-bp duplexes were only slightly degraded and 9-bp duplexes were cleaved normally .

to analyze possible interactions of dsn with ss or ds rna, we used total rna isolated from cells as ss rna and synthesized ds rna in vitro. we found that dsn was unable to cleave either ss or ds rna , suggesting that dsn would be very useful for removing dna impurities during rna isolation procedures.

finally, the activity of dsn toward dna-rna hybrids was studied by hybridizing complementary deoxyribo- and ribo-oligonucleotides and digesting with dsn. interestingly, the deoxyribo-oligonucleotide was completely degraded, but the ribo-oligonucleotide remained intact .

discussion
our investigation into the structure and properties of the kamchatka crab hepatopancreas dsn was prompted by the discovery of a novel nuclease from the kuruma shrimp hepatopancreas  <cit> . initially described as a dnase  <cit> , this shrimp nuclease has since been found to possess properties, including weak rnase activity  <cit> , that are very different from those of bovine dnase i. a primary structure analysis showed that the kuruma shrimp nuclease was homologous to serratia-like dna-rna non-specific endonucleases, which hydrolyze rna as well as ss and ds dna  <cit> .

investigations of invertebrate nucleases led to identification of a thermostable dnase in the hepatopancreas of the kamchatka crab. this enzyme  was shown to predominantly hydrolyze ds dna, but the structure and detailed properties of this enzyme remained uncharacterized  <cit> . to clone this enzyme, identified subsequently as a duplex-specific nuclease , we applied the race procedure using degenerate oligonucleotides homologous to the most conserved region of the shrimp nuclease. the sequence of cloned dsn was very similar to that of the shrimp endonuclease and contained an nuc-domain, characteristic of serratia rna/dna non-specific endonucleases. unfortunately, dsn expressed in e. coli was localized to inclusion bodies and could not be isolated in an active form.

although our attempts to express functional recombinant protein were unsuccessful, we were able to use purified, denatured dsn to generate a highly specific antibody to aid in the development of a successful strategy for purifying dsn from the kamchatka crab hepatopancreas. the method developed consisted of a series of chromatographic steps and resulted in a > 600-fold purification of the enzyme. after the final step, dsn had been purified to homogeneity and was found to possess a specific activity of  <dig>  kunitz per mg protein, and activity comparable to that of the corresponding shrimp nuclease. the identity of both the denatured recombinant protein  and active dsn purified from the crab hepatopancreas was confirmed by mass-spectrometric peptide analysis and immunoblotting.

the activity of purified dsn depended on the presence of divalent cations, primarily manganese, cobalt and magnesium. calcium did not activate dsn per se but significantly enhanced the activating effects of manganese, cobalt and magnesium ions. dsn is very stable; for example, incubation in the presence of β-mercaptoethanol, sds and hydrogen peroxide at 37°c did not significantly decrease its activity. dsn was inactivated only at 70°c or higher, although even after boiling, dsn retained partial activity. the optimal temperature for dsn activity was approximately 60°c.

the substrate specificity of dsn appears to be unique among members of its family. dsn hydrolyzed only ds dna or dna in dna/rna hybrids regardless of nucleotide sequence and did not cleave ss dna or any rna. moreover, dsn cleaved dna duplexes containing at least nine base-pairs and left shorter dna duplexes intact. to our knowledge, no enzyme with these particular specificities has been previously described in the literature.

the fact that dsn belongs to the serratia-like family is of special interest. although these non-specific dna-rna endonucleases share characteristic amino acids in their active center, some members of this group, notably dsn, possess unusually high specificity. the mechanism that underlies this fascinating duality warrants further investigation.

it is important to note that dsn combines high specificity and high stability. this property makes dsn an attractive tool for molecular biology applications. prior to the discovery of dsn, there were no effective and simple methods for separating ss and ds dna, which is a central issue in the normalization of cdna libraries  <cit> . a number of important molecular methodologies have relied on the unique properties of dsn, including the original method for detecting point-nucleotide replacement mutations in a genome  <cit> , the method for full-length cdna library normalization  <cit>  and subtraction  <cit> , and quantitative telomeric overhang determination  <cit> . the application of dsn in the full-length cdna libraries normalization procedure, in particular, has no competitive alternative.

CONCLUSIONS
we have described a new duplex-specific nuclease from the kamchatka crab hepatopancreas, determined its primary structure and developed a preparative method for its purification. we found that dsn had unique substrate specificities, cleaving only dna duplexes longer than eight base-pairs, or dna in dna-rna hybrids. interestingly, the dsn primary structure is homologous to well-known non-specific nucleases structures, but its properties are quite different. the unique dsn substrate specificity makes it useful for a number of molecular biology applications.

