BACKGROUND
the bactivorous nematode caenorhabditis elegans is an established model for molecular genetics, development, neurobiology, and, more recently, for evolutionary biology  <cit> . one of the principal features that distinguishes this species from most of its congeners is the existence of self-fertile hermaphrodites. it is now clear that hermaphrodites evolved from females in at least two caenorhabditis lineages  <cit> . however, the age of self-fertilization in c. elegans' history is a longstanding question. the lack of a good fossil record for nematodes means that we must focus on theoretical and molecular methods for inferring the timing of such ancestral events. it is important to acquire a better understanding of how long hermaphrodites have persisted in the c. elegans lineage because a recent versus ancient origin of selfing will strongly influence our inferences from comparative analyses and population genetic patterns, and our interpretations about the adaptive nature of phenotypes. in the present study, we explore this issue by considering the potential for extinction to occur by way of muller's ratchet  <cit>  in the context of parameters that describe how c. elegans evolves.

muller's ratchet leads to the stochastic accumulation of slightly deleterious mutations in finite asexual populations  <cit> . this process operates by the sequential loss of the class of individuals in a population that have the highest fitness, resulting in an irrecoverable ratcheting up of the mutation load. in the absence of mitigating factors, this process can lead to population extinction  <cit> . muller's ratchet also accumulates deleterious mutations in selfers, with the dynamics being described appropriately by a simple rescaling of parameters relative to the asexual case  <cit> . this rescaling allows us to predict the rate of mutation accumulation from muller's ratchet in selfing organisms by using a methodology established for asexual systems  <cit> . consequently, we apply this approach to infer the expected time to extinction by muller's ratchet for lines of c. elegans under the assumption that outcrossing stopped immediately upon the origin of the self-fertile lineage. estimates of the effective population size for c. elegans based on genetic variation are generally small  <cit> , particularly as compared to related obligately outbreeding species  <cit> ; this observation reinforces the potential for muller's ratchet to operate in this system. because c. elegans populations do undergo low levels of outcrossing in nature, which could ameliorate the effects of muller's ratchet, this approach provides a benchmark for the time over which c. elegans can persist in a purely self-fertile state.

two qualitative outcomes may result from such an analysis.  the expected extinction times might exceed the time since divergence from the closest outcrossing relative. in this case, we could conclude that muller's ratchet is an unimportant factor for the persistence of the species subject to selfing, because insufficient time would have elapsed to have resulted in extinction by this process.  the expected time to extinction might be much shorter than the time since divergence from the nearest outcrossing relative. in this case, extinction times provide either an upper limit on the time since the origin of selfing or they indicate that some other biological process, such as outcrossing or compensatory mutation, must occur with sufficient frequency to offset genomic decay in the long term. while a variety of such potential processes are possible , simpler models are preferable in the absence of evidence supporting their operation.

here we aim to compute the most plausible estimates for the time to extinction for a lineage of c. elegans that reproduces purely by self-ferilization, based on the standard model of muller's ratchet described elsewhere  <cit> . we find that, for a wide range of biologically realistic parameters, muller's ratchet would have led to extinction in the known time of existence of the lineage leading to c. elegans. several explanations could reconcile this result with the persistence of this species:  nearly complete selfing is a relatively recent innovation in the c. elegans lineage,  a low level of regular outcrossing has been crucial for deleterious mutation elimination in this species history,  outcrossing activity might be concentrated in a few populations that repeatedly give rise to many purely selfing lines that are then distributed around the world,  adaptive or compensatory mutations repair most of the mutational damage, or  mutation rates in the wild are much lower than indicated by current evidence. we argue that scenario  is most plausible, and therefore propose that the present-day extreme form of self-fertilization seen in this species is likely to have originated relatively recently in evolutionary time, perhaps facilitated or exacerbated by the loss of pheromone attraction between the sexes  <cit> . however, it remains a formal possibility that low levels of outcrossing, perhaps in combination with other factors, might also play a role in the persistence of self-fertile c. elegans populations.

RESULTS
we estimated the time to extinction of a purely selfing population due to the accumulation of deleterious mutations via muller's ratchet, based on parameter values for c. elegans. the genomic deleterious mutation rate, usdm, is the key parameter, which we obtained by scaling estimates of the total genomic mutation rate, utot by fsdm, the fraction of slightly deleterious mutations. from usdm we infer the rate of deleterious mutation accumulation and extrapolate it to the expected extinction times using estimates of c. elegans reproductive capacity and generation time. to infer the rate of mutation accumulation we use analytical approximations  <cit> , global computing simulations  <cit>  and an appropriate scaling of the key parameters to accommodate a distribution of mutational effects  <cit> . in order to account for the fact that c. elegans is selfing and not truly asexual, we also applied a simple transformation to double the magnitude of heterozygous mutational effects, although this has little consequence for our conclusions  <cit>  as the distribution of mutational effects is very wide on a log-scale  <cit> . to visualize the results, we use the u-shaped plot of extinction time as a function of the selection coefficient against deleterious mutations , to characterize the range of critical selection coefficients sc between which extinction is expected to occur in a given interval of time  <cit> . this critical range of selection coefficients corresponds to the class of deleterious mutations that are sufficiently weak that they can accumulate, yet are strong enough to negatively impact fitness.

nuclear genome
for the nuclear genome, the results show that c. elegans cannot survive pure selfing for extended periods of time in the absence of mitigating forces, across most plausible parameter combinations . for example, considering usdm =  <dig> , a value that might closely reflect the true haploid genomic deleterious mutation rate , we expect an extinction time of less than  <dig> kyr  for a range of critical selection coefficients sc between about  <dig>  and  <dig> . even in the absence of precise estimates of the distribution of deleterious mutational effects on fitness  in c. elegans, we can be certain that a substantial fraction of all deleterious mutations will have effects in that range  <cit> . this assumption is confirmed by our point estimate of the ddme , which suggests that fsdm = 51% of all mutations have effects between s =  <dig>  and  <dig> . generation time exerts a linear effect on the expected extinction time, so the contribution of uncertainty in this life history character does not qualitatively alter the principal conclusion . maximal reproductive output rmax enters only as its log in the computation of extinction time. consequently, even large changes to rmax cause only minimal changes in extinction time, rendering our results robust to this parameter, as well. the effective population size ne can have a large effect on the operation of the ratchet, but only for the minority of mutations with effects that are very close to the 'wall of background selection' and would be eliminated deterministically by selection; because we simulate the whole range of realistic ne values, our results are robust in this regard as well. in general, the conclusion that c. elegans cannot persist over extended periods of evolutionary time in a purely selfing state is robust to uncertainty in s and other parameters.

mitochondrial genome
the results for the mitochondrial genome in c. elegans are less dire . the parameter values that are most plausible yield extinction times close to the estimated age of common ancestry with related species . thus, the genomic decay of c. elegans mitochondria is not strongly implicated as an important factor limiting the persistence of this species since its divergence with sister taxa. although we know of no evidence for or against the presence of mitochondrial recombination in c. elegans, despite examples from other nematodes  <cit> , such a phenomenon would only reduce the potential for muller's ratchet to operate in mitochondria.

discussion
these results indicate either that a predominantly selfing mode of reproduction is a recent innovation in the c. elegans lineage or that compensatory mutation and/or regular bouts of outcrossing contribute to species persistence. for the most plausible estimates of the nuclear deleterious mutation rate we conclude that muller's ratchet would have led to extinction within thousands of years . more generally, current knowledge about mutation rates and the distribution of deleterious mutational effects  cannot be reconciled easily with extinction times of more than a million years in the absence of outcrossing.

segregation in selfers
previous work has shown that the segregation of deleterious mutations that occurs during meiosis can reduce the rate of mutation accumulation  <cit> . the same is true for asexual species that experience mitotic recombination  <cit> . because recombination can stop muller's ratchet  <cit> , one might argue that segregation in selfers could be sufficient to halt muller's ratchet. however, existing theory shows that this would be true only if all mutations have effects of a specific size such that their doubling will shift them into the domain of background selection and thus prevent their accumulation  <cit> . this is not likely to stop muller's ratchet if there is a broad, continuous distribution of deleterious mutational effects, as is most compatible with our present understanding. if our analysis is corrected for the maximal recombinational repair that can come from free recombination within a selfer  <cit> , then it still indicates that muller's ratchet continues to operate . thus purging of deleterious mutations by segregation in selfers is not expected to stop muller's ratchet here.

outcrossing
our analysis of muller's ratchet assumes pure selfing, yet population genetic studies have demonstrated that outcrossing does occur at low levels in c. elegans  <cit> . however, recent evidence of outbreeding depression in c. elegans  <cit>  and of changes in multilocus haplotype frequencies over time in nature  <cit> , in which recombinants appear to suffer a fitness disadvantage, indicate that outcrossing and effective recombination are selected against, even if they occur within the same population. in laboratory populations, males and outcrossing are selected against, although elevated mutation rates and some genetic backgrounds partially mitigate this effect  <cit> . furthermore, females of obligate outcrossing sister species have a pheromone that is attractive to males of all related species, but this has been lost in the selfing species c. elegans and c. briggsae  <cit> , probably impeding the potential for male c. elegans to successfully locate and inseminate receptive mates in nature. although there is evidence of some form of attraction of males to hermaphrodite-produced compounds in c. elegans  <cit> , it would appear to be substantially weaker than in gonochoristic species  <cit> . hermaphrodite c. elegans are less likely to mate if self-sperm is present in their reproductive tract  <cit> . hermaphrodite c. elegans and c. briggsae also fail to exhibit the mate searching exhibited by females of related species  <cit>  and hermaphrodites lack the mating-immobility behaviour that is observed in females of obligate outcrossing species  <cit> , which will further obstruct successful insemination by males in nature.

these observations inform the potential for alternative causes of population persistence to occur in the face of deleterious mutation accumulation by muller's ratchet: is selfing a recent innovation, and rare outcrossing irrelevant to reducing the mutation load? or, are the low levels of outcrossing sufficient to prevent extinction even over long evolutionary periods of time? patterns of molecular evolution indicate that the reduction of effective population size observed for selfing caenorhabditis species is unlikely to have occurred too distantly in the past  <cit> . the multiple genetic, behavioural, and physiological factors that reinforce selfing behaviour would also appear to favor a recent origin of extreme selfing in c. elegans, but a role for outcrossing in species persistence cannot be ruled out at this point. we also note that a relatively recent origin for extreme self-fertilization does not preclude a period of more moderate selfing rates in the history of breeding system evolution in the lineage leading to c. elegans. however, the large number of factors that reinforce selfing reproduction argue against a simple common transition from frequent outcrossing to highly selfing. thus it appears unlikely that a few outcrossing source populations of c. elegans ensure long-term species persistence by continuously giving rise to many selfing lines that are doomed to extinction once they stop outcrossing regularly.

some degree of outcrossing in self-fertile species can be sufficient to stop deleterious mutation accumulation from muller's ratchet  <cit> . however, existing simulation results suggest that outcrossing rates of less than 1% do not reduce the rate of mutation accumulation substantially  <cit> . thus, further simulations of occasional outcrossing in c. elegans might not yield conclusions that differ strongly from our results. nevertheless, it is an important, albeit non-trivial, next step to quantitatively assess the potential impact of rare outcrossing events on expected extinction times, especially in combination with other potentially mitigating factors like advantageous mutation.

distribution of deleterious mutational effects 
for our analysis we only consider the probability mass of mutational effects in the critical range, fsdm  of magnitude where extinction times are critical, see methods). this approach is independent of any particular distribution and can be easily adapted to new findings. at the beginning of this study we had no direct estimates of the ddme in c. elegans. thus we assumed that a broad range of fitness effects are introduced by mutation, as found for drosophila and many other taxa  <cit> . the ddme should also partly be reflected in the distribution of protein divergence values as a result of variable evolutionary constraint among loci . the wide distribution of ka/ks values between c. elegans and c. briggsae suggests an equally wide ddme , assuming equal mutational effects within a gene . the results of estes et al.  <cit>  also suggest that a class of mutations exists with deleterious effects of such a size that they are not efficiently purged, and could accumulate over time  <cit> . thus, our approach appears sensible in assuming a broad, continuous distribution of mutational effects.

the assumption of a very wide ddme is supported by point estimates of the ddme in c. elegans that were obtained after completing the main part of our analysis. we used a recently developed method to estimate the ddme from nucleotide diversity data of two species  that exhibit strikingly different ne  <cit> . this method was applied to  <dig> kbp of shotgun sequencing-based diversity data from four wild strains of c. elegans that were compared to the genome sequence of bristol n <dig>  <cit>  and diversity data from  <dig> x-linked loci in c. remanei  <cit> . the point estimate for the resulting ddme can be seen in figure  <dig>  it predicts that fsdm = 32% of all non-synonymous mutations will have effects between s =  <dig>  and  <dig> . additional work is required to verify the robustness of this point estimate of the caenorhabditis ddme.

if one were to assume that the ddme of insertions and deletions would result in their deterministic removal by purifying selection, then limiting u to the single nucleotide mutation rate  would result in a somewhat longer expected time to extinction. we would nevertheless still expect extinction of a purely selfing lineage within hundreds of thousands of generations . however, the observation of substantial copy number variation in c. elegans  <cit>  suggests that it is probably most appropriate to apply a mutation rate calculation that includes indels, as we have done.

because muller's ratchet leads to a higher rate of mutation accumulation in selfers compared to outcrossers, one might expect such a signature in the form of increased ka/ks values in c. elegans, when compared to outcrossing sister species  <cit> . however, such a signature does not appear to robustly describe a selfing versus outcrossing dichotomy  <cit> . this could result from a lack of statistical power, because divergence at effectively neutral and very strongly selected sites will be independent of selfing rates, so only a fraction of sites would be affected. however, the absence of such a signature could also indicate that selfing has a sufficiently recent origin that not enough time has elapsed to accumulate detectable sequence differences.

other factors
even if c. elegans did not experience any outcrossing, other processes might prolong its survival . several factors warrant further attention.

lower mutation rates
many factors influence mutation rates  <cit> . although the evidence for the frequency of slightly deleterious mutations is quite robust compared to that in other species, it is difficult to exclude categorically the possibility of lower mutation rates in nature than inferred from the laboratory. however, the similar rates of fitness decline under mutation accumulation for different strains of c. elegans suggest that average mutation rates do not differ greatly among strains with low transposable element loads  <cit> . furthermore, one environmental variable, temperature, does not appear to alter mutation rates substantially in this species  <cit> .

compensatory and advantageous mutations
mutation accumulation experiments have found that compensatory mutations arise in c. elegans lines with compromised fitness and that they can increase fitness rapidly  <cit> . this kind of mutation can effectively compensate for fitness decay from muller's ratchet  <cit>  and might be based on variability in quantitative trait loci  that are not mechanistically related to the mutational damage that they compensate for. if long-term mutation accumulation also degrades the ability for fitness increases at these qtls, then our results still apply . further work is necessary to elucidate the nature of compensatory mutations in c. elegans and a recent study demonstrated that this is possible  <cit> . advantageous mutations also are powerful in stopping muller's ratchet  <cit>  and these cannot be distinguished from compensatory mutations in a genome that already has experienced a substantial amount of decay. experimental evolution in viruses indicates that the beneficial mutation rate can increase as fitness declines  <cit> , which could forestall extinction. however, it remains to be seen whether such a phenomenon is general and could apply to eukaryotes such as c. elegans.

population structure
natural populations of c. elegans show strong structure  <cit> , and metapopulation processes could be important for shaping diversity. here we assume that these effects are accounted for by using an appropriately scaled effective population size ne that corrects for deviations from panmixis. there is reason to believe that muller's ratchet basically depends on ne and that other details of population structure can be neglected  <cit> . thus our conclusions should not be strongly affected by the presence of structured populations per se in c. elegans. one potential means by which population structure could limit muller's ratchet is if different demes experience very different outcrossing rates, leading to differential persistence of highly outcrossing demes. inference from heterozygosity in different samples is suggestive of variable outcrossing rates  <cit> , although both local and global patterns of polymorphism and linkage disequilibrium do not support high outcrossing rates over the long term in this species  <cit> . the fact that several features of c. elegans biology are specific to the selfing life-style  further argues against the notion that there might be a long-term core of outcrossing populations that facilitate the survival of the species and that constantly produce the selfing lines that are so readily observed. in addition, theory suggests that effective outcrossing rates of less than 1% do not drastically reduce the rate of mutation accumulation  <cit> , thus limiting the potential for transient instances of elevated outcrossing to impact population persistence.

uncertainty in divergence dates
in concluding that extinction by muller's ratchet under pure selfing would occur in less time than has elapsed since the common ancestor of c. elegans and its relatives, we applied the divergence time estimates of cutter  <cit> . these date estimates are 4- to 6-fold more recent than previous divergence time estimates that assumed a universal molecular clock among mammals, insects, and nematodes  <cit> , and consequently are conservative for our analysis with respect to identifying a genomic decay paradox. longer divergence times between species make it even less likely that c. elegans could have persisted in a purely selfing state for most of the time since divergence with the caenorhabditis common ancestor.

mitochondrial dna
we find that muller's ratchet in mitochondrial dna operates much slower than deleterious mutation accumulation in nuclear dna, despite a higher per site mutation rate and taking into account differences in mode of transmission. this is mainly due to the much smaller mutational target of the mitochondrial genome. as a consequence, mutation load of the mitochondrial genome is not expected to be the limiting factor in species persistence for c. elegans. this finding may seem surprising in the light of recent results that found a substantial rate of fitness decay in human mtdna  <cit> . however,  the shorter extinction times in human mtdna are mostly due to higher mutation rates, which are probably a consequence of longer generation times,  comparing the same mutation rates shows that absolute nematode extinction times are a bit shorter, as expected from the shorter generation time that makes c. elegans reach the number of generations to extinction quicker,  the overwhelmingly faster speed of genomic decay in nuclear dna, rather than an absence of decay in mtdna, makes the mutational load in the nucleus the limiting factor. this conclusion is also robust to the possibility of stronger selection in mtdna than in nuclear dna, as our method compares the shortest possible extinction times for all corresponding selection coefficients .

c. briggsae
populations of the sibling species of c. elegans, c. briggsae, also contain a very high fraction of self-fertilizing hermaphrodites. in many respects, c. briggsae shares similar life history characteristics with c. elegans, including levels of polymorphism and linkage disequilibrium, outcrossing rate, generation time, and fecundity  <cit> . phenotypic assays of fitness in mutation accumulation lines suggest that c. briggsae might experience a higher mutation rate than c. elegans  <cit> , although this observation has not yet been confirmed with direct mutation detection. c. briggsae shares a more recent common ancestor with the obligately outbreeding sibling species c. sp.  <dig>  than does c. elegans with any known sibling species, so in c. briggsae we can place a more recent upper bound on the time of persistence of self-fertilization . sequence divergence suggests that tage for c. briggsae is roughly  <dig> my  <cit> , which implies that this species probably also experiences a genomic decay paradox with respect to muller's ratchet in the same sense as c. elegans. a deeper sampling of species within the caenorhabditis phylogeny will help elucidate whether a predominantly selfing mode of reproduction in c. elegans and c. briggsae arose recently in their evolutionary history.

CONCLUSIONS
we find that c. elegans life history characteristics and evolutionary parameters are inconsistent with long-term survival as a complete selfer. therefore, c. elegans' highly selfing lifestyle likely evolved relatively recently in evolutionary time. alternatively, outcrossing and other factors have played a significant role in maintaining a tolerable mutation load throughout its history. if deleterious mutations are accumulating by muller's ratchet and c. elegans is on its way to extinction, then the potential for compromised molecular biological phenomena should be taken into consideration in the analysis of c. elegans genetics and development.

