BACKGROUND
dna sequences have often been used to investigate the evolutionary relationships of populations and species  <cit> . phylogenetic trees are reconstructed using dna sequence data to illustrate the evolutionary relationships of species, and the extent of evolutionary changes  recorded in dna sequences can be used to infer the timing of divergence events. however, it can be difficult to use dna sequence data to confidently resolve the evolutionary relationships between recently diverged taxa, because too little time may have elapsed for the accumulation of sufficient genetic differences to provide phylogenetic resolution among taxa  <cit> . also, particularly in cases in which population or taxon divergences have occurred over a short space of time , incomplete lineage sorting may cause the patterns of their molecular divergences to be inconsistent with the actual patterns of organism divergences  <cit> . mitochondrial dna , as a uniparentally inherited genomic region, has higher mutation rates, as well as a smaller effective population size, than typical autosomal loci and hence has a shorter coalescence time conducive to resolving phylogenetic relationships of recently diverging species  <cit> . short segments of the mitochondrial genome  have long been used for phylogenetic reconstruction, and moreover sequencing of the entire mtgenome has been adopted to provide improved resolution for reconstructing robust phylogenies of species with recent rapid evolution and to facilitate the molecular dating of divergence events within their phylogenies . however, due to the maternal inheritance of mitochondria, the phylogenetic relationships inferred through mtgenomes, intrinsically, reveal matrilineal evolutionary history only. hence, although less commonly used, as a paternally inherited counterpart of mtdna, genetic data from the non-recombining portion of y chromosome  loci are good candidates for extracting evolutionary information of the patrilineal history for mammals, including primates, and in comparison with data from the mtdna, reveal potentially contrasting patterns of male and female phylogeny and gene flow  <cit> .

while all of the modern great apes currently exist as distinct, geographically-discontinuous species, gibbons are unique among the hominoids in consisting of multiple closely-related species living now or recently in close geographic proximity to one another. gibbons are described as 14– <dig> nominal species divided into four genera: hylobateshoolocknomascus, and symphalangus,  <cit> . of the four genera, hoolock and symphalangus contain just two and one species, respectively, while hylobates comprises some half-dozen species as does nomascus. the hylobates gibbons are of particular interest as they apparently underwent a rapid speciation process and successfully colonized not only parts of mainland southeast asia but also the sundaland  and are thus the most widespread group of gibbons  <cit> . the systematics and evolutionary relationship of the hylobates members have been investigated using morphological characters, vocal traits of the songs, analysis of chromosomal morphology and dna sequence data . in particular, the increasing number of dna sequence studies have enabled molecular inferences on several aspects of the hylobates evolutionary history, such as phylogenetic relationships, divergence time estimation and possible routes of dispersal  <cit> . the sequence data have demonstrated that hylobates species are monophyletic  <cit>  and suggested that their radiation began around  <dig> million years ago   <cit> . however, the phylogenetic relationships among hylobates species had remained unresolved based on dna sequences of short mitochondrial segments  <cit> , the combined sequence of mtdna, y-linked and x-linked loci  <cit>  or nuclear sequences from autosomes and x chromosomes  <cit>  until a recent work depicting a well-supported hylobates phylogeny based on more than 15 kb-length dna sequences of the mitochondrial genome  <cit> .

although genetic studies have thus been conducive to the understanding of the hylobates evolutionary relationships, most of the analyses in these studies have primarily relied upon mtdna sequence data  <cit> ; in other words, the most current molecular inferences are based solely upon the matrilineal evolutionary history of the hylobates. therefore, sequence data from y-linked loci of gibbons would provide an opportunity to compare the evolutionary histories of both sexes, as differences arising either by chance assortment of genetic loci or arising out of different patterns of sex-mediated gene flow may be reflected by different branching patterns observed in the mtdna and y chromosome phylogeny trees. thus far, phylogenetic information of gibbon y chromosomes has been limited to short segments  from a few loci   <cit> . in the present study we used information from studies of y chromosome variation in primates or other mammals  <cit> , to generate sequences of multiple nry loci in gibbons. our sampling of  <dig> male individuals includes three of the four extant genera and  <dig> gibbon species, including six hylobates species. based on a large amount of gibbon y chromosomal sequence data , we reconstruct the gibbon y chromosome phylogeny and compare these results with those inferred from various mtdna data as well as with inferences from the previous mtgenome sequencing of the same individuals  <cit> .

RESULTS
 <dig> sequencing and nucleotide diversity levels of y chromosome loci
we used  <dig> sequencing technology to sequence seven pcr amplicons from six y chromosome loci for each of  <dig> gibbons. a total of  <dig>  raw reads were generated and the  <dig> % of these reads with an average phred-equivalent base quality score of  <dig> were used for subsequent individual barcode sorting and contig assembly. in summary, for each individual, we obtained an average of  <dig>  assembled reads with an average length of 214 bp per read, thus yielding approximately 1 mb of sequence data corresponding to 146-fold coverage. the coverage for each individual ranged from 88- to 222-fold. after contig assembly, the consensus sequences of each amplicon were generated and each of the  <dig> gibbon individuals had seven amplicon sequences. we then generated the datasets for each amplicon as well as the concatenated dataset in which seven amplicon sequences were combined, representing a total length of ~ <dig>  kb. multiple sequence alignments were carried out for all datasets.

by calculating two nucleotide diversity indices , we found that the diversity levels varied among the seven y chromosomal amplicons : the smcy and tspy showed relatively high nucleotide diversity indices, whereas the lowest diversity level was found in the amplicon uty. we further calculated the nucleotide diversity of the concatenated datasets for each genus and each hylobates species containing multiple sampled individuals, respectively  and compared the y chromosome sequence variation observed here to that of the mtgenome sequences from the same number of individuals. we calculated two nucleotide diversity indices π and θw for the  <dig> published mtgenome sequences  <cit> . we found that, overall, the values for the gibbon y chromosomes were more than five times lower than that of the mtgenomes . this lower nucleotide diversity level for the y chromosome was also observed consistently in the three sampled genera as well as in the four multiply sampled hylobates species.

s is the number of segregating sites; π is nucleotide diversity  <cit> ; θw is estimated from s  <cit> .

n is the number of individuals and in parentheses is the number of species sampled for each genus; s is the number of segregating sites; π is nucleotide diversity  <cit> ; θw is estimated from s  <cit> . acalculations were carried out using mtgenome sequences excluding the control regions from the  <dig> individuals  <cit> . bcalculations were carried out using  <dig> cytochrome b gene sequences .

among the three sampled genera, we found that the genus hylobates showed the highest diversity levels for its mtgenome and y chromosome dna sequences. however, the differing sample sizes for the various genera and species in our study, and especially the larger sample size for the genus hylobates, renders it difficult to explicitly compare the diversity indices among genera. therefore, we randomly resampled three species from the six hylobates species represented here and then randomly resampled one individual from each of the resampled species, respectively, to obtain similar sample sizes among the three genera. we then calculated two nucleotide diversity indices for the three resampled hylobates individuals and repeated this resampling procedure  <dig> times. we obtained: π =  <dig> - <dig> % and θw =  <dig> - <dig> % for y chromosome and π =  <dig> - <dig> % and θw =  <dig> - <dig> % for mtgenome, respectively and so we still observed the highest level of nucleotide diversity for hylobates. the lack of readily available samples for the hoolock genus and our limited number of samples of nomascus relative to hylobates make it inappropriate for us to attempt statistical tests or draw strong conclusions concerning comparisons of diversity among gibbon genera. in addition, among the four hylobates species, h. pileatus showed the highest level of nucleotide diversity in both of y chromosome and mtgenome sequences.

phylogenetic analyses
multiple alignments with outgroups were conducted for each y chromosomal amplicon and the proportions of variable sites varied among amplicons . the highest proportion of variable sites were observed in the tspy dataset , which was almost twice that of the uty dataset . we reconstructed non-partitioned maximum-likelihood  and bayesian inference  majority-rule trees for each amplicon dataset and found that the branching patterns varied from amplicon to amplicon . among these trees, we observed that both ml and bi trees based on two amplicons, namely the smcy and tspy, had relatively better resolution for depicting the relationships of three sampled genera albeit with weak support values . in contrast, the sequence data of the other five amplicons were unable to provide information on the phylogenetic relationship of the three genera. despite the low resolution of the trees of seven individual amplicons considered singly, the monophyly of the genera hylobates, nomascus and symphalangus were well supported in all trees, except those of rps4y and uty, in which nomascus and symphalangus but not hylobates were recognized as monophyletic taxa. given these results, it is not surprising that we also found inconsistent phylogenetic relationships of hylobates species among the individual amplicon trees which lacked good statistical support values on the nodes .

since all of the nry loci are linked, we concatenated the sequences of the seven amplicons to obtain single sequences for each of the  <dig> gibbons as well as the outgroups. we aligned these concatenated sequences and reconstructed phylogenetic trees using partitioned ml and bi analyses. the alignment was  <dig>  bp in length and  <dig> % of the sites were variable while  <dig> % were parsimony-informative . we found topologically identical majority-rule trees from the ml and bi analyses with similar support values . the monophyly of each genus received high support . two of the three sampled genera  formed a weakly supported clade . within the genus nomascus, n. concolor was closer to n. leucogenys than to n. gabriellae. within the genus hylobates, sequences from h. muelleri were basal to others with high support values followed by two groups in which representatives of the species h. lar and h. pileatus separate from an unresolved trichotomy consisting of members of the three remaining species . interestingly, sequences from h. lar and h. pileatus are not reciprocally monophyletic but occur in a single clade .

the mtgenome phylogeny tree was also reconstructed based on the  <dig> retrieved sequences in which most sampled individuals were the same or the direct maternal relatives of those used in the y chromosome tree . we obtained identical topologies from the ml and bi analyses, showing no basal taxon and all well-resolved nodes  in the hylobates mtgenome phylogeny. the species h. lar and h. pileatus are reciprocally monophyletic to each other. the hylobates phylogenetic relationships inferred from this subset of mtgenome sequences were entirely consistent with the previous highly supported mtgenome tree which featured a larger number of individuals  <cit> .

estimation of divergence times
we used the concatenated y chromosome sequence dataset and implemented a bayesian mcmc approach with the relaxed clock model in the program beast to estimate divergence times in the gibbon y chromosome phylogeny. beyond giving two monophyletic groups  as the two fossil calibration points, we did not constrain the phylogeny with an a priori fixed topology. the maximum-clade-credibility tree generated by the beast analysis showed the same topology as produced in the ml and bi trees, respectively. the estimates of divergence times with 95% highest posterior densities  suggest that the initial split within gibbons occurred  <dig>  mya . the y chromosome sequences of hylobates spp. diverged at about  <dig>  mya, followed by a split between two species groups, the clade  and the trichotomy  at  <dig>  mya. the estimated time to most common ancestor  of y chromosomes for the clade  was  <dig>  mya and the tmrca of the trichotomy  was  <dig>  mya. moreover, we inferred a recent divergence at approximately  <dig>  mya of y chromosomes between n. concolor and n. leucogenys .

the estimated divergence dates are in million years before present. mrca denotes the most recent common ancestor. hpd, highest posterior density

*nodes used for calibration.

discussion
nucleotide diversity of gibbon y chromosomes
based on sequence data of y chromosome loci examined here, we found that the sequence diversity of the examined segments of the y chromosome was at least five-fold lower than that of the mtgenome . this lower nucleotide diversity of y chromosome sequences relative to mtdna diversity is not specific to gibbons but appears to be a common pattern in mammals  <cit> . the large difference in diversity between y chromosome and mtdna is probably due to the much higher substitution rate of mtdna compared to nuclear dna causing a high rate of evolution in mitochondria  <cit> , as well as strong selection on sex-limited chromosomes  that could contribute to the relatively low sequence variability observed on mammalian y chromosomes  <cit> .

we further examined nucleotide diversity levels for each of the three sampled genera. in spite of the limited sample sizes, we found that hylobates apparently has a higher level of nucleotide diversity than nomascus and symphalangus for both the mtgenome as well as the y-chromosome . this inference is supported by a recent examination of the mtdna cytochrome b sequences using fairly comprehensive sampling of extant gibbon taxa  <cit>  which provides estimates consistent with those based on our mtgenome and y chromosome datasets of relatively small sample size . moreover, their data with the inclusion of sampling of hoolock species showed the highest π and θw for genus hylobates  and suggested that hylobates may be the most genetically diverse gibbon genus.

owing to the limited samplings of the six species and lack of samples from the h. albibarbis species, we were unable to extensively compare nucleotide diversity levels among hylobates species. however, we found that h. pileatus showed  <dig>  times the nucleotide diversity levels of h. agilis on the mtgenome but exhibited nearly four times the nucleotide diversity of h. agilis on the y chromosome. this relatively high y chromosome diversity in h. pileatus was consistent with its paraphyletic y chromosome lineage, in which the sequences derived from two different lineages . while our results provide some indication of the relative levels of sequence diversity present in the various gibbon taxa, we caution that comparisons of diversity must be considered provisional until the adoption of widespread sampling and analysis of individuals of known geographic provenance.

dating divergences in gibbon evolutionary history
different molecular inferences of divergence times may be derived from the paternally-inherited y-chromosome and the maternally-inherited mtdna, and such differences may reflect the different evolutionary histories of maternal and paternal lineages as well as simply the influence of chance on the coalescent history of these two single loci. we find that the molecular divergence times inferred from the two loci are largely consistent with broad confidence intervals, but that the coalescence times inferred from the mtdna data tend to be older than those from the y-chromosome. specifically, the divergences of y chromosomes among the three sampled gibbon genera began around  <dig>   mya , in comparison to the  <dig>   mya  <cit>  or the  <dig>   mya  <cit>  inferred from mtgenome data from these same genera . within the genus hylobates, the first divergence of hylobates paternal lineages began around  <dig>   mya, involving the divergence of h. muelleri lineage from others. mtgenome data  <cit>  suggested that the first divergence of hylobates maternal lineages occurred relatively earlier around  <dig>   mya and the large confidence interval of this time estimate overlaps with the interval of y chromosome estimate.

comparatively older mitochondrial and younger y chromosomal estimates of molecular divergence dates also have been observed in other primates, including african colobine monkeys , macaques  <cit> , odd-nosed monkeys  <cit> , chimpanzees  <cit>  and humans  <cit> . sex-biased dispersal or other demographic processes have been suggested to explain the differences between mitochondrial and y chromosomal divergence times in macaques and humans  <cit> . for example, tosi et al.  <cit>  suggested that the relatively recent y chromosome relative to mitochondrial divergence time estimates in macaques could be explained by sex-biased dispersal . in gibbons, individuals of both sexes exhibit natal dispersal  <cit> , and although the dispersal age and distance may vary between females and males  <cit> , little data exist on the patterns exhibited by most gibbon species. with regard to demographic processes, tang et al.  <cit>  suggested that an unequal generation length between males and females may contribute to the difference in y and mtdna coalescence times in human populations while wilder et al.  <cit>  suggested the skew in human breeding ratio  may explain the more recent time to coalescence of human y chromosomes. the social and breeding systems of gibbons, although often comprising a breeding pair of adults and their offspring, also features small groups with multiple male or female adults, extrapair copulations, and extra pair paternity  <cit> .

the complexity and variability of the flexible mating strategies and sex-specific dispersal patterns in gibbons make it difficult to readily elucidate their effects on the divergence time estimates. if the pattern of molecular dating inferred from mtdna and y chromosome data is a true reflection of gibbon matrilineal and patrilineal histories, the delayed divergences occurred among paternal lineages might raise speculation of prolonged male-biased gene flow. it has been generally agreed that the genus hylobates originated on the southeast asia mainland  <cit> . the two northernmost distributed species  may have diverged first and then the southern species  migrated southward to the sundaland area  <cit> . during the dispersal, the hylobates maternal lineages gradually genetically differentiated from each other and then have diverged into six monophyletic lineages whereas the gene flow mediated through males might have lasted much longer than those through females. this prolonged gene flow may lead to slower fixation of species-specific variation on y chromosomes, and therefore may result in uncertainty of phylogeographic inferences concerning hylobates based upon y chromosome data.

molecular dating makes it possible to estimate the divergence times of populations and species, especially for species without adequate fossil record such as chimpanzees and gibbons  <cit> . our dating results of y chromosomes, together with mtdna estimates  <cit> , offer an opportunity to compare the time window of divergence events in gibbon evolution with inferred biogeographical events in the sundaic region, a topic that is outside the scope of the present study but well described recently  <cit> . however, we must emphasize that the dates of actual population or species divergences are necessarily more recent than dates of molecular divergences  <cit> .

monophylies of gibbon genera
the consequence of the relatively low level of sequence variation of the y chromosome amplicons is apparent in a comparison of the results of phylogenetic analysis of the y chromosome and mtgenome data. unlike the strongly supported branching pattern depicted by the mtgenome phylogeny  <cit> , our y chromosome phylogeny features some weakly supported nodes; however, most of the nodes in the tree were well-supported and provide information relevant to the history of gibbon paternal lineages . importantly, our y chromosome tree depicted each of the three sampled genera as monophyletic clades. the consistency of the genus level monophyly inferred from the y chromosome and mtdna data  <cit> , as well as from the 14 kb-length combined sequences of mtdna, y-linked and x-linked loci  <cit>  and the  <dig>  kb-length autosomal dna sequences  <cit> , is concordant with expectations based upon the marked differences among genera in chromosomal numbers and structures  <cit> . nonetheless, some cases of intergeneric hybridization in captivity have been documented and involve hylobates ×  nomascus <cit>  and hylobates ×  symphalangus <cit> . however, these hybrids were all induced by captive conditions and intergeneric hybrids never have been reported in the wild  <cit> . furthermore, the hybrid offspring are expected to be sterile due to the errors of meiotic pairing during gametogenesis  <cit> . based on the strongly supported genus level monophylies inferred from the y chromosome , mtdna  <cit>  and autosomal  <cit>  studies, we would suggest that the genetic differentiation at the genus level have been completed in gibbons and the dramatic chromosomal dissimilarity and rearrangements among genera have likely acted as major barriers driving the intergeneric divergences  <cit> .

y chromosome and mtdna phylogenies of hylobates species
compared to other gibbon genera, hylobates diverged within a relatively short period of time  <cit> . the divergence of the six hylobates species sampled here has been estimated to occur over an interval of only ~ <dig>  million years  <cit> . the low sequence variation of y chromosome loci produced the inferred phylogenetic trees with weak support values on the nodes . the resolution of trees based on the concatenated dataset showed relatively high resolution compared to the trees of individual amplicons but an unresolved trichotomy within hylobates remains . in our y chromosome tree, we depict h. muelleri as basal species of the genus hylobates, but this placement is inconsistent with other studies which place h. pileatus <cit> , h. moloch <cit>  or h. klossii <cit>  as the basal hylobates taxon with strong or weak supports. although the identity of the basal taxon is still debated, the grouping of four hylobates species with geographic distribution restricted to the sundaic inlands  has been consistently depicted in several studies  <cit> . moreover, as shown in our mtgenome tree of the  <dig> retrieved sequences , the gibbon phylogeny based on  <dig> mtgenome sequences recently suggested that the hylobates divergence started with two clades which are further divided into three species pairings: h. larh. pileatush. klossiih. moloch and h. agilish. muelleri, and thus the absence of a basal species in the hylobates phylogeny  <cit> . in sum, these results suggest that the sampling of large amounts of sequence variation, as was done using entire mtgenomes, is necessary to resolve divergence events within hylobates. while sequencing the y chromosome loci benefits the understanding of hylobates patrilineal history, the sequence variation of the loci sampled here was not sufficient for clarification of phylogenetic relationships among these rapidly diverged gibbon species.

gene flow between hylobates species
although hylobates species have been recognized as distinct taxa, three hybrid zones have nonetheless been described within hylobates <cit> . these occur between h. lar and h. pileatus in thailand, between h. lar and h. agilis in peninsular malaysia, and between h. albibarbis and h. muelleri on borneo  <cit> . of these zones, natural hybridization between h. lar and h. pileatus has been documented in khao yai national park of thailand where mating between representatives of the two species or their hybrids and backcross individuals were observed  <cit> . these hybrids were apparently fertile based on identification of the offspring of the first or second generation backcrosses according to pelage and song features  <cit> . though the currently reported natural hybrid offspring between h. lar and h. pileatus are limited to the narrow range of the contact zone  <cit> , the evidence of these field observations may imply the ongoing gene flow between these two species after their divergence. moreover, genetic information could be helpful to corroborate this inference of gene flow and genetic data based on the mtdna and y chromosome will benefit the detection of possible sex-mediated gene flow  <cit> . in the present study, we found one of the sampled h. pileatus  individuals falling within the h. lar clade in our y chromosome tree, but the mtgenome sequence of this individual was sorted into monophyletic clade of h. pileatus <cit> . possible explanations for this paraphyly of h. pileatus y chromosome were misleading inference due to our small sample size or incomplete lineage sorting in the short time since these two species had shared a polymorphic common ancestral population  <cit> . alternatively, the individual j <dig> having a h. pileatus mitochondrial genome but a h. lar y chromosome may represent an instance of recent male-mediated gene flow between h. lar and h. pileatus. information concerning this individual is extremely limited. individual j <dig> was described as h. pileatus when was collected in the 1980s and also was judged as a pure h. pileatus but not a f <dig> hybrid by two researchers familiar with gibbon morphological characteristics recently independently from several of its photographs . however, the unclear origin and unknown parentage of this captive individual makes it difficult to provide further information about gene flow.

potential gene flow between gibbon species is not surprising in light of what we know from genetic data about hybridization between closely related lineages in other apes: orangutans, gorillas, bonobos-chimpanzees, neanderthals-humans, and primates in general  <cit> . gibbons live in small groups and the social unit consists typically of a breeding pair, and immature presumptive offspring, although groups with multiple adults have been reported  <cit> . because both males and females typically leave their natal groups upon reaching maturity and establish new social groups  <cit> , there is the potential for both male and female-mediated gene flow across taxonomic boundaries. the natural hybridizations occurring between hylobates species at the present time  <cit>  motivates future investigation of what role gene flow may play in the evolutionary history of hylobates speciation, and insights are likely to be gained by sequencing of multiple autosomal loci in addition to mtdna and y chromosome sequences. particularly important would be the sampling of individuals of known geographic provenance and subspecies affinity. although feasible, the sampling of gibbons in the wild is challenging and often limited to the acquisition of fecal samples  <cit> , which tend to produce dna in low concentration and quality that can impede analyses, though new developments in sequencing technologies can improve the ability to use such samples  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
our study generated a total of over 165 kb sequence data of gibbon y chromosomes from  <dig> individuals representing  <dig> different species. these paternally inherited y chromosomal sequences confirm the monophyly of the respective gibbon genera as previously suggested using data from maternal mtdnas, biparental autosomal loci and chromosomal analyses  <cit> . furthermore, in comparison with mtdna analyses  <cit> , we show different branching patterns in the y chromosome phylogeny tree  and somewhat more recent estimates of y-chromosome divergence time . although the results from the small sample sizes of our study limit our interpretations of possible gene flow between hylobates species, we suggest that this gene flow may have occurred recently or be ongoing between closely distributed species, and suggest that the incorporation of autosomal data and a larger sample set is necessary for elucidating any such patterns of gene flow.

