BACKGROUND
phenotypic cell behaviors are strongly governed by various extracellular cues, such as binding of cell surface receptors to soluble  and insoluble  ligands. cue combinations can generate distinct cell behavioral responses by selectively inducing signal transduction pathway activation. it is rare, however, that a particular signal actuates only a single pathway; rather, the rule is for the activation of multiple divergent pathways that together hold potential to elicit numerous, often mutually exclusive, cellular responses. the cell phenotypic outcome may be considered to derive from a governing pattern of activation across the network comprising particular pathways in interconnected fashion. while the simplest hope might be to understand and manipulate cell behavior in terms of targeting an intervention at some "most important" molecular "switch", in reality there is a greater likelihood that such an intervention will impact the network as a whole much more broadly – and quite possibly with unexpected phenotypic outcome effects. thus, systems biology approaches are now being conceived for application to signaling network control of complex cell responses, in order to gain rationale capability for predicting the effects of targeted interventions  <cit> .

one vital cell functional behavior is that of motility induced by growth factors. this plays a key physiological role during organogenesis and wound healing. further, induced cell motility is dysregulated in cancers leading to cancer progression and metastasis  <cit> . thus targeting motility can be employed in the hope of limiting tumor dissemination  <cit> . but such targeting is a challenge as a ramifying network of signaling pathways lead to motility. while total inhibition of individual pathways leading to motility and subsequent invasiveness can be attained in vitro, this cannot be readily applied to the in vivo milieu, as inhibitor levels fluctuate due to pharmacodynamics. furthermore, as these signaling networks are interrelated, alterations in one will lead to changes in many others. thus, a clear delineation of the interplay of key proteins mediating cellular properties is crucial to future efforts aimed at drug discovery and individualized treatment  <cit> .

targeting growth factor-induced cell motility that drives tumor invasion is a challenge given its complexity. one approach towards understanding motility is to break it down into discrete and individual biophysical components  <cit> . the principal processes that are well studied include acquisition of cell directionality with a front and a rear end with lamellipodal protrusion  at the front, transcellular contractility , and detachment of cell membrane at the rear   <cit> . hence, productive migration ensues due to the repetitive cycling of these complex biophysical events in a temporally organized manner. it is evident that such a complex event is exhibited by a coordinated signal propagation and amplification/attenuation within existing intracellular proteomic networks. our goal is to define how these key signaling switches governing cell migration can be targeted for modifying this cellular behavior, all the while recognizing the quantitative adaptations of the other pathways that will compensate for the subtotal interventions of a single pathway.

computational modeling can compile and classify data sets in a quantitative manner and consequently provide testable predictions to extract vital information not readily apparent by conventional analytical techniques. in addition, mathematical models can expand data sets to proportions that can be used to make non-intuitive predictions related to biological responses  <cit> . we have previously offered  <cit>  a decision tree modeling approach for understanding cell migratory events based on measurements of activation status of key intracellular signaling proteins. this study was inspired by earlier observations from maheshwari et al  <cit>  that elucidated the biophysical components of fibroblast migration across a range of different extracellular cues. individual cellular biophysical processes including cell speed were measured across  <dig> different experimental conditions  concentrations and presence or absence of egf). the observations indicated that cells move fastest upon egf stimulation when the surface fibronectin concentration  is in the intermediate range whereas minimal motility was observed at the two extreme conditions. however, substratum fibronectin concentration  alters motility not just by altering surface adhesiveness but also by actively signaling through the integrins towards downstream intracellular cascades  <cit> . here, we have applied the methodology suggested in  <cit>  to new signaling protein data sets at  <dig> h and  <dig> h in addition to  <dig> min, in order to construct a more powerful decision tree model capable of a priori prediction. the computational analysis suggested that the activation status of the contractility-related molecular switch, myosin light chain , as key to migration speed. further, our results predicted that maximal speed would be achieved at intermediate levels of mlc activity. we test this prediction explicitly by modulating mlc activation status directly, finding successful experimental confirmation of a non-intuitive effect that an inhibitory pharmacological agent enhances migration speed – not only for the original model-foundation fibroblasts but also for an additional test case, breast tumor cells.

RESULTS
signaling protein data set across different surface fibronectin concentration in the presence of egf
we aimed to elucidate the relative contributions of different signaling proteins in mediating biophysical migratory processes of adherent cells across different extracellular conditions. as a model system, we chose a mouse fibroblast line for which biophysical data included cell speed, membrane protrusion activity, cell spread area, surface adhesion, and membrane retraction . our new study employed  <dig> nm of egf whereas the earlier maheshwari study used  <dig> nm, but both of these concentrations are saturating for the egf receptor level on these cells so can be assumed to be similar in their cellular effects. in addition, egf was added to the cells for periods of  <dig> minutes,  <dig> hour and  <dig> hours to capture the entire  activation spectrum of signaling proteins, during the phases of acute effects, the transition to productive motility, and during sustained motility  <cit> .

addition of egf activated egfr within minutes and this signal was transmitted downstream to signaling cascades measured . interestingly, the egfr activation profile mirrored that of erk within early time periods of egf stimulation . erk activation was robust immediately after addition of egf compared to quiesced cells and remained significantly increased for over an hour  with minimal change over different surface fibronectin concentrations . thus, erk functioned like a 'switch' turned on dependent mainly on egfr signaling. egfr signaling also activated plcγ and pkcδ, with their activation increasing linearly across increasing surface fn levels with resultant mlc activation downstream of pkcδ  <cit> . however, fibronectin does exert a significant influence on cell speed, as predicted  <cit> , biphasic with surface adhesiveness .

mlc activation begins within a few minutes of egf stimulation and reaches a plateau at about  <dig> hours; increases were still appreciable up to  <dig> hours after egf stimulus . interestingly, after  <dig> hour and longer exposure to egf, mlc activity was inversely biphasic across fibronectin, with lowest levels at intermediate fn concentration  . thus, using these experimental conditions, we captured important quantitative and temporal trends of molecular activations.

decision tree model of signaling proteins predicts a critical role of myosin light chain  based cell contractility in mediating maximal cell migratory response
a complex and well-orchestrated cellular response such as migration can only manifest from optimal quantitative activation/involvement of tens and hundreds of signaling proteins. accordingly, it is important to address the relative contributions of such protein clusters in order to define the most significant switches that can be altered for therapeutic purposes. we constructed decision trees using the above five key signaling proteins activated on different levels of fibronectin by egf that predicted the quantitative contribution of signaling proteins in dictating cell speed. the utility of decision trees is to identify prediction rules from the data and then illustrate them as a binary tree where each terminal node  corresponds to a class and other nodes represent measured variables. the decision trees obtained from three different egf treatments  yielded different classification efficiencies of observations from the training data set. the 5-minute decision tree accounted for approximately 70% of observations from the  <dig> independent validation data sets correctly , whereas the 1-hour decision tree had an explanatory power of greater than 75% . the 16-hour decision tree could account for only less than 60% of the observations from the validation data sets, however, so was eliminated for further consideration; this result was comforting given the expectation that signaling network activity should be upstream of the longer-term cell behavior. lastly, generating a decision tree of similar simplicity using data across the three time periods did not increase the predictive accuracy above that of the 1-hour tree . for our purposes of testing capability for a priori prediction of effects of signal inhibition, we focused on the 1-hour model because of its superior performance with the independent validation data sets.

contractile force production is enabled through the actin-myosin coupling upon activation of regulatory myosin light chains  <cit> . while each of the 'crucial molecules' that govern motility have been characterized, decision tree analysis is useful in predicting which of these molecules, and therefore which of the biophysical processes they controlled, were hierarchically important in governing motility. as such, since the 1-hour decision tree had the maximum classification accuracy, we utilized it to extract important predictions. interestingly, after egfr activation, mlc mediated contractility was the most crucial ingredient in mediating maximal motility. according to the predictions from the 1-hour decision tree , the cells move with highest speed when following egfr activation mlc phosphorylation is low; in training set 68% of the situations in which cells move with high speed can be explained with this rule alone. in other words, lowering mlc activation and resultant contractility to a subtotal level apparently leads to enhanced cell motility whereas total mlc inhibition can abrogate cell motility. while the effects of total mlc inhibition on cell motility have been intuitive and published by iwabu et al  <cit> , the biphasic dependence of cell migration  upon subtotal inhibition of mlc is non-intuitive and novel. moreover, it is an especially significant prediction for targeted therapeutics because it indicates that subtotal versus total abrogation of a key signaling pathway node can have drastically opposite cell responses.

subtotal inhibition of mlc activation increases cell speed
our model predicted that subtotal lowering of mlc activation would increase fibroblast cell speed. our experimental data set indicated that while cell speed showed a biphasic response, mlc activation was inversely biphasic across fibronectin concentration of the surfaces. thus, at the two extreme conditions, where surface fibronectin was either too low  or too high , cell migration speed was minimal. from our polynomial model, these two conditions corroborated with surface fn concentrations below  <dig>  μg/ml or greater than  <dig>  μg/ml. at these two conditions there is apparent dysregulation in the balance between the substratum adhesion strength versus contractility; i.e., despite high mlc activation in both conditions, there is too little substratum adhesion at  <dig>  μg/ml while it is in excess at  <dig> μg/ml  <cit> . thus, at  <dig>  μg/ml, contractility supersedes adhesion strength whereas this phenomenon is reversed at the condition of  <dig> μg/ml of surface fibronectin.

to test the model predictions under such conditions, we employed a well-characterized mlck inhibitor, ml- <dig>  to measure fibroblast migration speed under the same extracellular conditions . such a downstream inhibitor was chosen  because it is mlc kinase-specific and hence the resultant cellular responses can be attributed directly and specifically to mlc inhibition since pkcδ is involved in diverse cellular responses in addition to motility  <cit> . in addition, fibronectin ligandation can activate mlc-based contractility, likely independent of pkcδ. these considerations are likely reflected in the decision tree analysis wherein mlc lies hierarchically above pkcδ. we initially measured cell migration on fibronectin using the 'scratch assay' under a range of ml- <dig> concentrations within the culture medium containing saturating levels of egf. in parallel, immunoblotting analysis of activated mlc  showed a linear decrease in phosphorylated mlc levels with increasing ml- <dig> concentration . under the same conditions and as predicted by the decision tree model, lower ml- <dig> concentration  increased fibroblast migration compared to egf alone at fibronectin concentration of  <dig> and  <dig> μg/ml . greater inhibition led to the predicted decrease in motility. we validated this fibroblast migration speed using single cell tracking under the same experimental conditions. speed was measured as the distance traveled by an individual cell over a given period of time   <cit> . we found that a partially inhibitory ml- <dig> concentration in the presence of egf increased cell migration distance as well as speed relative to egf alone . this greater than 50% increase in individual cell speed accords with earlier studies that show that in vitro wound healing assays minimize increases in cell speed. the outcomes of these experiments determining the effect of partial reduction of mlc activation are in accordance with the predictions from our decision tree model.

subtotal inhibition of myosin light chain activity increases migration of cancer cells
to assess whether our predictions of hierarchical control could be extended to a different application of egf-induced cell motility behavior, we utilized the mda-mb- <dig> invasive human breast cancer cell lines and measured their migratory response across a range of mlc kinase  inhibition. these cells overexpress egf receptor and actively exhibit autocrine stimulatory loops that drive their migration and invasiveness  <cit> . in accordance with the findings in fibroblasts, migration of mda-mb- <dig> cells was substantially higher when the medium contained low concentration  of ml- <dig> as compared to diluent alone . the term 'low' or 'medium' in relation to ml- <dig> concentration is obtained from titrated inhibition of mlc under those concentrations and varies within different cell types; i.e. for nr6wt cells,  <dig> μm of ml- <dig> is high whereas the same is 'medium' for mda-mb- <dig> cells. in other words, the amount of mlc downregulation that is achieved by  <dig> μm in nr6wt cells is approximately similar to that achieved by  <dig> μm in mda-mb- <dig> cells. migration was completely lowered when ml- <dig> concentration completely abrogated mlc activity .

discussion and 
CONCLUSIONS
the vast majority of diseases are now appreciated to be "complex"; i.e., they arise from alterations within multiple molecular regulatory pathways. signaling pathways represent an especially critical domain for pathological dysregulation, as they contain forward- and reverse-feedback cascades that can act as signal amplifiers, transmitters, or distributors to a multitude of highly-connected protein nodes across numerous pathways within a network. thus, multiple signaling proteins with interactive activity profiles govern phenotypic cell behavioral phenomena underlying normal physiology and pathology. altering cell behaviors is difficult without a thorough understanding of how these signaling switches work in relation to each other. while enormous data sets are available for biological conditions, such data sets have not been integrated to provide information about the interlinked and branched signaling networks. therefore, targeted therapies often fail because cells utilize parallel and alternative pathways to mediate the necessary biological functions. identification and modulation of key signaling nexi from such complex networks can alter cell behaviors and yield favorable responses  <cit> .

we utilized here decision tree analysis to identify the crucial effectors of cell motility depending upon a set of extracellular cues. fibronectin was selected since nr6wt fibroblast express α5β <dig> integrin receptors that are actively involved in cell signaling during motility. also, these being adhesion receptors provide a counter-balance against the motogenic egf receptor that is overexpressed in these cell lines. such adhesion versus motility balance is present in vivo environments, where motility of cells is dictated by the cellular ecology, cell-substratum and cell-cell adhesion profile, extracellular matrix components along with a spectrum of soluble and matrix-embedded extracellular stimuli  <cit> . our model was based on the quantitative measurements of five signaling proteins that are activated downstream of the egfr and are known to mediate key biophysical events of motility. arguably, such a model could suffer from predictive power due to the possible exclusion of other key signaling proteins . however, our model achieved 75% accuracy for independent validation data sets, which is more than twice expected by random association. future experiments are aimed at incorporating other key signaling proteins within this foundational decision tree model.

our decision tree model clearly identified mlc-mediated contractility as a key regulatory biophysical event during egf induced motility. this does not mean, however, that disrupting other cellular events, such as plcγ-based lamellipodal protrusion, will not abrogate motility. the utility of a decision tree model is to predict the switches that upon disruption can produce highly significant responses and illustrate them as a hierarchical logic. decision trees represent non-linear depictions of contributory influencers and do not imply hierarchies or linkages between the constituent molecules or events. a decision tree model may also suggest molecules that need to be inhibited together to alter the cell phenotypic behavioral outcome. in our model that was based on 5-minute and 1-hour egf stimulation data set , contribution by erk was masked by similar activation profile observed with egfr. this does not mean that erk is not vital in motility since disrupting erk reduces migration  <cit>  but rather means that the contribution of erk activation was captured by measuring egfr activation and did not provide further information to the prediction in itself. further, the model predicted is in accordance with glading et al  <cit>  that motility requires functional erk activation since 90% of cells that migrated could be explained to operate using this rule alone . furthermore, even the 5-minute data set resulted in a predictor with 70% accuracy, although maximum motility is observed at least  <dig> to  <dig> hours after egf addition  <cit> . this may derive from the fact that 5-minute measurements can capture activation trends of important molecules such as erk that are indispensable for cell migration but are usually attenuated at  <dig> to  <dig> hours after egf stimulus when motility has started becoming a stable biophysical response. such transient activation is sufficient to elicit motility since erk transmits the signal downstream towards the final effectors of motility before attenuation. additionally, the model indicates that erk functions like an 'on-off' switch during motility: if erk  is active, the cells will move depending upon the profile of other signaling proteins but if erk is inactive, the motility is practically negligible since 90% of cells with minimal motility could be predicted by this rule alone . this also points to a new proposition: targeting mlc and erk together to retard cell migration.

our model, non-intuitively predicted that lowering mlc activation, but not totally abrogating it, can paradoxically increase cell speed. these predictions held true in the population based 'scratch assay' that assessed cell migration distance as well as single cell tracking that assessed migration speed, under different concentrations of mlckinase inhibitor, ml- <dig>  an especially important consequence is that of subtotal inhibition of mlckinase under higher fibronectin concentration of substratum increased cell speed  whereas under lower substratum adhesive conditions , further reduced it . motility is a function of optimum balance between cell-substratum adhesion versus cell contractility that enables cells to break some cell-substratum adhesions but form newer ones as the cell moves  <cit> . this is evident at intermediate fibronectin concentration of surfaces in our experiments  <cit> . the adhesion-contractility balance is impaired at the two extreme conditions where too little adhesion precludes a cell from generating sufficient adhesions for locomotion; hence further lowering of contractility even by subtotal inhibition of mlc further reduces motility. on the other hand, too much surface adhesiveness  maintains a cell in an unproductive situation due its inability to detach. this is because higher surface fibronectin promotes excessive integrin receptor engagement evenly on the surface rather than keeping it selective at focal adhesions. cell-substratum adhesiveness is governed by a combination of ligand concentration, receptor number or ligand-receptor affinity, with maximum motility  occurring at intermediate level of cell-substratum adhesion strength  <cit> . thus, a higher fn concentration results in a cell stuck to the surface with a high intrinsic contractile force. in such situations, any decrease in contractility can be predicted to increase cell motility by reinstating the adhesion versus contractility balance and enabling cell detachment, breakage of focal adhesions with formation of new ones. this was indeed confirmed by our initial experiments using 'scratch assay' and observed in single cell tracking experiments.

these findings have profound implications for therapy. identifying key nodes enables quantitative manipulations using pharmacologic methods for specifically desired cellular responses. it also points to the importance of how these signaling proteins are regulated stoichiometrically. our predictions held true even when applied to breast cancer cells, where subtotal inhibitory doses of ml- <dig> promoted cell migration. while a complete abrogation of mlc can be beneficial in limiting tumor cell motility and hence invasion, partial inhibition using lower pharmacological doses can paradoxically increase tumor cell motility and invasion leading to devastating consequences. this further points to the importance of applying newer modeling approaches to fully characterize the role of signaling cascades in mediating cellular behaviors. such understanding will enable precise therapeutic targeting of key signaling nodes and open the door to individualized 'patient-tailored therapy'  <cit> .

