BACKGROUND
following the completion of the human genome project it is anticipated that genome sequencing of an individual will be an aspect of routine treatment for a number of diseases and illnesses, truly ushering in the era of personalized medicine. however, the reality of implementing genome sequencing as a medical tool depends on the cost of sequencing technology  <cit> . the price tag on the human genome project was $ <dig>  billion, requiring the labor of hundreds of scientists, and a decade's worth of time  <cit> . by contrast, sequencing and analyzing a human genome can now be performed for under $ <dig>  in about four months' time with the labor of a few individuals  <cit> . this advance was made possible by progressing from traditional sanger sequencing methods to so-called "next-generation" methods that focused on miniaturization of the sequencing reactions, massive parallelization of data acquisition, and computational analysis. this not only resulted in increased sequencing speeds, but also significantly reduced the cost of genome sequencing  <cit> . however, in order to expand the use of genomic analysis to the clinic, price, quality, and speed must all be advanced further  <cit> .

sanger sequencing remains the gold standard today for accurate dna sequencing. sanger sequencing can reach read lengths of up to roughly  <dig>  base pairs, dwarfing most current next-generation methods that average fewer than  <dig> base pairs  <cit> . what next-generation methods accomplish is massive parallelization, resulting in throughputs that are orders of magnitude greater than sanger sequencing. however, the throughput gains come at a cost of a reduced read length  <cit> . therefore, sanger sequencing will remain an essential laboratory tool for years to come; although, for the purposes of large sequencing projects , next-generation methods are the new standard  <cit> .

there are multiple sequencing methods that are utilized in next-generation methods. the two most common can be broadly categorized as sequencing by synthesis   <cit>  and sequencing by ligation   <cit> . sbs is a method of sequencing which utilizes a dna polymerase enzyme to incorporate a single fluorescently labeled nucleotide that contains a reversible terminator. this allows a period of data acquisition before removal of the fluorophore, reversal of the terminator, and continuation of sequencing  <cit> . additionally, there are single molecule and real-time sbs approaches  <cit> , which, as their names imply, are performed without template amplification and sequenced in real-time using some indicator of nucleotide incorporation. in the present work, we have focused on increasing the read length of sbl.

sbl is a straightforward enzymatic method of sequencing dna. sbl uses known, universal sequences that flank an unknown genomic tag as anchor primer sites  <cit> . an anchor primer is hybridized to one of these known regions, and a ligatable end  is available. an oligo, called a query primer, is then ligated to the end of the anchor primer. the query primer is a mix of oligos that are degenerate for all positions except a single position that is being sequenced, which allows the sequencing of a single position based on the design of the query primer. after sequencing a single position, the query primer and anchor primer are stripped from the dna template, effectively resetting the sequencing. the process begins again, sequencing a different position by using a different query primer, and repeating until the entire sequence of the tag has been determined  <cit> . increased read length can be accomplished either by increasing the distance sbl can be performed in a single direction, or by incorporating additional universal regions for more anchor primer sites  <cit> .

currently, the number of sequential bases that sbl-based approaches can sequence is limited by loss of specificity of base pair hybridization at any distance away from the site of ligation. errors in the first six base pairs adjacent to the site of ligation are rare due to the destabilizing effect of mismatches. however, at a distance of about seven base pairs, the specificity of the sbl reaction is reduced . therefore it is not possible to simply use longer and longer query primers in order to increase sbl read lengths  <cit> .

in this manuscript, we describe a variation on sbl that utilizes a deoxyinosine in the query primer that can be cleaved by endonuclease v  <cit>  to increase the read length through successive cycles, which we refer to as cyclic sbl or csbl. our approach is conceptually similar to the abi solid method of sbl, which uses a chemical cleavage of the query primer to get extensions of read lengths. however, in contrast, our method utilizes an enzymatic cleavage using completely off-the-shelf reagents. deoxyinosine is a universal base  <cit>  that is recognized by endonuclease v, which cleaves between the 2nd and 3rd phosphodiester bond 3' from the deoxyinosine site  <cit> . cyclic sbl is thus identical to standard sbl except that there is a deoxyinosine incorporated in the query primers that is used for cleavage. therefore, after ligation of a query primer onto an anchor primer, one can use endonuclease v to cleave off the end of the query primer. this cleavage results in a ligatable end with a portion of the query primer is still ligated to the anchor primer, effectively lengthening the anchor primer for an sbl reaction to increase the sbl read length. the cycles of ligation and endonuclease v digestion can be repeated to further increase the read length. we have used this approach to extend the read length of sbl to thirteen base pairs in the 3' - 5' direction.

RESULTS
cyclic sbh
three cycles of csbl were performed, giving accurate signal for the first  <dig> positions of the test template. there was a slight increase in non-specific signal with each cycle, but the third cycle still had clearly correct signal with an acceptable signal to noise ratio .

we were unable to sequence the 14th position and beyond using the csbl strategy. in order to determine the possible cause of this, we performed a series of tests to explore whether the template dna had been digested by the endonuclease v treatment, since this seemed the most likely problem. after the beads had undergone csbl and stripping of the sequencing strand of dna, we hybridized a fluorescent probe to the 3' end of the dna loaded onto the beads and confirmed that the test template was still present on the bead.

we also ruled out the issue of secondary structure causing the 3' end of our test template to become inaccessible. we performed folding calculations using idtdna's oligo analyzer software  when constructing our test template specifically in order to avoid secondary-structure problems. calculations for melting temperatures  of secondary structures were performed assuming  <dig> mm na+ and  <dig> mm mg++. this simulated the highest folding tm at  <dig>  degrees, and the fold as modeled by the software was not located near the 14th base pair.

we additionally performed ligation at 50°c using taq dna ligase , which has a higher optimal temperature, but could not obtain the 14th position or further. we have been unsuccessful in identifying a definitive reason for the observed sequencing limit of  <dig> continuous bases. however, based on the results from figure  <dig>  our csbl strategy does consistently provide at least thirteen base-pair reads in the 3' - 5' direction, and can easily reach twenty-three bases with the addition of a flanking anchor primer site and 5' - 3' sequencing of  <dig> bases.

read length versus genome coverage
to demonstrate the feasibility of a csbl approach to genome sequencing and calculate gains in using csbl over traditional sbl methods, we utilized the sawtooth resequencing code developed at the university of new mexico . human genome coverage was simulated using mate-paired data ranging from twenty-six bases to  to forty bases .

a set of simulated mate-paired tags, each separated by a range of 300- <dig> bases, was created, ranging in size from  <dig> paired tags to  <dig> paired tags. a sufficient number of tags were computationally generated to simulate  <dig> × coverage. the tags were all generated from chromosome  <dig>  mapped back to the entire genome, and calculations of chromosome  <dig> coverage were performed. mapping tags back to the whole genome, instead of just chromosome  <dig>  provided a more realistic comparison to how human genome sequencing is typically performed  <cit> . tags that mapped to multiple locations, whether in the entire human genome or chromosome  <dig>  were discarded. a tag that maps uniquely or maps back to the reference genome in a single location provides useful data. if a tag maps uniquely to the reference sequence, the loci where it maps are said to be covered by that tag. for a given locus, the number of all such unique mappings when all tags are considered is called the depth of coverage for that locus. sawtooth uses a general hash index, perhaps the fastest data retrieval structure. although there are some limitations to general hash indexes, the nature of genomic data and the specialized task of mapping paired end reads to a reference genome, allows the use of hash indexes that circumvent these limitations.

the sawtooth mapping analysis yielded the results summarized in figures  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  figure  <dig> shows raw coverage of chromosome  <dig> as a function of tag length. increasing tag lengths from thirteen to twenty, or twenty-six to forty total bases while mate-paired, results in an increased coverage of chromosome  <dig> from 96% to  <dig> %. gains of coverage are significant when the read lengths are small, but suffer from diminishing returns as read length increases. also, as expected, depth of coverage increases with tag length .

next, we performed an analysis of how many times each tag mapped to the genome. one of the more significant benefits gained by increasing tag length from  <dig> to  <dig> bases is that far fewer tags must be discarded because they do not map uniquely . at a tag length of  <dig> bases, only  <dig> % of the tags are used, compared to  <dig> % at a tag length of  <dig>  thus effectively increasing throughput.

discussion
the csbl protocol described here is a variation on traditional sbl that can increase the read lengths by increasing the number of contiguous bases sequenced. implementation of the csbl approach could potentially increase reads to twenty-three base pairs, or forty-six total base pairs with a mate-paired constructed library. in this manuscript, we performed the sequencing on a test dna template rather than a genome library. however, we expect that any biases or mismatches in our csbl will be exactly the same as general sbl. these issues include increased mismatches in specific positions of the query primer  <cit> , or general drops in efficiency when dealing with a or t rich regions of the genome  <cit> . additionally, our experiments were performed on beads suspended in solution rather than on beads immobilized on a surface. therefore, to implement our sequencing strategy in a next generation sequencing platform, the methods would need to be optimized on immobilized beads.

our csbl strategy is not truly bi-directional. this is because endonuclease v cuts in the 3' direction relative to the deoxyinosine position. therefore, using endonuclease v for csbl in the 5' to 3' direction would result in the deoxyinosine remaining in the extended anchor primer. this would limit the number of csbl cycles in the 5' to 3' direction to two, as attempts to go further will recognize the first incorporated deoxyinosine and limit the extended reads in the 5' to 3' direction.

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, we have demonstrated that next-generation sequencing approaches applying the csbl variation will be able to produce longer read lengths relative to standard sbl. additionally, csbl is compatible with and further increases the sequence gains from methods that incorporate additional anchor primer sites. also, csbl can complement traditional sbs approaches as csbl can sequence in the 3' to 5' direction. this variation of traditional sbl approaches has useful applications in many next-generation sequencing methods that are in active use today.

