BACKGROUND
in contrast to neurons of the central nervous system, many adult peripheral neurons not only survive axotomy but also undergo axonal regeneration. within just a few hours, injured axons grow collaterals  and their growth cones respond to guidance cues in order to find an environment supportive of regeneration  <cit> . as well as being regarded as the beginning of the regenerative response, many sprouts form close associations with neighbouring ganglion neurons. these have been best described for sympathetic ganglion and primary sensory  neurons  <cit> . neurotrophic factors, released by target tissues and by glial cells in the vicinity of the injured neuron, are critical for this growth  <cit> . in sympathetic ganglia the neurotrophins, especially nerve growth factor, play this role after injury. neurotrophin-dependent regeneration is also associated with changes in expression of neurotrophin receptors, possibly caused by altered availability of ligand, and setting up a feedback loop in the regenerative process  <cit> .

the regenerative abilities of injured parasympathetic ganglion neurons are very poorly understood. this is partly because of technical difficulties in selectively injuring their axons, given that most parasympathetic neurons lie in small, dispersed ganglia that are closely associated with or even within their target tissues  <cit> . therefore, damage to many organs injures not only the axons but also the somata of parasympathetic ganglion neurons. another major factor has been the delay in identifying the neurotrophic factors for parasympathetic neurons. neurturin  belongs to a recently identified family of neurotrophic factors, which include glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor , ntn, artemin and persephin  <cit> . ntn and gdnf are important during the development  and/or maintenance of many cranial parasympathetic neurons. their actions vary with the stage of development and between different cranial ganglia  <cit> . the gdnf family ligands  act via a two-component receptor complex, a common signalling component, the ret receptor tyrosine kinase, and a glycosylphosphatidylinositol-anchored gfrα protein, which binds ligand with high affinity and determines specificity  <cit> . gdnf preferentially binds to gfrα <dig> and ntn to gfrα <dig>  although in vitro studies have suggested that each ligand may be able signal through alternative gfr mechanisms at higher concentrations  <cit> .

ntn is a neurotrophic factor for many pelvic cholinergic ganglion neurons, which are the sole source of parasympathetic innervation of the urogenital organs and a major source of extrinsic autonomic nerves supplying the lower bowel  <cit> . most or all of the pelvic organs express ntn  <cit>  and most adult cholinergic pelvic neurons express gfrα <dig>  <cit> . mice deficient in gfrα <dig> exhibit loss of cholinergic nerve terminals in some regions of the penis  <cit> . these mice, and neurturin knockout mice, also show a substantial decrease in cholinergic innervation of reproductive organ epithelia  <cit> . both deficits may indicate a failure of survival, arborisation or maintenance of these projections. recently, ntn has been shown to have multiple neurotrophic actions on adult rat pelvic parasympathetic ganglion neurons in vitro  <cit> . gdnf is also relevant to maintenance of penile innervation; many penile neurons express gfrα <dig> and retrogradely transport gdnf from the penis  <cit> .

pelvic autonomic neurons, especially parasympathetic neurons, are inadvertently axotomised during pelvic surgical procedures such as prostatectomy, hysterectomy, and bowel resections for cancer removal  <cit> . this commonly leads to post-operative urogenital problems such as erectile dysfunction and urinary incontinence. there is high demand for new regenerative strategies for these injured neurons. as an initial step in understanding the injury and regenerative processes in these neurons, we have investigated whether pelvic parasympathetic neurons undergo similar changes after axotomy as seen in adult sympathetic and dorsal root ganglia, by assessing structural changes in adult rat pelvic ganglia shortly after penile  nerve transection or crush. to provide further insight into the role of growth factors in the regenerative response we investigated the effects of axotomy on the neuronal expression of the ntn receptor, gfrα <dig>  and the gdnf receptor, gfrα <dig>  we chose to use immunohistochemical analysis for this component of the study as it allows changes in neuronal expression to be distinguished from those in non-neuronal cells, such as glia, and also allows expression to be monitored in different chemical classes of neurons or neurons retrogradely labelled from the penis. our results show profound structural changes in the pre- and postganglionic nerve pathways innervating the penis following penile nerve injury. we also identify an effect of axotomy on gfrα <dig> expression by injured neurons, suggesting an effect of injury on growth factor signalling.

RESULTS
axotomy of penile neurons causes structural changes in pelvic ganglia
we used two immunohistochemical markers to monitor changes in pelvic ganglion neurons after nerve injury. vip , is a marker for many parasympathetic ganglion neurons  <cit>  and is expressed by virtually all pelvic parasympathetic neurons innervating the penis  <cit> . th  is a marker of noradrenergic sympathetic pelvic ganglion neurons  <cit>  but is not expressed by any pelvic ganglion penis-projecting neurons  <cit> .

in the present study, vip neurons were distributed throughout the pelvic ganglion but were particularly prevalent near the dorsal region where the penile nerve exits, as described previously  <cit> . in pelvic ganglia from unlesioned animals, vip baskets were sparse and most are known to comprise projections from viscerofugal neurons of the lower bowel  <cit> . eight days after unilateral penile nerve axotomy , vip baskets were still sparse in the pelvic ganglia contralateral to the injury . in contrast, in the ipsilateral  ganglion many vip fibres  were present and were concentrated in the dorsal region near the exit of the penile nerve . many of these fibres appeared to form discrete "baskets" surrounding a subgroup of pelvic ganglion neurons . studies where the retrograde tracer, fluorogold, was injected into the penis seven days prior to nerve injury showed that many penis-projecting neurons were targeted by these injury-induced fibres . ipsilateral to the injury,  <dig>  ±  <dig> % of the fg-labelled neurons were targeted by these new fibres , whereas in the contralateral ganglion only  <dig>  ±  <dig> % of fg-labelled somata  were surrounded by vip baskets. vip fibre growth appeared very similar in ganglia following a crush injury to the penile nerve , but was not quantified. in rats more than 90% of retrogradely-labelled penile neurons in the pelvic ganglion express vip  <cit>  and we also observed that after either type of penile nerve injury most fg neurons continued to express vip .

preganglionic terminals in pelvic ganglia can be visualised by immunostaining for synaptic proteins  <cit> . following either penile nerve cut  or crush  injuries, there was a marked reduction in synaptophysin- or synapsin-immunoreactive varicosities surrounding somata in the region near the exit of the penile nerves, i.e. where penis-projecting neurons are prevalent . this suggests that postganglionic axotomy caused a loss of preganglionic terminals  in newly growing axon collaterals. double-staining immunofluorescence showed that the residual fibres expressing synaptic proteins did not co-express vip , indicating that the new axon collaterals initiated by the injury process are unlikely to make functional synapses by this time.

axotomy causes a decrease in gfrα <dig> but not gfrα <dig> expression in penis-projecting pelvic neurons
gfrα2-immunoreactivity was present in many neurons in the rat pelvic ganglion, as described previously  <cit> . this was evident as fine granular staining in the cytoplasm and occasionally staining of the plasma membrane. as described previously, most gfrα2-positive neurons were immunopositive for vip but rarely expressed th, and conversely the majority of vip pelvic neurons expressed gfrα <dig>  <cit> . quantitation of gfrα <dig> immunofluorescence intensity in fg neurons  and in th neurons from pelvic ganglia contralateral to the injury demonstrated this difference in expression level .

after axotomy, gfrα <dig> staining intensity decreased in many pelvic ganglion neurons ipsilateral to the injury . analysis of gfrα <dig> immunofluorescence intensity in fg neurons showed that axotomy caused a decrease in gfrα <dig> expression in injured neurons . there was no change in gfrα <dig> expression within th  neurons of the ipsilateral ganglion, none of which were labelled with fg. penile nerve transection would not be predicted to damage these neurons.

gfrα <dig> was more broadly expressed in pelvic ganglion neurons and expressed at similar levels in both vip and th neurons. quantitation of gfrα <dig> immunofluorescence intensity in fg neurons  and in th neurons from pelvic ganglia contralateral to the injury demonstrated this similarity in expression level . most neurons of each type showed low to moderate levels of gfrα1-immunoreactivity. gfrα <dig> immunostaining was present within the cytoplasm of neuronal somata, occasionally with some staining of the neuronal plasma membrane, glia and some fibres that may be axons or glial processes. axotomy had no effect on gfrα <dig> expression in fg neurons , but gfrα <dig> fluorescence intensity decreased slightly in th neurons, even though these neurons would not be injured by penile nerve transection . figure 4b also shows that there is no obvious difference between vip- positive and -negative neurons in gfrα <dig> fluorescence intensity.

discussion
we have examined the effects of axotomy on pelvic parasympathetic ganglion neurons and possible changes in growth factor receptor expression initiated by the injury. the penile nerve was chosen as it is a well-characterised projection from the pelvic ganglion, and is both easily identifiable and readily accessible for experimental intervention. it is also relevant to clinical problems associated with pelvic surgery  where penile axons are injured and the demand for regenerative therapies is high. our results show that axotomy causes sprouting within the pelvic ganglion, most likely from the axons of injured parasympathetic neurons. moreover, axotomy may trigger structural or chemical changes in preganglionic terminals innervating the damaged neurons. our results showed that following axotomy there is a decrease in gfrα <dig> but not gfrα <dig> expression in pelvic parasympathetic neurons, which may indicate a change in gfl signalling mechanisms at an early phase of the regenerative state.

the pelvic ganglion is unusual, not only because it contains intermingled populations of sympathetic and parasympathetic neurons, but also because many of its parasympathetic neurons lie distant from their target organs  <cit> . moreover, a minority of cholinergic pelvic neurons receive synaptic inputs from the lumbar cord, so strictly speaking should be referred to as sympathetic  <cit> . this is also the case for a minority of penis-projecting pelvic cholinergic neurons  <cit> , however in the present study we did not determine the source of spinal inputs for fg-labelled neurons. because most of these are likely to be parasympathetic  and in recognition of their similar chemical phenotype and likely growth factor dependency, for simplicity we have referred to them collectively as penile parasympathetic neurons.

in the present study we injured only one population of pelvic parasympathetic neurons but assessed the effects of injury on the broader population of parasympathetic neurons and on the neighbouring uninjured noradrenergic sympathetic populations. most of our results concur with structural and chemical changes being restricted to the injured parasympathetic population, although a small decrease in gfrα <dig> expression in sympathetic neurons after penile nerve transection suggests that some changes may occur more broadly in the ganglion. one possible mechanism for this is if axotomy alters glial secretions or glial coupling within the ganglion, allowing signalling between pelvic ganglion neurons. this has been described in sensory ganglia  <cit> .

penile nerve injury caused sprouting of vip neurons in the region of the ganglion closest to the injury site, resembling the sprouting seen in sympathetic ganglia after axotomy, and regarded as an early phase of the regenerative response  <cit> . the vast majority of rat pelvic ganglion neurons are adendritic or have only a few short fine dendrites  <cit> . therefore potential cellular targets of growing fibres are relatively easy to identify. following penile nerve lesion, vip fibres formed basket-like structures around pelvic ganglion neurons, many of which were injured . it is not known if these fibres are capable of forming functional synapses or are likely to be permanent, although eight days after injury did not yet express immunohistochemically detectable levels of synapsin or synaptophysin. aberrant connections are made within other injured ganglia and are thought to underlie prolonged problems with some visceral reflexes  <cit> . in the pelvic ganglion these changes could lead to profoundly altered connectivity and functionality in the penile erection reflex circuitry following axotomy. therefore, even if regeneration to the target occurs, other problems with reflexes may continue.

our immunohistochemical studies raise the possibility of axotomy triggering dramatic changes within preganglionic axons that synapse on penis-projecting neurons. the loss of synaptic protein immunoreactivity within these terminals may represent a chemical or structural change, or both. ultrastructural or electrophysiological methods are necessary to determine the functional nature of the deficit. there are various precedents for such a retrograde effect of neuronal injury. previous studies of sympathetic ganglia show retraction of dendrites and of preganglionic inputs after postganglionic axotomy, both of which reverse if postganglionic regeneration occurs  <cit> . there are also profound and at least partially reversible changes in synaptic transmission, nicotinic receptor expression and postganglionic membrane properties after axotomy  <cit> . it is important to determine the longer-term impact of penile nerve injury on lumbosacral spinal neurons. the reversibility of this change with penile nerve regeneration or compensatory growth from ipsilateral pathways should also be determined in order to understand the possible extent of recovery or manipulation required to facilitate recovery in this system.

a number of groups have shown that penile erection can return after injury, although after bilateral transection the success of reinnervation is low  <cit> . regeneration of the erectile response is much more successful after unilateral penile nerve lesion, indicating that it is largely due to compensatory sprouting of uninjured penile-projecting fibres. both types of growth, regeneration and compensatory, may be driven by and depend on neurotrophic factors, the most likely candidates being ntn and gdnf. ntn is synthesised by many urogenital tissues, including the penis  <cit>  and radioactively labelled ntn is transported retrogradely along penile axons  <cit> . indeed, axotomy of penis-projecting neurons causes a decrease in soma size  <cit> , consistent with reduced access to neurotrophic factors. however, ntn may also be secreted by glial cells within the ganglion or glia associated with the injured axon  <cit> . these would be the most likely sources of trophic factor after injuries where axons are disconnected from their target organs. another interesting possibility has been raised by a recent report of ntn expression by immune cells  <cit> .

gdnf  <cit>  and neurotrophin- <dig>  <cit>  are additional possible neurotrophic factors for penile parasympathetic neurons. in the present study all of the vip-immunoreactive and fg-labelled neurons expressed gfrα <dig>  gdnf can also prevent some of the axotomy-induced changes, including sprouting, in sensory neurons  <cit> , and has additive effects with ntn to rescue retinal ganglion neurons from axotomy-induced death  <cit> . it is possible that a combination of these growth factors acts in concert to promote regenerative responses in the penis-projecting neurons.

the present study showed that penile nerve axotomy consistently caused a decrease in gfrα <dig> expression in injured neurons but had no effect on gfrα <dig>  however our experiments do not exclude an effect on uninjured parasympathetic neurons. previous experiments on dorsal root ganglion neurons showed that after sciatic nerve injury there was a decrease in gfrα <dig> but an increase in gfrα <dig> expression, and that gdnf was able to prevent the change in gfrα <dig>  <cit> . the greater effect of injury on gfrα <dig> shown in these earlier studies may indicate a fundamental difference between sensory and parasympathetic ganglia in their injury responses or in their gfl availability within injured ganglia. it is also possible that in our experiments subtle changes occurred in gfrα <dig> expression that were not detected with our technique. our observation of a decrease in gfrα <dig> expression after axotomy does not necessarily preclude a role of ntn in axonal regeneration. for example, it is possible that ntn is involved in the initial extension of axons or collatorals following injury but then further axonal extension is ntn-independent. alternatively, even after down-regulation of gfrα <dig> there may still be sufficient receptor expression to mediate physiological maintenance and growth responses. ideally the expression of ntn and gfrα <dig> should be monitored or manipulated at various time points following injury. in addition, our studies relied on immunohistochemistry to assess changes in gfr expression. the strength of this approach is that it allows changes in neuronal expression to be determined . moreover, this approach has allowed us to selectively analyse retrogradely labelled and th-positive neurons. we acknowledge that there is unlikely to be a linear relationship between fluorescence intensity measurements and protein levels, nevertheless expression changes and the direction of those changes can be clearly identified following injury.

in contrast to gfrα <dig>  which was selectively expressed by parasympathetic neurons, gfrα <dig> was expressed similarly in sympathetic and parasympathetic neurons. our results indicate that axotomy had no effect on gfrα <dig> expression by pelvic parasympathetic neurons, although subtle changes may have occurred that were not measurable with our technique. however gfrα <dig> was down-regulated in sympathetic  neurons, even though these neurons do not project to the penis and therefore are unlikely to be injured. recent studies on regeneration of injured penile axons show that gap- <dig> expression is increased in some th-positive neurons on the contralateral  side  <cit> , suggesting a compensatory response. this may be related to their decrease in gfrα <dig> expression.

CONCLUSIONS
these studies show that there are profound changes within the pelvic ganglion after penile nerve injury. sprouting of injured postganglionic axons occurs concurrently with structural or chemical changes in preganglionic terminals. new growth of postganglionic axon collaterals within the ganglion raises the possibility of the formation of aberrant synaptic connections between injured and un-injured ganglion neurons. together these changes demonstrate a broader effect on the pelvic autonomic circuitry than simply loss of neuroeffector connections. these structural changes are accompanied by potential changes in neurotrophic factor signalling due to altered expression of receptors for members of the gdnf family. together our results advance understanding of the responses of pelvic autonomic nerve circuits to injury and may assist in designing strategies for promoting regeneration.

