BACKGROUND
mathematical modelling of large cellular networks is infeasible or impractical, mainly due to the large number of model states and parameters needed to describe these networks. this combinatorial complexity is particularly problematic for signal transduction networks. their components are often influenced by multiple interaction partners and/or modifications such as phosphorylations, which rapidly combine to a large number of possible configurations – or specific states – of each component. this makes it very difficult to build and parameterise large quantitative models, and computationally very costly to analyse them. however, mathematical analysis of these networks is an important tool for network validation and understanding, urging a development of methods that can be used even for large complex networks.

boolean modelling provides one of the few feasible approaches to whole-network modelling. while crude, boolean modelling can prove useful for an initial study of network properties and is often used when quantitative effects do not play a major role in the overall qualitative behaviour of a network. boolean models were invented for modelling of gene regulatory networks
 <cit> , and are now used in a variety of signalling systems
 <cit> . programs supporting boolean models enable the user to simulate a network, find attractors and perform several analyses on network properties. although there is software available to “fit” networks to measured data and to translate boolean models into simple ode systems
 <cit> , there is no simple software available for the step-by-step analysis and visualisation of boolean simulations on network graphs with simultaneous state space visualization. furthermore, the classical boolean modelling approach
 <cit>  does not distinguish between different downstream roles played by a single component activated in different contexts: it only models components  explicitly, neglecting to differentiate between specific modifications and interactions that provide context specific activity. that is, components are only active or inactive and an activating signal will result in a generic active state. this de-contextualisation of activation makes it impossible to address cross-talk or signal specificity, and makes the classical boolean approach unsuitable for modelling of interactions between pathways in large complex networks.

here, we address these shortcomings with a bipartite boolean modelling approach and supporting software, which integrates model generation, simulation and visualisation. we use a state oriented modelling approach with separate update rules based on reactions and contingencies that corresponds directly to the reaction-contingency  format
 <cit> . briefly, this is a network definition method which separates reaction and contingency information . the elemental reactions and their corresponding elemental states define the possible signalling events that can occur and the outcome of these events, respectively. importantly, different elemental states are not intrinsically mutually exclusive, but instead correspond to sets of specific states sharing a specific property. the contingencies define the contextual constraints on these reactions, i.e. which and how elemental states influence downstream elemental reactions. the bipartite boolean model has the same structure with separate update rules for reactions and for states: states are a function of reactions that produce or consume them, while reactions are functions of states via contingencies. this bipartite boolean modelling approach retains the contextual information on activation and distinguishes distinct signals passing through the same component. it is implemented and simulated in the classical synchronous boolean fashion, but retaining the exact network structure of the rxncon input. in this regard, our method goes into a similar direction as the recently published site-specific logical models proposed by
 <cit> . however, it does not require parameterisation whereas the site-specific logical models require threshold parameters on top of a fully parameterised rule based model. the issue of signal specificity in boolean networks has also been addressed by the recently published mechanistic boolean approach
 <cit> , which relies on specific state based description with the associated scaling issues due to the combinatorial complexity .

we integrate our approach into the rxncon framework to allow automatic model generation, and benchmark the method with the previously mapped map kinase network in yeast. finally, we demonstrate how this modelling approach can be integrated in the network definition process for validation purposes. taken together, we present a bipartite boolean modelling approach that retains contextual activation information, can be used without parameterisation, and largely avoids the combinatorial complexity. it also supports automatic model generation from existing network definitions and can therefore be used for iterative network building and validation.

RESULTS
the reaction-contingency information corresponds to a unique boolean model
we have previously shown that a rxncon network unambiguously defines a model structure and can be exported to sbml , rule based or agent based formats
 <cit> . while these models can be generated automatically, their behaviour relies heavily on parameter values that must be estimated from empirical data. here, we complement these export options with a new boolean format that is able to capture the qualitative network behaviour without any further parameterisation. the model structure mirrors the rxncon regulatory graph , and update rules are automatically derived as described in the methods section following a set of fixed export rules that define the boolean update functions. the bipartite boolean model is based on two sets of nodes with distinct update rules: reactions produce or consume states , and states determine if reactions are active via contingencies . this bipartite model structure, while not always necessary, has the advantage of simplifying data management for the boolean model. the model generation requires no further input and hence the rxncon information corresponds to a unique boolean model.

comparison to previous approaches
to show the differences between our approach of boolean model creation and classical boolean models we used a small example network . the standard translation of a biological process into the boolean formalism is phenomenological and based on a purely topological map of the system . it converts the boolean states of e.g. proteins ste <dig> and ste <dig> into the boolean state of protein ste <dig> and in turn to downstream proteins. compared to that, our approach  is more detailed and includes variables for each protein state and each reaction, i.e. ste <dig> binding ste <dig>  ste <dig> phosphorylating ste <dig> which act in combination on the downstream signal. our approach has the advantage of distinguishing between upstream signals that act on one component and translating it into different downstream activations. this higher specificity comes at the price of more variables and a larger state space, and therefore higher complexity. simulation results of the two models  clearly show the separation of the signals. the bipartite approach  leads to the activation of the correct output, while the classic approach  always activates both outputs as it is unable to keep the signals separate.

integrated model generation, simulation and visualisation
to further facilitate integration of model creation and validation, we extended the rxncon tool to simulate and visualise boolean models. these functions are accessible directly within the user interface of rxncon; using booleannet for simulation
 <cit>  and the biographer library for visualisation
 <cit> . the simulation interface visualises the network as an activity flow  diagram according to the systems biology graphical notation standard . the sbgn-af representation contains the reactions and states from the rxncon regulatory graph, but also includes the nodes for each of the network components themselves . it comes in two different styles: the default style visualises all influences according to the boolean update rules, while the alternative style mirrors the regulatory graph format. the regulatory graph is more easily accessible as it leaves out the influence of components on reactions and a large number of boolean operators. both styles include all components, reactions, states, inputs and outputs; which can be turned on or off individually to alter the initial state of the simulation. the network layout can be imported from file and/or edited manually. the possible state trajectories are calculated automatically and visualised within the simulator . the complete state space can only be calculated and visualised for small models, while for larger models the calculation is limited to states reachable from a limited set of starting states. the state space visualisation allows the user to access a specific state by simply selecting it, and also clearly identifies point and cyclic attractors. the modelling interface includes layout algorithms and the node positions can be saved to let previously existing nodes retain their positions as new nodes are added. hence, this extension provides support for iterative model generation, visualisation and simulation; facilitating integration of the three steps in the network reconstruction process. as we show below, the bipartite boolean simulation provides a powerful albeit qualitative validation tool. the iteration between model creation and qualitative model validation provides for quality assurance in the model creation process without the need of expensive – if not infeasible – parameterisation and quantitative simulation.

iterative model building and validation
the potentially most potent contribution of the integration of boolean model generation and simulation in the network definition framework is that it enables iterative model building and validation . the idealised work flow starts from an existing model or a small network reconstruction, which is translated into a bipartite boolean model and simulated to confirm that the current reconstruction can reproduce the network’s in vivo function qualitatively. ideally, the iteration uses small steps to immediately identify missing and/or erroneous features and to constantly keep the model consistent with in vivo observations. this can be done without any overhead due to boolean model creation, as the network definition format is identical to that used in all other rxncon features . the input used to create the bipartite boolean model can also be exported to the standard sbml format or to formats for rule or agent based modelling; as well as to a range of visual formats, including the sbgn formats. hence, the boolean analysis can easily be integrated as a validation step in a modelling effort aiming for a quantitative model without duplication of work.

validation and extension of the yeast map kinase network
we revisited the carefully curated map kinase network of baker’s yeast, saccharomyces cerevisiae <cit> , henceforth referred to as tiger network. this is a literature based network reconstruction that was performed in a controlled vocabulary supporting automatic model generation, but the network was never computationally analysed: the bipartite boolean model analysis presented here is the first analysis of a model derived from this network reconstruction. the simulation enabled us to test whether the information in the network reconstruction is sufficient to recreate the expected behaviour reflecting the existing biological knowledge about the system or not. the mapk network controls cell morphology, mating and mitosis in response to environmental perturbations and hormones. the high osmolarity glycerol  pathway responds to increased extracellular osmolarity and turgor loss via two branches converging on the map kinase kinase pbs <dig> . it is antagonistic to the protein kinase c  pathway, which among other stimuli responds to increased turgor . the mating  pathway is active in haploids, in which mating type specific receptors respond to pheromones from cells with the complementary mating type . less well characterised, the pseudohyphal differentiation  pathway is thought to regulate growth pattern in response to nutrient depletion. to assess the accuracy and completeness of this network curation, we generated the corresponding bipartite boolean model to determine which additional features would be needed to  capture the physiological behaviour of the network .

the network was translated into a bipartite boolean model assuming all contingencies were absolute, as boolean simulations cannot deal with quantitative modifiers . not surprisingly, we found that this network definition is insufficient to predict the network behaviour and proceeded to identify the missing features. most importantly, the tiger network contains  <dig> phosphorylation reactions that lack a corresponding dephosphorylation reaction. to address this, we added  <dig> hypothetical dephosphorylation reactions to make all phosphorylation states reversible . phosphorylation reactions are generally reversible, and the lack of the corresponding dephosphorylation reactions in the tiger network most likely corresponds to a gap in our knowledge rather than their absence in vivo. adding these highly plausible reactions without any assumptions on their regulation was enough to make the sln <dig> branch and hence the hog pathway functional, as measured by its ability to respond to turgor.

next, we turned our attention to the pkc pathway. it has been reported to respond to increasing osmolarity
 <cit> , although the sensing mechanism remains unclear. to make it turgor sensitive, we simply added a turgor requirement for the guanine nucleotide exchange  of rho <dig>  while mechanistically unsatisfactory, this is sufficient to make the pkc pathway responsive to turgor. importantly, no additional modifications are needed downstream for the signal to reach its targets.

the mat pathway required more complex adjustments, in part due to the interconnection with the hog and phd pathways. yeast mating only occurs between haploid yeast cells of complementary mating types; mata and matalpha. to simulate the well studied mata-cells, we removed the matalpha-cell specific mating receptor , and added a negative feedback loop on the pheromone response by allowing degradation of alpha factor only after gene induction of bar <dig>  next, we eliminated the interference from the only partially defined phd pathway. in the tiger network, the phd and mat pathway stimulates some of the same components, which was translated as absolute requirements hence blocking these reactions completely in the boolean model. to remove this block, we simply removed the influence of the phd pathway by removing the effect of four contingencies, and corrected the requirement for two others . finally, we removed the cooperative binding of the downstream transcription factors , and added the ubiquitination dependent degradation of the tec <dig> transcription factor, which was missing in the tiger network. in total, we needed to adjust only ten out of  <dig> contingencies, and add one reaction and one contingency to make our boolean model of the mat pathway work according to our current understanding.

we resolved the hog-mat crosstalk by removing one final contingency, namely the ability of ste <dig> recruitment of ste <dig> to block the interaction of ste <dig> and sho <dig>  while this block is likely true for each ste <dig> bound to ste <dig>  the amount of ste <dig> in the cell vastly exceeds that of ste <dig>  making a complete inhibition by stoichiometric binding impossible
 <cit> .

taken together, the main changes were addition of  <dig> new dephosphorylation reactions and turgor regulation of rho <dig>  the dephosphorylation reactions, at least, are likely to exist in vivo and reflect a clear bias in experimental evidence towards characterisation of kinases. additionally, we corrected the assumption of absolute effects of 4% of all contingencies, which is a surprisingly low number considering the strength of the assumptions that all quantitative regulatory effects can be considered to be functionally absolute requirements. we also added transcriptional induction of bar1
 <cit>  and tec <dig> degradation after ubiquitination
 <cit> . hence, apart from the dephosphorylation reactions and the turgor regulation of rho <dig>  the changes are either a relaxation of the assumption that all regulatory effects can be described as absolute, or based on empirical evidence; and overall very few. this shows that we are close to a functional understanding of the hog, pkc and mat pathways; that this functional understanding can be expressed within the rxncon formalism; and that the iterative model building and bipartite boolean simulation is a potent tool to identify and correct missing or erroneous features in even very large models.

CONCLUSIONS
we present a bipartite boolean modelling approach supported by automatic model generation, simulation and visualisation in the rxncon software. our boolean approach retains contextual activation information and avoids inappropriate pathway crosstalk, even when the signal passes through shared components. the boolean export and simulation complement the existing rxncon exports to sbml, rule based and agent-based models, and graphical formats such as the sbgn formats. furthermore, we demonstrate the use of boolean modelling for model validation and show how it can be integrated in the model construction process. the simple boolean model creation without further necessary information sets our approach apart from similar methods proposed before. we envisage this iterative process of model building and qualitative validation to be a useful tool in construction of network maps and even quantitative mathematical models.

