BACKGROUND
one of the most frequent malignancies in women worldwide is the uterine cervical carcinoma , both in incidence and mortality and the first cause of death among the mexican female population  <cit> . high-risk human papillomavirus  persistent infection is considered the most important risk factor associated with the development of this tumor  <cit> . although hpv is a mandatory cause for cc, it is not sufficient to trigger all the changes required for its development  <cit> .

a number of recent studies about gene expression profiles in in vitro hpv-infected cultured keratinocytes and from  clinical samples have provided an initial notion of the changes in gene expression induced by hpv and in early cc  <cit> . moreover, some studies have compared normal versus tumor-induced gene expression in cervical samples with the aim to identify potential tumor markers of clinical value  <cit> .

at present, there are reports of genes expressed by keratinocytes derived from a normal human epidermis and from mouse uterus carried out by serial analysis of gene expression   <cit> . however, no such study exists for human cervix. therefore, the aim of our study was to describe the first compendium of expressed genes in normal cervical epithelium, which is composed mainly by keratinocytes strongly influenced by hormones. to achieve this we used sage, which is capable of producing an accurate molecular picture of cervical tissue based on expressed genes, as the main methodology. as sage is not dependent on preexisting databases of expressed genes, it provides an unbiased view of gene expression profiles within the mrna populations  <cit> . sage allows the simultaneous quantitative and qualitative analysis of thousands of gene transcripts based on two principles: first,  <dig> mers are sufficient to uniquely identify 95% of cell transcripts  <cit> ; and second, cloning of these  <dig> bp tags serially with the insertion of a restriction enzyme recognition sequence as an anchor, the throughput is considerably increased. to obtain a catalog of expressed genes and their relative frequencies we performed database analysis to relate each tag to its corresponding gene  <cit> . as an important drawback of sage is that a large amount of messenger rna  is required, and our tissue supply was limited  we employed the microsage protocol in rna thereof  <cit> . the present report describes a partial transcriptome of a sample derived from normal cervical epithelium used to construct a sage library with  <dig>  sequenced tags.

RESULTS
sage library derived from one normal uterine ectocervical sample
our sage library was obtained from ectocervical tissue from a  <dig> year old healthy woman with active sexual life, not taking any hormonal therapy, nor any other drug that could potentially alter cervical physiology, we designated this as sage_cervix_normal_b_ <dig>  histological analysis of this sample by h&e revealed normal ectocervical tissue, approximately 80% epithelium and 20% stroma without evidence of glands. there were minimal inflammatory infiltrates in the periphery of the sample, considered normal for this type of tissue.

the sage library yielded  <dig>  sequenced tags, which was used to generate a table, which represents genes expressed in normal human cervix. for a complete list of the expressed genes, please visit the sagemap website,  <cit> . the derived catalog of expressed genes represents the first attempt to generate a comprehensive and profound analysis of the cervical epithelium expression profile. the wealth of information obtained allows detection of genes involved in normal epithelium physiology, as well as possible target genes of hpv infection. in general, tag frequency in a typical sage experiment follows a normal distribution  <cit> . table  <dig> summarizes the general statistics of this library. as seen there is a normal distribution, where only a limited number of tags were either highly expressed or at an extremely low frequency . tags with a frequency of  <dig> were not considered for quantitative purposes, because these are likely to represent artifacts of sequencing or of the sage procedure  <cit> .

acalculation of the frequency distributon of a given tag was based on total tags sequenced in library.

bsome genes have more than one tag, hence we search for individual genes in a database created in sql language.

c,dpercentage of tags or genes in frequency group.

ebased on fatigo datamining website  <cit> 

representativity of the data
according to zhang et al.  <cit> , a study of sage data mining analysis of  <dig>  tags, 75% of mrna consists of transcripts expressed at more than five copies per cell, and, in general, transcripts are expressed at a range from one to  <dig>  copies per cell. with this in mind, our ~ <dig> -tag library, represents 10% of the total tags analyzed by velculescu et al. the most frequently represented tag in the current report had a frequency of  <dig> . an estimate of such data indicates that this gene tag has an expression level of ~ <dig>  copies per cell, similar to what is observed in digital northerns of other top expressed tags in sage libraries . we have to keep in mind, however, that in certain tissues, some genes are expressed at much higher levels, such as growth hormone, with  <dig>  tpm in pituitary gland  <cit> . because sage analysis represents a qualitative and quantitative assay of messenger rna abundance not biased by cloning or polymerase chain reaction efficiency  <cit> , our data provide an estimate of the genes normally expressed by normal uterine cervix.

among the most frequently expressed tags in our library , some corresponded to ubiquitously expressed transcripts . the presence of this type of genes is a common result in sage experiments with an expected heterogeneity in their expression levels  <cit> , indicating a possible role as housekeeping genes . in a report velculescu et al., by means of data base analysis of sage libraries, found that ~ <dig>  genes are present in all normal or tumor tissues analyzed with over five copies per cell  <cit> . hence, this list of genes identified by data mining is termed minimal transcriptome , which represents genes constitutively expressed. in supplementary information of velculescu's work  <cit>  a search for the minimal transcriptome in our library, indicates >95% of housekeeping genes , further validating the cervical library.

atpm: tags per million; .

bbiological function obtained from source, at 

spectrum of genes expressed by normal cervical tissue
to obtain better knowledge of the functional categories of global gene expression profile, we employed the fatigo data mining website  <cit> . figure  <dig> shows the distribution of expressed genes by functional categories defined by the gene ontology consortium. as seen, the most frequent individual transcripts correspond to genes involved in maintenance and basic metabolism. on the other hand, genes corresponding to other processes such as cell growth regulation, morphogenesis, cell differentiation, or death were not as frequently expressed.

top expressed non-ubiquitous genes in normal cervical tissue mainly correspond to epithelial growth and differentiation
it was important to distinguish which non-ubiquitous genes were predominantly expressed in normal cervix. as seen in table  <dig>  genes related with epithelial differentiation and squamous architectural maintenance are abundantly represented in our library. these include s100a <dig>  s100a <dig>  and sprr <dig>  that belong to a complex of genes that are subject to coordinate regulation during keratinocyte differentiation. this complex has been called the epidermal differentiation complex  and is located on the 1q <dig> chromosome  <cit> . these genes share spatial and temporal expression and interrelated functions and are grouped in three related gene families: cornified envelope precursor proteins ; intermediate filament-associated proteins , and calcium binding proteins  . approximately  <dig> genes belonging to the edc are clustered together in a  <dig> mb region, from which there are  <dig> genes expressed the in cervical sage library .

atpm: tags per million.

end point rt-pcr analysis confirms expression of genes detected by sage
it was important to confirm the expression of some edc representative genes in different normal cervical tissues by a different technique. for this, we chose end point reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction  analysis. figure  <dig> shows the expression of five edc genes in hpv negative tissue samples with no histopathologic lesion. as expected, the majority of cases expressed these genes. however, there were some differences in the level of expression among the different normal samples. this could be due to the fact that samples were taken on different days of the menstrual cycle  or to unknown physiological differences among biological systems.

minor expression of fibroblast-related genes in cervical tissue
the gene expression catalog reported on here was obtained from a heterogeneous population of cells composed mainly of epithelial keratinocytes in dissimilar differentiation stages . nevertheless, these tissues also contain fibroblasts associated with connective, besides other minor cell populations. to know which genes are related to fibroblasts, we compared a sage library derived from neonatal foreskin primary fibroblasts . we found  <dig> gene tags shared by both libraries, which could due to the presence of fibroblasts in the cervix sage library . shared genes with known biological function reveal that processes as signal transduction, regulation of transcription and cell adhesion are mainly involved. we consider important to identify minor contributions to global gene expression profile in a heterogeneous cell population; however, it is important to note that unknown differences between cervical and neonatal foreskin fibroblasts could exist.

CONCLUSIONS
to our knowledge, this is the first effort to achieve a global profile of gene expression in normal cervical tissue. this was accomplished by means of a methodology that produced an accurate catalog of expressed genes in this tissue. analysis of gene expression revealed genes involved in keratinocyte differentiation. these genes have not been detected in cervical epithelium by traditional methodologies such as rt-pcr or in situ hybridization. although our sage library was derived from a single donor, the majority of samples analyzed expressed the genes selected, indicating reproducibility in human samples. sage methodology is a complex and expensive analysis mainly due to the great sequencing efforts required to achieve sage libraries. nevertheless, the overwhelming information derived from these justifies the effort and provides better knowledge of cervical biology and physiology. in a near future, it could also provide an insight of cervical physiology or hpv infection and in other pathologies affecting cervical tissue.

