BACKGROUND
parthenogenetic females have a two-fold advantage over sexual females because they produce only the fecund sex while sexual females produce also males. the elimination of sex is predicted whenever the two strategies compete unless there are factors that overcome this disadvantage. nevertheless, most of the higher animals reproduce sexually <cit> . this leads to a fundamental question which continues to puzzle evolutionary biologists: how is sex maintained? a large body of theories seek to explain the maintenance of sex  <cit> .

advantages of sexual reproduction arise from genetic recombination in cross-fertilisation, which purges deleterious mutation and increases genetic variability in the population  <cit> , enhancing adaptation in a changing environment. the idea that sexual reproduction and recombination may be favoured in changing environments has been the subject of several papers  <cit> . if a trait is subjected to stabilising selection, genetic variability introduces a genetic load as a consequence of the produced phenotypes that deviate from the optimum  <cit> . however, in a varying environment that exerts directional selection on a trait, genetic variability is essential because the response to selection will be proportional to the additive genetic variance in the population  <cit> . under the mutation accumulation theory, the persistence of asexual lineages is more problematic unless asexuals are able to minimise the competition with sexuals through high dispersal rates  <cit> .

under the red queen hypothesis for sex  <cit> , we should expect that heavy directional selection exerted by parasites can favour greater genetic variability in host populations. parasites are more likely to infect the most common genotypes while rare genotypes, produced by sexual females, may escape infection  <cit> . asexual reproduction is expected to be an unstable long term strategy since asexual females can only generate offspring with new genotypes through mutation.

the parasite hypothesis relies on several critical assumptions: the all-else-equal assumption and assumptions about the population structure and the genetic diversity of sexual and asexual populations  <cit> . the all-else-equal assumption  depends on: how the asexuals originate, the type of parthenogenesis, and the degree of polyploidy of the asexuals  <cit> . the difference in population genetic structure between competing sexuals and asexuals may determine difference in the parasite infection load. asexual hosts can persist in the long term, even in the presence of parasites, if they out-disperse their parasites  <cit> . the parasite hypothesis also assumes that sexual populations harbour higher levels of genetic diversity than asexual populations. the parasite hypothesis does not select for sex per se, but for diversity  <cit> . thus, high clonal diversity could erode any advantage of sex. howard and lively  <cit>  theoretically showed that host-parasite coevolution could lead to the accumulation of clones with different resistance genotypes and, in turn, to the elimination of sexual populations.

few systems with coexisting sexual and asexual competitors are known. so, comparisons of genetic diversity between coexisting sexual and asexual populations are scarce: e.g. the freshwater snails, potamopyrgus antipodarum  <cit>  and genus campeloma  <cit>  and the aphid rhopalosiphum padi  <cit> . additional comparisons are needed to further evaluate the parasite hypothesis for sex.

bag worm moths  provide an attractive case for investigating the coexistence of sexual and asexual reproduction in the same locations. in lepidoptera, parthenogenetic reproduction is very rare. however, in the family psychidae and especially among dahlica species, parthenogenesis seems to have evolved several times  <cit> . a parthenogenetic  and two sexual species  are common in finland and often coexist in the same habitat. in these small insects , adult females are always wingless, sessile and incapable of dispersing. males are always winged but their dispersing ability is very limited and they can only fly short distances . life cycle from egg to adult takes from one to two years, but the adults only live 3– <dig> days  <cit> . s. rupicolella and d. fennicella are very difficult to separate from each other and the only distinctive characters are their reproductive mode and genetic markers  <cit> . in central finland, these bag worm moth species occur patchily in wooded habitats. the proportion of sexually and parthenogenetically reproducing species varies between locales from the total absence of the sexual species to only their presence.

psychid larvae are often infected by at least two common species of hymenopteran parasitoids, e.g. orthizema spp.  <cit> . kumpulainen et al.  <cit>  found a strong positive correlation between parasite prevalence and the occurrence of sexual reproduction in finnish bag worm moth populations for three consecutive years. s. rupicolella  was more abundant where parasitoids were more common, whereas d. fennicella  was more common in localities where parasitoids were scarce or absent. this result could argue in favour of the parasite hypothesis for the maintenance of sex. in light of this previous result, we investigated the genetic variability and the population structure of three closely related species of bag worm moths, two strictly sexual  and one parthenogenetic  using isozyme variation.

RESULTS
genetic variability
thirteen loci from ten isozymes were detected . all were polymorphic in the two sexual species whereas twelve were polymorphic in the asexual species, with only fumaric acid  being monomorphic. no more than two bands were observed at all loci in the asexual d. fennicella, thus it is possible that this species is not tetraploid as are its relatives d. lichenella and d. triquetrella   <cit> . ewens-watterson  <cit>  and chakraborty's  <cit>  test of neutrality indicated that the polymorphism observed, at the scale investigated, can confidently be assumed to be neutral.

me2
* enzyme commission number

the estimates of genetic variability are shown in table  <dig>  sufficient sampling of all three species in each population for population genetic analyses was not possible. there were two reasons for this; 1) although all three species were present to some extent in each location, they were not all abundant, particularly d. fennicella, and 2) females of the sexual species s. rupicolella are difficult to separate from d. fennicella without observing their mating behaviour. while sexual females secrete pheromones to attract males and do not lay eggs before mating, parthenogenetic females lay eggs in their larval case immediately after hatching from pupa. species determination for sexual females was performed by experimental mating with a male. because the adults are very short lived, females can mated with males hatching only few days apart restricting the sample size.

allelic richness ranged from  <dig>  in d. fennicella to  <dig>  in d. charlottae. the expected heterozygosity  ranged from  <dig>  in d. fennicella to  <dig>  in d. charlottae. allele richness and gene diversity  were similar in the two sexual species . both sexual species harbour significantly higher allele richness and hs than the asexual species . as expected, the proportion of different genotypes  was close to  <dig> in the sexual populations and no differences were observed between the two species . the proportion of different clones  was also high in the asexual species, ranging from  <dig>  to  <dig> in the different populations; however it was significantly lower than in d. charlottae and almost significantly lower than in s. rupicolella . evenness was very similar among asexual populations and it was very close to  <dig> because of the high genotype diversity. significant deviation from the hardy-weinberg equilibrium was observed in most of the loci in all three species. in the sexual species, this deviation was due to heterozygote deficiency. the fis values, over all loci indicated a significant deficiency of heterozygotes in all populations of both sexual species with the exception of isosaari  and sippulanniemi  <dig>  populations of d. charlottae . in d. fennicella, instead, only two populations showed heterozygosity deficiency . a large variation in fis values was observed across all loci and populations in all three species with the exception of mdh <dig> for which no heterozygote individuals were ever observed . the exclusion of this locus, however, did not change any of our results.

null alleles might cause deviation from h-w proportion. the presence of null alleles at many of the loci analysed is strongly suggested by the significant correlation of the fis values between the two sexual species  and between d. charlottae and d. fennicella . calculation of the frequency of null alleles with the methods of brookfield  <cit>  indicate that null alleles are present in high frequencies in most of the loci in all three species .

population differentiation
the overall differentiation among populations, fst, was high and significantly different from zero in all three species , which is an indication of strong population structure. mean fst values across loci and the 95% confidence interval  are shown in figure  <dig>  the overall differentiation was significantly different in the three species. while the mean fst value of d. fennicella was not different from that of d. charlottae, it was significantly higher than that of s. rupicolella. hierarchical analyses of molecular variance  indicated that the two areas, jyväskylä and orimattila, did not differ from each other for both sexual species. in d. charlottae the percentage of variance among sites was  <dig> , p =  <dig> , while it was  <dig> , p <  <dig>  among populations within sites. in s. rupicolella the percentage of variance among sites was  <dig> , p =  <dig> , while it was  <dig> , p <  <dig>  among populations within sites. we did not observe isolation by distance  and the natural logarithm of the geographical distance) in any species at either of the sites: d. charlottae , s. rupicolella  and d. fennicella .

sixty five different genotypes were detected among the  <dig> samples of d. fennicella. only two of them were shared among different populations. one genotype was shared between sippulanniemi  <dig>  and huviniemi  while the other was shared between sippulanniemi  <dig>  and pihta . in both cases the two populations are geographically distant, and three populations in the same area  did not share any genotypes.

discussion
analysis of isozyme variation in three species of psychid moths revealed that the genetic diversity of the sexual species d. charlottae and s. rupicolella is higher than that of the asexual species d. fennicella. allele richness, gene and genotypic diversity were also higher in the sexual species than in the asexual species. higher genotype diversity in sexual than in asexual populations is most likely the logical result of recombination and was an expected result. the sexual populations also showed higher allele diversity, which is a more intriguing outcome  <cit> . one possible explanation for this difference is that the asexual lineage retained only a portion of the diversity of its sexual ancestor. alternatively, a lower per locus diversity in the asexual species could reflect lower population sizes compared to the sexual species. asexual d. fennicella is, in general, rarer than the sexual species, although it was the most abundant species in some locations. a lower population size is also suggested by the higher differentiation  among d. fennicella populations than among sexual populations.

surprisingly, parthenogenetic d. fennicella showed a considerable amount of genotype diversity, with  <dig> different genotypes detected among  <dig> individuals. this was in contrast with a previous analysis with allozyme markers which found limited diversity among samples of d. fennicella  <cit> . this amount of genotype diversity was higher than that recently observed in potamopyrgus snails  <cit>  and that reported in animals  and in plants  in the previous allozymes literature. interestingly, clonal lineages of d. fennicella were mostly restricted to single populations. only two genotypes were shared among distant populations. the lack of a common broadly adapted haplotype spread over different populations is in conflict with the hypothesis of the general-purpose-genotype  <cit> . instead, adaptation to different microclimates or other specific environmental conditions of these locales could explain the presence of many different genotypes, as suggested by vrijenhoek's  <cit>  frozen niche variation hypothesis. however, we found no significant differences in morphology, size and life-history characters between two different d. fennicella populations that would reflect ecological specialisation  <cit> . although several studies have reported allozymes as not neutral , in our study there were no indications that they deviate from neutrality, thus these markers are expected to be subjected more to drift than to selection. high genotypic diversity could indicate the presence of cryptic sex in the parthenogenetic species. although we cannot completely rule out this hypothesis, we never observed sex in the species. all parthenogenetic females lay eggs immediately after hatching from pupa and never show the characteristic behaviour of sexual females when they secrete pheromones to attract potential mates . moreover, mitochondrial sequences from sexual and asexual females clearly indicate these are two different species . this high genotypic diversity could also be explained by alternative types of parthenogenesis involving recombination, such as the automictic thelytoky  <cit> .

high clonal diversity and the observed distribution of different clones could be the result of a restricted dispersal capacity and the fragmentation of suitable habitats for these psychid moths. large differentiation was also observed among populations of diploid parthenogenetic d. triquetrella in the alps but not among tetraploid populations of the same species in finland  <cit> . the same pattern, however, could be explained by an extinction-colonisation process associated with a long persistence of the populations, which would explain the high intrapopulation diversity. large genetic differentiation among populations was also observed in both the sexual species, d. charlottae and s. rupicolella, which is consistent with their extremely low ability for active dispersal  and the patchy distribution of suitable habitats. nevertheless, psychid moths sometimes colonise new areas as suggested by the absence of d. charlottae in the isosaari population in  <dig> and its presence in  <dig> . most probably, dispersal between different populations is a relatively rare event taking place as passive aerial dispersal of very small larvae  <cit> . the large genetic differentiation among d. charlottae and s. rupicolella populations is in contrast with the data obtained for populations of sexual d. triquetrella in the alps by lokki et al <cit> , where allelic frequencies were described as homogeneous among populations, although rigorous tests of population differentiation were not carried out.

the observed proportion of heterozygotes was not different between the two sexual species d. charlottae and s. rupicolella  and was very similar to that previously observed in another sexual species d. triquetrella   <cit> . the level of heterozygosity was also highly similar among populations in both sexual species. d. charlottae and s. rupicolella, in contrast to d. triquetrella, were not in hw equilibrium for most of the loci and populations. heterozygote deficiency has been widely reported in allozyme surveys of natural populations of marine invertebrates  and also in fishes , amphibians and reptiles . alternative hypotheses have been advanced to explain such heterozygote deficiencies  <cit> . the high heterozygosity deficiency in all three species of bag worm moths could be explained by null alleles. the high variation across loci in fis values correlate among species and the methods of brookfield  <cit>  for the calculation of null alleles frequencies strongly suggest that most of the loci in the three species are affected by null alleles. most populations of sexual psychid moths are small, consisting of just  <dig> to  <dig> individuals. suitable forest patches are also small and isolated. moreover, females are apterous and unable to disperse. when sexual females emerge from pupae they quickly start to secrete pheromones to attract males. once emerged, males respond promptly to the female pheromones because they have a very short adult life span . therefore, copulation most likely occurs between emerging adults that are both spatially and temporally close. this could create substructured populations and a wahlund effect, both spatial and temporal, which could maintain a high number of alleles in the population but increase the homozygosity  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, the three different moth species show a similar population structure characterised by high genetic differentiation among populations and low dispersal. the parthenogenetic d. fennicella shows reduced genetic diversity compared to the sexual species but still shows high genotype diversity that could indicate the presence of cryptic sex. all species show a very high heterozygote deficiency due to the presence of null alleles at most of the loci or to the wahlund effect. dna markers certainly need to be investigated to determine the causes of such heterozygote deficiency shown by the allozymes.

