BACKGROUND
the difficulty in achieving lasting solutions to integration of diverse biological data continues to be a central problem in bioinformatics  <cit> . a number of technologies and systems have been developed that offer a variety of potential solutions to the data integration problem. these solutions differ by the architecture they adopt  and by the common "touch-points" used to integrate data   <cit> .

one major hurdle in current data integration efforts is the issue of naming and identity such that a variety of aliases exist for many of the same genes, proteins, and keywords. for example, goble et al. states: "the failure to address identity will be the most likely obstacle that will stop mashups, or any other technology or strategy, becoming an effective integration mechanism." another shortcoming of current data integration architectures is the high barrier of entry for contributions from both developers and the general research public. the data integration systems currently in existence either do not account for the general researcher contribution or are too difficult to utilize by non-specialists.

we have developed a data integration platform with an easy to use web interface that allows a broad variety of users to perform powerful comparative analysis between disparate datasets, including the use of boolean operations  and concatenated comparisons. an important element of this system is an integrated streamlined aliasing system to address the identifier problem by deciphering differing names of the same gene or protein. furthermore, we have created a simple yet flexible data model so that the barrier of entry for both developers and researchers is minimal. for example, researchers can easily create new datasets by cutting and pasting their data from spreadsheet tables, while developers will have direct access through our representational state transfer  style web services. finally, we have created a collaborative sharing system and a repository within booly so that users can retrieve new datasets while contributors can easily and securely share new content, allowing for fast creation and dissemination of entirely new databases with minimal effort.

we anticipate that the novel framework booly provides for storing and integrating biological databases, with contributions from general researchers and large data centers alike coupled with high-throughput on demand alias translations, will spark a new approach in data integration efforts. these advantages over existing data integration approaches should attract growing contributions from developers and the research community that spur important new discoveries.

overview
the booly data integration platform consists of a data warehouse, scripts to perform alias lookups and boolean operations, and a web interface for interaction from the user. in booly, data from gene ontology  <cit>  and pubmed are represented as individual datasets similar to a spreadsheet table consisting of rows and columns. each dataset can be merged with others to produce an output of the requested combination of boolean operations constrained against the identifiers and their aliases grouped by a similar fingerprint such as gene sequence or chemical formula . for example, one can merge a table of microarray data with a gene ontology dataset to attach annotation to previously unannotated microarray data. furthermore, heterogeneous identifiers from the datasets are resolved by the integrated alias lookups and applied accordingly.

implementation
one can perform a combination of boolean logic on multiple datasets by simply arranging datasets on our web interface in a manner akin to an algebra equation. we demonstrate the ability to perform powerful comparative analysis on the recently sequenced twelve drosophila genomes to identify genes lost in one species of the melanogaster subgroup .

combining diverse datasets can be difficult when consideration must be made to map identifiers to a uniform nomenclature. a number of aliasing services exist which perform the task of alias resolution   <cit> , however many require pre-existing knowledge of an identifier's source before translation can be performed while others lack the flexibility to allow for aliases beyond just genes and proteins . to resolve these shortcomings, we have implemented our own streamlined form of alias resolution and demonstrate an approximate running time performing a booly intersection with aliasing .

privacy and data integrity
the booly web application allows for users to create a secure personalized account for storage of datasets. in this manner, only the original owner of a data set will be able to view, modify, delete, and share their content. once a data set is shared either publicly or to other individuals, permission is granted for the recipients to receive a copy of the data set, thereby preserving the original data set's integrity. the security of individual accounts is consistent with today's current web standards and will continually see improvements as the technology advances.

RESULTS
we illustrate the power of booly's alias resolution while integrating multiple sources for the purpose of comparing mammalian and avian brain architecture. our analysis began with a homebrew dataset we curated from the allen institute brain atlas for genes that are selectively expressed at high levels in the mouse hippocampus  <cit> . the next step was to integrate this dataset with mouse gene ontology and blast  <cit>  hits of the mouse genome against other species such as the fish, chicken, and fruitfly. unfortunately, while the allen data and gene ontology had identifiers mapped to official mouse gene names, our blast data had identifiers mapped to ensembl  <cit>  sequence identifiers. using our aliasing tool, we overcame this commonly encountered problem and seamlessly integrated these datasets together, which resulted in the identification of an enriched set of genes that are expressed in a region of the avian brain believed to correspond to the mammalian hippocampus .

extensions and applications
in addition to the core functionalities we have previously described, booly can be extended further by creation of new applications. for example, we created an application that allows researchers to generate new blast datasets. another application allows the user to switch "touch points"   <cit> , which makes it possible to perform concatenated series of complex boolean comparisons. an example of the utility of this tool is to integrate known drosophila melanogaster genetic interaction networks with human diseases and existing uses of fda approved drugs to develop a new approach to identify new potential uses for drugs, sometimes referred to as drug repurposing .

additionally, we are in the process of creating an application programming interface  utilizing restful web services , which will allow developers an easy way to both import and retrieve data within booly.

discussion
the growing volume of biological and medical information deposited within disparate databases has created an organization and data integration dilemma within the research community. furthermore, new data not configuring to pre-existing specialized databases must await creation of new dedicated inclusive databases. we have created a novel tool, booly, as a web application that solves key problems impeding current data integration efforts. an important feature of this system is a real time alias translation system, which we used to successfully integrate datasets with heterogeneous identifiers between ensembl, gene symbols and gene ontology. secondly, we addressed the issue of the entry barrier by creating an easy to use contribution model for both developers and researchers. users are able to easily add datasets by copying and pasting their spreadsheet tables or by utilizing applications designed to create new booly datasets. lastly, we showed how booly could be used as an intermediate step in data mining and data integration through our implementation of the switching and chaining technique to change "touch points".

there are a myriad of other enabling applications for booly. for example, as personalized genomes become available to the general population, booly is poised to offer individuals space to house their biological and medical information such that it can also be used to compare with publicly available content in a safe and secure fashion. booly is also a resource for developers to add content without the obstacle of creating an online storage facility or the troublesome nature of alias resolution. booly thus offers a fundamentally new paradigm for storing, sharing, and integrating current and future health and biological content.

future directions
boolean modeling is a formal description of a broad array of biological phenomena, one notable example being gene regulation  <cit> . to this extent, many biological processes can be modeled by using boolean networks. booly offers an important functionality for system level studies as it greatly facilitates integration of diverse datasets from multiple experimental sources, providing the first step in gathering data into a boolean model. further development of algorithms that apply networking or clustering of touch points within the groupings created by booly could similarly lead to novel systems based hypotheses.

booly offers a uniform resource locator  based web api, allowing developers to easily integrate their applications and datasets into booly. in this manner, developers will be able to create their tool or database and use booly as a repository for the tool's output. for example, an external database may allow users to directly download all of the results from a search and place them directly into the user's booly account. the output generated from these tools, once placed inside booly, will inherit all its functionality, including the ability to easily share the data, to perform boolean logic comparisons with other data sets, and to resolve aliases.

an obvious concern for comprehensive databases, and thus for booly, is the issue of scalability. that is, how will booly deal with the exponential growth of data deposited into its systems? for example, as personalized genomes become a reality, as is currently being implemented in the  <dig> genomes initiative  <cit> , a means for an individual to store and explore this information will be highly desirable. we have created booly in such a way that as the data grows, additional machines can be introduced in parallel into the system for load balancing and data partitioning without adversely affecting the booly's efficiency  and reliability .

a large component of booly is the user contribution model as similarly applied to such online applications as wikipedia and more relevantly, wikigene  <cit> . however, a major concern is quality control of user-contributed data. our plan to address this dilemma is to implement a community based review system for each dataset . in this manner, users will be able to search and add datasets based on "collective intelligence", a key element of web  <dig>   <cit> .

with most if not all data integration platforms, there is a concern that data can quickly grow out of date and require updating. the goal for booly is to become a publically driven data repository reviewed and updated by its community. to aid the community in their efforts, we hope to implement a notification system such that when a new dataset is available, subscribers to the old dataset will be notified and allowed to upgrade or add the new dataset. in the meantime, we have created a forum message board so that contributors can disseminate update information to the community.

finally, there is a growing movement in the life sciences to develop tools for semantic integration by way of the resource description framework  model  <cit> . semantic integration approaches involve establishing complex relationships between objects, which can then be used to classify them or extract novel information regarding their behaviours. the goal of booly is more modest, to establish identity between objects and to use this information to integrate data in which distinct names refer to the same objects. we felt our initial challenge was to help researchers and developers get their data quickly onto the web and to address the identity problem directly. however, to aid in interoperability with other data integration efforts that utilize rdf and other semantic integration approaches, we plan to provide export of data into a structured model such as rdf. it is our hope that the streamlined but efficient and user friendly comparative tools offered by booly attract a broad base of users who are confronted by the simple but vexing problem of integrating data from a diverse set of spread sheets. such users once adept at using booly would presumably be primed to expand their sphere of comparison by trying out new tools such as those offered by semantic integration approaches.

CONCLUSIONS
booly offers a new platform for the creation, storage, and integration of both personalized and public biological databases. as more applications are developed around the booly platform, we anticipate these additions will further enhance the user experience. booly presents a great opportunity to engage the research community in sharing data and adding combinatorial depth to potential queries. such advances as offered by booly should greatly aid researchers in formulating new questions that lead to novel discoveries in the laboratory.

availability and requirements
booly is freely accessible via most javascript enabled web browsers at http://booly.ucsd.edu.

