BACKGROUND
promyelocytic leukemia protein  is a tumor suppressor protein, originally identified as a fusion partner of the retinoid acid receptor  gene characteristic of chromosomal translocation involved in acute promyelocytic leukemia . pml is enriched in distinct nuclear sub-domains known as pml nuclear bodies   <cit> . hitherto, more than  <dig> proteins have been reported to constitutively or transiently reside in pml nbs. recent studies suggest that pml is involved in the regulation of various cellular processes including transcription, cell cycle, post-translational modification, anti-viral responses, dna damage repair, apoptosis, and cell adhesion in response to extracellular stimuli  <cit> . in addition, studies showed that pml protein accumulation is down-regulated in many cancer types suggesting that pml is a tumor suppressor  <cit> . a tissue profiling study showed that pml is highly expressed in endothelial cells  and tissues with inflammation  <cit> , but its physiological significance in these contexts remains elusive.

the tumor necrosis factor alpha , secreted by activated immune cells including macrophages during inflammation, elicits a cascade of cellular signaling events in ecs  <cit> , such as up-regulation of leukocyte adhesion molecules and increased endothelial permeability. tnfα was initially described as being capable of shrinking tumor size, however later studies suggested that it may stimulate tumor growth by promoting inflammation  <cit> . thus, pharmaceutical application of tnfα or tnfα inhibitors in cancer treatment remains debatable  <cit> . to this end, we have recently investigated the role of pml on angiogenesis in tnfα-stimulated ecs and showed that tnfα induces pml expression and pml is important for tnfα-suppressed angiogenesis  <cit> . these observations suggest that there may be complex relationship between pml and tnfα signaling.

to further dissect the role of pml in ecs and especially in the presence of tnfα signaling, we took an unbiased systematic approach. we knocked down pml by two independent sirnas with a non-targeting sirna as control in the presence or absence of a mild dose of tnfα in primary human umbilical vein endothelial cells  and carried out gene expression microarray studies. following identification of the significantly altered genes, we performed extensive functional analysis and identified an intricate pattern of crosstalk between pml and tnfα signaling.

RESULTS
identification of pml target genes, tnfα responsive genes and synergistically regulated genes by pml and tnfα
to identify potential pml target genes, we transiently transfected pml targeting sirnas into huvecs to knock down pml expression prior to the microarray gene expression analyses. because sirnas can have off-target effects, we used two independent pml sirnas  targeting different regions of pml transcripts with duplicate samples to help eliminate false target genes. we considered a gene to be significantly altered in responsive to pml knockdown if was identified by both sirnas. thus, using > <dig>  fold and a q <  <dig>  as cut-off parameters, we identified  <dig> genes up-regulated  and  <dig> genes down-regulated  as a result of pml knockdown in the absence of tnfα treatment in huvecs . using similar parameters, we also identified genes whose expression is significantly altered following  <dig> h of tnfα treatment in wild type cells . our data show that totally  <dig> genes were up-regulated, whereas  <dig> genes were down-regulated in response to tnfα treatment . because tnfα potently induces pml expression  <cit> , we also carried out microarray studies in which pml was knocked down with or without tnfα treatment. when pml was knocked down, tnfα induced  <dig> genes and repressed  <dig> genes . among these genes,  <dig>  and  <dig>  are common tnfα responsive genes, regardless of whether pml was present or not . we identified  <dig>  and  <dig>  genes that were responsive to pml knockdown only in the presence of tnfα . because of the factorial design of our experiments, we were able to estimate the interaction effects of pml knockdown and tnfα treatment in huvecs that is designated as sip∗tnfα and calculated as sip∗t = − or equally sip∗t = −. similarly as in figure 1a, we identified  <dig> such genes by two different sirnas , of which  <dig> genes positively responded while  <dig> genes showed negative interaction effect following pml knockdown and tnfα treatment . full gene lists are shown in additional file  <dig> 

gene ontology analysis of pml target genes and tnfα responsive genes
using the genes described in figure  <dig>  we carried out functional ontology analyses and identified the biological functions significantly affected  by pml knockdown and tnfα treatment through hypergeometric tests using the gene ontology  . we found that pml knockdown and tnfα treatment affected a considerable number of common biological functions. the top  <dig> gene ontology biological processes  commonly affected by both treatments are listed in table  <dig>  specifically both treatments affected various metabolic processes, cell communication, signal transduction, multiple biosynthetic processes, gene expression, transport, and multicellular organismal development. full lists of significantly affected gene ontology information are found in additional file  <dig> 

canonical pathway associated with pml target genes and tnfα responsive genes
we further analyzed significantly altered  canonical pathways defined by pml knockdown and tnfα treatment using kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes  database . the top  <dig>  are shown in tables  <dig> and  <dig>  consistent with the go.bp analyses, we found that the largest category of genes  affected by pml knockdown are those involved in metabolic pathways . pml is known as a tumor suppressor, and indeed, we identified pathways in cancer as the second largest affected category of genes  following its knockdown. similarly, tnfα treatment showed that metabolic pathways and pathways in cancer were the top two affected pathways . our pathway analysis also suggested that pml knockdown and tnfα treatment commonly affected pathways involved in cell communication biological process including cytokine-cytokine receptor interaction, focal adhesion, regulation of actin cytoskeleton, endocytosis, tight junction, chemokine signaling pathway, cell adhesion molecules , leukocyte transendothelial migration, and axon guidance .

implication of pml and tnfα signaling in diseases
pml is a well-defined tumor suppressor; however its role in diseases other than cancers has yet to be determined. in addition, it is well known that endothelium actively participates in cardiovascular and chronic inflammation-related diseases. because pml is highly expressed in ecs and inflamed tissues, we suspect that pml plays a significant role in regulating the ec physiology in the pathogenesis of ec-related diseases. therefore, we analyzed the significantly altered genes using disease ontology lite  database  <cit> . we found that pml target genes are significantly associated  with a variety of human diseases . consistent with its known tumor suppressor role, we identified cancer as the largest category of disease associated with pml. specifically, we identified cancers of multiple organ origins to be associated with pml expression including breast, colon, prostate, leukemia, embryoma, liver, lung, brain, melanoma, endometriosis, stomach, and ovarian cancers. we also found pml to be linked to cancer metastasis as identified by an association with neoplasm metastasis. interestingly, pml appears to be involved in several metabolism-related diseases and cardiovascular diseases such as diabetes mellitus, obesity, atherosclerosis and hypertension. pml is also associated with inflammation and auto-immune related diseases including rheumatoid arthritis, atherosclerosis, obesity, polyarthritis, asthma, systemic scleroderma, ulcerative colitis, dermatitis. our data also show that pml is associated with neural system diseases including alzheimer’s diseases, schizophrenia and parkinson’s diseases and embryonic development disease . consistent with results from go.bp and kegg analyses showing that pml and tnfα signaling are involved in a similar spectrum of biological processes and canonical pathways , tnfα responsive genes are also significantly associated  with these diseases.

pml and class i major histological complex human leukocyte antigens
among the significantly affected genes, we found that a group of class i major histological complex  human leukocyte antigens  were down-regulated by pml knockdown, including hla-a , hla-b , hla-c , hla-f , and hla-g . interestingly, this cluster of genes is located on chromosome 6p <dig> , a region previously linked to leukemia and other auto-immune diseases  <cit> . other disease-associated chromosomal regions including 2q <dig> – <dig> , 6p <dig> – <dig> , 12q13– <dig>  12q <dig> – <dig>  and 20q <dig> – <dig> also contains pml-knockdown responsive genes and summarized in table  <dig>  these regions have been previously linked to a variety of human health conditions including multiple cancers, chronic inflammatory diseases, auto-immune diseases, diabetes, cardiovascular disease and developmental defects . however, the link between pml-regulated gene expression and the disease-associated chromosomal abnormalities is currently unclear.

crosstalk between pml knockdown and tnfα signaling
given that tnfα potently induces pml expression, we anticipated that tnfα and pml would regulate expression of a common sets of genes and not just common pathways. indeed, our microarray gene expression analyses show that this is the case. intriguingly, we also identified a group of genes  whose expressions were interactively altered when pml was knocked down in the presence of tnfα treatment . the top  <dig> such genes and their fold changes are listed in table  <dig>  gene ontology information analyses revealed that these genes are involved in kegg pathways including metabolic pathways, cell cycle, p <dig> signaling pathway, hematopoietic cell lineage, apoptosis and immune response-related kegg pathways such as cytokine-cytokine receptor interaction, graft-versus-host disease and type i diabetes mellitus .

knockdown of pml promotes tnfα-induced inflammatory response
tnfα is a cytokine that mediates inflammatory response during wounding, chronic inflammation, and bacterial infection. our findings suggesting that pml is associated with inflammation and auto-immune related diseases implies that pml may actively participated in tnfα-mediated effects in the inflammatory response. to test this, we utilized a cluster analysis combined with the gene functional ontology information  to examine potential crosstalk between pml and tnfα. we identified two clusters of genes significantly associated  with inflammation-related ontology information . these genes showed a positive synergistic effect between pml knockdown and tnfα treatment .

we found that these two clusters of genes are mostly induced by tnfα treatment . the nf-κb pathway is a well-established early activation pathway downstream of tnfα signaling during the inflammatory response. both of these two clusters contain a large number of genes that are nf-κb activators or target genes. for example, the tnfα induced genes, apol <dig>  tnfaip <dig>  traf <dig> are activators of nf-κb signaling while many other genes are known nf-κb target genes, such as ccl <dig>  ccl <dig>  cd <dig>  csf <dig>  csf <dig>  icam <dig>  il <dig>  il1a, il <dig>  il <dig>  irf <dig>  irf <dig>  mmp <dig>  nfkb1a, nfkb1e, nfkb1z, nfkb <dig>  pdgfb, ptgs <dig>  relb, sele, sod <dig>  tap <dig>  tnc, tnfaip <dig>  tnfaip <dig>  tnfrsf <dig>  tnfrsf11b. most interestingly, we found that pml is required for the normal expression of these tnfα-induced genes  as knockdown of pml decreased expression of these genes. since members of tnf superfamily and tnf receptor superfamily play pivotal roles in the activation of nf-κb pathway, we examined the expression of these genes in the microarray and found that pml knockdown did not significantly affect the expression of the tnf gene or its superfamily members tnfsf7– <dig>  11– <dig>  and  <dig>  although knockdown of pml did affect expression of tnfsf <dig>  and tnfsf <dig> . we also found that knockdown of pml up-regulated a group of tnf receptor superfamily  members, including tnfrsf1b , tnfrsf10b , tnfrsf10d  and tnfrsf <dig> , and down-regulated tnfrsf10a . other tnfrsf members 1a,  <dig>  6b, 7– <dig>  10a, 10c, 11a, 11b, 12a, 13b, 13c,  <dig>  17– <dig>  19l, and  <dig> were not significantly affected by pml knockdown.

to determine the effects of pml knockdown in tnfα signaling, we compared the tnfα effects without and with pml knockdown. we found that the tnfα-induced genes were further up-regulated when pml was knocked down . we also examined the effects of tnfα when pml was knocked down and found that tnfα treatment relieved or even reversed the suppression of these clusters of genes by pml knockdown . therefore, we conclude that these inflammatory response-related genes are interactively regulated by pml and tnfα in a positive manner  and that pml may have effects on nf-κb activity in tnfα-treated huvecs.

pml and tnfα signaling interactively regulates cell adhesion in ecs
our go.bp and kegg analyses suggest that pml knockdown affected cell communication processes and the related kegg pathways. in-depth analyses of the genes altered by pml knockdown showed that pml knockdown interferes with a molecular network of genes involved in the cell adhesion, cytoskeleton, and signaling transduction by extracellular cytokines/chemokines . because tnfα is known to activate leukocyte adhesion to endothelial cells during inflammation, we suspect that pml target genes and tnfα responsive genes are involved in a coregulatory network of cell adhesion. indeed, by hierarchial cluster analysis we found that an array of genes  involved in cell adhesion pathways show interaction patterns following pml knockdown and tnfα treatment . we also identified potential regulatory mechanisms of cell adhesion by pml and tnfα signaling through analysis of the sub-clusters of genes in the dendritic tree identified by the hierarchial cluster.

we identified  <dig> sub-clusters of genes that generally represent  <dig> putative mechanisms by which pml and tnfα regulate huvec adhesion pathways. in figure 5a, the sub-cluster annotated by the blue side bar represents a group of genes that were mostly suppressed by pml . however, tnfα treatment had a mixed effects  on these genes. the interaction effects  mildly showed green, which indicates that tnfα treatment had negative effects on pml knockdown-induced gene expression. the sub-cluster annotated by the red bar shows a group of genes whose normal expression required pml . tnfα treatment suppressed most of these genes . for these genes, there was little crosstalk . the sub-cluster annotated by the green bar are genes mostly induced by tnfα treatment  but not potently affected by pml knockdown , except a small fraction of genes that require pml for their normal expression . although this small fraction of genes was not very responsive to tnfα treatment alone , tnfα potently induced the expression of these genes after pml was knocked down . the final sub-cluster annotated by the purple side bar are genes induced by tnfα  but suppressed by pml knockdown . some of these genes showed positive interaction  and others showed negative interaction effects  by pml knockdown and tnfα treatment. taken together, our data indicate that pml and tnfα regulate huvec cell adhesion in huvec through in an interactive manner by regulating overlapping and distinct groups of genes.

one of the key events during leukocyte transendothelial migration is cell adhesion, which we identified as one of the significantly affected pathways by pml knockdown and tnfα treatment . during the initial stage of leukocyte transendothelial migration, the endothelial cells express cell adhesion molecules to adhere the circulating leukocytes in response to inflammatory cytokines, such as tnfα. to determine whether pml regulates cell adhesion in this process, we carried out an in vitro cell adhesion assay . we knocked down pml by two different sirnas in huvecs followed by treatment with vehicle or tnfα for  <dig> h. a suspension of fluorescence-labeled human leukocyte u <dig> cells were added to a monolayer of huvecs for  <dig> min. after extensive washing, the adherent cells were quantified by reading the fluorescence signal retained by huvecs. we found that knockdown of pml modestly increased the u <dig> adherence to huvecs in the absence of tnfα treatment . as expected, tnfα potently promoted u <dig> cell adhesion to huvecs as shown in control sirna transfected cells . interestingly, knockdown of pml significantly decreased tnfα-mediated induction of cell adhesion . taken together, our data demonstrate that pml and tnfα regulates cell adhesion in an interactive manner and that pml is required for maximal tnfα-induced leukocyte adhesion to huvecs.

discussion
the off-target effects of sirna
sirna is a commonly used approach to transiently knock down expression from gene of interests to investigate their function. however, some sirnas have off-target effects. indeed, our data  showed that the overlapping affected genes account for 63% and 68% of the total affected genes by two independent pml sirnas respectively. our study suggests that careful evaluation of sirna by using more than one sirnas is critical for data analysis.

the role of pml in class i mhc hla expression
our study found that pml is required for normal expression of a cluster of class i mhc hlas, including hla-a, hla-b, hla-c, hla-f, and hla-g as pml knockdown significantly reduced the expression of these genes. normal expression of class i hlas is essential for adaptive immune responses, cytotoxicity-mediated cancer cell removal, and precise modulation of inflammatory responses. loss or down-regulation of class i mhc hlas plays a causative role in etiology of these conditions  <cit> . because pml is down-regulated in many cancers  <cit> , we suspect the down-regulation of pml and thereby class i mhc hlas is one of the mechanisms used by cancers to escape the anti-tumor immune response. thus, pml likely maintains the expression levels of class i hlas as part of its tumor suppressor activity. furthermore, class i hlas are often down-regulated by virus infection  <cit> , consistent with the notion that pml is an anti-viral protein. loss of pml may increase the vulnerability to viral infection  <cit> . therefore, our analysis suggests that pml is a putative novel regulator of class i hlas and that pml functions to reduce the susceptibility to cancers and other diseases by controlling expression of downstream target genes, including class i hlas.

pml in metabolic control of cell physiology
tumors have been known to alter metabolism pattern since the description of the warburg effect  <cit> . recent studies have linked tumors with obesity. obesity is also a known risk factor for diabetes and cardiovascular diseases. pml is known for its role as a tumor suppressor protein; however its role in metabolism remains largely unexplored. our data suggest that pml is involved in multiple aspects of cellular metabolic pathways involving macromolecules, biopolymer, nitrogen compounds and nucleotides. as we were preparing our manuscript, it was reported that pml negatively regulates adipogenesis  <cit> . when our manuscript was under review, we learned that two latest papers reporting pml’s role in cancer metabolism  <cit>  and stem cell metabolism  <cit> . therefore the role of pml in cellular metabolism is an incomplete understood question worth further in-depth investigation.

pml inhibits cell adhesion and inflammatory response in endothelial cells: pml’s role in vascular angiogenesis unveiled
endothelial cell has significant relevance in angiogenesis, a critical process during embryology, cancer development and cardiovascular diseases. angiogenesis is a series of multicellular morphological modification involving cell adhesion, migration and differentiation  <cit> . chronic inflammation usually promotes angiogenesis  <cit> . our data show that pml regulates multiple pathways involved in cell adhesion , the inflammatory response following tnfα treatment , and a molecular network of genes involved in cell mobility . together, our data suggest that pml is able to regulate several different aspects of angiogenesis. indeed, pml has been shown to inhibit hypoxia-mediated neoangiogenesis  <cit> . we have also recently demonstrated that pml is essential for tnfα-mediated inhibition of endothelial cell network formation and migration by regulating downstream target gene expression  <cit> . we believe that further study on pml and tnfα target genes will shed a light on specific molecular mechanisms of angiogenesis in cancer and human cardiovascular diseases.

the networks that are regulated by both pml knockdown and tnfα treatment
tnfα signaling has been well-studied but remains to be fully elucidated. our study suggests that pml and tnfα signaling regulates genes involved in a similar spectrum of biological processes, molecular functions, cellular components, canonical pathways, and human diseases . these analyses suggest that there exists mutual regulatory networks between pml and tnfα signaling. indeed, we identified a set of nf-κb-dependent genes that are uniquely regulated by pml and tnfα signaling . we found that knockdown of pml suppressed the expression of these genes in the absence of tnfα treatment but enhanced their expression following tnfα treatment. we hypothesize that pml functions as a molecular switch in tnfα signaling. as such, we reason that the magnitude of pml accumulation following tnfα treatment may have profound effects on tnfα activity and that ablation of pml gene may lead to dysregulation of inflammatory responses. in fact, our microarray analyses demonstrate that knockdown of pml is associated with a network of genes involved in chronic inflammation-related diseases, such as rheumatoid arthritis and atherosclerosis . in summary, we have identified the genes induced by tnfα treatment alone, the genes induced only when pml is knocked down and the genes co-regulated by tnfα and pml knockdown. we believe our results provide future directions in the study of pml- and tnfα-coregulated inflammatory responses.

CONCLUSIONS
through microarray analyses, we identified novel pml target genes and tnfα responsive genes in huvec. intriguingly, we found that pml is required for normal expression of class i mhc hlas, thereby suggesting a potential novel mechanism by which pml functions as a tumor suppressor. our gene ontology information analyses show that pml target genes and tnfα responsive genes participated in a variety of overlapped and distinct biological processes, canonical pathways and human diseases. notably, we identified clusters of genes implicated in inflammation-related diseases and tnfα-elicited nf-κb-mediated immune responses that are synergistically regulated by pml knockdown and tnfα treatment. our data further suggests that pml is a putative novel tnfα regulator, required to finely control tnfα-mediated inflammatory responses. our study adds to the understanding of tnfα biology and provides novel information for potential pharmaceutical targets in tnfα-related diseases. through clustering analyses, we noticed that the adhesion-related crosstalk between pml and tnfα engages a complex molecular mechanism. indeed, our leukocyte adhesion assays demonstrated that the effects of pml knockdown could be switched from activation to inhibition of leukocyte adhesion depending on the presence or absence of tnfα. together, our results that had not been previously appreciated have uncovered roles of pml and its crosstalk with tnfα signaling.

