BACKGROUND
gene flow between closely related species has been reported in an increasing number of studies as a rule and not as an exception and it is currently well accepted that sibling species can retain a low level of gene flow between them  <cit> . in this case, divergence between closely related species is determined by competition between gene flow and genetic drift, where the first tends to decrease divergence, and the latter to increase it  <cit> . a number of studies have provided evidence that introgression can occur more easily in certain regions of the genome. this is determined mainly by natural selection, which is expected to restrain gene flow at regions associated with species-specific adaptations  <cit> .

in insect disease vectors, gene flow between species may have important epidemiological consequences, as it might allow changes in the disease patterns. fonseca et al.  <cit>  have shown that hybrids between two different forms in the culex pipiens complex, probably introduced in the united states at two different moments, may act as a bridge vector between birds and humans of the west nile virus, contributing to the current epidemics. in another example, besansky et al.  <cit>  have proposed that the acquisition of chromosome inversions by anopheles gambiae from the more arid-adapted anopheles arabiensis may have contributed to the spread and ecological dominance of this malaria vector.

evidence of introgression has also been reported in sand flies  <cit> , including lutzomyia intermedia and lutzomyia whitmani two important vectors of cutaneous leishmaniasis in brazil  <cit> . recently, we obtained further evidence for gene flow between these two closely related species using the period  gene  <cit> , a locus controlling circadian and lovesong rhythms in drosophila, that might have a role in the reproductive isolation between sibling species . these first pieces of evidence for introgression lead us to inquire about the level and extent of gene flow between l. intermedia and l. whitmani.

in this study, we performed a multilocus analysis using ten different nuclear loci in a sample of l. intermedia and l. whitmani from the locality of afonso claudio  in order to estimate the level of gene flow between these two vector species in each individual locus and across the genome. the possibility that introgression between these two leishmaniasis vectors is extensive and recurrent, could have important epidemiological consequences. for example, genes controlling aspects of vectorial capacity such as adaptation to man made habitats , competence to transmit different leishmania strains and host preference could be passing from one species to another  <cit> . analysis of multiple markers might determine if introgression between the two species is affecting many loci and whether gene flow in genes known to control aspects of the reproductive isolation in other species, such as period, is relatively reduced compared to other loci.

RESULTS
molecular markers
the choice of molecular markers includes genes with different functions and genome locations as described in the methods. the ten loci used in this study are the homologues of the following drosophila genes: ca1d , cac , rp <dig> , rpl17a , rpl <dig> , rps19a , tfiia-l , up  and ζcop   <cit> . in addition, we also obtained new sequences of per from the same samples. sequences have been submitted to genbank .

polymorphism, recombination and divergence analyses
initially all sequences were checked for recombination, a necessary step for the im analysis . the four-gamete test  <cit>  was carried out for each locus in order to identify fragments with no evidence for internal recombination events. the larger non-recombining  block including at least part of an intron was finally chosen for each locus to be used in subsequent population analyses .

note: values refer to sequences without gaps/ambiguous alignment; numbers in parentheses are related to the non-recombining block for each locus.

anumber of sequences for each species for each locus.

bthe minimum number of recombination events.

cnumber of segregating sites.

dthe average number of nucleotide differences per site between two sequences.

etheta  =  <dig> n μ from s .

fnone of the tajima's d values was significant after bonferroni's correction.

divergence between l. intermedia and l. whitmani, estimated from fst values, is relatively high , ranging from  <dig>  to  <dig> , except for zetacop, which shows limited divergence between the two species . however, only three out of the ten loci present fixed differences , whereas polymorphisms are shared in most genes, particularly in per . some of the loci present differences in the degree of genetic divergence estimated from the analysis of the whole fragment and the nr block, respectively. the rpl17a nr block presents far less divergence between species compared to the whole fragment , while the opposite is observed in rpl <dig> .

apairwise fixation index. significance evaluated with  <dig> permutations; * significant at p <  <dig> ;

+ significant at p <  <dig> ; ns non significant p >  <dig> .

b estimated number of migrants per generation between populations calculated from fst.

cthe average number of nucleotide substitutions per site between populations.

dthe number of net nucleotide substitutions per site between populations.

e number of fixed differences between species.

fnumber of shared polymorphic sites between species.

im analysis
an analysis of population divergence under the "isolation with migration" model has been performed using the im software  <cit> . the im analysis requires sequence data from individual loci that show variation within or between two populations, under the assumption that recombination is negligible. for this reason, only the nr blocks containing at least part of an intron have been used for the analyses and some putatively recombinant sequences were excluded . in order to avoid mistaking the effects of selection for those of drift or migration, we carried out preliminary tests of selective neutrality. these included tajima's d  <cit> , fu and li's d* and f*  <cit> , ramos-onsins and rozas' r <dig>  <cit> , and fu's fs  <cit> . the statistic tests have been calculated using the dnasp software  <cit>  . the simulation analyses of the hka software  <cit>  were used for performing the hka multilocus test of neutral molecular evolution  <cit> . in only one case  a significant deviation from neutrality has been detected after bonferroni's correction . based on their chromosome positions in drosophila  <cit> , all ten loci studied are expected to be unlinked, although we do not know their location in the lutzomyia genome.

migration parameters have been estimated for each locus as well as for all loci together for each population in different im runs. our aim was to detect the occurrence of gene flow using the multilocus data, and determine whether the evidence for introgression is exclusive to some loci. all marginal densities suggest stationary distributions, with one exception .

the marginal posterior probability densities for each of the six demographic parameters estimated using im are shown in figure  <dig>  the results obtained suggest gene flow from l. intermedia to l. whitmani . table  <dig> summarizes the features from the marginal histograms for each of the parameters. the migration rate estimate with the highest smoothed value of likelihood is m <dig> =  <dig>   and the 95% confidence intervals exclude the value zero for gene flow . on the other hand, no evidence of migration has been found in the other direction, from l. whitmani to l. intermedia .

note: values are presented for each of the three runs with different seed numbers .

a the population size parameter for l. whitmani , l. intermedia  and ancestral population ; θ =  <dig> nm.

b time of population splitting parameter

c migration rate estimate .

d the midpoint value of the lowest  and highest  bin.

e the value of the bin with the highest count , after the counts have been smoothed by taking a running average of  <dig> points centered on each bin .

f the estimated points to which  <dig> % of the total area lies to the left  and to the right .

g the lower  and upper  bound of the estimated 90% highest posterior density  interval.

simulations were also carried out to estimate the migration rates of each locus separately. figure  <dig> shows the marginal posterior probability densities for each locus migration rate while table  <dig> presents a summary from the marginal histograms. the results have revealed nonzero values in three different loci, cac, rpl17a and zetacop towards l. whitmani , showing no evidence of introgression between these two species at the other loci. although the distribution for the rpl17a locus does not reach the zero value on its right tail, this gene shows the highest estimate for the migration parameter in the direction of l. whitmani.

note. i – l. intermedia; w – l. whitmani. each estimated value is an average of four im runs with different seed numbers.

a the midpoint value of the lowest  and highest  bin.

b the value of the bin with the highest count , after the counts have been smoothed by taking a running average of  <dig> points centered on each bin .

c the estimated points to which  <dig> % of the total area lies to the left  and to the right .

d the lower  and upper  bound of the estimated 90% highest posterior density  interval.

* hpd estimate not reliable

maximum likelihood estimates for θ suggest that the l. whitmani effective population size is almost twice as large as in l. intermedia  while the ancestral population is estimated to be smaller than the current ones, indicating a possible expansion for both species.

divergence time as well as the other parameters estimated with im cannot be directly converted to numbers in years or generations, since the mutation rates in these two species or in other sand flies are unknown. however, using d. melanogaster synonymous and nonsynonymous substitution rates for nuclear genes,  <dig>  × 10- <dig> and  <dig>  × 10- <dig> per site per year  <cit> , respectively, seems to be a reasonable first step for estimating the divergence time between lutzomyia species. thus, our educated guess for the divergence time between l. intermedia and l. whitmani would be of approximately  <dig> thousand years.

genealogy analysis
gene trees for both entire sequence and nr block were estimated using neighbor-joining  and parsimony methods, available in mega  <dig>   <cit> , with similar results . only in the rpl <dig> gene tree the sequences of the two species occurred in two separate clusters  while for  <dig> genes only one species formed a cluster  and  <dig> genes did not present the sequences from any of the species in a single cluster  .

discussion
populations seldom evolve according to a simple and easy-to-identify mechanism. under the model of isolation with migration, information on both divergence time and gene flow rates can be extracted from the data; thus, this model is more flexible and realistic than most alternative models of subdivided populations, which assume either absence of gene flow or an infinite divergence time  <cit> . therefore, the im model is particularly suitable for the study of recently-separated populations that may still be connected by some genetic exchanges, as we believe to be the case for the closely related species l. intermedia and l. whitmani, which despite presenting some identical haplotypes and no fixed differences in the per gene and in a mitochondrial marker  <cit>  are nevertheless distinguishable by morphological differences  <cit> . indeed, the simulations presented here between these two vectors showed good convergence and consistency among independent runs. in addition, the estimated population size difference between the species seems intuitively reasonable, since the distribution of l. whitmani is wider than l. intermedia. l. whitmani is distributed throughout most of brazil occurring also in neighboring countries. l. intermedia occurs in the northeastern and part of the southeastern regions of brazil  <cit> .

although genealogies can be difficult to interpret in case of recombination, phylogenetic analyses do not have to assume any historical demographical model  <cit> , and therefore it is useful to observe the gene trees and compare them with our summary-statistics analyses. figures  <dig> and  <dig> illustrate the difference between the topologies of loci presenting either evidence for gene flow or high differentiation between species.

three loci present fixed differences between l. intermedia and l. whitmani and no evidence of gene flow and can therefore be suggested as molecular markers to differentiate the two species: rp <dig>  rps19a and rpl <dig>  the latter also presents insertions/deletions which have not been considered in table  <dig>  these three genes codify ribosomal protein subunits and it is intriguing that only such genes present fixed differences. as far as we know there is no reason one should expect these highly conserved ribosomal proteins to be less prone to introgression or to be under directional selection that would increase the likelihood of fixed differences between the two siblings. one interesting, but perhaps unlikely, possibility is that codon bias, as observed in drosophila ribosomal protein genes  <cit> , might somehow be responsible for the observed fixed differences.

the cac and per genes determine aspects of the lovesong patterns in drosophila , and therefore they are potentially good candidates for speciation loci in insects producing acoustic signals. so far, there is no behavioral study providing evidence that lovesongs play a role in the reproductive isolation between l. intermedia and l. whitmani as might be the case for the lutzomyia longipalpis s.l. siblings  <cit> . our data suggest the occurrence of introgression in cac and, although no evidence for gene flow in per was obtained in the present study, a previous analysis using this gene as a molecular marker also suggests introgression between l. intermedia and l. whitmani in at least one of the populations analyzed  <cit> . this evidence of gene flow in cac and per might indicate that these two loci do not have an important role, if any, in the reproductive isolation of l. intermedia and l. whitmani.

the rpl17a gene presented great differences between the genealogies and haploytpe networks obtained with the whole fragment and the nr blocks. while the latter show topologies with no grouping pattern for l. intermedia or l. whitmani and some identical haplotypes in both species , the nj tree and haplotype network from the whole fragment divide the species in two distinct groups . the same difference can be noticed for the fst values,  <dig>  and  <dig>  for the whole fragment and nr block, respectively . the im simulations using the nr blocks indicated migration in the direction of l. whitmani at this gene. the observation that non-recombining blocks present low-divergence between species in opposition to the whole gene, suggests the occurrence of migration followed by recombination, where new haplotypes are created by recombining different alleles inside a population instead of by the occurrence of new mutations. it also reinforces the idea that different regions of a gene might have different evolutionary histories  <cit> .

the zetacop gene has also presented interesting results. the fragment analyzed here revealed a large level of gene flow between the two species, with low  or non significant values  of fst  in addition to genealogies and networks that do not follow any grouping pattern .

the epidemiological consequences of gene flow involving disease vectors are still not well known  <cit> , however some studies do suggest important phenotypical changes in insect vectors due to introgression . the results obtained here are especially important because l. intermedia and l. whitmani are considered two main vectors of the cutaneous leishmaniasis, a disease for which the distribution has been expanding throughout brazil, as silvatic areas have been constantly modified by urbanization  <cit> . the two species show some behavioral and ecological differences. l. intermedia is usually more common in the peridomestic area and more frequent in the summer months while l. whitmani is found mainly in the surrounding forest and is more abundant in the winter  <cit> . interestingly it has been reported that only l. whitmani populations sympatric with l. intermedia are involved in cutaneous leishmaniasis transmission in the peridomestic environment  <cit> . the fact that we find evidence for introgression from l. intermedia towards l. whitmani is consistent with that although the loci we studied are probably not directly related to aspects of vectorial capacity. further and more specific analyses focusing on the correlation between genetic, behavioral and habitat characteristics of these two sand fly species will be necessary to elucidate the possible consequences of gene flow for the disease epidemiology.

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, we have found evidence of introgression from l. intermedia towards l. whitmani in three out of ten analyzed loci. in addition, a different study using the per gene to analyze the geographical variation among populations of the two species has also indicated introgression in this locus. these findings suggest the occurrence of gene flow in roughly one third of the genome of these two vectors of cutaneous leishmaniasis in southeastern brazil raising the question whether this might be related to the observed changes in the epidemiological patterns of this disease.

