BACKGROUND
optineurin is a multifunctional protein involved in a variety of functions such as vesicular trafficking from the golgi to the plasma membrane, golgi ribbon formation, signaling by metabotropic glutamate receptor, regulation of nf-κb activation and gene expression  <cit> . it is a  <dig> kda protein that contains multiple coiled-coil domains, a leucine zipper, a ubiquitin-binding domain  and a c2h <dig> type zinc finger at its c-terminus . although optineurin is ubiquitously expressed, it shows high level of expression in certain tissues such as retina, brain, heart, skeletal muscle, placenta, testis and kidney  <cit> . studies in various cell lines have shown that endogenous optineurin is present in the cytoplasm, golgi and recycling endosome   <cit> . however, overexpressed optineurin is present more prominently in the re  <cit> .

some of the optineurin- interacting proteins such as rab <dig>  huntingtin and myosinvi are involved in vesicular trafficking  <cit> . rab <dig> is a member of family of small gtpases that regulate intracellular membrane trafficking pathways  <cit> . it is localized to vesicles at the trans-golgi network , re and membrane ruffles  <cit> . it plays an important role in membrane trafficking from the tgn to the plasma membrane in polarized epithelial and neuronal cells, and in membrane trafficking at the re  <cit> . huntingtin, a protein mutated in the neurodegenerative huntington's disease, is localized to the golgi complex, and to the endocytic and exocytic vesicles, where it plays a role in membrane trafficking pathways  <cit> . myosin vi, an actin based motor protein, is found in diverse cellular compartments including the golgi complex, membrane ruffles, endocytic vesicles and secretory vesicles  <cit> . optineurin forms a bridge between myosin vi and rab <dig> during sorting of cargo molecules in polarized epithelial cells  <cit> . knockdown of optineurin affects golgi ribbon formation and post-golgi membrane trafficking to the plasma membrane  <cit> . however, the role of optineurin in endocytic membrane traffic has not been examined.

endocytic membrane traffic is essential for the delivery of various membrane components, receptors and their ligands to their respective intracellular compartments  <cit> . transferrin and transferrin receptor  regulate iron uptake in almost all cell types, and are frequently used to study endocytosis and recycling. the iron-bound transferrin is endocytosed through tfr and delivered to the peripheral early/sorting endosome  <cit> . most of the internalized tfr is recycled back either through a fast, direct step from the early endosome, typically with a t1/ <dig> of 2- <dig> min, or a slower step via the recycling endosome, with a t1/ <dig> of ~ 10- <dig> min. the re is a network of tubular structures that is perinuclear or juxtanuclear in most cells  <cit> . it is a relatively long lived compartment and acts as a sorting station for the endocytic and exocytic cargo  <cit> . the transport of cargo like tfr from the re to plasma membrane is regulated by rab <dig>  whereas rab <dig> regulates endocytic traffic to the re  <cit> . as transport through re is a relatively slow process, at steady state most of the receptors, like tfr, that are recycled, are localized mostly at the endocytic recycling compartment  <cit> .

mutations in optineurin, encoded by the optn gene, are associated with certain glaucomas, a group of neurodegenerative eye diseases that cause blindness  <cit> . however, functional alterations caused by mutations in optineurin are not known. genetic evidence suggests that the e50k  is a dominant disease-causing mutation of optineurin which was found in  <dig> % of families with hereditary glaucoma  <cit> . previously we have analyzed the effect of overexpression of the e50k and other mutants on survival of various cells  <cit> . during this work we observed that, as compared to wild type optineurin, the e50k mutant forms large vesicle-like structures in many cells. this observation raised the possibility that the formation of large vesicle-like structures by the e50k mutant could be due to impaired trafficking. here, we have analyzed the role of optineurin in endocytic recycling and the effect of e50k mutant on this process. our results show that knockdown of optineurin results in slower trafficking of tfr to the juxtanuclear region. we show that optineurin interacts with tfr and inactivation of the ubd of optineurin by a point mutation abrogates this interaction. the results of several experiments suggest that the e50k mutant causes impaired trafficking at the re due to enhanced interaction of this mutant with rab <dig> and tfr. the ubd of optineurin plays an essential role in its localization to the re and also in impaired trafficking by the e50k mutant.

RESULTS
optineurin is required for trafficking of transferrin receptor
we examined the role of optineurin in trafficking of tfr, which has served as a model system for the study of endocytic recycling. for this purpose, two shrnas  which target two different regions of optineurin mrna were used to knockdown endogenous optineurin. infection of hela cells with the adenoviruses expressing shrnas  resulted in 70-80% decrease in optineurin protein level, as determined by western blotting . the level of tfr was unaffected by these shrnas . an adenovirus expressing shrna of unrelated sequence of the same length was used as a control. hela cells were infected with adenoviruses for  <dig> hours, serum starved for  <dig> hours and then incubated with alexa546-labeled transferrin. after  <dig> minutes labeled transferrin was seen concentrated in the juxtanuclear region  in control cells. upon knockdown of endogenous optineurin by two different shrnas, most of the internalized transferrin was found distributed throughout the cell especially in the cell periphery . the distribution of endogenous tfr was similar to that of the labeled transferrin . upon chase with unlabeled transferrin for  <dig> - <dig> min, most of the transferrin was externalized both from the control and optineurin depleted cells . to rule out the possibility of non-specific effects of shrna, we generated an shrna resistant mutant of optineurin . expression of the shrna-resistant mutant in knockdown cells restored the distribution of labeled transferrin to the juxtanuclear region . these results suggest that optineurin is required for the trafficking of tfr to the juxtanuclear region. these results also indicate that in optineurin knockdown cells the sorting endosomes are taking up most of the tfr or the recycling endosome is disrupted spatially or functionally, or both.

the ubd is required for localization of optineurin to the recycling endosomes
we examined the localization of endogenous optineurin in hela cells and found that it showed some amount of colocalization with tfr and rab <dig> in some of the vesicles present in the juxtanuclear region . both tfr and rab <dig> are markers of re  <cit> . to further validate these observations, hela cells were pulsed with labeled transferrin for  <dig> min, chased with unlabelled transferrin for  <dig> min and stained for endogenous optineurin. a fraction of endogenous optineurin showed colocalization with transferrin . similarly endogenous optineurin showed some colocalization with tfr in rgc- <dig> cells, a retinal ganglion cell line . these results showed that at least a small fraction of endogenous optineurin is present in the recycling endosomes; this is in addition to its presence in the golgi reported previously. overexpressed optineurin without tag and its e50k mutant also showed colocalization with tfr . vesicles formed by the e50k mutant showed better colocalization with tfr compared to vesicles formed by wild type optineurin  . the e50k mutant expressed without tag  or with gfp tag  formed larger vesicle-like structures than wild type optineurin mostly in the juxtanuclear region . the cells expressing e50k mutant showed larger number of vesicle-like structures than those expressing wild type optineurin . formation of larger vesicle-like structures by gfp-e50k was not due to its higher level of expression as compared to gfp-optineurin . we then analyzed colocalization of overexpressed optineurin and its e50k mutant with markers of early endosome , late endosome  and trans-golgi network . overexpressed optineurin and the e50k mutant did not show any significant colocalization with eea <dig>  although few vesicles showed colocalization with rab <dig> and tgn <dig> . however, both e50k mutant and wild type optineurin showed significant colocalization with rab <dig>  . these results suggest that most of the e50k vesicles are not likely to be routed to late endosome or lysosome although a small fraction might be doing so.

a recent study showed the presence of a novel ubd in optineurin, and the d474n mutation in this ubd abolished the binding of optineurin to ubiquitinated proteins  <cit> . to explore the role of the ubd in the recruitment of e50k mutant to recycling endosomes, we generated the d474n mutant and a double mutant of optineurin that contains both e50k and d474n mutations . the d474n mutant formed smaller and fewer vesicle-like structures than those formed by wild type optineurin . the d474n mutant showed very little colocalization with tfr   or rab <dig> . the e50k-d474n double mutant also formed few small vesicle-like structures similar to d474n mutant, and did not show any significant colocalization with tfr   or rab <dig> . we then examined the ability of optineurin and e50k mutant to bind ubiquitin in an in vitro assay. lysates of hela cells transfected with wild type optineurin or e50k or e50k-d474n mutants were incubated with gst-ubiquitin and bound proteins were analyzed by western blot. as compared to wild type optineurin, e50k mutant showed a marginal increase in binding with gst-ubiquitin . the e50k-d474n double mutant did not show any binding to gst-ubiquitin . these results suggest that the ubd plays an essential role in the localization of optineurin and its e50k mutant to the re and in the formation of large vesicle-like structures by e50k mutant.

the ubd of optineurin is required for trafficking of transferrin to the juxtranuclear region
since ubd was required for localization of optineurin to the re, we examined its role in trafficking of labeled transferrin to the re. for this purpose we generated shrna-resistant d474n mutant of optineurin. while re-introduction of shrna resistant wild-type optineurin could restore distribution of transferrin to the juxtanuclear region, in cells expressing shrna resistant d474n mutant, transferrin was found distributed throughout the cell . these observations suggest that a functional ubd is required for trafficking of transferrin to the juxtanuclear region.

the e50k mutant causes reduced uptake of transferrin
we examined the effect of over expressed optineurin and e50k mutant on trafficking of transferrin. hela cells transfected with either wild-type or e50k optineurin were incubated with alexa594-conjugated transferrin. to our surprise the uptake of transferrin was significantly reduced in majority of the cells expressing mutant optineurin . quantitative analysis showed that there was 60% inhibition  of uptake of labeled transferrin by mutant optineurin, whereas wild type optineurin showed no significant inhibition . the reduction in uptake of transferrin was not due to decreased level of total cellular tfr in e50k expressing cells . however, the amount of cell surface associated tfr in the e50k expressing cells was decreased , suggesting that the reduced uptake of transferrin by the e50k expressing cells was due to a reduction in tfr on the cell surface. the expression of either d474n mutant or double mutant e50k-d474n did not cause any reduction in the uptake of labeled transferrin , indicating therefore that the interactions of ubd are required for the effect of e50k on transferrin uptake. neither the steady state localization of tfr nor trafficking of transferrin was affected by overexpression of d474n or e50k-d474n mutant suggesting that these mutants possibly do not affect the function of endogenous optineurin. the formation of transferrin receptor-positive large vesicles by the e50k mutant and the decreased uptake of transferrin, suggest that the e50k optineurin causes a reduction in endocytic recycling of transferrin receptor, leading to its accumulation in the large vesicular structures.

the e50k mutant exhibits slower dynamics
the dynamics of the optineurin-containing vesicles was analyzed using time-lapse video microscopy. gfp-tagged wild type or e50k optineurin cdnas were transfected into hela cells and the vesicle movement monitored by acquiring a series of time lapse images . a large number of these vesicles moved inwards from the cell periphery towards the nucleus/golgi body . occasional fusing of the smaller vesicles with larger ones was observed, mainly in the perinuclear region. analysis of velocities of vesicles of largely comparable sizes revealed that wild type optineurin vesicles moved at an average velocity of  <dig>  ±  <dig>  μm/min, while those containing the mutant moved significantly slower   . the e50k-d474n containing vesicles moved at an average velocity of  <dig>  ±  <dig>  μm/min. we then determined the pausing of vesicles by measuring the time these vesicles spend without moving and found that e50k vesicles paused for a longer period of time compared with wild type optineurin vesicles .

fluorescence recovery after photo bleaching  is a widely used method to measure two dimensional diffusion of molecules in live cells. we further analyzed the dynamics of e50k mutant and wild-type optineurin in the vesicles of comparable size by using frap. these experiments showed that the half time of recovery of fluorescence in the e50k-containing vesicles was higher  than those with the wild type molecule  .

optineurin interacts with transferrin receptor through ubd
the results so far showed that optineurin is required for tfr trafficking and it is localized to the recycling endosomes through its ubd. how does the ubd help in recruitment or retention of optineurin in the recycling endosomes? one possibility is that optineurin may form a complex with a ubiquitinated protein present in the recycling endosomes. since optineurin colocalizes with tfr very well, we examined the possibility of complex formation between optineurin and tfr. to analyze the interaction between endogenous optineurin and tfr, hela cell lysates were immunoprecipitated with optineurin antibody. tfr was detected in the immunoprecipitate with optineurin antibody but not with control antibody . to examine the possible role of the ubd of optineurin in complex formation with tfr, we used the d474n mutant which does not bind ubiquitin. hela cells were transfected with either ha-tagged wild-type or d474n mutant optineurin and immunoprecipitation was carried out with ha antibody. while tfr was detected in the immunoprecipitate from wild type optineurin expressing cells, inactivation of the ubd resulted in 80% reduction of complex formation between optineurin and tfr . since the interaction between optineurin and tfr was dependent on intact ubd, it raised an interesting possibility that tfr complexed with optineurin could be ubiquitinated. reprobing of the blot with ubiquitin antibody suggested that tfr, that was complexed with overexpressed optineurin, was ubiquitinated . to provide further evidence for ubiquitination of tfr, we immunoprecipitated it from optineurin-overexpressing and control cells. western blot of the immunoprecipitate with ubiquitin antibody showed a band moving slower than the bulk of the immunoprecipitated tfr, comigrating with the upper band of tfr in optineurin-overexpressing cells . in the control cells we could not detect ubiquitinated tfr. these results suggest that ubiquitination of tfr is transient and overexpression of optineurin enhances this ubiquitination.

the e50k mutant shows enhanced interaction with transferrin receptor
we compared the ability of optineurin and its e50k mutant to form complex with tfr by immunoprecipitation. in the e50k immunoprecipitate,  <dig> fold higher level of tfr was present compared to the optineurin immunoprecipitate, as determined by western blot . the role of the ubd in complex formation between e50k and tfr was examined by using e50k-d474n double mutant which showed a drastic reduction in complex formation with tfr . reprobing of this blot with ubiquitin antibody suggested that the tfr immunoprecipitated by e50k is ubiquitinated . vesicles formed by the e50k mutant and wild type optineurin showed colocalization with endogenous ubiquitin . the double mutant e50k-d474n formed very few small vesicles which did not show significant colocalization with ubiquitin . staining for transferrin receptor in the cells co-transfected with ha-ubiquitin and wild-type or e50k mutant optineurin showed that ubiquitin colocalizes with both e50k mutant and transferrin receptor in same vesicular structures . these results suggest that optineurin and the e50k mutant are recruited to the re  by complex formation with a ubiquitinated protein, possibly tfr. these results also indicate that formation of larger vesicles  by e50k might be due to formation of stronger complex with tfr.

the e50k mutant is altered in its interaction with rab8
rab gtpases control various membrane trafficking pathways in the cell and rab <dig> is involved in regulating exocytic and recycling membrane trafficking at the re  <cit> . optineurin interacts directly with the constitutively active gtp bound q67l-rab <dig> mutant but not inactive t22n mutant  <cit> . it is therefore believed that optineurin is an effector of some of the functions of rab <dig>  rab <dig> is also required for the trafficking of tfr to the juxtanuclear region  <cit> . we next tested the hypothesis, that the e50k mutant of optineurin might be altered in its interaction with rab <dig>  by immunoprecipitation experiments. hela cells were cotransfected with myc-tagged q67l-rab <dig> mutant and wild-type or e50k mutant optineurin. immunoprecipitation experiments revealed that in the rab <dig> immunoprecipitate  <dig>  fold higher amount of e50k was present compared to wild-type optineurin . this suggests that as compared with optineurin, e50k forms a stronger complex with q67l-rab <dig>  transferrin receptor was also seen in rab <dig> immunoprecipitates co-expressing optineurin or e50k mutant . quantitative analysis of the western blot showed that the amount of tfr was 96% more in rab <dig> immunoprecipitate from the e50k expressing cells compared to wild type optineurin expressing cells. in accordance with these observations, the e50k mutant showed better colocalization with q67l-rab <dig> compared to wild type optineurin  . we then examined the distribution of tfr in cells co-expressing e50k and q67l-rab <dig>  both the tfr and rab <dig>  were found together in the same vesicular structures as that of e50k but to a lesser extent in cells containing wild type optineurin . quantitative analysis of pair wise colocalization was carried out by calculating correlation coefficients . this analysis suggests that rab <dig> shows better colocalization with tfr in the e50k-expressing cells compared to wild type optineurin expressing cells. these observations provide support to our results showing that compared to wild type optineurin, the e50k mutant shows stronger interaction with rab <dig> and tfr. taken together these results suggest that optineurin associates with rab <dig> and tfr through its different domains to form a trimolecular complex.

*p <  <dig> ; **p <  <dig> ; ***p <  <dig> 

in order to ascertain if the e50k mutant affects rab <dig> function, we examined the dynamics of rab <dig> vesicles in the presence of e50k mutant and wild type optineurin by time-lapse video microscopy. hela cells were cotransfected with gfp-rab <dig> and ha-optineurin or e50k mutant or gfp-rab <dig> alone. the movement of rab <dig> vesicles was then monitored by acquiring a series of time-lapse images. rab <dig> formed mostly elongated tubular structures with many smaller, rapidly moving vesicles. these rab <dig> vesicles moved at an average velocity of  <dig>  ±  <dig>  μm/min. co-expression of wild type optineurin only slightly reduced the velocity of rab <dig> vesicles . in the cells co-expressing e50k, rab <dig> formed conspicuous vesicles whose velocity was decreased to  <dig>  ±  <dig>  μm/min  . these results suggest that the e50k mutant optineurin affects trafficking of rab <dig> 

the ubd is required for induction of cell death by the e50k mutant in rgc <dig> cells
defective vision in glaucoma occurs due to apoptotic death of rgcs in the optic nerve head  <cit> . we have shown earlier that the e50k mutant of optineurin selectively induces the death of rgcs, and not of other cell lines tested  <cit> , indicating that this mutation causes glaucoma by directly inducing the death of rgcs. to explore the role of the ubd of e50k in inducing death of rgcs, we studied the effect of the e50k-d474n double mutant on rgc <dig> cells, and found that it did not induce cell death . in rgc <dig> cells also, the e50k mutant showed strong colocalization with tfr whereas the e50k-d474n mutant showed much less colocalization  . expression of the e50k mutant in rgc <dig> cells reduced the uptake of transferrin whereas the double mutant did not . these results show that the function of ubd is required for the retinal ganglion cell death induced by the e50k mutant of optineurin.

discussion
optineurin gene is mutated in certain forms of glaucoma. the e50k mutation is the most common and severe disease causing mutation  <cit> . nevertheless, the nature of functional alterations caused by mutations in optineurin and their probable role in etiopathogensis of glaucoma are unclear. here we have investigated the role of optineurin in endocytic trafficking of tfr and how the e50k mutant affects this trafficking. our results show that optineurin regulates trafficking of tfr to the juxtanuclear region and at least a fraction of endogenous as well as overexpressed optineurin is localized to the re. this localization of optineurin to the re is dependent on a functional ubd. the results of several independent experiments suggest that the e50k mutant causes impaired trafficking at the re; these include:  e50k forms larger, tfr-containing vesicles  than those formed by normal optineurin,  e50k vesicles show slower velocity and pause more frequently than those formed by normal optineurin,  the expression of e50k mutant  reduces uptake of labeled transferrin by the cells, and  the expression of e50k reduces velocity of rab <dig> vesicles.

a recent study has shown the presence of a novel ubd in optineurin through which it binds lys <dig> linked poly-ubiquitin chains  <cit> . the ubiquitin binding-deficient mutants of optineurin and its e50k mutant failed to localize to the re and did not form complex with tfr. these results suggest that the function of ubd is required for the localization of optineurin to the re. the function of ubd is also needed for trafficking of transferrin to the juxtranuclear region because shrna resistant d474n mutant could not rescue the effect of optineurin knockdown. thus we have identified novel functions of the ubd of optineurin. since optineurin interacts with tfr through ubd, it is likely that this interaction plays a role in the localization of optineurin to the re.

ubiquitination plays a key role in various aspects of vesicular trafficking, including internalization and the endocytosis of many cell surface receptors  <cit> . ubiquitination of endocytosed receptors usually serves as a targeting signal for lysosome for their eventual degradation. the role of ubiquitination in endocytic recycling is uncertain. our results indicate that tfr that is complexed with optineurin and the e50k mutant is ubiquitinated. it has been observed that tfr when tagged to ubiquitin is targeted to lysosomes  <cit> . our observations provide first indication of the ubiquitination of tfr at the re. however, this ubiquitination of tfr is likely to be very transient. recently it has been shown that optineurin enhances ubiquitination of tax <dig> protein of htlv- <dig> raising the possibility that optineurin may be involved in regulating ubiquitination  <cit> . it is plausible that the overexperssed wild-type optineurin and its e50k mutant in particular either enhance this ubiquitination, or by their stronger association/affinity for ubiquitinated tfr, might prevent it's deubiquitination. however, the role of ubiquitination of tfr in its recycling needs further investigation. it is probable that the ubiquitination of tfr may be involved in the localization of optineurin to the re.

various studies have shown a role for rab <dig> in trafficking at the recycling endosomes  <cit> . interestingly, cells depleted of rab <dig> are also defective in trafficking of tfr and exhibit a similar phenotype as that of optineurin depleted cells  implicating that both rab <dig> and optineurin may regulate a common pathway in the trafficking of tfr  <cit> . since optineurin interacts directly with rab <dig>  we suggest that optineurin, rab <dig> and tfr form a trimolecular complex and recruit additional factors to facilitate transferrin/tfr trafficking to the re. stronger association and colocalization of rab <dig> and tfr in presence of the e50k mutant suggest that the e50k mutant affects rab <dig> mediated tfr trafficking. this suggestion is supported by the observation that the e50k mutant reduces the velocity of rab <dig> vesicles.

yue and colleagues have shown that in two ocular cell lines most of the endogenous optineurin is not present in the golgi and overexpessed optineurin forms foci which co-localize with markers of the recycling endosomes  <cit> . the e50k mutant forms larger and more foci, and induces more cell death in retinal pigmented epithelial cells. it was speculated that the golgi breakdown and/or defect in vesicle trafficking may be involved in the induction of cell death by the e50k mutant. whether defective trafficking caused by the e50k mutant contributes to the golgi breakdown is yet to be investigated.

e50k is a dominantly inherited mutation which shows strong association with glaucoma phenotype in a large family, suggesting therefore that it is a disease causing mutation  <cit> . the e50k mutant but not wild type optineurin causes death of rgc, indicating thereby that this mutation causes glaucoma by directly inducing death of rgc  <cit> . since optineurin does not have any enzymatic activity it is likely that the altered interactions  of the e50k mutant with cellular proteins might cause functional defects leading to rgc death. the e50k mutant shows enhanced interaction with a protein kinase, tbk <dig>  although functional significance of this interaction is not known  <cit> . here, we have shown that the e50k mutant causes impaired endocytic recycling of tfr, and altered interactions of this mutant with rab <dig> and tfr possibly contribute to impaired trafficking. impaired trafficking by the e50k mutant is likely to affect cellular homeostasis because constant recycling of receptors between the cell membrane and re is vital for maintaining homeostasis of membrane components and nutrients, such as iron. endocytic recycling also plays an important role in cellular signal transduction by many cell surface receptors  <cit> . requirement of the ubd for impaired trafficking as well as induction of cell death in rgc by the e50k mutant indicates that the impaired trafficking caused by e50k might contribute to death of rgc, possibly by disrupting cellular homeostasis or signal transduction.

patients with mutations in optineurin, such as e50k, have glaucoma and are not affected in other tissues although optineurin is expressed ubiquitously. it is likely that mutations in optineurin affect a function that is critical for the survival of neuronal cells. some studies have shown blockade of axonal transport in glaucomatous conditions  <cit> . axonal transport, especially of neurotrophins, is essential for the survival of neuronal cells including rgcs. since e50k mutant impairs endocytic recycling, it is likely that this mutant causes defective axonal trafficking. the higher levels of optineurin in rgcs compared to brain might contribute to increased rgc death resulting in glaucoma with relatively little or no neuronal cell death elsewhere.

CONCLUSIONS
our results show that optineurin is required for trafficking of transferrin receptor to the juxtanuclear region. optineurin is localized to the re through ubd, which is also required for trafficking of tfr to the juxtanuclear region. dynamic interactions of optineurin with rab <dig> and tfr are likely to contribute to the endocytic recycling of tfr. a disease causing mutation, e50k, impairs endocytic recycling of tfr, possibly due to altered interactions with rab <dig> and tfr. these results also have implications for the pathogenesis of glaucoma caused by the e50k mutation.

