BACKGROUND
during the last decade it has become evident that neurogenesis occurs in certain restricted regions of the adult mammalian brain, particularly in the dentate gyrus of the hippocampus and the subventricular zone  of the lateral ventricle  <cit> . the neurogenic cells in these areas have been isolated and can be propagated in vitro where they form clonal aggregates of cells denoted neurospheres  <cit> . however, there seems to be some differences between the populations of neurospheres obtained from the different regions. svz neurospheres possess the two cardinal properties of stem cells, i.e. they are self-renewable and multipotent  <cit> , whereas hippocampal neurospheres appear to be more precursor cell-like, in that they are more limited in their self-renewal and individual spheres exclusively give rise to neurons or glia  <cit> .

the rather recently discovered neural stem cell  population, sustaining continuous neurogenesis in the adult brain, has become a promising source of cells for cell-replacement therapies for various neurological diseases  <cit> . cell replacement with fetal mesencephalic or striatal tissue has previously been shown to lead to functional improvement in patients with parkinson's disease and huntington's disease  <cit> . however, the use of fetal cells is hampered by a number of hurdles, in addition to ethical concerns. fetal tissue is only available in limited quantities and the fetal cells are mostly postmitotic and cannot be expanded, nor stored for long periods of time. furthermore these cell populations are heterogeneous, and their purity and viability cannot be reliably controlled, perhaps explaining the variation in functional outcome between different transplantation studies. in contrast, stem cells represent a source of cells that is more readily obtainable, expandable and could potentially be maintained as a more homogeneous, pure cell population. by supplying the appropriate factors endogenous stem/progenitor cells could be recruited to generate new neural or glial cells of specific phenotypes . alternatively the nscs could be expanded and properly manipulated in vitro, before transplanting them into the appropriate area of the brain. both strategies have been evaluated with limited but promising success  <cit> . however, more knowledge on the control of nsc proliferation and differentiation into specific phenotypes, both in vivo and in vitro, is needed before any clinical trails can be made.

some factors stimulating neurogenesis are already known . these include epidermal growth factor , basic fibroblast growth factor , brain-derived neurotrophic factor  and transforming growth factor-α . recently there was a report that neurogenesis can also be stimulated through a g-protein coupled receptor  <cit> . the pleiotropic neuropeptide pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating polypeptide  promotes nsc proliferation both in vivo and in vitro, via the pacap receptor  <dig> . pacap belongs to the vasoactive intestinal peptide /secretin/glucagon family of peptides and exerts a number of biological effects in addition to neurogenesis .

we have recently performed a gene expression analysis of primary neural stem cells , demonstrating the need to consider biological fluctuations of these cells when performing comparative transcriptome analysis  <cit> . here we continue the work to investigate the transcriptional changes underlying the proliferative effect of pacap on svz neurospheres by using microarrays, including controls for differentiation and proliferation.

RESULTS
to investigate the molecular changes underlying the proliferative effects of pacap we performed a gene expression analysis using a  <dig> k cdna microarray. the experimental design depicted in figure  <dig> was utilised. nscs were isolated from a pool of lateral ventricular wall tissue from  <dig> mice and grown in culture as neurospheres, after which they were dissociated and cultured to form secondary neurospheres. secondary neurospheres were dissociated and split into eight parallel cultures. the cells were used to study the culture variance and three different treatments, each replicated in two individual cultures  we used amplification and culture replicates to control for technical and biological variation respectively, and controls for differentiation and proliferation activation to verify our results.

in all comparisons undifferentiated neurospheres , maintained in culture medium supplemented with epidermal growth factor , was used as a reference control sample. in the first of three treatment regimes neurospheres were induced to proliferate in response to pacap by replacing the egf supplemented culture medium with medium supplemented with pacap. in the proliferation control, the cells were induced to proliferate in response to a transmembrane receptor agonist  by replacing egf with the agonist in the neurosphere culture medium. in the third treatment, the differentiation control, neurospheres were induced to differentiate into neurons, astrocytes and oligodendrocytes by replacing the egf supplemented culture medium with medium supplemented with fetal calf serum, and plating the cells onto poly-d-lysine plates.

mrna was isolated from all cell cultures and used in a series of cdna microarray hybridisations. to avoid extensive passaging of the neurospheres, a limited amount of cells were obtained, and the generated rna was not sufficient for labelling and subsequent microarray analysis. the rna was therefore amplified using a previously described protocol  <cit> , that has recently also been evaluated for neurosphere analysis  <cit> . the principle relies on incorporating a biotin moiety into the cdna during the first-strand cdna synthesis, by using a biotinylated oligo primer. the population of cdnas is fragmented and the biotinylated 3'ends captured onto a streptavidin-coated solid support. the isolated cdna tags are released from the support, amplified by pcr and labelled for subsequent microarray hybridisation.

amplified and labelled cdna from each treated sample was hybridised against the neurosphere control sample . in order to measure the technical variation self-to-self hybridisations were made with material from ns sample a. in addition, to measure the variation between two identical cultures, the two ns replicates  were hybridised against each other. for each comparison two replicate and two dye-swap hybridisations were performed.

we have previously shown that neurosphere culture passaging or prolonged culturing per se, is sufficient to induce differential expression and that this should be taken into account in the design of the experiment  <cit> . to address these issues, i.e. to get a variance measure from as many slides as possible, the results from all hybridisations were divided into three groups prior to data analysis, as indicated in figure  <dig>  group  <dig> contains eight hybridisations comparing the technical amplification replicates  and the biological culturing replicates . groups  <dig> and  <dig> consist of sixteen hybridisations each and include the ns a-ns b hybridisations as well as one replicate of each treatment comparison . this scheme allows for estimation of technical and biological noise . also, by using the ns a and ns b samples as reference samples in each group, the "contrasts"  can be calculated and compared between the groups . the data in all three groups was filtered  and print-tip lowess normalised using identical criteria. for each group individual gene-wise variances were calculated, and taken into account in the identification of differentially expressed genes using the empirical bayes moderated t-test  <cit> . for each comparison the log-odds ratio  was used to rank the genes in order of evidence for differential expression. higher b-value indicates higher probability of differential expression.

in order to investigate the magnitude of differential expression in each comparison the m-value ) for each gene was compared to the corresponding b-value . genes with a high m-value usually receive a high b-value, which gives the plots the characteristic volcano shape. figure  <dig> shows that the number of differentially expressed  genes and the magnitude of differential expression is much lower for the technical and biological replicates than for the treated samples. this indicates that the rna amplification and the biological fluctuations during culturing do not contribute substantially to the observed differential expression for pacap and control treatments. noteworthy, the distributions of b- and m-values are very similar for all treated samples, implicating that the magnitude of gene expression changes are similar for all treatments. the correlation between the replicated comparisons in groups  <dig> and  <dig> was investigated by visualising the m-values from a comparison in group  <dig> against the corresponding m-values in group  <dig> . this shows that there is a high correlation between the replicates, with correlation coefficients ranging from  <dig>  to  <dig> . for the a-values  the correlations are even higher ranging from  <dig>  to  <dig>  . the m-value correlations between the contrasts were analysed in a similar fashion, but yielded much lower correlation coefficients . these low correlations are a consequence of the small differences between the contrasts as shown in the m-value distributions for the different comparisons 

to further explore the overlap between de genes in the replicated treatments venn diagrams shown in figure  <dig> were created. the comparisons include genes with a holm adjusted p-value <  <dig>  and an m-value > +/-  <dig>  . also included in the comparison are  <dig> de genes  identified in the ns a-ns b comparison that could be considered as technical noise. figure  <dig> shows that the overlap between the biological replicates is high. for all three treatments the majority of the genes  are differentially expressed in both replicates;  <dig> genes  for the ns vs. pacap treatment,  <dig> genes  for the ns vs. proliferation control and  <dig> genes  for the ns vs. differentiation control. also, a large proportion of the non-overlapping genes showed a similar m-value in the two groups, indicating that the true overlap is even higher. the genes shared by both replicates for a certain treatment were further compared between the different treatments to visualise the effects of the different treatments on gene expression levels. surprisingly, the great majority of the genes  fall within the overlap of all treatments, further suggesting that the different stimuli results in very similar effects on gene expression level.

a likely explanation is that the removal of growth factor  from the neurosphere culture medium, coinciding with the treatment initiation, masks the effect on gene expression changes caused by the different stimuli. to further investigate whether the remaining unique de genes were true differences or related to the egf effect we performed additional analysis of the  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig> , non-overlapping genes. a comparison was made by taking the lists of the unique genes for one treatment and visualising their corresponding m-values in the other treatments . the results depicted in figure  <dig> demonstrate that the majority of genes are clustered around the threshold values of the criteria for differential expression, either with an m-value just above or below  <dig>  or with a p-value greater than  <dig> . thus, the majority of unique  genes are borderline cases, nearly included in the category of overlapping genes. genes that would have been truly unique to the treatment in question would have had m-values in both replicates that were centred round zero. no such genes can be found when comparing the results from ns vs. pacap treatment and ns vs. proliferation control. a few genes can be found when comparing ns vs. differentiation control to either one of the other two treatments, indicating that the serum treatment gives a somewhat more different gene expression profile, as expected. to facilitate further analysis of the results, annotated gene lists corresponding to the genes that were considered differentially expressed only in the ns vs. diff cont comparison, or shared between ns vs. pacap and ns vs. prol cont comparisons are provided . the complete results for all comparisons are available in arrayexpress using experiment accession number e-mexp- <dig> 

these findings indicate that the differentially expressed genes in the different treatments are due to the withdrawal of egf rather than to the treatment itself. a list of the  <dig> genes identified as the egf treatment/withdrawal genes  is provided . a short version of the list, with the top  <dig> genes, is shown in table  <dig>  the genes were further grouped and ranked according to their gene ontology annotation. we focused on the 'biological processes' branch of the go theme structure and analysed the functional categories represented in the data. in total,  <dig> genes received a functional annotation. the results of the analysis, which was carried out at the detail level  <dig> , are provided . the themes with the highest representation were 'cell growth and/or maintenance' , 'nucleobase, nucleoside, nucleotide and nucleic acid metabolism' , 'protein metabolism' , 'signal transduction' , 'catabolism'  and 'organogenesis' . in general, the list of expressed functional categories is enriched for various metabolism-related themes, but further down also contains themes such as 'cell adhesion', 'cell death', 'response to external stimulus' and 'cell-cell signalling' next we analysed the overrepresentation of functional categories by using the genes represented on the array as background for the significance calculations. the top go terms of the biological process class overrepresented in the data are shown in table  <dig>  a large proportion of these go themes are related to the cell cycle and/or dna replication, as expected for egf-related effects. many of the transcripts found and classified within "mitotic cell cycle" and "dna replication and chromosome cycle" are down-regulated in the treated samples lacking egf. in contrast many genes within "neurogenesis", "organogenesis" and "development" are up-regulated in these samples, probably reflecting the removal of inhibitory regulation on differentiation as egf is withdrawn from the culture medium.

discussion
we have recently performed a pilot study investigating both the amplification technology and various neurosphere isolation and culture conditions  <cit> . in that study we could show a low technical variability in the microarray analysis, large transcriptional differences between passages of neurospheres and a smaller differences between parallel cultures. the variability is addressed in this study by increasing the number of replicates, using parallel cultures to improve the statistical power in identification of differentially expressed genes. the observed differential gene expression  is low for the culture and technical replicates, confirming previous findings, and has a minor impact on the results obtained in the three treatment comparisons.

the primary goal in this study was to identify the genes activated by pacap treatment. pacap acts as a neurotransmitter or neuromodulator in the brain, and regulates the secretion of certain neurohormones. pacap also acts as a neurotrophic factor during brain development and as a neuroprotective agent in the adult brain and acts via three g-protein coupled receptors, pac <dig> and the vasoactive intestinal peptide receptors vip <dig> and vip <dig>  in the recent study  <cit>  it was shown that pac <dig> is expressed in the neurogenic regions of the adult mouse brain and in neurospheres generated from the lateral ventricular wall in the adult mouse. importantly it was also shown that pacap stimulates proliferation of nsc in the brain and of cultured neurospheres, and a number of new proliferation targets were sought to be discovered by the array analysis of neurospheres. the previous study  <cit>  also demonstrated a synergistic proliferative effect of the combined stimulation of egf and pacap. it has previously been described that pac <dig> signalling shows cross-talk to the signalling of receptor tyrosine kinase cascades, such as that elicited by nerve growth factor , suggesting that pacap may act in concert with other molecules to maximize or regulate their effect  <cit> . in order to investigate the pacap effect without egf interference, we chose to culture the neurospheres for three days in the absence of egf, but presence of pacap.

however, the obtained results could not demonstrate a pacap-specific transcriptional signature. instead, by comparing the differentially expressed genes from pacap treatment with control experiments representing proliferation or differentiation activation we could conclude that the removal of egf was the main contributor to the observed differential expression. we demonstrate this by the large overlap in the venn diagram of de genes and we could also conclude that the group of "unique"  genes were not truly unique by demonstrating that these would have been shared among the different treatments if slightly less stringent criteria had been used in the definition of differential expression. so why does egf removal have such a strong effect in comparison to the addition of other factors, such as pacap? egf is an extremely powerful mitogen for adult mouse neural stem cells, exhibiting a four-fold greater proliferative potency than pacap at  <dig> nm and  <dig> nm, respectively  <cit> . such a profound mitogenic effect as that elicited by egf is likely to require large alterations in levels of gene transcription and consequently the removal of this agent necessitates large reversals. pacap, being a substantially less powerful proliferative agent, may well trigger less dramatic transcriptional changes, be it on genes in common  or not to those utilized by egf to promote mitogenesis. in essence, it appears that transcriptional fluctuations induced by the presence and absence of egf dwarf that elicited by pacap, and indeed the tmr agonist and even differentiating factors.

consequently, the shared de genes reflect the removal of the mitogenic signal of egf. gene annotation analysis also supports the conclusions by demonstrating a down-regulation of proliferation signals and up-regulation of differentiation signals in the treated neurosphere cultures. some of the genes observed in the differentiation control are however unique, which probably reflects a broader activation spectrum induced by fetal calf serum and solid support plating, as compared to egf withdrawal. previous studies of neurospheres using microarrays have also used culture conditions with withdrawal of growth factors to study differentiation  <cit> . these showed decreased expression of cell cycle related genes as well as increased expression of differentiation markers as a response to the respective treatments.

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, we report that using the current study design, egf removal in neurosphere culture medium creates too large transcriptional changes to be able to identify other parallel transcriptional events relating to proliferation by pacap. this requires future development of modified culture conditions and assay designs to enable monitoring and proof of these transcriptional alterations.

