BACKGROUND
genome size, measured as the haploid nuclear dna content , is extremely variable among eukaryotes. this variation has long puzzled biologists, because it could not be accounted by organismal complexity or the total number of genes . in the last decades it has become evident that the observed genome size variation is largely caused by differences in the content of non-coding and/or repetitive dna, such as introns, pseudogenes, or transposable elements  <cit> . nevertheless, there are still many unanswered questions about genome size diversity, such as the actual causes driving the differences in dna content, speed and mode of changes in genome size over population genetic and longer evolutionary time scales, or the cellular and organismal consequences of large vs. small genome size  <cit> .

so far, most genome size comparisons in animals have been done at high taxonomic levels, e.g., between classes, families, or genera . studies on genome size variation among strains or closely related species are still very scarce . yet, variation at these lower taxonomic levels might provide important clues on the tempo and mode of genome size evolution. whenever two species have become separated in their evolutionary trajectories, their genome sizes might diverge neutrally, due to independently occurring processes of genome expansion and genomic deletion, unless there are factors constraining the evolution of genome size. in asexually reproducing organisms such processes might even occur on the population level. such accumulated differences can become important, because they may contribute to genomic incompatibility, hybrid inviability, or reproductive isolation. for instance, a causal role of genome changes in speciation has been suspected for gene duplications  <cit>  and transposable elements . in this study we focus on the evolution of genome size in brachionus plicatilis, a cryptic species complex consisting of at least  <dig> closely related species  <cit> .

cryptic species complexes have been described in many animal groups . in particular, small microscopic invertebrates seem to harbor large amounts of hidden genetic diversity within morphotypes that had been traditionally classified as a single species. the rotifer b. plicatilis is one of the most striking examples of such hidden diversity: initially described as a single species, it has experienced an enormous taxonomic inflation to currently 14- <dig> postulated species, based on molecular markers  <cit> . morphological discrimination among some species of this complex is possible, however difficult, as it involves tight experimental control over environmental and developmental variation  <cit>  or sophisticated analysis methods combined with high sample sizes  <cit> . despite the morphological similarity among members of the b. plicatilis complex, recent studies have demonstrated extensive ecological diversification in terms of temperature or salinity preferences  <cit>  and prezygotic and postzygotic reproductive isolation among members in this species complex  <cit> . in addition there are large differences in body size, with more or less continuous variation across species  <cit> . in the last decade, b. plicatilis has emerged as an important model organism for studies on speciation, sexual signaling  <cit> , mate choice  <cit> , biogeography  <cit> , or selection in the wild  <cit> . b. plicatilis is thus also a promising future candidate for genome sequencing.

in this study we use the flow cytometry method to estimate genome size variation in the b. plicatilis complex. we measured the genome sizes of  <dig> different clones, representative of  <dig> cryptic species and analyze these data in a phylogenetic context. in addition, we examined body size and egg size variation in a subset of our clones and tested whether genome size is significantly correlated with any of these variables. finally we discuss our results in the light of studies on reproductive isolation among members of the brachionus plicatilis species complex.

RESULTS
dna sequencing
blastn searches in the genbank database using the coi  and its <dig>  sequences confirmed the genetic identity of our strains . the three new african isolates  shared 95% coi and 99% its <dig> sequence identity with isolates belonging to the b. 'austria' lineage . our new clone ohj <dig> exhibited identical sequences to previously published ones for a b. 'austria' isolate , while those from clone ohj <dig> were identical to another b. 'austria' isolate , except for one nucleotide position in its <dig>  for several clones only one of the markers was available from existing databases - either coi or its <dig> . in these cases, we provided the missing marker sequences. our new sequences, or sequences that were substantially longer than database sequences, have been submitted to the embl database with the accession numbers fr729668-fr <dig> 

phylogenetic analyses
both weighting schemes utilized in the mp analyses of the partial coi sequences  generated the same consensus trees as the nj analysis. nodal support for previously described species was generally high for both phylogenetic methods . in general, there were no strongly supported discrepancies in topology of the its <dig> trees resulting from the two different tree building methods. however, while all the  <dig> branches leading to major clades exhibited strong bootstrap support in the nj consensus tree, the branch leading to clade b suffered from weak bootstrap support in the mp consensus trees. employing gaps as 5th base in mp improved bootstrap support . no disagreements among the groupings of isolates into certain clades/species between coi and its <dig> trees were found. mp analysis of the combined sequence data sets using two different weighting schemes and gap handling and nj analysis produced consensus trees with similar topologies , which were in accordance with previously published phylogenies  <cit> . the trees for the analysis of phylogenetically independent contrasts were constructed from the combined data set by mp method with equal weighting and treating gaps as 5th base e.g. as shown in figure  <dig> for subset  <dig> 

genome size measurements
haploid genome sizes  in the b. plicatilis complex ranged more than seven-fold, from  <dig>  pg  in the adriatic <dig> clone, to  <dig>  pg  in the mnchu <dig> clone of the b.'austria' lineage . estimation of variance components showed that the largest proportion of total variance in genome size was observed among the three major clades , followed by 25% of the variation that could be attributed to the species level. variation among clones  amounted only to 7%. yet, it is evident that within species-variation in the 'austria' lineage was higher than in other lineages with comparable phylogenetic structure .

* according to suatoni et al.  and gomez et al. 

taxonomic level refers to the major clades and species designations displayed in figure 1

our results indicate that whole-genome duplications have occurred during the evolution of the b. 'austria' lineage. genome sizes within this lineage could be approximated roughly as multiples of  <dig>  pg . interestingly, this is the average genome size of the three most closely related species . for instance, clones of two east african lakes  and clones isolated from obere halbjochlacke  had genome sizes of  <dig> - <dig>  pg , whereas one clone isolated in mongolia  had a genome size of  <dig>  pg . an exception from this pattern is the mnchu <dig> clone, also isolated from a mongolian inland lake, which had a haploid genome size of  <dig>  pg  - clearly less than the expected  <dig>  pg .

correlations between genome size and body/egg size
there was considerable variation in body size and egg size among the clones in our study . this is consistent with earlier studies  <cit> , in particular, the finding that the three major phylogenetic clades showed morphological divergence into large morphotypes , medium , and small mophotypes . interestingly this is correlated with genome size . thus, we analyzed in more detail these correlations, in order to test the hypothesis that genome size might influence body or egg size variation in these eutelic organisms.

to test for phylogenetic autocorrelation, we employed the method suggested by abouheif  <cit>  involving 'tests for serial independence' before and after calculating pics  according to felsenstein  <cit> . we first applied this method to our full data set of  <dig> clones, for which we had data on all three variables . in this full data set, phylogenetic autocorrelations could be successfully removed in the pics of body size and egg size . however, pics of genome size remained significantly autocorrelated . we assume that the reason for this were the strong genome size differences within the b. 'austria' lineage, which probably represent a strong deviation from the brownian motion model, which underlies the calculations of pics  <cit> . therefore we repeated these calculations with a dataset that excluded the b. 'austria' lineage and found that phylogenetic autocorrelation could be successfully removed . correlation analysis on pics calculated from this reduced dataset showed that the correlation between genome size and egg size remained significant after controlling for phylogenetic non-independence . however the correlation between genome size and body size became non-significant .

using either pearson correlations on raw data, or phylogenetically independent contrasts .

discussion
the purpose of this study was to examine genome size variation in the brachionus plicatilis complex, with the aim of quantifying the amounts of genome size diversification that might build up at the time scales of speciation. we found an unexpectedly high variation in this species complex, with genome sizes ranging approximately seven-fold. this variation is even higher than that observed, so far, among some rotifer species that are more distantly related and belong to different genera  <cit> . an analysis of the variance components showed that the largest proportions of total variance in genome size were observed at high taxonomic levels . however, it should be kept in mind that this analysis refers the genealogical species concept. if we would apply other species concepts, some of the genealogical species would merge, resulting in a higher within-species variation 

whole-genome duplications
our results suggested that whole-genome duplications have played a role in the evolution of the b. 'austria' lineage. such duplications might have been followed by gradual reductions in genome size, which could explain the lower-than-expected genome size of the mongolian mnchu <dig> clone. interestingly, such "genome downsizing" has been frequently observed in polyploid plants, where c-values have been found to be less than expected based on the degree of ploidy  <cit> . genome downsizing is believed to aid in the elimination of dosage effects, caused by extra dna sequences, and to restore normal cytological and genetic behavior  <cit> . nevertheless, it should be kept in mind that our conclusions about whole-genome duplications in b. 'austria' are based solely on observations of genome size variation. thus we cannot rule out alternative mechanistic explanations, such as a massive accumulation of retrotransposons, which might incidentally lead to similar patterns of genome size variation . future studies are therefore needed to elucidate the exact mechanism of genome expansion in the b. 'austria' group.

we assume that the genome size differences among clones within b. 'austria' are fixed for each population and reflect divergence among populations . this would be in line with other studies showing "quantum variation" of genome size among members of a taxonomic group , even though most of these studies addressed genome size variation at higher taxonomic levels . an alternative explanation might be that the genome size variation observed among our 'austria' clones is incidental, in that we might have sampled polymorphic populations consisting of clones of different ploidy and happened to sample two clones with higher ploidy in the mongolian populations. we consider this unlikely for several reasons. first, we never found clones with genome sizes of ~ <dig>  pg in the b. 'austria' lineage. this supports the hypothesis that at least one whole-genome duplication happened very early when b.'austria' separated from the other lineages. second, in populations from which we sampled several conspecific individuals  we did not find any evidence for multiple ploidy states. for the bogoria population, we actually measured the genome sizes of several additional clones, and all these clones had genome sizes of ~ <dig>  pg . third, substantial differences in genome size were always observed among clones that also differed in both their its <dig> and coi sequences , suggesting that they belong to reproductively isolated populations, rather than the same population.

correlates of genome size
genome size was significantly correlated to egg size. this result is consistent with other studies showing correlations between genome size and cell size . the correlation between genome size and egg size might be expected, since rotifer egg size is determined before the first cell division. for the same reasons, it might be expected that body size is correlated to genome size, since rotifers are eutelic. however, this correlation became non-significant after we controlled for phylogenetic non-independence . a possible explanation for the lack of significance could be developmental variance: our brachionus clones originated from a variety of habitats, from different latitudes, salinities, or water chemistry . if they were locally adapted to these conditions, our experimental conditions  might have favored somatic growth differentially.

genome size variation and speciation
the brachionus plicatilis species complex is a good example for the difficulties in reconciling different species concepts , such as the morphological sc, the biological sc, or the genealogical sc. species boundaries in brachionus plicatilis can vary considerably depending on which concept is applied  <cit> . for instance, while the genealogical sc suggests a clear separation of b. manjavacas from the other species of the clade a , crossing experiments among these species often result in mating behavior  <cit> , zygote formation, or even viable f1-offspring  <cit> . by contrast, the deeply diverged clades a, b, and c are well separated in terms of all species concepts, indicating that they are old  <cit> .

the latter is consistent with our result that most of the variation in genome size  can be ascribed to these major clades. however, we also found substantial variation at lower taxonomic levels, within and among genealogical species in each clade . this suggests that substantial genome size variation can build up early during speciation, since many of the genealogical species identified by suatoni et al.  <cit>  have not yet become fully reproductively isolated. for instance, our clones "lostlake1" and "sm5" differed  <dig> -fold in genome size, yet suatoni et al.  <cit>  observed successful f1-offspring production in crosses between these two clones . likewise, males of the "russian" strain  exhibited mating behavior towards females of the b. 'austria' lineage  <cit> , despite the fact that the genome sizes of the latter are at least 2-fold larger.

the existence of intraspecific genome size variation has been debated extensively in the past, especially among botanists  <cit> . to date, there are several case studies which unambiguously documented such intraspecific variation in plants, even though the magnitude of intraspecific variation is usually low compared to the variation observed among species . in comparison to such estimates, intraspecific variation in the rotifer brachionus plicatilis seems extraordinarily high, especially if we apply the biological species concept. there are several interpretations to this pattern. first, new genome size variation might indeed be generated at very high rates in this species complex . if this were the case, we should expect significant variability in genome size even among individuals of the same population. unfortunately our data do not allow conclusions in this respect, since most clones derived from different populations. however future studies could address this question by examining a larger number of individuals deriving from the same population, and perhaps by examining their sexually produced offspring. this would be particularly interesting in case of the b. 'austria' lineage. recent studies in plants indicate that such genome size variation within populations can reach levels that are high enough to be detected by flow cytometry . a second explanation for the high intraspecific variation in b. plicatilis might be that the formation of reproductive barriers in this species complex proceeds unusually slow. this is actually indicated by a general observation in the b. plicatilis complex: genealogical species tend to merge if the biological species concept is applied  <cit> . nevertheless, it should also be kept in mind that successful experimental crosses between lineages  do not necessarily mean that the resulting offspring would have high fitness under natural conditions, hence, the term 'reproductive barrier' itself is difficult to define. future studies are therefore needed to estimate the fitness consequences of hybridization between lineages with very distinct genome sizes. such experiments would ideally include backcrosses and fitness assays under natural conditions.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study we observed substantial amounts of genome size variation at or slightly above the species level. this suggests that genome size variation can build up early during speciation, and that some of this variation may even accumulate among subdivided populations. it remains to be investigated to which extend such genome size variation might directly contribute to speciation.

