BACKGROUND
human xenografts implanted and grown in immunodeficient mice are commonly used to expand tumor cell populations for cancer stem cell investigations  <cit>  and to test anti-cancer drug efficacies or toxicities in vivo  <cit> . it is often assumed any anti-tumor drug activity is due to targeting pathways in the human cells present in the xenograft, and any associated gene expression data is derived from a mostly human cell population. however, as the implanted xenograft grows in the mouse its human stromal cells are replaced by mouse stromal cells  <cit> , influencing its microenvironment and resulting in a tumor xenograft that is a heterogeneous mixture of human and mouse derived cell populations. each cell type may possess different growth rates and react differently to an administered drug. further, there are many reliable reports in the literature of human xenografts serially passed in vivo transforming adjacent mouse cells into fibrosarcoma-like malignancies  <cit> . drugs tested on such samples would generate false and misleading data. how can researchers easily verify that a tumor xenograft sample contains only a relatively small number of contaminating mouse cells?

over the years, several groups have attempted to answer this question using in situ hybridization  <cit>  or immunohistochemical procedures  <cit> . however, they are slow, labor-intensive endeavors, and are limited by subjective, difficult-to-reproduce measurements. recently, pcr-based strategies have been developed which take advantage of the ability of species-specific oligomer primers to quickly amplify species-specific genomic dna sequences. ono et al  <cit>  were able to differentiate fourteen different species by targeting their relatively abundant and highly conserved mitochondrial dna sequences. cooper et al  <cit>  took this a step further by performing fourteen species-specific pcr reactions simultaneously in a single pcr tube . each species-specific amplicon was a unique length, different enough from the others to be successfully resolved on a 4% agarose gel. while these methods are certainly not quantitative, they are fast, easy, and accurate. one way to obtain a more quantitative result is to take advantage of dna sequencing technology to measure gene length variation by pcr-amplification of several markers across different chromosomes then compare the species-specific differences in relative amplicon lengths  <cit> . this improved method still requires manually measuring peak heights generated by capillary electrophoresis from an abi  <dig> genetic analyzer, a robust but still expensive and uncommon piece of laboratory equipment. this method also relies on the use of multiple genomic loci, many of which are located on or near chromosomal regions known to be deleted or amplified in some human cancers.

real-time quantitative pcr  instruments have been used to quantify genomic dna from multiple species in mixed dna samples: multiple human targets  <cit> ; rhesus and long-tailed macaques  <cit> ; feline, bovine, equine, and cervid  <cit> ; human, cat, and dog  <cit> . these machines have become commonplace and a 96-well plate can be processed in  <dig> minutes or less. therefore, we set out to develop a multiplex qpcr assay that addresses some of the obstacles that limited previous methodologies. herein we describe the assay methodology, various quality control analyses, and a survey of human xenograft samples to illustrate the kind of real-world results that can be expected from the assay.

RESULTS
initial sequence targeting and validation
we surveyed information from several published reports  <cit>  to help identify a chromosomal region that is not known to be frequently duplicated/deleted in human disease or near a recombination hotspot, yet very homologous to the orthologous mouse sequence. the prostaglandin e receptor  <dig>  gene region on human chromosome 14q <dig> fits these guidelines. we focused on a target region within that gene which has high homology between human and mouse sequences allowing us to design primers which could bind both sequences equally well and amplify the homologous sequences . for the species-specific qualitative pcr, we designed species-specific forward primers which contain seven non-homologous base pairs . along with the common reverse primer, the species specificity of these primers is illustrated in figure 2a, where the human-specific forward primer generates a  <dig> bp band only in samples that are human-only or from xenografts known to contain human material. similarly in figure 2b, the mouse-specific forward primer generates the  <dig> bp band only in samples derived from mouse tissues, mouse-tumor allografts, or human xenografts which invariably contain some mouse tissue. this qualitative, end-point pcr assay can be used to quickly screen xenograft samples to verify the presence of human dna and confirm that a xenograft has not been replaced by a mouse-only fibrosarcoma.

the real-time qpcr assay was designed to estimate the percentage of human and mouse dna contained in a xenograft or other mixed-dna sample. the human+mouse forward and common reverse primers were designed to bind the same ptger sequences on human and mouse genomic dna . they amplify the same  <dig> bp dna sequence, whether the template dna is from mouse or human sources, minimizing differences in amplification efficiency and primer-binding. two species-specific taqman probes, each conjugated with a unique fluorescent tag, were designed to target a non-homologous sequence within the amplified region . these species-specific probes allow for multiplex reaction chemistry in a single pcr reaction tube, minimizing pipetting error and maximizing the number of samples that can be tested on a single 96-well optical plate. all qpcr data in this manuscript were derived using the probes as described in figure  <dig>  however, we have also tested the probe sequences with flip-r fluorophores  with no loss of qpcr efficiency or species specificity. to verify the species-specificity of the real-time qpcr assay, we set up reactions containing a known quantity of single species dna sample along with both qpcr primers and both qpcr probes. serial dilutions were used to investigate the assay sensitivity and reliability. figure  <dig> shows the resulting qpcr traces and the resulting standard curve comparing mean ct to log initial genomes using either the human prostate carcinoma cell line lncap or the mouse b16f <dig> melanoma tumor dna. as expected, the graphs illustrating the use of human probe + human primers  or mouse probe + mouse primers  both show robust sequence amplification from approximately  <dig>  down to  <dig> initial genomes. but the mouse probe does not bind to the amplified human sequence , and the human probe does not bind to the amplified mouse sequence , thus confirming the assay's species specificity. although the variance in cts increases dramatically when testing the lowest starting dna amounts , the mean ct is still on the linear standard curve down to approximately  <dig> haploid genomes in both species .

evaluating mixed dna samples
next, we evaluated the assay using samples containing known amounts of human and mouse dna at inverse proportions serially diluted such that the total amount of dna in each sample was  <dig> ng . total genomes of each species were calculated from the known dna concentrations. samples were run in triplicate and the mean cts and standard deviations  are listed in figure 4a. sds less than  <dig>  are considered acceptable. genome numbers were calculated as before and converted to "percentage human" and "percentage mouse". these results were compared to the initial number of human genomes in figure 4b and percent of initial mouse genomes in figure 4c. there is a linear correlation for both species with r <dig> =  <dig> .

in reality, the ratio of human and mouse dna in a given xenograft or other mixed dna sample is initially unknown. we can verify the robustness of the qpcr assay by comparing the initial amount of template dna in a given sample to the sum of the mass of the measured number of human and mouse genomes. we surveyed  <dig> human xenograft samples, currently being grown in our facility, comprising different tumor types and various lengths of serial passage in vivo . the average percentage of mouse contamination in the tumor xenografts varies widely from 0%  to 87% in mda-mb- <dig>  low mouse contamination percentages were found in all in vivo passages, from p <dig> to p <dig>  and high mouse contamination was found in some p <dig> passage xenografts, suggesting the length of time spent in vivo is not a significant factor in predicting which xenografts will contain the highest amount of contaminating mouse cells. there was significant variability amongst samples of the same tumor type, as illustrated in the five lox imvi tumor samples. mouse contamination varied in these from 45%-66%, even though all were derived from the same cell culture sample. important factors that may contribute to the amount of mouse contamination in a xenograft may include the histological type of tumor, how many times it was serially passaged in vivo and how vascularized the xenograft normally becomes. additional sample collection and analysis is required to investigate this further. the mass of measured human and mouse dna in each sample can be summed and compared to the initial amount of dna; the percentage of measured/initial dna is shown in the far right column in table  <dig>  this data set was generated by two operators each performing the assay multiple times thus some variance is expected. we routinely find that the percent human and percent mouse measurements are robust from assay to assay, but pipetting variations contribute to the variation in magnitude of the calculated species dna and adds greatly to the variance sometimes seen in the % of initial dna calculation. using only one operator greatly reduces this variance. we have designed this qpcr assay for a  <dig> μl reaction volume solely as a cost-saving measure. however, using the standard  <dig> μl qpcr reaction volumes reduces the impact of variations in pipetting and may be preferable for some operators.

the xenograft names, tumor types, and number of in vivo passages a sample has progressed through are given for each sample at the time of sample collection. letters following the passage number signify independent tumor samples derived from tumors grown on different mice of the same cohort. after dna extraction and purification, samples were diluted between  <dig> ng/μl and  <dig> ng/μl; one microliter of this dilution serves as the initial dna  template in the qpcr reactions. the ct value for each sample was derived from standard curves and converted to a log genomes value, which can be converted to the number of measured haploid genomes present. percent human and percent mouse values were derived by dividing # human genomes by total genomes present or # mouse genomes divided by total genomes present, respectively. genome numbers for each species are back-calculated into dna , the sum of which should be equal to the initial dna used in the qpcr sample. the far right column lists the percentage of the initial sample calculated from the qpcr assay and gives a measure of quality assurance.

CONCLUSIONS
this qpcr method allows for quick and accurate estimations of mouse contamination in human xenografts. this is important when accessing anti-tumor drug efficacy in human tumor xenografts and in evaluating any other mixed dna sample where significant proportions of mouse dna could influence the interpretation of the results.

