BACKGROUND
the resorcylic acid lactones are mainly produced by fungi belonging to hypocreales order . majority of the known compounds is bioactive  <cit> . the most widespread  is zearalenone -resorcylic acid lactone).

zearalenone  - a mycotoxin produced by several species of fusarium, most notably f. graminearum and f. culmorum - has relatively low acute toxicity, but it exhibits distinct estrogenic and anabolic properties  <cit> , due to its ability to couple with the estrogen receptor. the examination of zen metabolism in swine, rat and chickens liver resulted in α- and β-zearalenol as products  with indication that α-zearalenol binds to estrogen receptors 10– <dig> times stronger than zen and  <dig> times stronger than β-zearalenol. the long-term effects of zen exposure include genotoxic and carcinogenic effects e.g.  <cit> , as well as variety of reproductive disorders in animals e.g.  <cit> .

in vivo, zearalenone has been proven to exhibit significant fungistatic effects and is thought to contribute one of the key mechanisms of competition between producer and non-producer species  <cit> . in keeping with this, ability to detoxify zearalenone is thought to confer a considerable adaptive advantage to competing fungal taxa  <cit> .

among the fungi of hypocreales order, the mycoparasitic fungus c. rosea was long known to degrade zearalenone  <cit> . the exact mechanism of detoxification was determined in form of zearalenone-specific lactonase  enzyme  which catalyzes the hydrolysis of zen, a process followed by spontaneous decarboxylation  <cit> . the end products exhibit both significantly lessened toxic effects and a decreased affinity for estrogen receptors.

to this day, independent detoxification mechanisms have been reported both in fungi   <cit>  and in bacteria   <cit> . however, a systematic screening of potential biocontrol agents  for lactonohydrolase activity and expression patterns has not, to our knowledge, been described in literature.

in this study, we present the results of screening a combined collection of trichoderma and clonostachys isolates, for strains with functional lactonohydrolase homologs and confirmed biotransformation ability. we report the first finding of a functional zearalenone lactonohydrolase in t. aggressivum. we also present results of an inquiry into the evolutionary basis of potential resorcyclic acid lactonohydrolase activity in filamentous fungi.

RESULTS
population screening for potential biocontrol agents
taxonomic identification of isolates used in the screening was carried out with use of both morphological  and molecular techniques .

we found seven pairs of primers amplifying overlapping products nested within the zearalenone lactonohydrolase coding sequence . total of seventy nine isolates belonging to the trichoderma and clonostachys genera were tested for the presence of the gene. for three isolates  we obtained full length products for all seven primer pairs, which allowed for the assembly of complete coding sequences for respective lactonohydrolase homologues . the three isolates were further investigated in detail. genbank accession numbers: an  <dig> - kf  <dig>  an  <dig> - kf  <dig>  an  <dig> - kf  <dig> 

verification of biotransformation ability potential in isolates of clonostachys sp. and isolate of trichoderma sp
the fastest mycotoxin decomposition was observed in the isolate an  <dig> , where after 24 hours the levels of zen were found to have declined below detectable levels . in the other two cases, the process progressed much slower. in case of isolate an  <dig> , two days after incubation the concentration of zen decreased below 50% of initial concentration. in an  <dig> culture  comparable level was achieved after six additional days. in both cases, after full eight days of incubation the concentration of zen in the medium dropped by approximately 80–90% .

zearalenone lactonohydrolase gene expression in isolates of clonostachys sp. and isolate of trichoderma sp
expression of zearalenone lactonohydrolase gene was tested via quantitative rt-pcr . the isolate an  <dig>  isolate exhibited over 16-fold induced increase in zhd <dig> expression 2 hours after zearalenone exposure . conversely, the two other isolates an  <dig>  and an  <dig>  exhibited different expression patterns. the an  <dig> isolate  accumulates higher transcript levels slowly but consistently over the period of days, while an  <dig> most likely presents constitutive varying enzyme activity .

phylogenetic analysis of gene sequences in multiple species
in unsupervised clustering of a/b-hydrolases from multiple genomes, newly sequenced homologs of zearalenone lactonohydrolase were found to form a stable cluster of sequences with previously published homologues from b. ochroleuca, as well as  <dig> additional proteins from m. brunnea and a. montagnei.

while phylogenetic reconstruction by maximum likelihood indicated strong support for a monophyletic clade formed by the cluster members , positioning of the resulting clade within a/b-hydrolase phylogeny was poorly supported and thus remains uncertain.

homology modelling and comparative structure analysis
the created homology models uncovered similarities in the active site pocket, as detected by fpocket <cit> . in all of the modelled structures, the active site pocket is strongly hydrophobic under normal conditions - likely the catalysis is enabled by allowing access to the active site  which allows the reaction to proceed by standard mechanism involving forming a transient oxyanion hole and subsequent cleavage of the lactone ring . while homology-based models are likely insufficient for elucidation of full sequence of events during substrate binding and catalysis , we were nevertheless able to ascertain the key functional residues involved.

our identification of the catalytic triad conflicts with the initial proposition of takahashi-ando  <cit>  that active site is formed by s102-h242-d <dig> . typically, the nucleophilic attack of hydrolase enzyme is facilitated by interaction of histidine with acidic residue . this role, according to all our homology-based models cannot be fulfilled by d <dig> .

a typically, the third member of catalytic triad appears to be e <dig> residue, where the side chain is capable of interacting with distal nitrogen of catalytic histidine, provided conformational changes allow rotation of the glutamate side chain towards histidine . this residue is sequentially equivalent  to catalytic glutamate residues demonstrated in human epoxide hydrolase  and epoxide hydrolase from pseudomonas aeruginosa .

another possibility is residue d <dig> - however it appears to be nonconserved in marssonina sequence . sequencing error cannot be completely ruled out in this case, as a single nucleotide change is sufficient for aspartate to alanine substitution in this context. notably, d <dig> residue position in relation to the active site histidine favorises interactions with proximal imidazole nitrogen  - suggesting possible conformational change  during substrate binding.

discussion
zearalenone is one of the most dangerous mycotoxins produced by fungi belonging to the fusarium genus. those species are usually severe pathogens of cereals and legumes, and may cause fusarium head blight and fusarium ear rot of corn. these toxins are contributing to significant economic losses in livestock production causing the disease known as estrogenic syndrome, which results in a sterility. since  <dig>  <cit>  it is known that among the fungi of hypocreales order, the mycoparasitic fungus c. rosea have the ability for zearalenone decomposition but so far no such properties has been described in any species of the trichoderma genus.

selected mycoparasitic trichoderma and clonostachys isolates were found to be able to reduce significantly both the production of zearalenone on medium czapek-dox broth with yeast extract  <cit>  and to detoxify zearalenone. the three isolates  were clearly demonstrated as possible agents with verified biotransformation ability . this finding includes the first demonstration of zearalenone lactonohydrolase activity present in a member of trichoderma genus .

both gene expression and the ability of isolate an  <dig>  to reduce zearalenone levels were confirmed in vitro experiments. the hplc experiments verified that all three isolates are able to decrease toxin concentration in a quick and effective manner  <cit> . the rt-pcr analyses further indicate that the expression of the zearalenone lactonohydrolase gene is subject to different modes of regulation in examined isolates. in particular, for the isolate an  <dig>  two hours after the toxin administration, a significant increase in the zearalenone lactonohydrolase expression is noted, suggesting that in t. aggressivum the presence of zearalenone in the medium directly activates expression of the gene.

further study of sequence variation in lactonohydrolase genes is planned, with redesign of pcr markers based on sequenced regions and extension into non-coding regions of transcript   <cit>  using race-pcr. subsequent research will also encompass separation and identification of end products for detoxification process, as well as isolation of enzyme protein using western blot.

previous works have confirmed the existence and function of zearalenone - specific lactonase in clonostachys sp.   <cit> . the enzyme is one of the reasons clonostachys growth is not inhibited by zearalenone. we posit that presence of functioning homologues within trichoderma can also contribute to their effective antagonistic activity  <cit> , against zearalenone-producing f. culmorum and f. graminearum .

mechanistic features of catalytic site involved in zearalenone biotransformation ability are shown to be evolutionarily old, likely predating the split between leotiomycetes and sordariomycetes . while it is unlikely that the exact function of distant homologs is the same, the affinity towards large hydrophobic epoxides and conservation of catalytic mechanism  are likely. presence of several conserved arginines within the cap domain raises possibility of their involvement in substrate binding or orientation , analogous to the mechanisms observed previously in dienelactone hydrolase  <cit>  and 3-oxoadipate enol lactonase  <cit> . elucidation of the full substrate orientation/catalysis scenario  is planned through application of molecular dynamics experiments for modelling of the ligand binding process.

notably, according to previously published work on b. ochroleuca enzyme  <cit>  zen was rapidly replaced with conversion product. the mass of the molecular ion  corresponding to this product was  <dig>  in our analysis, we did not register the corresponding peak, either due to differences in protocol or because of another mechanism of zearalenone decomposition. an alternative mechanism of zearalenone biotransformation ability was recently demonstrated in basidiomycetous yeast trichosporon mycotoxinivorans <cit> , which requires a modification of hypothetical zom- <dig> intermediate by an unspecified a/b-hydrolase. one possibility, testing of which is beyond the scope of current work, is that the one-step lactonohydrolase evolved as a neofunctionalisation  of the two-step detoxification mechanism retained by t. mycotoxinivorans. if so, the original mechanism can still exist in select extant lineages  in varying degrees .

CONCLUSIONS
our research shows the first finding of a functional zearalenone lactonohydrolase in mycoparasitic trichoderma aggressivum . based on the combined screening of over ninety isolates of trichoderma/clonostachys and in silico investigation of origins of the enzyme activity  we were able to provide supporting evidence for its evolutionary origins, as well as monophyly of functional lactonohydrolase homologs in both genera. the supporting evidence for presence and activity of functional enzyme homologs is based on chemical analyses, gene expression patterns, homology models showing conservation of key structural features and a marked reduction of zearalenone content in cultured samples .

