BACKGROUND
among biofilm communities, there are multiple biochemical interactions that shape the dynamic community that contrasts from free-living planktonic cells. specifically, the notable stress resistance of biofilms has been associated with physiological changes that bacteria undergo during the transition to the biofilm state  <cit> . a vast amount of research in the last decade has focused on characterizing unique aspects of microbial biofilms, which include genomics and post-genomic functional approaches. these techniques have allowed a comparative molecular characterization of bacterial communities during various life history stages . numerous techniques include 16s rrna sequencing for community composition analysis  <cit> , mutational analysis of particular genes, rna profiling  <cit> , genomics  <cit> , transcriptomics for capturing global views of genetic diversity and expression, and isotope-probing to link phylogeny with community function and processes  <cit> . these pioneering studies were helpful for their initial differential analysis of biofilm life history strategies, and have opened the way to genetic characterization of biofilm-single cell transitions in phenotype.

new approaches have become available that allow a complete differential profile including proteomic and metabolomic analysis  <cit> . proteomic profiles help dissect the complexity of microbial communities by analyzing protein expression, function, modification, and interactions over temporal scales. specific separation techniques coupled with mass spectrometry  analysis are also essential for proteomic profiling of these extensive and diverse populations. one classic approach is the combination of two-dimensional  protein gel electrophoresis followed by spot identification via isoelectric focusing  <cit> . in addition, high-throughput approaches are available for protein profiling such as shotgun proteomics, where proteins are digested and the generated peptides are identified by capillary liquid chromatography in tandem with mass spectrometry  <cit> .

metabolomics refers to the analytical approach used to study different cell products  that help to understand the physiological state of microorganisms  <cit> . this analysis is achieved with the use of liquid chromatography coupled with mass spectrometry , followed by detection, and quantification. subsequent identification of metabolites is then accomplished by cluster analysis and mapping  <cit> . although each type of analysis produces an extensive amount of information, combining complementary techniques could significantly contribute to our understanding of biofilm developmental processes. a more recent approach termed “meta-proteomics” aims to identify and combine protein and metabolic data to bridge the gap between phenotypic changes  with genotypic changes   <cit> . earlier studies have integrated various system biology analyses  for biofilms formed by bordetella pertussis  <cit> , leptospirillum sp.  <cit> , and pseudomonas fluorescens  <cit> . however, there are no studies that integrate data collected via proteomic/metabolomic  data for vibrio biofilms.

vibrio fischeri is a mutualistic bioluminescent bacterium that infects the light organs of sepiolid squids and monocentrid fishes. v. fischeri produces bioluminescence that is used by the squid to avoid predation in a behavior known as counterillumination  <cit> . the mutualism is established when the host provides an appropriate niche for the bacteria to reproduce at much higher rates than in their free-living state  <cit> . v. fischeri is capable of forming biofilms both in seawater during its free-living stage and inside its host squid’s light organ while in symbiosis  <cit> . environmental and mutualistic biofilms differ in the sense of bacterial diversity, where multispecies biofilms dominate the seawater environment  <cit>  and only one or a few vibrio bacteria colonize and form biofilm inside the squid’s light organ . the ability of v. fischeri to form a biofilm community within its squid host plays a central role in the establishment and maintenance of the mutualism, as well as the degree to what functional molecules are produced and overexpressed for biofilm formation. therefore, this study aims to describe the metabolic and proteomic profiles of a monospecies biofilm that is crucial for understanding what bacterial molecular components are important for establishing this mutualistic association. proteomic and metabolomic analyses for both free-living  and monospecies biofilm were completed for v. fischeri strain etjb1h to provide the first partial vibrio meta-proteome profile for single cell-to-biofilm physiology. metabolomic analysis indicates several molecular changes that are the result of different biosynthetic pathways associated with exopolyssacharide  production and biofilm formation, as well as proteins that are important for persistence in the seawater environment.

methods
microorganism and biofilm formation experiments
vibrio fischeri etjb1h was isolated from the light organ of euprymna tasmanica from jervis bay, australia  <cit>  and was used throughout this study. v. fischeri etjb1h was routinely cultured on luria broth high salt  agar  and sub-cultured on lbs liquid media at 28 °c. biofilm formation was grown as previously described  <cit> . briefly, three flasks of 250 ml with 100 ml of lbs media were inoculated with a 1: <dig> dilution from an overnight culture  and incubated for 24 h at 28 °c under static conditions. after incubation, planktonic cells were removed and flasks were briefly washed with lbs to remove any excess planktonic cells. biofilm-forming bacteria  were then removed by placing 100 ml of lbs and sonicating for 10 s three times under low intensity  power using the bransonic  <dig> sonicator . biofilm cells were then concentrated and washed three times by spinning down the cultures at  <dig>  xg for 15 min and removing any excess supernatant media. each of the samples were divided in equal amounts for their proteomic 2-d page and shotgun analysis respectively .

protein preparation and 2-d page electrophoresis
for protein extraction, we used the easylyse™ bacterial protein extraction solution  following manufacturer’s instructions. in brief, a lysis solution was prepared as follows:  <dig>  ml of d.i. water, 2 μl of 1 m mgcl <dig>  and  <dig>  ml of lysis buffer and 1 μl of enzyme were added. a cell pellet consisting of aproximatelly  <dig> cells was added to 200 μl of the above solution. after incubation at room tempareture for 5 min, the samples were centrifugated and the supernatant  was transferred to a clean tube. fifty micrograms of each cell paste was prepared for first dimensional isoelectric focusing by adding four parts of lysis solution  to one part of protein sample  as described previously  <cit> .

the proteins are initially separated in the first dimension based on their isoelectric points; the focused proteins of the first dimension are subsequentelly separated in a second dimension based on their molecular masses. first, dimensional separation was completed using 17 cm ipg strips, ph 3– <dig>  one microgram of the protein sample was loaded and isoelectric focusing was performed following the manufacturer’s protocol . protean© ief cell was used for the first separation at settings of  <dig> kvh and 23 °c. strips were then equilibrated for 15 min in a buffer containing 2 % sds, 6 m urea,  <dig>  m tris–hcl, ph  <dig> , and 20 % glycerol with 2 % dtt  and equilibrated again in the same buffer with  <dig>  % iodoacetamide. the equilibrated strips were transferred to a protean ii© version xi cell tank for second dimension run  in 10 % polyacrylamide gel, and then visualized after staining with coomasie brilliant blue r <dig>  stained cells were covered with cellophane and air-dried overnight at room temperature. gels were analyzed pairwise by eye for differences in their protein patterns  <cit> . in addition, differential analysis by guild biosciences proteome analysis service and a computer densitometric analysis of spots were completed using the image master platinum  <dig>  software . a threshold of 2-fold change was used to determine significance between biofilm and planktonic groups. gels were analyzed pairwise by eye for differences in their protein patterns by overlaying the gels on a light table, gels were then scanned into a computer graphics program  and one replicated is used as a reference.

protein shotgun analysis
a fraction of the whole protein extractions  were trypsin-digested. for digestion, the sample was reduced by adding 5 μl of ddt  and boiled for 10 min and then incubated for 1 h. alkylation was achieved by adding 4 μl of iodoacetamide  and incubated for 1 h. neutralization of the remaining iodoacetamide was achieved by adding 20 μl of dtt and incubating for 1 h. trypsin was added to the mixture  and complete digestion was accomplished after incubating for 18 h at 37 °c. protein digests  were analyzed by tandem mass spectrometry through cation exchange-reversed phase chromatography, utilizing a hybrid linear ion trap ft-icr mass spectrometer with ultra performance liquid chromatograph  with a capillary system attached to a quadruple ion time . three technical replicates were analyzed for each combined sample. peptide libraries were collected in a database  searched against a marged database composed of reviewed entries of uniprot database and analyzed with mascot search engine . mascot parameters include proteolysis by trypsin/chymotrypsin with size tolerances of  <dig>  da for peptide fragments, with a 95 % probability that the protein identified is not a random match. the false discovery rate  was calculated using the automated decoy database tool in mascot where decoy statistics were automatically calculated for all matches. alternatively, fasta sequences of target peptides previously identified were run in the program peptide cutter  and resulting fragments were compared to those identified in our analysis. a score of 35 % matching peptides  indicates a protein match  <cit> .

metabolomic analysis
to prepare samples for metabolite extraction, strains were inoculated in triplicate in 120 ml of luria bertani high salt media . when cultures reached an od <dig> of  <dig> , they were pelleted at  <dig>  xg for 10 min at 4 °c. pellets were re-suspended in 10 ml of ice-cold phosphate buffered saline  and cells were pelleted again under the same conditions. the supernatant was discarded and pellets were snap-frozen with liquid nitrogen. bacterial cells were lyophilized for 24 h  and were analyzed by the biotechnology center at the university of illinois at urbana-champaign . the approach used was a two-step lc/ms  followed by targeted identification of differentially expressed metabolites using quadrupole time of flight  ms/ms. three technical replicates were used for this analysis.

RESULTS
v. fischeri cells were grown in parallel as the planktonic  culture and as biofilms on the glass surface of the flask to identify and compare differences in protein profiles from the two physiological states. cell viability was not affected after sonication for the biofilm cells, and there was no statistical difference between the number of colony forming units of planktonic and biofilm samples collected after incubation time  for an od600 =  <dig>  . the profiles presented correspond to a mature biofilm  and free-living cells that did not form any biofilm. two proteomic analysis approaches were used including i) complete protein profile obtained by spot analysis, followed by differential two-dimensional gel electrophoresis, and ii) trypsin protein fractionation followed by shotgun identification  and peptide analysis . metabolomic analysis was achieved through liquid chromatography coupled with mass spectrometry .

identification of biofilm protein fractions by two-dimensional gel electrophoresis
patterns of protein expression in biofilm communities were complex with an average of approximately  <dig> spots per gel. using the planktonic protein gel as the reference, protein spots detected in the biofilm profile were matched against the reference. the number of matched spots was  <dig> with a total of 75 % gel coverage. of these,  <dig> spots were up-regulated in a magnitude of  <dig> fold or more . table  <dig> lists the assay parameters used  that correspond to spots numbered in fig.  <dig>  in addition, there were  <dig> spots that were unique to the biofilm state  that are indicated in fig.  <dig> and table  <dig>  all the proteins listed from this analysis could be detected reproducibly in the range of  <dig> to  <dig> kda.fig.  <dig> 2d-page gel of the up-regulated vibrio fischeri etjb1h biofilm protein exudate. colored squares correspond to magnification of fractions of the gel indicating a better resolution of spots. numbers identify up-regulated proteins described in table 1


spot numbers correspond to proteins labeled in fig. 2


fig.  <dig> 2d-page gel of unique vibrio fischeri etjb1h biofilm protein exudates. colored squares correspond to magnification of fractions of the gel indicating an increased resolution of spots. numbers identify unique biofilm proteins described on table 2




tandem mass spectrometry of peptides
the first scale proteomic analysis for v. fischeri using two-dimensional electrophoresis provides us with differentially expressed protein profiles that include both isoelectric points and molecular weight. in order to identify proteins that were present in the biofilm state of v. fischeri, a shotgun approach was used to detect differentially expressed proteins by matching peptide mass data to available proteome sequence databases  using the keyword “vibrio fischeri es114”. additional analyses utilized the mascot database. in order for a protein to be identified and considered present, tryptic peptides were required to be the primary identified hit in the database, and digests had to match at least 35 % of the complete protein compared with ncbi and uniprot databases. in addition, theoretical isolectric points for the protein matches were calculated using algorithms from antheprot  and scansite <dig> . the criteria applied for identification resulted in a list of peptides that correlate with the molecular weight and isoelectric point detected for some protein spots observed to be either unique or up-regulated during biofilm production .table  <dig> summary of vibrio fischeri etjb1h biofilm proteins identified by uplc/ms

referencea

ancbi reference sequence


bcalculated using antheprot  and scansite <dig> 



proteins related to multiple cellular processes were identified and listed in table  <dig>  the highest match corresponds to the catalytic enzyme udp-n acetylglucosomine  <dig> carboxyvinyltransferase  with a calculated mw/ip match to spot  <dig> . another enzyme detected corresponds to the adenosyltransferase cobyrinic acid a,c-diamide transferase . porins and membrane transporters were detected in v. fischeri etjb1h biofilms, including outer membrane protein u , membrane transporter abc , and multidrug efflux pump .

interestingly, multiple stress-related proteins were detected in our study. these include the heat-stress response-related atpase clp protease , the carbon starvation protein a , the specific helicase ruva related to holiday junction formation , the dna double-strand repair protein reca , the chaperone dnak  and the transcriptional activator sigma  <dig> . another set of proteins include flagellin , bioluminescence regulator , oxidoreductase  and phosphate binding protein .

metabolomic analysis of vibrio fischeri etjb1h biofilms
a mass spectrometry-based profiling method was used for constructing the metabolome of v. fischeri etjb1h planktonic and biofilm stages. this comparison is the first metabolomic study to determine the chemical fingerprint of v. fischeri biofilms, as well as the important biochemical pathways involved in formation from planktonic state to the mature biofilm of v. fischeri.

nominated altered chemicals  were identified in both the planktonic and biofilm samples and are listed in fig.  <dig> in a form of a heat map with a subset of color-coded metabolites  indicating critical fold changes between the two states. a concordance analysis of the two metabolic signatures  indicates significant differences in metabolite profiles. results for biofilm signatures indicate, up-regulated differences  detected for multiple organic acids including carboxylic, phosphoric, aspartic, docosanoic, malonic, hydrobenzoic and keto-gluconic, as well as important sugars such as fructose, mannose, and maltose. glycerol-derived components were also detected , and alcohols included mannitol and tetradecanol. components that were observed to be significantly down-regulated  in biofilms and up-regulated in the planktonic state include threoic acid, hydroxypyrimidine, tyramine, and cellobiose .fig.  <dig> heat map indicating the metabolomic profile of biofilm and planktonic etjb1h vibrio fischeri strains. data are shown in triplicate as a colored map reflecting the logarithms that relate to the metabolite changes . log values are color coded as indicated in the scale



discussion
in this study, we selected a meta-proteomics approach in order to resolve functional differences between the two life-history stages for v. fischeri , and to describe factors that are important for successful colonization of the host, since the biofilm studied here resembles the community found in sepiolid squid light organs , vibrio fischeri biofilms and planktonic cells have been observed previously under scanning electron microscopy . there are distinct morphological differences; for example, planktonic cells are observed with flagellum and different shapes of fimbriae  <cit> , whereas biofilms are observed as a flocculent bacterial mass encapsulated in a polysaccharide matrix  <cit>  structure that is similar to the one observed in biofilms formed in the squid’s light organ  <cit> .

results indicate differences in protein expression levels, including the number of unique proteins detected, as well as those with enhanced levels of expression . the two-dimensional approach used was limited to the inability to identify all the spots through mass spectrometry as previously reported  <cit> . alternatively, identification of some proteins were achieved through shotgun proteomics , and allowed the comparison of both theoretical molecular weight and isoelectric points to experimental values from proteins identified in the two dimensional gel, which validated the combinational methodology. proteins identified in this manner were then classified depending on their functions including: a) stress-response regulators, b) catalytic enzymes, c) transporters, d) metabolic enzymes, and e) structural proteins. proteins that were previously reported overexpressed include those involved in energy generation  and in biosynthesis  . future studies will focus on more specific differences between these two community phenotypes , since it has been observed that environmental versus symbiotic strains respond differently to stress, including fluctuations in temperature and salinity  <cit> .

upregulated proteins are important for maintenance and integrity of v. fischeri biofilms
in vibrio fischeri, flagellin is expressed constitutively, and is esseantial for host colonization . v. fischeri contains between one and five flagellar filaments that form a tuft of polar sheathed flagella  <cit> . v. fischeri flagellins are more similar to each other than to flagellins of other vibrio species  <cit> , and therefore was not possible to differentiate the type of flagellin detected in this study. however, two proteins detected might be the closest match:  the flagellin flga that has been reported to be important for initial stages of host colonization  <cit>  and  flgf, found to be important for host colonization and biofilm formation  <cit> .

stress response proteins were also identified in this study. elevated expression of the chaperone clp was detected here. clp proteins are known to regulate virulence in pathogenic bacteria such as porphyromonas gingivalis  <cit>  and vibrio cholerae  <cit> , and increased concentrations observed in v. fischeri biofilms might be related to increased success in host colonization, since it is believed that strong biofilm formers are also excellent host colonizers  <cit> . more interestingly, as reported for v. cholerae, clp chaperone may be linked to the control of oxidative stress within the biofilm matrix . oxidative stress is thought to be a result of a combination of slow growth in conjunction with a shift in oxygen at different depths of the biofilm  <cit> . additional stress-related proteins were overexpressed in biofilms, including dnak   <cit>  and the carbon starvation protein a   <cit> . it has been suggested that different micro-niches within the biofilm community are continuously exposed to various environmental stresses, inducing an increase of stress resistance mechanisms  <cit> .

stress-inducible biofilm formation also produces dna damage, which can trigger the bacterial sos response initiated by the sensor protein reca  <cit> , which was overexpressed in the biofilm samples. in addition, these methods detected the protein ruva . ruva along with ruvb in the presence of atp release the cruciform structure formed during strand exchange during homologous recombination  <cit> , which might also occur in vibrio biofilm communities. since expression of proteins related to dna repair can be synthesized up to  <dig> times more in biofilms  <cit> , this may result in undetectable traces in planktonic bacteria.

another important component detected in v. fischeri biofilms is sigma factor  <dig>  that has been reported to be an important regulator of a wide range of bacterial processes, including nitrogen metabolism in escherichia coli  <cit> , biogenesis of flagella in vibrio parahaemolyticus and vibrio cholerae  <cit> , and bioluminescence in vibrio harveyi  <cit> . more interestingly, σ <dig> in v. fischeri is encoded by the rpon gene  <cit>  that is overexpressed during the biofilm state, controlling flagellar biosynthesis , nitrogen assimilation, luminescence, and biofilm formation  <cit> .

biofilms cells expressed a presumptive abc transporter, which corresponds to a major class of translocation machinery in multiple bacterial species  <cit> . abc transporters have been previously identified to be differentially expressed during biofilm formation in pseudomonas aeruginosa and e. coli  <cit>  and they may be linked to the transport of small molecules and solutes during the formation and maintenance of the mature biofilm compared to the cells in their planktonic state. in addition, the detected abc transporter might influence cytoplasmic ph homeostasis by increasing transmembrane fluctuation of ions  to allow compensation after ph stress . it is known that the light organ of sepiolid squids undergoes anaerobic stress based on fermentation genes expressed solely in the light organ environment  <cit> , and possible drops in ph may be due to the acid by-products accumulating during this time.

the outer-membrane protein detected in this study  has been previously identified in symbiotic v. fischeri, and has an important role in the initiation of colonization of the squid light organ  <cit> . in addition, disruption of the ompu gene results in increased sensitivity to membrane-disrupting chemical agents such as chlorine and organic acids  <cit> . these observations indicate that ompu might have an important role in maintaining membrane integrity during v. fischeri biofilm development by providing defense mechanisms that are essential for resistance to the acidic environment within the biofilm matrix.

biofilm development is guided by several regulatory systems. one of the important processes is formation of the exopolyssacharide  matrix, a hallmark of bacterial biofilms. udp-glcnac  was detected in this study, and has an important role in the synthesis of eps by acting as a transcriptional regulator  <cit> .

phosphatase-binding proteins have been described to increase production of the second messenger cyclic diguanylic acid  in pseudomonas aeruginosa  <cit>  and this protein was prevalent in our study. c-di-gmp is a central regulator of the prokaryote biofilm lifestyle  <cit> , including v. fischeri biofilms.

there are multiple proteins that regulate bioluminescence. in particular, biofilm formation and bioluminescence are linked through proteins that regulate bacterial communication or quorum sensing  <cit> . one protein detected in this study  may up-regulate the quorum sensing cascade, which, among other functions, has been reported to increase production of eps  <cit> . this finding is particularly important for host-related biofilms and host survival since bacterial bioluminescence  is the main process that sepiolid squids use for the counterillumination . therefore, in v. fischeri, regulation of bioluminescence is activated when bacterial concentration significantly increases in number and proximity  . provided that the bioluminescence protein was detected in a biofilm that was formed under laboratory conditions, a similar bacterial community  is present in the squid host.

metabolomic profile revelas an increased number of components of the biofilm matrix
most vibrio biofilm matrices are composed of polysaccharides, such as the vps , present in v. cholerae biofilms  <cit> . this metabolomic study detected carbohydrates that were present during the biofilm state and absent in planktonic cells. proteins present consisted of mannose, maltose, fructose, and other monomeric sugars . in addition, smaller amounts of n-acetylglucosamine and n-acetyl glutamic acid were detected and have been described to be part of the vps  <cit> . the presence of multiple glycerol-derived metabolites suggests that biofilm cells may use phospholipids released from neighboring cells, which possibly serve as a carbon source for amino acid biosynthesis. this metabolomic study revealed the presence of highly phosphorylated  glucans, which have been identified to be associated with the matrix of strains of p. aeruginosa  <cit> . metabolites detected are important for synthesis of eps components, or are related to regulatory processes involving second messengers . these components are strictly unique of community formation, but further research is required in order to determine if these metabolites are also important for mutualistic associations and what could be the metabolic differences between environmental and mutualistic biofilms. future studies are needed in order to test whether glycerol and phosphate-derived components  are dominant in the squid’s light organ and how these components may contribute to host specificity and maintenance of symbiosis integrity.

CONCLUSIONS
the objective of this study was to examine conserved proteomic and metabolomic signatures of both planktonic/free-living v. fischeri and their biofilm communities. our results establish the methodology to utilize meta-proteomic analysis, enabling a more detailed perspective for understanding the biochemistry and metabolism of growth between the free-living/planktonic and community biofilm stages in a mutualistic bacterium. this meta-proteomic approach also improves the understanding of biofilms at a molecular level that is different from a transcriptomic or genomic comparisons . results indicate a clear divergence associated with the restructuring of regulatory networks that allow community formation. unique proteins and metabolites  were significantly overexpressed in the biofilm state when compare to the free-living planktonic cells. future work will entail combination of more differential studies  to link the role of candidate genes to biochemical pathways and protein functionality.

additional file
additional file 1: figure s <dig>   2d-page gel of unique spots presents in protein exudates from a) vibrio fischeri etjb1h planktonic cells and b) vibrio fischeri etjb1h biofilm cells. circles indicate the spots that are unique for each protein extraction. spot detection revealed  <dig> spots for the planktonic cells and  <dig> spots for biofilm cells. using planktonic cells as the reference profile, there were a total of  <dig> spots upregulated and  <dig> downregulated for the biofilm cells. 



abbreviations
v. fischerivibrio fischeri

es114euprymna scolopes st. 114

etjb1heuprymna tasmanica st. jervis bay 1h

2d-pagetwo-dimensional polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis

epsexopolysaccharide

msmass spectrometry

lcliquid chromatography

lbsluria broth high salt

ipgimmobilized ph gradient

mamilliampere

dttdithiothreitol

sdssodium dodecyl sulfate

ft-icrfourier transform-ion cyclotron resonance

dadalton

kdakilodalton

fdrfalse discovery rate

q-tofquadruple-time of flight

uplcultraperformance liquid chromatography

mwmolecular weight

ipisoelectric point

c-di-gmpcyclic diguanylate

vpsvibrio polysaccharide

competing interests

the authors declare that they have no competing interests.

authors’ contributions

conceived and designed the experiments: m.k.n., a.c.-d. performed the experiments: a.c.-d., c.g. analyzed the data: a.c.-d. contributed materials/analysis tools: m.k.n. wrote the paper: m.k.n., a.c.-d. final approval of manuscript: m.k.n., a.c.-d., c.g. all authors read and approved the final manuscript.

authors’ information

not applicable.

