BACKGROUND
the tephritidae family of insects includes the most important agricultural pests of fruits and vegetables. most of them belong to four genera: bactrocera, ceratitis, anastrepha and rhagoletis. ceratitis includes  <dig> different species. among them, the medfly, ceratitis capitata, is the best so far studied member of the family and attacks over  <dig> different fruits and vegetables in tropical and sub-tropical regions  <cit> , causing damages of hundreds of billions $ per year. anastrepha is the most economically important genus of pests in the american tropics and subtropics and includes more than fifteen economically important pests  <cit> . rhagoletis includes more than  <dig> described species distributed in eurasia and the new world, several of which are important pests  <cit> . bactrocera is among the largest genera in tephritidae including about  <dig> species  <cit> . many of them are serious pests of fruits and vegetables in different parts of the world  <cit> . the only member of this genus present in europe is the olive fruit fly, bactrocera oleae, the major pest of the olive fruit, with estimated damages of 5–30% of the global olive production, resulting in economic losses of about  <dig> million $ per year  <cit> . quarantine orders against non-indigenous tephritidae exist in all countries, demonstrating the appreciation of these species' destructive abilities and invasiveness success  <cit> .

currently, control of these insects is based on chemical insecticides. the sterile insect technique  is the most promising, environmentally friendly method, based on the mass production and release of sterile insects into field populations. when the released males mate with the field females no progeny are produced and the field population may finally be suppressed. the appreciation of the negative effect of the released females  <cit>  lead to the development of genetic sexing strains   <cit> . successful development of such approaches, however, presupposes an understanding of the species at the genetic, molecular and population level. additionally, new molecular and genetic tools, such as genetic transformation, could prove very helpful since they can improve mass rearing of effective male insects. such knowledge developed in the medfly lead to successful sit protocols , whereas respective lack in the olive fly lead to fruitless attempts. in the early '70s, efforts to employ the sit against the olive fly were unsuccessful  <cit> , principally due to the low competitiveness of the sterile mass-reared males compared to the wild ones  <cit> . several molecular and genetic studies have changed b. oleae's research landscape in recent years. among them we mention studies on population genetics  <cit> , cytogenetics , sex-determining cascades  <cit>  and, most notably, the successful genetic transformation  <cit> , an achievement that gives new perspectives towards the efficient use of the sit.

microsatellites constitute very powerful genetic and molecular markers  <cit> . in the medfly they have been used to identify sources of origin, invasion phenomena, to design control strategies  <cit> , as well as in the genetic mapping of the species  <cit> . this last possibility renders microsatellite markers particularly useful in the olive fly, since several years of efforts have provided no morphological markers and therefore the development of classical genetics has been entirely hindered . in addition, such markers can also be helpful in sit development. for example, they have been successfully used in the analysis of mating systems in b. dorsalis  <cit>  and c. capitata  <cit>  and they can be used to detect the degree of differentiation between laboratory and wild flies, the main reason of sit failure in the olive fly.

the present study enriches a previously described set of  <dig> microsatellite markers  <cit>  with  <dig> new ones. most of these markers were proven polymorphic, some of them were localized in the polytene chromosomes of the species and many of them were successfully cross-amplified in other tephritidae species. their utility in genetic studies and evolutionary comparisons is considered.

RESULTS
isolation and characterization of microsatellites from small-insert genomic libraries and enriched libraries
thirty-four microsatellite containing clones were isolated from small-insert genomic libraries and  <dig> from enriched libraries, yielding a total of  <dig> and  <dig> discrete microsatellite motifs, respectively, since a few of them contained more than one microsatellite motif . despite the use of an equal mix of  <dig> and  <dig> as probes, there was a clear predominance of gt over ct repeats obtained from the small-insert library. this most likely reflects a difference in the abundance of these sequences in the genome, as has been the case in other diptera, such as d. melanogaster  <cit> , d. simulans  <cit> , a. gambiae  <cit>  and c. capitata   <cit> . in hymenoptera, ct repeats seem to be more abundant than gt repeats, as studies in apis mellifera and bombus terrestris reveal  <cit> .

boms1–34: microsatellite loci isolated from total, small-insert dna libraries

boms35–70: microsatellite loci isolated from enriched libraries

t: annealing temperature for in situ hybridization

: not tested

n: bases that do not present any motif

a significant predominance of interrupted  over perfect motifs  was observed in both isolation approaches, while only a few  were compound. these percentages are quite similar to those observed in c. capitata  <cit>  and b. terrestris  <cit> . on the other hand, they are not in agreement with results from b. tryoni  <cit> , b. morii  <cit> , d. pseudoobscura  <cit>  and a recent study in c. capitata . therefore, it is unclear whether these results represent the actual structure of microsatellites in the olive fly genome, since data from closely related species are conflicting. possibly these results can be attributed to differences in isolation strategies.

in situ hybridization to polytene chromosomes
cytological analysis of b. oleae has revealed five chromosomes  and a heterochromatic mass, corresponding to the five autosomes and the sex chromosomes, respectively . well-defined polytene maps have been produced, providing the opportunity for a cytologic localization of molecular markers on the chromosomes.

twenty of the isolated microsatellite clones were in situ hybridised to the salivary gland polytene chromosomes of b. oleae, in order to identify their chromosomal localization. at hybridisation temperature of 58°c, sixteen of the microsatellite probes gave specific signals  and  <dig> of them mapped to unique chromosome loci. clone boms <dig> hybridised to two neighbouring bands of the same chromosome region, boms <dig> hybridised to two regions on the same chromosome arm, while boms <dig> mapped to three regions on two chromosome arms  . these microsatellite clones gave the same multiple hybridisation pattern even at the higher hybridisation temperature of 62°c. chromosome localization was not possible for four of the microsatellite probes, although tested at several hybridisation temperatures. lack of hybridization signal can be attributed either to insufficient hybridization due to small probe length or to the fact that these clones may lie in heterochromatic regions . boms <dig> gave no detectable signal, while the remaining three gave multiple signals.

the thirteen microsatellites that uniquely mapped to the polytene chromosomes of b. oleae are dispersed on seven polytene arms, establishing genetic markers for all five autosomes. table  <dig> summarizes the microsatellite hybridization sites and figure  <dig> schematically presents the relative positions of the hybridization signals to the polytene chromosome arms of b. oleae together with previously described markers  <cit> . hybridization signals are presented in figure  <dig> 

although their number is small, they enrich the already existing cytological map and are the basis for a low-resolution cytogenetic map that will facilitate future genome projects of the species. it is encouraging that these thirteen markers are dispersed in seven of the ten chromosome arms . however, our in situ hybridization data are still limited to support a claim of a uniform distribution of microsatellite loci in the olive fly genome.

development of microsatellite markers
unique sequences flanking each repeat array were used to design pcr primer pairs for the amplification of  <dig> microsatellites. thirty-one primer pairs amplified a product of the expected size, as revealed by agarose gel electrophoresis . subsequently, all primer pairs that amplified a specific band were used for the genotyping of  <dig> individual wild flies  and/or up to  <dig> individuals of a laboratory strain. in addition,  <dig> c. capitata microsatellite markers  that cross-amplified in the olive fly were used, raising the total number of functional primer pairs to  <dig> . in total,  <dig> primer pairs  amplified a polymorphic and easily scorable pcr product, while eight pairs amplified a monomorphic one. the five remaining primer pairs generated pcr products that were not easily scored .

e.s: expected size

tm: pcr annealing temperature

n: sample size

na: actual number of alleles; ne: effective number of alleles

ho: heterozygosity observed; he: heterozygosity expected

: in hwe; : out of hwe

the mean allele number per locus was  <dig>  for natural populations and  <dig>  for laboratory strains , demonstrating their usefulness in population analyses of the species. conformation to hwe was tested for  <dig> loci for natural populations and  <dig> loci for laboratory strains, according to g <dig> criterion, at a significance level of 5%. only five deviations were observed due to homozygosity excess, which can be attributed to small sample size or to the presence of null alleles .

cross – species amplification in tephritidae
the  <dig> primer pairs designed for the olive fly and proved polymorphic were tested in a pooled mix of five flies from each one of  <dig> tephritidae species. twenty-six of them amplified a specific dna fragment, at least in one of the species examined. four species belong to bactrocera , four to anastrepha , two to ceratitis  and one belongs to rhagoletis  .

300/
500/
400/
500/
numbers in columns indicate pcr product size, as revealed by agarose gel electrophoresis

sm: smear; f: faint band; mb: multiple bands

bo: b. oleae; bco: b. correcta; bcu: b. cucurbitae; bd: b. dorsalis; bt: b. tryoni; cc: c. capitata; cf: c. fasciventris; af: a. fraterculus; al: a. ludens; aser: a. serpentina; astr: a. striata; rc: r. cerasi

species/
bactrocera
functional primer pairs: number of primer pairs that cross-amplified successfully; expected size: number of primer pairs that cross-amplified and produced fragment of the expected size ; presence of ssr motif: number of cross-species amplification products that harboured a microsatellite motif; presence of the expected motif: number of cross-species amplification products that harboured the expected microsatellite motif ; mean number of uninterrupted repeats: sum and comparison of the number of uninterrupted repeats for primer pairs that cross-amplified and harboured the expected motif. dividend represents repeats in the new species, while divider stands for number of repeats in b. oleae

a total of  <dig> pcr products were amplified. the species with the highest degree of amplification was b. tryoni , while with the lowest was rhagoletis cerasi . as expected, the highest percentage of amplification was inside bactrocera, with a mean of  <dig> %. ceratitis presented the next higher amplification degree , followed by rhagoletis and anastrepha  . it is worth mentioning that b. cucurbitae exhibited very low amplification rate, similar to that of anastrepha. finally, c. capitata presented substantially lower degree of amplification than c. fasciventris.

the majority of pcr products had similar size  with those obtained in b. oleae . still, the highest degree of pcr product size conservation was inside bactrocera , although ceratitis showed a comparable percentage . anastrepha and rhagoletis presented significantly lower values  . surprisingly, b. cucurbitae showed very low size conservation , comparable to that of anastrepha, implying that the low amplification value mentioned before may not be a pcr artefact. this in not the case in c. capitata, since size conservation is very high . this value is higher than that of c. fasciventris and comparable to that of bactrocera, suggesting that medfly's low amplification value is more likely a pcr artefact.

analysis of cross-species amplification products
amplification of a band of expected size does not necessarily mean that the expected microsatellite motif is also present. to evaluate the degree of motif conservation,  <dig> of the reactions that produced a specific band were subcloned and sequenced. we focused on pcr products of similar to the expected size and distributed in as many species as possible. twenty-seven of the amplification products harboured a repeat motif,  <dig> of which contained the same as that of b. oleae. six of the products harboured new motifs  .

bco: 2tan72/22323c3
bcu: 3aca24
bd: 2tgca3a25ca227
bd: 2aa/5
bt: 2a/3
cc:/a32
cf: gac4
bd: tg4
bcu: 37
bd: caca22/a13ca6ta4n4a3ca2ta2ca5
bt: caca22/a6ca3gca6ta5ca5n28a2ga9cga4
af: caca23/4a3ga8ga4n9ga3gata4ta8gaca5ca4
al: caca23/4a3ga9ga4n9ca3gata4ta11ca5ca5
aser: caca23/ca5ga5ga4taca4taca2tca2ca <dig> gata4ta4taca5ca8
in bold: cases of preservation of the expected motif

n: non-motif bases

bco: b. correcta; bcu: b. cucurbitae; bd: b. dorsalis; bt: b. tryoni; cc: c. capitata; cf: c. fasciventris; af: a. fraterculus; al: a. ludens; aser: a. serpentina; astr: a. striata; rc: r. cerasi

nineteen  sequencing reactions were performed in bactrocera. the presence of a microsatellite motif in  <dig> of them , demonstrates their potential in the analysis of other bactrocera species. results from other genera are encouraging, although preliminary. in ceratitis, for example, four sequencing reactions were performed, three of which exhibited the expected motif. in anastrepha, five sequencing reactions were performed, all of which exhibited a microsatellite motif with four cases possessing the expected one . finally, in rhagoletis, three sequencing reactions were performed, one of which exhibited a microsatellite repeat of the expected motif. these results are summarized in tables  <dig> and  <dig> and demonstrate the potential utility of these markers in the analysis of tephritidae genera other than bactrocera.

mean number of uninterrupted repeats was measured only in cases where the expected motif was present in cross-species amplification products . in seventeen cases within bactrocera , the mean number of uninterrupted repeats was  <dig>  for b. oleae and  <dig>  for the other bactrocera species. same analysis for three pcr products  in ceratitis gave a mean of  <dig>  and  <dig>  uninterrupted repeats for b. oleae and ceratitis, respectively. although sequencing data are still limited, it is obvious that microsatellites tend to present longer arrays in the species in which they were isolated from. this has been described in a variety of species, such as drosophila  <cit>  and primates  <cit> , and has been attributed to the fact that microsatellites can evolve directionally and at different rates in closely related species.

sequencing analysis and phylogenetic comparisons
although we did not perform a phylogenetic analysis, it seems that measures of cross-species amplification  are indicative of the phylogenetic history of these species. our results support the notion that three of the bactrocera species are very close to b. oleae, while the fourth  seems to be more distant . also, ceratitis seems to be more closely related to bactrocera than anastrepha and rhagoletis seems to be the most distantly related genus to bactrocera. these results perfectly replicate the exact same relationships observed in the most recent phylogenetic analysis of these species based on mtdna sequencing data  <cit> . secondarily, they are also supported by several other studies from different insect species based on alignment of mitochondrial 16s rdna sequences  <cit>  and 18s rdna sequences  <cit> , which show that bactrocera is more closely related to ceratitis, and closer to anastrepha than it is to rhagoletis. in addition, we also performed sequencing alignments of a few cross-species amplification products of some of our markers . in all cases, the different species were clustered to their respective genera with high bootstrap values. although these data are very limited, they come from dispersed regions of nuclear dna which gives significant value to phylogenetic analyses. there are studies supporting that microsatellite data can shed light to phylogenetic relationships among closely related taxa  <cit> . sequencing analysis of more microsatellite markers can probably reveal complex phylogenetic relationships among different tephritidae species, especially in cases of species complexes.

polymorphism of cross-species microsatellite markers
presence of a microsatellite motif does not necessarily mean that these loci can be used as genetic markers. nineteen microsatellite markers developed in the medfly cross-amplified in the olive fly . the fact that eight of them were polymorphic in a relative small sample  confirms the possible utility of the markers presented here in the analysis of other tephritidae species.

CONCLUSIONS
since their discovery, microsatellite markers have been particularly useful in population and genetic analyses, mainly due to their high degree of polymorphism. their significance is even greater in organisms like the olive fly, where the lack of morphological markers makes classical genetic analysis practically impossible. the interest in olive fly's genetics is not only theoretical, since modern genetic and molecular tools have benefited several operational sit programmes, particularly those where gsss are involved  <cit> . the observed polymorphism of the developed microsatellite markers  guarantees their utility in genetic and population analyses. a subset of these markers has already been successfully used in previous population studies  <cit> . the existence of well-described polytene chromosomes in the olive fly  <cit>  and the possibility of cytological localization of molecular markers by in situ hybridisation provide a powerful method to link the genetic and molecular information of an organism. the existence of defined polytene chromosomes in other diptera  <cit>  also offers the opportunity to establish syntenic linkages and to study the evolutionary relationships of separate chromosomal segments  <cit> . cross-species amplification of the developed markers to other tephritidae demonstrates their potential utility in those species. sequencing analysis of several cross-amplified products revealed a varying degree of conservation that declines outside the bactrocera genus. such sequencing analyses can also assist the clarification of phylogenetic relationships among different species, particularly in cases of species complexes.

