BACKGROUND
a huge amount of information has been obtained from sequencing projects. more than two hundred complete microbial genomes are available to date in public databases and sequencing of a similar number is in progress  <cit> . many questions remain unsolved. for example, what is the biological meaning, if any, of gene arrangement in the bacterial chromosome?

changes in gene sequence and chromosomal rearrangements constitute the main sources of genomic variability. nonsynonymous substitutions in the first or second nucleotides of the codon change the encoded residue and are thus a driving force of natural selection. genomic studies in bacteria regarding synonymous and nonsynonymous substitution rates have been published elsewhere  <cit> . chromosomes show constraints on rearrangement and works dealing with that aspect were recently reviewed by rocha  <cit> ; he suggested that there is a balance between conservation and change in the organization of the chromosome.

the operon represents the first level of the gene organization. neighboring genes, especially those in co-directional and in divergent orientation, represent a second organization level because they show a certain functional association revealed by genomic context analysis  <cit> . regarding comparisons among closely related species, the gene order conservation, or synteny, represents a third level of organization. synteny depends on shared ancestry and inter- and intrachromosomal exchanges, and represents a higher relationship between taxa. it was suggested that physiologically important gene clusters could be positively selected, and synteny perhaps reveals the functional constraints of these genes  <cit> . for the detection of synteny it is necessary first to determine the set of orthologous genes in pairs of organisms and recently an inverse method has proven useful for this  <cit> .

recombination/transposition events can easily disrupt synteny. species of buchnera and corynebacterium have low levels of chromosomal rearrangements and lack reca and recbcd orthologs, respectively  <cit> , thus suggesting that recombination is an important factor for loss of synteny. synteny studies have focused in short gene clusters in eukaryotes  <cit>  while whole chromosome comparative analysis has been done in bacteria and archaea  <cit> . for example, there is a striking conservation between the chromosomes of escherichia coli and salmonella typhimurium  <cit> , and also between those of brucella melitensis, b. suis and mesorhizobium loti  <cit> . however, the synteny analyses for alpha proteobacteria such as those reported in the genome sequence determinations of brucella melitensis, sinorhizobium meliloti and agrobacterium tumefaciens are highly schematic  <cit> . a thorough analysis of rhizobiales genomes would determine if the key set of genes covering the most important metabolic functions in these organisms are syntenic.

another factor affecting chromosomal rearrangement is horizontal gene transfer  which occurs in bacteria  <cit> , but estimating its impact on genome organization has proved a daunting task for two reasons. first, the reliability of compositional methods to detect hgt events has been questioned  <cit> . second, phylogenetic methods, albeit more reliable, are not always applicable and can easily be misleading without proper care. the results of a recently published analysis suggest that codon usage compatibility between alien genes and recipient genomes  <cit>  is a prerequisite for successful hgt events. this premise has been supported by other evidence  <cit> .

among the most accepted methods to deduce functional relationships of proteins are phylogenetic profile  <cit> , gene neighboring  <cit> , and the rossetta stone method  <cit> . these methods can give additive information about metabolic networks existing in organisms  <cit> . prolinks is a program based on these methods with an extensive library of predicted functional interactions from  <dig> genomes  <cit> . von mering et al.  <cit> , also applying these approaches with the string program, found global modularities in functional protein networks. a question remains about whether functional linkage differences exist in syntenic and non-syntenic gene clusters.

rhizobiales is a prokaryotic order belonging to the alpha proteobacteria subdivision; some rhizobial species are intensively studied for their nitrogen-fixing ability when in symbiosis with leguminous plants. the order comprises both plant symbionts and plant and animal pathogens such as rhizobium, agrobacterium and brucella, respectively. in rhizobia, genes responsible for the symbiotic interaction are commonly found on large plasmids or incorporated in a particular stretch of the chromosome called the symbiotic island  <cit> . the physiological potential of the rhizobial chromosome allows cell survival under different conditions. for example, an a. tumefaciens strain containing the symbiotic plasmid from rhizobium etli induced nodules on legume plants  <cit> , and conversely, an s. meliloti derivative strain with ri, the rhizogenic induction plasmid, formed root mats on alfalfa plants  <cit> . additionally, there are similarities in the parasitic/symbiotic strategies employed by species of the rhizobiales  <cit> . also, it is possible to find diverse life-styles among the members of enterobacteriales order : for example, buchnera is an obligate aphid symbiont; e. coli and s. typhimurium are common gut inhabitants in mammals; and shigella flexneri, yersinia pestis and erwinia carotovora are pathogens, either for animals or plants  <cit> .

the complete genome sequences of seven species of rhizobiales were available by  <dig>  namely s. meliloti  <cit> , mesorhizobium loti  <cit> , bradyrhizobium japonicum  <cit> , a. tumefaciens  <cit> , b. melitensis  <cit> , b. suis  <cit>  and rhodopseudomonas palustris  <cit> . although their genomes show a certain degree of conservation, variability corresponding to their evolutionary divergence points, microbial life styles and ecological niches was also found. comparative genomics has captured the attention of researchers as a way of achieving a better understanding of the molecular basis underlying phenomena such as symbiosis and pathogenesis.

we classified the genes of several rhizobial species in order to gain a comprehensive insight into chromosomal conservation and genome rearrangement. conserved genes among these species can reveal phylogenetic relationships, but also show metabolic strategies useful in understanding the niche diversity in which these organisms usually grow. in particular, syntenic/non-syntenic genes among these species were analyzed in terms of their sequence identity/similarity, physical characteristics of the encoded products and functional relationships among them. additionally, in order to find more general trends, we compared these results with an analysis performed on genomes belonging to the enterobacteriales.

RESULTS
approach, strategy and outline
our main objective was to enhance our understanding of the functional meaning of the gene arrangement on the bacterial chromosome, taking as examples some genomes from the rhizobiales and enterobacteriales. we consider that gene neighboring is not a random trait and gives an adaptive advantage to the cell because the proteins produced are likely to perform related functions. our belief is that the coordinated expression of genes, organized on the chromosome either as operons or clusters, permits the correct integration of metabolic functions.

our approaches were: i) to obtain a comprehensive gene classification, applicable to each of the species analyzed and suitable to make comparisons among them, and ii) to detect specific gene characteristics  of each of the classes. in the first approach we identified orthologs among chromosomes, defined those that were syntenic, those in a different replicon, and those that were species-specific. for the second approach, we analyzed gene/protein sequences for identity, calculated the horizontal gene transfer rate for each class and the predicted molecular weight and isoelectric point of the peptides, and inferred the functional relationship in syntenic or non-conserved chromosomal regions. the results are presented in the following order: 1) synteny in rhizobiales , 2) synteny in enterobacteriales, 3) sequence analysis of the chromosomal predicted orthologs, 4) physical characteristics of the translated products of syntenic genes, and 5) functional roles and linkage of chromosomal predicted orthologs. s. meliloti was taken as reference organism for the comparisons with each a. tumefaciens, m. loti, b. melitensis and e. coli. e. coli was used as base to compare with s. typhimurium, e. carotovora and s. meliloti.

1) synteny in rhizobiales
gene classification of rhizobiales
the selection criteria mentioned in methods were applied to the chromosomes of s. meliloti , a. tumefaciens , m. loti , and b. melitensis . as compared to the chromosome of s. meliloti, we found that more than 60% of genes were chromosomal predicted orthologs in the at circular chromosome  and bm chromosome i , one third in ml chromosome and bm chromosome ii  and one quarter in the at linear chromosome ; however, the number of chromosomal predicted orthologs in each organism was similar, about two thousand . the sm chromosome presents  <dig> genes in  <dig>  mb.

chr., chromosomal. synt., syntenic. at-c, a. tumefaciens circular chromosome. at-l, a. tumefaciens linear chromosome. at, a. tumefaciens chromosomes. ml, m. loti chromosome. bm-i, b. melitensis chromosome i. bm-ii, b. melitensis chromosome ii. bm, b. melitensis chromosomes.

we assessed the chromosomal genes with conserved order or synteny . syntenic genes represented about 70–80% of chromosomal predicted orthologs . that is, the conserved chromosomal order of these genes seems favored. the remarkable synteny level is highlighted by a group of  <dig> common syntenic genes in all these species. non-syntenic genes represented from 17% to 35% of the chromosomal predicted orthologs in these organisms. only  <dig> non-syntenic genes were common in the four rhizobiales.

the remaining categories obtained in this analysis were: homologs present in plasmids, homologs with the rest of rhizobial chromosomes, and those with no orthologs in the public databases . homologs in plasmids were more abundant in the at-l,ml and bm-ii chromosomes . these replicons have special features as commented below and in discussion. aside from the two organisms being compared, some genes also matched with other rhizobial chromosomes  and comprised about a quarter of the chromosomal genes in these species . some of them only matched with unidirectional best hits . in this context, in an additional analysis between s. meliloti and a. tumefaciens, we found that  <dig> genes matched with unidirectional best hit , but the rest were predicted orthologs with bidirectional best hits, either syntenic or non-syntenic, and are represented in the red and blue striped bars , respectively. species-specific genes were especially abundant in the m. loti chromosome, while in the other replicons this class covered at most 20%. one half of these species-specific genes were not present in the cog database  <cit>  and the rest were denoted as hypothetical .

in this way, all chromosomal genes were assigned to the categories mentioned, as shown in figure  <dig> for the comparison of s. meliloti with a. tumefaciens. this approach gives a panoramic view about shared and unshared genes with other rhizobial species. additional file  <dig> shows the categories for the other comparisons.

a schematic representation of rhizobial chromosomes was obtained relative to the classification of the genes. a high proportion of chromosomal predicted orthologs of the analyzed species were syntenic; however, in the a. tumefaciens linear, m. loti and b. melitensis i chromosomes, plasmidic homologs and species-specific genes were particularly abundant.

gene organization in operons and microsyntenic regions in rhizobiales
a relationship between predicted orthologs and operons was also explored. for s. meliloti , one half of the syntenic genes was found organized in  <dig> syntenic operons, a half of the total predicted operons ; similar proportions were found for the a. tumefaciens circular and b. melitensis i chromosomes. in the a. tumefaciens linear, b. melitensis ii and m. loti chromosomes, the proportion was about 21% . the first two can be considered as accessory chromosomes and the last is the largest chromosome of the analyzed species. non-syntenic genes were found organized in operons in a very small proportion in all analyzed rhizobiales .

a relevant level of operon conservation was found. in the comparison of s. meliloti with a. tumefaciens, 50% of the syntenic genes organized in operons were in identical operons, and taken together with those in similar operons , 82% of total syntenic genes were in conserved operons. similar proportions were found for the other comparisons .

the operons formed with plasmidic homologs constituted a small fraction of the predicted operons . also, a reduced proportion was found for species-specific operons, except for ml. finally, mixed operons were present in a higher amount and ranged from  <dig> to 64% of the predicted operons . this category revealed the highest rate of chromosomal rearrangements in these organisms. the mixed operons contained 17% of the syntenic genes, on average.

syntenic genes were found in clusters and were assigned to microsyntenic regions . when comparing s. meliloti with both a. tumefaciens chromosomes,  <dig> regions were common. in particular, at-c regions in common with sm chromosome were found along all the chromosome, except in the third quarter . the third quarter had colinearity with at-l . in the other comparisons, a similar amount of common regions were observed .  <dig> regions were shared in sm, at, and ml and  <dig> regions were common to the four rhizobiales. about 90% of syntenic genes were located in the microsyntenic regions .

when at-c syntenic genes were compared with sm chromosome, a high level of colinearity was found . in the case of ml, the synteny was disrupted possibly due to a conflicting annotation; for bm-i, an inverse colinearity was obtained, possibly by oric inversion relative to sm . in regard to the rearrangement of microsyntenic regions, an extensive chromosomal colinearity was observed in long tracts. for example, in the comparison of sm and at circular chromosomes,  <dig> microsyntenic regions were colinear,  <dig> almost colinear,  <dig> with drastic changes, and  <dig> inverted. the schematic representation is shown in figure  <dig> panel a, lower part. in the comparison with the at linear and bm-ii chromosomes, highly rearranged structures were found . rearrangement of microsyntenic regions on the chromosomes of m. loti  and b. melitensis i , showed a high level of colinearity when the conflicting annotation and the oric inversion, respectively, were modified .

syntenic genes were organized mainly at two levels: operons and microsyntenic regions. syntenic operons were as abundant as mixed operons. extensive blocks of chromosomal colinearity were found, despite rearrangements.

synteny and insertion sequences, horizontal gene transfer and codon usage
the mobile elements play an important role in chromosomal rearrangement. to determine how these elements were dispersed among microsyntenic regions, insertion sequence  and transposase locations were analyzed. the s. meliloti chromosome contains  <dig> is and  <dig> transposases belonging to diverse families  <cit> . of the total transposases,  <dig> were found with homologs in plasmids,  <dig> were common with other rhizobial chromosomes,  <dig> were denoted as species-specific and  <dig> were common with the a. tumefaciens linear chromosome. only  <dig> pairs of is/transposases  were found inside microsyntenic regions.

we assessed the influence of horizontal gene transfer  on the genomic structure of rhizobial genomes . table  <dig> shows calculated hgt events for each of the classes syntenic, non-syntenic and plasmid homologs. even though syntenic genes were in the largest class analyzed, they displayed the lowest number of hgt events . predicted hgt rates of non-syntenic genes were  <dig> to  <dig> times higher than those of syntenic genes. on the other hand, unlike any other gene class, species-specific genes had the strongest bias toward a low codon richness index in the four rhizobiales . no significant differences were found for syntenic or non-syntenic genes in each organism.

*calculated by using the method described in medrano-soto et al.  <cit> .

2) synteny in enterobacteriales 
to assess the adequacy of applying our synteny analysis to another bacterial clade, we chose two members from the enterobacteriales , the closely related e. coli and s. typhimurium genomes and defined their orthologous genes. these organisms contained  <dig> predicted orthologs and 95% of them  were syntenic. an extensive chromosomal colinearity with few rearrangements was found .

also, we chose a more phylogenetically distant species, erwinia carotovora subsp. atroseptica to compare with e. coli. their genomes comprise  <dig> and  <dig> genes, respectively. they shared  <dig> orthologous genes and these represented about half the total genes in each chromosome. in the detection of synteny between these organisms,  <dig> genes  fulfilled our requirement and the rest,  <dig>  were classified as non-syntenic. when the genes were assigned to microsyntenic regions,  <dig> regions were found and contained  <dig> %  of total syntenic genes and the rest,  <dig> % , were detected in the non-conserved tracts .  <dig> non-orthologous genes also formed part of microsyntenic regions. the  <dig> non-conserved regions contained  <dig> genes.

to define the conservation of orthology and synteny of enterobacteriales genomes in comparison with the rhizobiales, we compared the s. meliloti and e. coli chromosomes. we found  <dig> predicted orthologs between them, a proportion that represents only a third of the genes shared in the rhizobiales. by visual examination no synteny was apparent between the sm and e. coli chromosomes . with an algorithm, only  <dig> syntenic genes were assigned to  <dig> microsyntenic regions.

3) sequence analysis of the chromosomal predicted orthologs
to determine the level of sequence identity among chromosomal predicted orthologs of the rhizobiales, distribution curves of their translation products were obtained. two different types of curves were found. by comparing s. meliloti with both a. tumefaciens chromosomes, the syntenic products presented a gaussian distribution, with a tendency to high identity levels   and a mean value of  <dig> %. the non-syntenic products showed a non- asymmetric distribution  with a lower mean value  . similar curves were found for the chromosomal predicted orthologs of the other comparisons . when at replicons were separately compared with sm, syntenic products of both at-c or at-l showed a similar bias toward high identity levels; in contrast, non-syntenic products of at-l showed a strongly deviated distribution to low identity values . the tendency of syntenic products to higher identity levels reflects not only restriction to change but also functional constraints, possibly due to an essential character. conversely, the lower identity levels of non-syntenic products represent lower restrictions to change and higher functional versatility.

a comparison of e. coli and s. typhimurium genomes  was performed. a very asymmetric distribution curve with a tendency to high identity levels for syntenic products was obtained ; it remarkably resembled that obtained in the comparisons of syntenic products of the rhizobiales. interestingly, in the comparison of s. meliloti with e. coli both chromosomal non-syntenic and syntenic products had asymmetric curves with strong tendency to low identity levels .

to obtain a complete view of sequence variation of chromosomal predicted orthologs in the four rhizobiales, either syntenic or non-syntenic genes were graphed in relation to their identity levels in comparison with s. meliloti. figure  <dig> panel a shows the sequence identity of  <dig> common syntenic genes in the four rhizobiales, for sm-at, sm-ml and sm-bm comparisons. we referred the comparison to the identity of sm-ml genes ordered progressively. we found that each comparison showed a particular clustering, probably related to the phylogenetic distances between these organisms. the pearson correlation coefficients were r =  <dig>  and r =  <dig>  for sm-bm and sm-at comparisons, respectively. in the clustering of  <dig> non-syntenic genes common to the four rhizobiales , lower correlation coefficients were obtained . in figure  <dig> panel b the sequence identity of  <dig> common syntenic genes in the rhizobiales and enterobacteriales are shown. while the comparison for rhizobiales follows a similar tendency to the previously observed, for e. coli and salmonella there is a higher relatedness level. however, when comparing s. meliloti and e. coli a different tendency with very low identity level is observed. a high level of clustering among closely related species belonging to the same subdivision is visible and also, a tendency to reduced relatedness in members of different subdivisions; that is, synteny is a common trait for members of each subdivision.

to determine the meaning of sequence differences we analyzed the translated syntenic product argc, which participates in the arginine biosynthetic pathway. the alignment presented in additional file  <dig> panel a shows  <dig> positions with identical residues and a range from  <dig> to  <dig> different residues, particular for each of the species compared. however, sequences from brucella melitensis and brucella suis showed only one difference between them . synteny is almost absolute in these organisms . changing residues  were dispersed along the sequences and varied according to the identity level.

to determine more comprehensively sequence differences and similarities in rhizobiales  and enterobacteriales , we selected five organisms from each: s. meliloti, a. tumefaciens, m. loti, b. melitensis and r. palustris for the first and e. coli, s. typhimurium, s. flexneri, buchnera sp. and e. carotovora for the last. we chose some syntenic products from the arginine biosynthetic pathway, namely argb, argc, argd, argf, argg, and argh. the alignment belonging to argc is shown in additional file  <dig> panel b. as can be observed, there are sequence identities and differences among species from the same order , but also similarities between species of different orders, albeit at smaller level. additionally, we found an interesting pattern: proteins from enterobacteriales showed an almost uniform level of sequence identity and similarity , however, sequences from rhizobiales showed a clear increasing tendency, from  <dig> to 62% in identity, and from  <dig> to 81% in similarity . these different profiles possibly are related with the particular conditions of the niches occupied by these organisms.

4) physical characteristics of the translated syntenic genes
molecular weight  and isoelectric point  are the main traits for proteomic comparisons. to determine whether syntenic and non-syntenic genes could present differential protein characteristics, we graphed pairs of translated predicted orthologs for both mw and pi parameters. in all comparisons, mw graphs showed lower dispersion than pi ones. figure  <dig> shows the pi graph for the s. meliloti-a. tumefaciens comparison . a large group of proteins  was located on the diagonal. the correlation coefficient for this group was r =  <dig>  in all comparisons. however, the rest of the predicted proteins showed differential pi's and were assigned to sectors . sector i had acidic proteins in s. meliloti and basic proteins in the organism compared with it. sector ii had basic proteins in s. meliloti and acidic in organism compared to it. in sector iii were neutral proteins in s. meliloti and covered all pi range in each of the organisms compared. proteins in sector iv were neutral in the comparing organism and covered all pi ranges in s. meliloti. in additional file  <dig> there is a summary of pi variability of common syntenic products from comparisons with the chromosomes of s. meliloti, a. tumefaciens and m. loti. about 75% of products showed similar pi and 14% and 8% presented high and low variation, respectively. high level is defined as pi variation from acid in one or two organisms and basic in the other, and viceversa. low level is defined as pi variation from neutral to acid or basic . proteins of the sectors mainly corresponded to the functional categories of energy generation, post-translational modification, and transport. in the case of non-syntenic products, a pattern similar to that described above was found . proteins in the diagonal were the most conserved group with subtle pi changes possibly responding to species adaptation, whereas those with deviated pi's may represent a group with higher functional versatility.

since the functional categories mentioned above for sectors are known to often interact with the cell membrane, a membrane prediction for all syntenic products from the s. meliloti-a. tumefaciens circular chromosomes comparison was assessed. strikingly,  <dig> syntenic products were predicted to contain membranal segments. this amount represents almost all membranal proteins coded in the s. meliloti chromosome, considering that bacterial genomes have 18–28% membranal proteins  <cit> . about 70% of predicted membranal proteins with assigned function belonged to transport, energy generation, post-translational modification, cofactor synthesis, amino acid metabolism and central intermediary metabolism categories . there are reports about membrane-interacting proteins with functions such as amino acid and cofactor biosynthesis and central intermediary metabolism  <cit> .

to determine whether the charged amino acid residues were clustered in proteins from the sectors described above, we selected several proteins from each. the residues determining radical changes in pi were observed scattered along the sequences .

5) functional roles and linkage of the chromosomal predicted orthologs
to define the metabolic participation of the chromosomal predicted orthologs, a functional classification was made with chromosomal syntenic and non-syntenic genes. as shown in figure  <dig>  syntenic genes of s. meliloti-a. tumefaciens chromosomes contained a high proportion of the most important house-keeping functions. the relative proportion of non-syntenic genes grew with decreasing functional essentiality, for example transport and binding proteins, cellular processes and regulatory functions . furthermore, the syntenic products covered 85% of the main metabolic pathways as defined in metacyc for s. meliloti . similar results in functional coverage were obtained with the other comparisons . common syntenic genes in the four rhizobiales also included a large fraction of the house-keeping functions . in the case of the comparison between e. coli and e. carotovora, syntenic genes also covered a high proportion of essential functions, however, the first two positions were occupied by cofactor and nucleotide synthesis . in this regard, it is important to note that e. coli and e. carotovora possess no large plasmids.

when functional classes of genes in the microsyntenic regions were divided into informational, operational and cellular processes superclasses and graphed for the s. meliloti chromosome with a  <dig> kb window, an interesting pattern was observed , with the majority of the peaks belonging to a superclass matching with valleys of the other. this could represent functionally specialized blocks of chromosomal tracts, which were part of the ancestral rhizobial chromosome. for instance, the existence of genomic domains is accepted in eukaryotes  <cit> .

the prolinks program was used to determine how the chromosomal predicted orthologs are functionally related. functional links were calculated for all genes in the s. meliloti and e. coli chromosomes and then correlated to their neighbors. for the s. meliloti-a.tumefaciens comparison, the microsyntenic regions presented, on average,  <dig>  connections per node , almost twice the value obtained in the non-conserved regions . from  <dig> microsyntenic regions,  <dig> had functional networks; in the case of non-conserved regions, only  <dig> presented networks. networks with less than  <dig> connections were omitted. the networks of microsyntenic regions presented  <dig> syntenic genes and from these  <dig>  were organized in operons.  <dig> non-syntenic genes were in the networks of the non-conserved tracts, and only  <dig>  were in operons. in the case of the synteny comparison between e. carotovora-e. coli ,  <dig> microsyntenic regions were obtained and from these,  <dig> presented functional networks, with a connectivity average of  <dig>  connections/node. the non conserved regions with networks were  <dig> with a connectivity average of  <dig>  connections/node. from  <dig> syntenic genes in the networks,  <dig>  formed part of operons. network connectivity obtained in s. meliloti and e. coli is shown in the graph of additional file  <dig> . there is a striking difference in connectivity level in the networks from syntenic  or non-conserved regions . the connectivity levels in syntenic vs non-conserved regions in both organisms were similar using the string program .

discussion
the comparative genomic analysis reported here was useful in finding interesting gene properties. orthologs with conserved replicon and neighborhood were the principal component of the chromosomes. compared with non-syntenic genes, syntenic ones had higher identity levels, lower horizontal gene transfer  rates, showed strongly organized structures as operons and microsyntenic regions and a relative absence of mobile elements. thus, the syntenic genes can be considered as the chromosomal backbone of the order. plasmidic homologs were scattered on the chromosomes, and higher hgt rate and linkage to transposases support their extrachromosomal origin. species-specific genes had the lowest codon richness index, and possibly were acquired in the evolutionary history of each of the species.

in this way, a rhizobial chromosomal origin can be envisioned. the chromosomal orthologs were the gene set derived from the common cenancestor. from these, syntenic genes conserved a relative chromosomal order  and encode the essential functions of the cell; non-syntenic genes lost the clustering and possibly some came from hgt events. the plasmidic homologs were obtained possibly by mobilization throughout replicons, a nonrare process in the rhizobial phylogenetic branch. the species-specific genes represent the particular gene set of the species and are the most intriguing group due to their unknown functional roles and origin. work with members of the last group will help to define traits not shared with other species.

the rhizobiales species analyzed showed a striking proportion of orthologous genes, mainly chromosomal syntenic; non-syntenic genes were found in lower proportion. a large fraction of the first class was common in the four organisms. syntenic genes had a strong tendency to form operons and almost all were clustered in microsyntenic regions. additionally, these operons were conserved in pairs of organisms. therefore, a strong restriction for chromosomal rearrangement is visible. given that these organisms cover a wide spectrum of environmental distributions, from plant rhizosphere to animal host, the conserved chromosomal tracts may be important to determine the metabolic properties common to the order. similar results were observed in the enterobacteriales comparison. in a recent report, using computational inference, boussau et al.  <cit>  proposed a common ancestral set of about  <dig> genes for proteobacterial genomes.

although rhizobial genomes shared common traits, important differences were also observed. for example, abundance of plasmidic homologs and species-specific genes in a. tumefaciens , b. melitensis ii and m. loti chromosomes confirmed their complex evolutionary histories  <cit> . the m. loti chromosome presents intensive incorporation of foreign genes by horizontal transfer, such as those belonging to the symbiotic island  <cit> . in regard to species-specific genes, a large number presented low codon richness index. this category will be reduced with incorporation of other rhizobial genomes into the databases. for example, r. leguminosarum biovar viciae  <dig>  r. tropici prf <dig>  r. sp. anu <dig> and r. etli cfn <dig> genomes soon will be available  <cit> . mobilization elements participate in chromosomal rearrangement and are abundant in rhizobiales. these elements can decompose the microsyntenic regions where they are. in this way, all synteny approaches consist of snapshots in chromosomal evolution.

from the comparison of sequence identities among chromosomal predicted orthologs in the rhizobial species analyzed, an interesting characteristic was the differential distribution curves obtained. the asymmetric curves of syntenic products, deviated to high identity levels , possibly reveal their essentiality and can be compared with those from gamma proteobacteria with high identity . conversely, non-syntenic genes had curves with lower sequence identity levels reflecting a higher functional versatility. in the case of s. meliloti-e. coli comparison, the identical curves for syntenic and non-syntenic genes with the majority at very low identity values  reflect their greater phylogenetic distances.

the high identity of syntenic genes indirectly reveals their essential character; for the non-syntenic genes the low identity could represent adaptability to the ecological niche of the species. the identity relatedness in the syntenic genes among rhizobial species  revealed a cohesively evolved group; additionally the sequence differences were reflected in the theoretical pi plots of the proteins encoded by these genes, with a majority in the diagonal and the rest in sectors with strong pi deviation. species signatures of the sequences  showed a differential level of changed residues and these could represent functional adaptation to a niche; this proposal is supported with the almost identical sequences of b. melitensis and b. suis. on the other hand, invariant peptides perhaps contribute to structural conformation  <cit> . experiments in progress in our lab will determine the validity of our proposal. recently, a conservative change which altered the function of the transcriptional regulator bosr  <cit> , and pathogenic differences in enteric bacteria due to the expression of pmrd regulators with divergent sequences  <cit>  were reported.

a typical trait of enterobacteriales is its pathogenic character, and this means a very intimate, frequent contact with their hosts and almost constant, homogeneous conditions: the extreme case is that of buchnera sp., an aphid-obligate symbiont. in contrast, rhizobiales are commonly found in the soil in saprophytic living style, and occasionally they associate with hosts, and therefore face more heterogeneous, variable environments. these features were reflected in the sequence comparisons of proteins from the arginine biosynthetic pathway . the syntenic gene organization was different in the rhizobiales compared with enterobacteriales, however it is important to note the high orthology and synteny degrees between members of each clade, the essentiality of functions covered by the syntenic genes and the high functional linkage in the microsyntenic regions in each chromosome . from the previous observations we can obtain a general trend: bacterial clades present a particular chromosomal gene arrangement and such plasticity possibly was selected in relation to the niches occupied by these organisms.

as have others, some time ago we found a proteomic bimodal distribution when mw and pi were plotted for rhizobial gene products. the main fraction was located at acid and basic pi's, in a shape resembling butterfly's wings and the body, at neutral pi, presenting a low number of proteins. recently knight et al.  <cit> , in a vast genomic study, reported similar results and additionally, related proteome similarities to shared metabolic features. in this respect, we plotted pi of syntenic products from pair comparisons of studied species in order to detect proteomic similarities in these organisms. it was possible to analyze the pi variability in each of the common syntenic products; however, it is necessary to carry out experimentation to determine the biological role of pi variation. the overrepresented membranal fraction in the syntenic products must be further explored to determine whether they respond to different extracellular/intracellular signals. a rapid evolution for the membranal proteomic fraction was suggested in the same study  <cit> .

the high proportion of syntenic operons in the microsyntenic regions and the duplicated connections per gene in the network-forming regions , in rhizobiales but also in enterobacteriales, supported the functional linkage and interaction of these genes in the conserved tracts , and this is a factor which could help to define the role of selective pressure in maintaining the gene order.

functional characterization of the predicted orthologs deepened our understanding of their cellular roles. in both rhizobiales and enterobacteriales, a clear essentiality was observed for chromosomal syntenic genes, agreeing with their sequence restrictions for change. non-syntenic genes, on the other hand, appeared abundant in functions granting metabolic versatility to the cell. by calculating nonsynonymous/synonymous substitution rates, other authors have shown that in bacteria most conserved genes cover the essential functions of the cell  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
our synteny analysis defined a multi-level gene organization in the bacterial chromosome. restriction of sequence variation in these genes, with clear essential functional roles, appeared extended to the conservation of chromosomal arrangement. in this way, synteny possibly has an important biological significance in these organisms.

