BACKGROUND
chimpanzee populations across western africa have decreased in number by more than 75% in the last  <dig> years  <cit> ; and their rate of decline is accelerating  <cit> . there are many reasons for this decline including the bushmeat trade  <cit> , widespread forest clearance along with habitat alteration  <cit>  and the spread of infectious diseases  <cit> . capturing and smuggling live animals further exacerbates this decline  <cit> . insufficient data and a lack of knowledge about how illegal activities directly affect chimpanzee populations impedes understanding the impact of illegal hunting on the long term survival of this species  <cit> .

african wildlife rescue and rehabilitation projects  have experienced a marked increase in their numbers of resident chimpanzees in the last decade  <cit> . chimpanzees often arrive at these refuges through circuitous routes, and their geographic origins are frequently unknown  <cit> . ascertaining the geographic origins of such chimpanzees can provide law enforcement officials with valuable insights on local patterns of wildlife hunting and smuggling  <cit> . for example, geographic origin estimates from large seizures of elephant ivory have provided important insights on patterns of illegal elephant harvesting and international ivory smuggling  <cit> . some observers have suggested that trade in elephant ivory follows an 'opportunistic take' model where dealers use a decentralized plan of procuring ivory stocks to ship internationally as they become available across africa  <cit> . recent evidence suggests, however, that illegal trade in african elephant ivory may be attributed to organized crime syndicates targeting specific elephant populations for intense exploitation  <cit> .

similar to elephant exploitation, ape hunting has been proposed to follow an 'opportunistic take' model in which chimpanzees are taken by commercial hunters in the process of hunting many other species in their local areas  <cit> . however, hunters appear to be increasingly targeting apes as automatic weapons, shotguns and ammunition have become more readily available in local markets  <cit> . this shift towards organization and centralization in the ape trade is unsurprising as merchants can charge up to $ <dig>  for a live chimpanzee on the international black market  <cit>  and roughly $ <dig> on the local black market in cameroon  <cit> . therefore, it may be reasonable to consider the possibility that, like elephants, specific chimpanzee populations may also be targeted for intense exploitation by organized wildlife criminals. determining the origins of rescued chimpanzees may indicate whether this pattern of targeted exploitation is shared between these two species.

the limbe wildlife centre  is one of three ape rescue and rehabilitation projects that house chimpanzees in cameroon. this refuge is home to  <dig> chimpanzees rescued by wildlife law enforcement officials in cameroon as of december  <dig>  until now, the geographic origins of the lwc chimpanzees have been enigmatic. tracking the geographic origins of these chimpanzees, particularly in cameroon, is important for two reasons. first, international wildlife crime syndicates use cameroon as a waypoint for smuggling a variety of wildlife and wildlife-derived products . these illegal activities suggest that chimpanzees at the lwc may come from other countries which may complicate jurisdiction over these animals and make it difficult to enforce cameroonian laws that prohibit hunting, capturing or selling chimpanzees and gorillas  <cit> . alternatively, the lwc chimpanzees could originate in cameroon from specific populations targeted for exploitation, as there are large local networks of hunters operating in cameroon that target specific animal groups  <cit> . therefore, illuminating where chimpanzees are procured and how they are transported could provide valuable information to cameroonian authorities.

second, cameroon is home to two chimpanzee subspecies , pan troglodytes ellioti  <cit>   and p. t. troglodytes  <cit> , although the taxonomy of chimpanzee subspecies is debated  <cit> . the ranges of these two subspecies converge at the sanaga river in central cameroon, which acts as a barrier to their dispersal; despite this, some limited gene flow between the two subspecies occurs around the confluence of the sanaga river and its main tributary, the mbam river  <cit> . reintroduction programs are being developed for these chimpanzees and must take into account the genetic histories of their chimpanzees in order to be most effective  <cit> . the rich and complex biogeographic history of chimpanzees in cameroon make evaluating the actual location of these reintroductions important towards maintaining evolutionary significant units of this species  <cit> . in particular, p. t. ellioti has a very restricted range, occurring only in nigeria and western cameroon  <cit> ; and  <dig> - <dig>  are believed to persist in the wild  <cit> .

we addressed three questions in this study. first, are the lwc chimpanzees from cameroon? second, if so, do their origins correspond to biogeographic boundaries for this species in cameroon? finally, do these data suggest that hunting is widespread; and/or do hunting 'hotspots' exist in cameroon where focused law enforcement is needed? we addressed these questions by estimating the geographic origins of  <dig> chimpanzees housed at the lwc using bayesian approximation approaches  <cit> . we compared microsatellite  loci genotype profiles and mtdna sequence data against a spatial map of allele frequencies constructed from orthologus genotypes from georeferenced chimpanzee dna samples from ten locations spanning cameroon and nigeria . the lwc chimpanzees were estimated to be from one of three biogeographically important zones within cameroon . the majority of them were estimated to originate within the range of p. t. ellioti, but several were also estimated to originate within the range of p. t. troglodytes. their estimated origins are dispersed across the country, suggesting that hunting is widespread across cameroon. although our current sample size of rescued chimpanzees is relatively small, these data suggest that, unlike patterns of organized elephant hunting, chimpanzee hunting in cameroon may follow an 'opportunistic take' model. more data from a broader sample of rescued chimpanzees should be compared against a more inclusive grid of georeferenced chimpanzee samples before definitive conclusions about chimpanzee exploitation in cameroon may be drawn.

RESULTS
strp genotype profile dataset
a total of  <dig> chimpanzee dna samples were typed at ten autosomal strp loci for this study. forty-six of these samples were from lwc chimpanzees, whereas  <dig> were from georeferenced chimpanzee dna samples from cameroon and nigeria. we considered an strp profile suitable for analysis if it included six or more loci. a total of 88% of the  <dig> samples had suitable strp profiles and were included in all assignment tests, but the vast majority of these samples had reliable allele scores for at least eight loci. in total, all  <dig> lwc chimpanzee strp profiles were used in the assignment tests, whereas  <dig> strp profiles from georeferenced chimpanzee dna samples from ten locations across the study area  were used in all our assignment tests. strp allele sizes for samples included in this study are listed in additional file  <dig> 

mtdna haplotype analysis
sequences of the first hypervariable region  of mtdna were newly generated for each of the  <dig> lwc chimpanzees and aligned against a georeferenced dataset composed of  <dig> hvri sequences from  <dig> locations across nigeria and cameroon from previous studies  <cit>  that are publically available on ddbj/embl/genbank international nucleotide sequence database. the median joining network shown in figure  <dig> was partitioned into two major haplotypes. haplotype  <dig> was composed of georeferenced chimpanzee samples within the range of p. t. ellioti from nigeria and western cameroon north of the sanaga river , with a single exception. haplotype  <dig> was subdivided into two subsets. haplotype 1a was composed of georeferenced samples from western nigeria, whereas haplotype 1b was composed of georeferenced chimpanzee samples from eastern nigeria and western cameroon. thirty-two of the lwc chimpanzees clustered into haplotype 1b. haplotype  <dig> was composed mostly of georeferenced samples that were collected in southern cameroon south of the sanaga river within the range of p. t. troglodytes. haplotype  <dig> was further subdivided into three subsets: haplotypes 2a, 2b and 2c. these haplotypes were composed mostly of samples collected at the same, or nearby, sampling locations in southern cameroon. fourteen of the lwc chimpanzees clustered within haplotype  <dig>  of which four, one and nine clustered into haplotypes 2a, 2b and 2c, respectively. these mtdna haplotype designations  were encoded as an eleventh locus in each assignment test for all the lwc chimpanzees and the  <dig> georeferenced chimpanzee strp profiles.

sam assignment tests
we performed assignment tests for each individual using smoothed and continuous assignment methods  <cit> , implemented in the scat software program http://stephenslab.uchicago.edu/software.html. scat uses allele frequencies from georeferenced samples combined with spatial smoothing methods to generate a geographic map of allele frequency variation. the smoothed assignment method  combines smoothed reference maps of allele frequency variation and an mcmc algorithm to generate a posterior distribution of the probability that samples of unknown origin share ancestry with samples of known origin from the allele frequency variation map of georeferenced samples  <cit> .

we first explored the reliability of the sam at accurately estimating the origins of our georeferenced samples by a leave-one-out cross-validation procedure in which each sample in turn was treated as the sample whose location was unknown, whereas the other samples were assumed to have known location. results of the cross-validation tests are given in table  <dig>  we assessed the reliability of the sam in two ways. first, we assessed how accurately the sam assigned georeferenced samples to their region of origin . the sam accurately placed individuals as originating north versus south of the sanaga river in 89% of assignments. half of the samples that were not placed back to their actual region of origin came from manb, a location lying in the transition zone where limited gene flow appears to occur between the two subspecies of chimpanzees in central cameroon. second, we assessed how reliably the sam assigned georeferenced samples to their location of origin. the sam accurately estimated sampling location origin in 58% of assignments. some locations  had a much higher proportion of samples correctly estimated back to their true locations, suggesting that chimpanzees at these locations were genetically somewhat distinct from those at other locations we sampled. many of the samples with incorrect sam assignments had estimated origins at locations very close to their actual sampling location. nearly all samples with incorrect sam assignments were estimated to have come from locations within the same geographic zone .

1percentage of georeferenced sample assignments using the sam that were correctly assigned to their actual sampling location of origin.

2average accuracy, 58%.

3percentage of georeferenced sample assignments using the sam that were correctly assigned back to their regional division but not necessarily their correct sampling location of origin. two regions were considered: 1) sampling locations that lie north and west of the sanaga river in nigeria and western cameroon  and 2) sampling locations that lie south of the sanaga river in southern cameroon . samples from the transition zone  in central cameroon were grouped with samples north of the sanaga to obtain these estimates.

4average accuracy, 89%.

given the results of the sam reliability tests, we concluded that the sam should be very accurate for estimating whether the lwc samples originated from either the region north and west of the sanaga river or from the region south of the sanaga river. furthermore, we expected the sam to produce less reliable results when estimating origins within those two regions given the mixed performance of the sam at accurately placing the georeferenced samples to their correct locations within these two regions. finally, these results suggest that there is substantial population structure separating populations north and south of the sanaga river, but less population structure between populations within these regions, as expected based on previous studies  <cit> .

we used the sam to estimate an origin of each lwc chimpanzee. these point estimates were determined by the highest log-likelihood ratios of the posterior distribution that each sample originated from a particular location across five independent runs for a total of  <dig>  iterations for each sample. summaries of these assignments are given in the last column of table  <dig>  whereas details regarding sam assignments for each lwc chimpanzee are given in table  <dig>  forty-two of the lwc samples were consistently assigned the same estimated origin across independent runs. only four of the lwc chimpanzees had sam location estimates that varied across runs; however, the discrepancies between the sam estimated origins of those four samples were from sampling locations that lie relatively close to each other and in the same regional partition. table  <dig> shows the majority consensus for these sam origins across independent runs. the sam assignment estimates revealed that  <dig> of the lwc chimpanzees originated from north of the sanaga river, whereas  <dig> originated from south of the sanaga river. interestingly, a high proportion of lwc chimpanzees were estimated to have come from mount cameroon  and gashaka gumti national park . mtcm and ggnp are two locations where the sam reliability tests accurately estimated the sampling location origins of the georeferenced samples most frequently.

1mtdna haplotype inferred from the median-joining network in figure  <dig> 

2estimated sampling location origin of sample using the sam.

3estimated regional location using the sam. here, samples were grouped by region into locations that are either north and west of the sanaga  or south of the sanaga river .

4point estimates of origins using the cam. point estimates are listed in decimal coordinates.

5point coordinate estimates were grouped by region: 1) north and west of the sanaga , 2) south of the sanaga river in southern cameroon  or 3) the transition zone near the confluence of the sanaga and mbam rivers .

6our estimate of subspecies designation based on cam estimated origins and mtdna haplotype.

cam assignment tests
we also performed assignments using a continuous assignment method . the cam is a considerable improvement over traditional assignment tests in that estimated origins are independent of sampling locations included in the study. in particular, the cam returns point estimates of geographical coordinates for each unknown sample that can be from anywhere within a specified geographic boundary  <cit> . in this case, we allowed the cam to estimate an origin anywhere within suitable chimpanzee habitat across the study area. we assessed the reliability of the cam by calculating the median values of  <dig>  coordinate point estimates for each georeferenced sample from five independent cam runs with a leave-one-out cross-validation check. then we estimated the accuracy of these estimates in two ways. first, we plotted  <dig> coordinates that were drawn randomly from the set of all possible locations across the full  <dig>  cam estimates for each georeferenced sample. tighter clustering of points indicates higher confidence in the median point coordinate estimates, whereas increased point dispersion indicates lower confidence in a given georeferenced chimpanzee sample's estimated cam origin. we generally observed more geographically concentrated clusters of point coordinate estimates in chimpanzees originating from north of the sanaga river, as opposed to those from south of the sanaga river or from the transition zone. examples of the patterns observed in these plots are shown in figure  <dig> 

second, we calculated the straight line distances between the estimated cam origin of each georeferenced sample and the sample's actual location coordinates. this cam reliability test showed that 30%, 50% and 80% of the georeferenced samples could be accurately placed within  <dig> km,  <dig> km and  <dig> km of their actual sampling location of origin, respectively. furthermore, there are three zones in cameroon that correspond to different 'pockets' of diversity observed from patterns in the georeferenced samples discussed in previous studies  <cit> : 1) north and west of the sanaga river, 2) south of the sanaga in southern cameroon and 3) a transition zone around the confluence of the sanaga and mbam rivers that is not well understood. we partitioned all straight line distance estimates into these three biogeographically important zones. based on these criteria, 85% of the georeferenced samples had straight line distances between their actual origin and their estimated origin that occurred completely within the zone where the samples originated. the vast majority of georeferenced samples placed in the wrong zone had estimated origins in the transition zone. based on these observations, we concluded that the cam should be very accurate for estimating whether the lwc chimpanzees originated north of the sanaga river, south of the sanaga river and, possibly, from the transition zone. however, we expected that the cam would produce less reliable point estimates at a more fine-grained geographic scale.

a plot of median coordinate point estimates for each lwc chimpanzee is shown in figure  <dig> and are also listed in table  <dig> in decimal degrees. all of the lwc chimpanzees have estimated origins in cameroon, with the exception of one that may originate from near the mambilla plateau that straddles the cameroon-nigeria border. we further partitioned the lwc chimpanzees' estimated cam origins into the three biogeographically important zones across the region. samples shown in figure  <dig> were also color-coded according to their mtdna haplotype membership as determined by the median-joining network analysis . samples shown in purple clustered with georeferenced samples from north and west of the sanaga river , whereas samples colored orange clustered with samples mostly from southern cameroon south of the sanaga river . samples with estimated cam origins in the transition zone in central cameroon consisted of both mtdna haplotypes . these findings support previous georeferenced population genetic data suggesting that some introgression occurs between p. t. ellioti and p. t. troglodytes around the confluence of the mbam and sanaga rivers  <cit> . the mtdna haplotype analysis was consistent with cam assignments in 87% of the tests in placing the lwc chimpanzees as occurring either north or south of the sanaga.

ten lwc chimpanzees that had mtdna haplotype  <dig> were also assigned origins south of the sanaga. thirty-one lwc chimpanzees that had mtdna haplotype 1b had also cam estimated origins north of the sanaga. one lwc chimpanzee  had an estimated cam origin north of the sanaga but also belonged to mtdna haplotype 2c. lwc <dig> was rescued near bertoua, cameroon , which lies near where the lom and pangar rivers merge to form the sanaga river in eastern cameroon. analyses of an additional  <dig> strp loci of lwc <dig> compared to chimpanzees representing each subspecies indicated that this chimpanzee shares significant ancestry with both p. t. ellioti and p. t. troglodytes . based on this information, we suspect that adding more strp loci to the cam tests will eventually place lwc <dig> inside the transition zone. the remaining four lwc chimpanzees have cam estimated origins in the transition zone. we also examined how much confidence we could place in each estimated origin by plotting  <dig> coordinates that were drawn randomly from the set of all possible locations across the full  <dig>  cam estimates for each lwc chimpanzee, with the degree of spread indicating how much confidence to give to any one cam estimated origin. examples of these plots are shown in figure  <dig>  generally, we observed tighter clustering of points in samples from western cameroon than in those estimated to be from the transition zone or southern cameroon. moreover, we did not observe any greater dispersion of points in the lwc samples compared to our confidence plots for the georeferenced dataset.

these observations suggest that the lwc chimpanzees come from many areas across cameroon, but the majority appear to have come from within the range of p. t. ellioti. we also calculated straight line distances between each estimated origin and the nearest protected area. these calculations revealed that  <dig> of the lwc chimpanzees had estimated origins either inside or <  <dig> km from a protected area. these findings suggest that chimpanzee hunting is relatively widespread across cameroon and occurs in both protected and unprotected areas. in addition, live animal transport appears to occur locally within cameroon.

cam estimated origins in southern cameroon
one limitation of the cam is that this method requires that a boundary be specified of allowable locations across a continuous region. in other words, all samples of unknown origin are assumed to have originated within the specified boundary, which can be problematic if reference samples are unavailable for a portion of a species' range. for our first cam assignments, we specified a boundary that included nigeria and cameroon, the range of our georeferenced samples. we had more confidence in the results for the lwc chimpanzees we estimated to belong to p. t. ellioti for three reasons. first, we included reference samples that covered the complete range of p. t. ellioti. second, all lwc chimpanzees that belonged to mtdna haplotype 1b, a haplotype used to identify p. t. ellioti in other studies  <cit> , also had cam origins from north of the sanaga in the range of p. t. ellioti or the transition zone. third, the lwc and georeferenced chimpanzee samples estimated to originate north of the sanaga river were more tightly clustered in the coordinate plots compared to those from southern cameroon, suggesting higher confidence in those assignments. however, our reference samples for p. t. troglodytes come only from southern cameroon, which is only a small portion of the range of that subspecies. due to this small reference sample, we explored how likely it was that the lwc chimpanzees with estimated origins from southern cameroon might have come from somewhere outside southern cameroon but within the larger range of p. t. troglodytes.

we created a second boundary file that included the complete range of p. t. troglodytes across central africa and a data file containing only georeferenced data from southern cameroon. in this new cam test, we used georeferenced samples from western nigeria as negative controls for the new boundary file, since we knew their origin to be outside the range of p. t. troglodytes. we also challenged this cam test to estimate the origins of lwc chimpanzees originally placed in southern cameroon by the cameroon-nigeria bounded cam tests; except in this test these lwc samples were allowed to originate anywhere within the range of p. t. troglodytes. we plotted  <dig> coordinates that were drawn randomly from the set of all possible locations across  <dig>  cam coordinate point estimates for each sample included in this test. we expected the point estimate coordinate plots for the georeferenced samples from western nigeria to be more dispersed across the area than the plots for samples that were more likely to have originated within the specified boundary .

point estimate coordinate plots for the georeferenced samples from western nigeria were very dispersed across the entire boundary specified for the cam. the plots for the lwc chimpanzees generally showed more clustering in southern cameroon as opposed to other areas in the range of p. t. troglodytes. t-test comparisons revealed that the lwc samples had significantly more coordinate point estimates in southern cameroon  than in other parts of the range of p. t. troglodytes compared to the control samples from western nigeria. these observations suggest that it is more likely that the lwc chimpanzees estimated to be from southern cameroon by the original cam tests are indeed more likely to be from southern cameroon than other regions within the range of p. t. troglodytes. however, some degree of uncertainty regarding the origins of these ten lwc chimpanzees is warranted.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study, we demonstrate that the lwc chimpanzees originate in cameroon or contiguous forests along the cameroon-nigeria border. second, we have considerable power using both sam and cam tests to assign each lwc chimpanzee to one of three biogeographically important zones in cameroon: north of the sanaga river, south of the sanaga river or from the transition zone in central cameroon. the sam and cam appeared to have less power for estimating origins on a finer geographic scale within these biogeographically important zones. intriguingly, these data provide additional support for the hypothesis that introgression between p. t. ellioti and p. t. troglodytes occurs around the confluence of the mbam and sanaga rivers in central cameroon  <cit> . we are conducting extensive population genetic studies of chimpanzees from this region to verify these observations in a larger, fully georeferenced data set.

the cam estimated origins indicate that the majority of the lwc chimpanzees appear to have come from western cameroon within the range of p. t. ellioti  or from the transition zone , which is unsurprising as the wildlife protection authorities based at the lwc focus their rescue and seizure efforts in that area of cameroon. ten lwc chimpanzees are likely to come from southern cameroon within the range of p. t. troglodytes. although we have limited power with this sample to make very firm conclusions, these data are suggestive of trends in patterns of chimpanzee hunting and live animal smuggling in cameroon. chimpanzee hunting and live animal transport largely appears to occur locally within cameroon, despite the existence of well organized wildlife crime cartels in the country that operate internationally  <cit> . that is, we did not find evidence to suggest that chimpanzees are being transported over large distances, involving movement over national borders prior to their residence at refuges . both assignment test methods reveal also that the lwc chimpanzees come from many areas across cameroon and near the cameroon-nigeria border. these observations indicate that chimpanzee hunting is widespread in cameroon. in addition, the cam assignments suggest that lwc chimpanzees come from both protected and unprotected areas of cameroon suggesting that local legal protection across the country needs to be reinforced. given that  <dig> chimpanzees may be killed for each chimpanzee that survives in a sanctuary  <cit> , this evidence of widespread hunting underestimates the full extent of chimpanzee exploitation in cameroon.

these observations make it difficult to pinpoint chimpanzee hunting 'hotspots', if they exist, given our current sample. it is possible that chimpanzee hunting 'hotspots' may not exist in cameroon because these animals are taken when it is advantageous for the hunter as in the 'opportunistic take' model. however, the fact that we did not observe chimpanzee hunting 'hotspots' in cameroon may be attributable to two factors. first, the lwc sample was relatively small making it difficult to pinpoint potential hunting 'hotspots' if they do exist. plans are underway to include chimpanzees from other refuges in similar studies in the near future to search for more specific trends in chimpanzee hunting in cameroon from a larger sample. second, a more comprehensive grid of georeferenced chimpanzee samples that includes genotype profiles at more strp loci may make it possible to increase the precision of origin assignments using the scat approach.

our findings offer promising insights that may augment assessing the location of reintroducing the lwc chimpanzees back into their natural habitats. iucn guidelines suggest that whenever possible, apes should be reintroduced within their historical range to the lowest 'unit of conservation action'  <cit> . our results indicate that cameroon is the appropriate location for reintroducing these chimpanzees back into the wild as they all appear to be from the area. furthermore, their estimated cam origins partition closely with the ranges of the two chimpanzee subspecies occupying cameroon  <cit> , which suggests that it may be possible to reintroduce these chimpanzees back into their historical ranges.

finally, chimpanzees at refuges are frequently used in scientific investigations, such as studies that focus on illuminating the history of zoonotic diseases like sivcpz  <cit>  and malaria  <cit> . these studies are often hampered by a lack of knowledge about the geographic origins of these chimpanzees  <cit> . several studies have shown that chimpanzee population history can be very important for understanding the distribution of disease  <cit> , but these studies have encountered considerable obstacles owing to the difficulties of working with fecal samples from reclusive, highly endangered chimpanzee populations  <cit> . refuge chimpanzees are a unique reservoir for understanding both the history of this species and of zoonotic diseases because they reside in an environment where it is possible to obtain high-quality samples for extensive analysis. our results provide a foundation for interpreting the findings of these studies within a precise geographical framework. in conclusion, these data reveal that illuminating the uncertain origins of refuge chimpanzees using the scat approach is a powerful tool that can provide valuable information to local wildlife law enforcement personnel for ascertaining patterns and trends in chimpanzee hunting, for planning reintroduction programs and for informing scientific investigation involving these chimpanzees.

