BACKGROUND
the most frequently used method to analyse scarce rna samples is to employ rna amplification technology  <cit> , enabling analysis of the full length transcripts. we have recently reported on an alternative transcriptome amplification method that minimises differences in transcript length in the amplification step  <cit> . this method is based on fragmentation of the mrna  population followed by isolation of a unique, short and representative 3'end tag of each transcript prior to amplification by pcr. here we have evaluated and applied the methodology on neural stem cells .

nscs can be isolated from the fetal or adult mammalian brain and grown in vitro in the presence of growth factors to form floating aggregates of cells denoted neurospheres  <cit> . a neurosphere is derived from one clonally expanded nsc or progenitor cell  <cit> . as the original nsc or progenitor cell proliferates the new cells adhere to each other, eventually forming a neurosphere. every neural stem cell in a neurosphere has the potential to differentiate towards a neuronal or a glial lineage depending on the internal neurosphere milieu and external signals. neurospheres are thus complex structures consisting of many cell types that can have varying degrees of differentiation commitment, but that are all derived from the same clonally expanded cell. neurospheres have extensive cell-cell contacts and a dense extracellular matrix. when plated onto solid support in combination with growth factor withdrawal the cells start to differentiate into all neural cell types  <cit> . in vitro expanded neural stem cells may therefore serve as an in vitro model of neurogenesis. the similarities between the in vivo and in vitro processes of neurogenesis are not well established although some characteristics are expected to be conserved  <cit>  and therefore challenging a cell in vitro will unveil some of its developmental properties and potentials. by subjecting neurospheres to different microenvironments  it is possible to uncover factors and mechanisms important for proliferation or differentiation into certain cell lineages, for example neurons of a particular type  <cit> . furthermore, nscs expanded as neurospheres also hold the promise of becoming an important source of cells for cell replacement therapies of different neurological diseases  <cit> .

due to the great scientific interest in nscs and the promise of their clinical use we decided to investigate nscs from a gene expression perspective. an important aspect was to investigate if neurosphere heterogeneity  <cit>  is reflected in their transcriptome. neurosphere populations from different levels of technical and biological replication were analysed by taking advantage of microarrays with  <dig> spotted mouse cdna clones, in combination with a highly sensitive amplification method. we compared neurospheres cultured under identical conditions but in separate culture flasks, as well as from different passages and from parallel isolations. the results are discussed from the perspective of differences in the number and extent of differentially expressed genes.

RESULTS
different sources of neurospheres were used to investigate the extent of heterogeneity between neurosphere populations at the gene expression level. to facilitate a broad transcript analysis of this relatively scarce material a recently developed amplification methodology  <cit>  was used  in combination with microarray technology. in brief, the approach involves biotinylation of the 3'-end of the cdna using a biotinylated oligo primer in the first-strand cdna synthesis reaction. the cdna is randomly fragmented by sonication into 50– <dig> bp fragments. the 3'-ends , representing the most unique part of most transcripts, are isolated by binding to streptavidin-coated beads. linkers are ligated onto the 3'-end signature tags, which are subsequently cleaved off the beads and finally amplified using pcr. this generates a smear of random-sized fragments  which is labelled by asymmetric pcr and then hybridised to microarrays. here we used a mouse microarray comprising of  <dig> mouse cdna clones, printed in duplicate.

differential expression was determined in a series of microarray experiments, as outlined in figure 1b. neurosphere cultures were initiated from cells dissociated from three pools of adult lateral ventricle wall tissue dissected from either  <dig> or  <dig> mice, as three identical but separate isolations. primary neurospheres were passaged one or two times and harvested three to four days after passage. average neurosphere size was deemed a more critical factor than the length of the incubation time, hence some neurosphere cultures were incubated for one day longer than others to obtain uniformity in neurosphere size between cultures at the key times of passaging and harvesting. when passaged twice the neurospheres were split into two or three equivalent cultures. this allowed us to measure the variability in gene expression levels between different isolations, as well as between passages and between parallel cultures. in order to estimate the technical noise, self-to-self hybridisations were performed using rna from one of the cultures. to confirm that we were able to detect differential gene expression cells in one of the parallel cultures were induced to differentiate into neurons, astrocytes and oligodendrocytes by withdrawing the growth factors from the culture medium, plating on solid support and adding serum . the nomenclature of the samples is given in figure 1b. seven different comparisons were made; a1-a <dig> , ci-cii and cii-ciii , b-ci , a2-ciii and cii-fi  and f-g . the use of short-term passaged neurospheres limits the number of cells that can be generated. consequently the amount of rna that can be isolated is below that normally used in labelling reactions for microarray hybridisations . after mrna isolation and cdna synthesis we therefore chose to amplify the obtained material using the method described above. two replicate and two dye-swap hybridisations were performed for each comparison, adding up to four hybridisations for each comparison in total.

the microarray data was filtered  and print-tip lowess normalised. differentially expressed genes were identified using an empirical bayes moderated t-test and by calculation of the associated p-values  <cit> . in the t-test the contribution of within-array replicate features was taken into account  <cit>  and the genes were ranked according to the probability of differential expression . higher b-value indicates higher probability of differential expression. genes were defined as differentially expressed if the fdr-adjusted p-value was <  <dig>  . in figure  <dig> the b-value distribution for each comparison is shown. the figure shows no differentially expressed  genes in the technical replicate , a higher number of de genes in neurospheres cultured in parallel, an even higher number of de genes in neurospheres from different isolations and passages, and the highest number of de genes in neurospheres vs. differentiated cells. note the high number of de genes in neurospheres from the same isolation but subsequent passages , indicating that the neurospheres may change character over time as they grow and proliferate in vitro.

to further investigate the variability in gene expression between the different neurosphere samples we visualised the data using a series of plots displayed in figure  <dig>  in panel a) the average a-value ) for each gene is plotted against the corresponding m-value ). the plots show that after filtration and normalisation there is no intensity bias in the distribution of de genes. they also show that the m-values for the technical replicates  are collected and centred close to zero , whereas the spreading of the m-values are higher for culture replicates , passage replicates  and isolation replicates . the highest spreading of m-values can be seen for the neurosphere vs. differentiated cells hybridisations , where many genes have m-values between +/- <dig> and +/- <dig> . in panel b) the b-value for each gene is plotted against the corresponding m-value. by definition genes with a high m-value will obtain a higher b-value, which gives the plots the characteristic volcano shape. also here it is clear that the technical replicates have no statistically significant de genes , whereas culture, passage and isolation replicates have several genes with high b-values, and the neurosphere vs. differentiated cells comparison clearly has the highest number of de genes. this is further visualised in figure  <dig>  panel c), where the average of the signal intensity for each gene and sample is plotted against the average signal intensity for that gene in the other sample. once again the pearson correlation for the two samples is highest for the technical replicates , lower for the culture replicates , passage replicate  and isolation replicates  and lowest for the neurosphere vs. differentiated cells .

the number of differentially expressed genes in each comparison is summarised in figure  <dig>  genes with a false discovery rate  adjusted p-value <  <dig> , giving less than one false positive per  <dig> genes, are included. this further demonstrates that the lowest number of de genes is in the technical replicates and the highest number in the comparison of the neurospheres vs. differentiated cells . again, the most noteworthy result is that neurospheres of different passages  have a surprisingly high number of de genes  compared to the other comparisons. to further explore the magnitude of differential expression of these genes  a table of their distribution over fold change was made . as expected, a high number of genes have high fold changes for the passage and isolation replicates and the neurosphere vs. differentiated cells comparison, whereas fewer genes are within the higher fold change ranges for the culture replicates.

genes with p <  <dig> , calculated by empirical bayes moderated t-test and false discovery rate adjustment, are included. ).

to investigate whether the transcript level differences in the two culture-to-culture comparisons are consistent or random events a venn diagram was created in figure  <dig>  displaying the number of shared and unique de genes in the ci-cii, cii-ciii and f-g comparisons. five genes out of  <dig>  and  <dig>  overlap, equivalent to 19% and 6% respectively. the vast majority of de genes are thus not shared between the two comparisons, indicating non-systematic changes in gene expression. when compared to the neurosphere vs. differentiated cells gene list only one of the five genes is in common, further demonstrating random differences between cultures.

a list of the de genes found in the neurosphere vs. differentiated cells comparison  is provided as an additional data file 1: differentially expressed genes in neurosphere vs. differentiated cells comparison . the genes that show four-fold or greater fold change  and adjusted p-values <  <dig>  are shown in table  <dig>  this demonstrates that genes found in the f-g comparison are genes that are expected to be involved in the differentiation of neurospheres. for example, included are several myelin related genes such as myelin-associated oligodendrocytic basic protein , myelin basic protein  and myelin-associated glycoprotein , all of which are up-regulated in the differentiated sample. also, there are some genes related to transmitter substances and their signaling; gamma-aminobutyric acid  receptor, subunit beta  <dig> and guanine nucleotide binding protein, alpha o , which is involved in dopamine signaling  <cit> . distal-less homeobox  <dig> , is also widely expressed in the brain and is involved in brain development and neural differentiation  <cit> .

genes with p <  <dig> , calculated by empirical bayes moderated t-test and false discovery rate adjustment, and fold change ≥  <dig> , are included. genes with m-value <  <dig> are up-regulated in differentiated cells, genes with m-value >  <dig> are up-regulated in neurospheres. m = log <dig>  b = b-value calculated by empirical bayes moderated t-test. higher b-values mean higher probability for differential expression. for a full list of differentially expressed genes in the f-g comparison see additional data file 1: differentially expressed genes in neurosphere vs. differentiated cells comparison. 

to understand the biological significance of the overall changes in gene expression, de genes in the neurosphere vs. differentiated cells comparison  were categorised according to their gene ontology theme annotation. genes with an adjusted p <  <dig>  were included in the analysis and the probability of a theme being over-represented in the data was calculated using jackknife fisher's exact probability test implemented in the ease software  <cit> . table  <dig> shows the most highly represented gene ontology themes . themes that showed enrichment in differentiated cells include neurogenesis, synaptic transmission, cell-cell signalling and development. in contrast, themes that showed enrichment in neurospheres include electron transport and mitotic cell cycle.

analysis is restricted to themes of category biological function. genes with p <  <dig> , calculated by empirical bayes moderated t-test and false discovery rate adjustment were included in the analysis. shown is the total number of genes found in the respective theme, as well as the number of those genes that are enriched in neurospheres  and differentiated cells  respectively. jackknife fisher's exact probability test was used to identify over-represented themes in the data. corresponding p-values are listed. 

discussion
this study has taken advantage of a recent template amplification method to study neurospheres at the level of transcription. rna from different isolations, cultures and passages was isolated, amplified and analysed by microarrays. the comparison was performed by analysis of the number of differentially expressed genes for the different conditions. the results show excellent performance of the amplification protocol. no differentially expressed genes were found in the technical replicates indicating that methodological noise in all comparisons should be considered minor.

fluctuations of transcript levels in different populations of neurospheres
the array results for the different neurosphere conditions were much more divergent than the technical replications and we observe a varying degree of heterogeneity among the different neurosphere populations, obtained from different isolations of adult mouse lateral ventricle wall tissue, from different passages and from parallel cultures. the results show that there is a large variation in gene expression between neurospheres from different isolations as well as between neurospheres from the same isolation but from different passages. neurospheres have previously been shown to gain altered properties through extensive, long-term passaging   <cit> . short-term passaged neurospheres have been considered rather stable, with unaltered multipotency and capacity for self-renewal  <cit> . here we have shown that already between passages one and two neurospheres show altered gene expression with up to  <dig> de genes . whether this is due to different properties of the parental, clonally expanded cell giving rise to the neurospheres in each passage or some other reason needs to be further investigated.

parallel culturing of neurospheres from the same isolation and the same number of passages, grown in identical conditions, show fewer de genes  than neurospheres compared between passages . furthermore, when neurospheres are induced to differentiate and compared to undifferentiated neurospheres cultured in parallel, the number of genes de as well as the magnitude of the m-values are clearly higher . these data indicate that an extended 3– <dig> day culturing, per se, is sufficient to induce changes in gene expression, but with careful experimental design and an appropriate number of biological replicates neurospheres cultured in parallel, from the same isolation and passage, may be used to study for example the effect of exposure to different microenvironments on gene expression.

the gene expression heterogeneity of neurospheres may be related to a number of different factors such as the age of the animal from which they were isolated, neurosphere size and the identity of the first clonally expanded cell  <cit> . our results are also confirmed by observations by suslov and co-workers that examined the expression of  <dig> transcripts from single neurospheres of different sizes  <cit> . the obtained information was used to cluster the individual neurospheres according to similar gene expression pattern. it revealed an inter-clonal heterogeneity that might reflect the maturity and developmental commitment of the parental clonogenic cell, as well as the size of the neurosphere and its time in culture. in another study it was shown that populations of neurospheres from different regions of the brain as well as from different species differ in properties such as growth rate, neuronal production and cell morphology  <cit> .

genes expressed in neurospheres
the different neurosphere populations show heterogeneity in their expression profiles, yet many of the genes expressed are representative of a neurosphere transcript signature. as described earlier, neurospheres consist of several cell types of varying degrees of differentiation, a dense extracellular matrix and extensive cell-cell contacts. electron-microscopy studies of rat fetal striatum egf-expanded neurospheres  <cit> , have shown that they consist of two types of cells, electron-dense and electron-lucent cells, both of which could be either healthy, apoptotic or necrotic. these neurosphere cells also demonstrated an expression of the cell adhesion molecules e- and n-cadherin , α- and β-catenin  and growth factor receptors for epidermal growth factor  and fibroblast growth factor , as well as fibroblast growth factor  <dig> . also neurospheres from adult human brain have been characterised, revealing the same type of heterogeneous, complex structure  <cit> . these express a variety of different markers, such as nestin , vimentin , glial fibrillary acidic protein , β-iii-tubulin  and cell adhesion molecule l <dig> , proteolipid protein  <dig> , b-cell cll/lymphoma  <dig> , paired box gene  <dig>  and tenascin c . in our study the genes related to these phenotypes and markers are expressed at similar levels in all neurosphere replicates . for example we observe many genes involved in apoptosis; bcl2-associated x protein , bcl2-associated athanogene  <dig> , cytochrome c- <dig> , death associated protein  <dig> , programmed cell death  <dig> interacting protein  and phosphoprotein enriched in astrocytes  <dig> . expressed are also α-e-catenin , β-catenin  and fibroblast growth factor  <dig> , and other neurosphere markers such as nestin , glial fibrillary acidic protein , β-iii-tubulin  and proteolipid protein  <dig>  .

the list of de genes in the neurosphere vs. differentiated cells comparison  as well as an overview of the corresponding gene ontology classification  also demonstrates the anticipated differences between neurospheres and differentiated neurospheres.

summary
the genes observed to be differentially expressed in identical but parallel cultures appear to be random, shown by the low overlap in de genes between the two parallel culture comparisons . the number of erroneously identified de genes, due to biological fluctuations, could hence be lowered by increasing the number of biological replicates. hereby random differences will be removed and true de genes can be selected by statistical means. it should be noted that the random differences mainly correspond to small fold changes as compared to the larger changes in the neurospheres vs. differentiated cells. reliable differences in gene expression could therefore be obtained and studied without increasing the number of replicates if a higher cut-off for de genes, such as fold change >  <dig>  was chosen.

CONCLUSIONS
we have shown that the tag cdna amplification method is well suited for the analysis of neurospheres, demonstrating low technical variability. furthermore we have demonstrated large differences between passages of neurospheres, but less variability between parallel cultures. the described variability appears to be random and the underlying cause needs further investigations. the neurosphere variability can be addressed by increasing the number of biological replicates and careful experimental design, which will facilitate future use of neurospheres as a tool to study gene expression changes involved in neurogenesis.

