BACKGROUND
with applications such as drug discovery  <cit> , the ability and the desire to experimentally determine protein localization and trafficking is leading to a rapid growth in cell image data sets in need of analysis on a scale comparable to that of the genomic revolution  <cit> . a key problem in location proteomics is that the analysis and comparison of localizations is largely performed by the slow, coarse-grained and biased process of manual inspection. just as algorithms such as blast have been developed to search, compare, cluster and draw conclusions from the sequence information of the genome revolution, it is critical that a similar suite of tools be developed for the flood of bio-imaging to maximise its benefit.

towards this goal, image statistics have proved invaluable in the analysis of fluorescent subcellular imaging. measures of features such as texture and morphology  in combination with machine learning methods such as neural networks and support vector machines have proved highly successful at classifying subcellular images of the major organelles of a cell, and have achieved near perfect accuracy  <cit> . however, a difficulty with such systems is that organelle structure can vary widely between each cell type, and thus automated classification systems usually require that they be re-trained for each cell type, though research is ongoing in removing this limitation  <cit> . another difficulty is that subcellular localisation classes and representative training images for each need to be chosen prior to training. hence automated classification is to some extent fitting an image into a pre-defined box which may not necessarily reflect the true diversity of protein expression within the cell. despite these limitations, the question of "where is the protein in the cell?" can readily be answered using automated classification, and these techniques have been applied to the whole yeast proteome imaging  <cit>  and demonstrated that automated classification can produce high confidence classifications on real world high throughput imaging  <cit> .

here we describe a methodology, protocol and software for testing for differencein protein subcellular fluorescent imaging. it draws together a number of components into a single framework, called icluster, for the visual and statistical differentiation of bio-imaging. the first component is threshold adjacency statistics , a type of image statistic specifically designed to distinguish subcellular imaging to a high degree while being fast to calculate  <cit> . tas are then utilised for statistical testing and visualisation. in the visualisation component, tas are sammon mapped  <cit>  into  <dig> or  <dig> dimensions in such a way as to preserve the distance relationships between image statistics vectors, and the images are visualized at the coordinates so determined in  <dig> or  <dig> dimensions. an error term gives feedback on how well the distances have been preserved by the mapping and is defined in detail in  <cit> . the effect is that those images that are statistically similar are spatially close, thus enabling patterns of difference and similarity to be readily recognized in large image sets. the user can also navigate through an image set, visualize different classes of images for comparison, show or hide classes of images, select and reclassify images, show a representative image  <cit>  for each class of images, and export data or create images of the results. this enables the distinct patterns of protein localisation or distribution across the image set to be readily seen, while also allowing images to be viewed at high resolution. in this manner outlier images may be found and either removed from further analysis, or reviewed in detail if it appears that they form a subclass of protein expression in their own right. further, when comparing treated and untreated experimental imaging, changes in localisation may be observed as the treated/untreated images forming distinct clusters. figure  <dig> shows a snapshot image taken of visualization in icluster . an early prototype of icluster showing the core principle of spatial layout by statistical similarity was described in  <cit> .

the aims of the current work are three-fold. firstly, we introduce a novel method of statistical testing, the centroid distance test, for comparing image sets and returning p-values for the null hypothesis, that is, there is no change. comparison to previous tests shows the centroid distance test to be significantly more sensitive in detecting difference in subcellular imaging. while the work we describe here has been implemented in icluster, the statistical test is simple to implement and hence could readily be applied within other image analysis pipelines. secondly, by examining the core issues in establishing an image analysis pipeline such as "how many images are needed?", "do cells need to be selected from the images?", "what is the effect of outliers?" and "how subtle an effect can be detected", the aim is to outline a protocol for creating a workflow. finally, by releasing the icluster software the hope is that there will be a much wider uptake of quantitative methods within the bio-imaging community to truly enable the many benefits that the new high throughput microscope technologies offer.

icluster is being released with this publication and is available for download under the gnu general public licence from . it is available for windows, gnu linux and macosx and includes source code. a java applet demonstration is also available on the same site.

RESULTS
a key requirement of many imaging experiments is to determine whether there has been a change such as a shift from one subcellular localisation to another or a re-distribution within the cell of the organelle containing the protein. typical experiments would be to image a protein with and without co-expression of another protein in order to understand how they interact  <cit> , or to image a protein under a range of drug treatments to screen for active compounds  <cit> . in such cases it is not so important what the actual localisation of the protein is so much as whether it has been perturbed by an introduced interaction. in the following, the core issues in establishing a workflow for testing for difference are considered with examples given for image sets a and b . a summary of the workflow is given in figure  <dig>  the aim is to test the limits of the centroid distance test  and establish a protocol for application to other image sets.

to crop or not to crop
depending on the application it may be beneficial to calculate image statistics for individually selected cells. for a screen in which cells are relatively uniform across the population, selection might not be required, while for transfection experiments in which cell populations may be more heterogeneous selection may be recommended. avoiding cell selection can be advantageous in that automated selection methods can give variable results, especially when cells are confluent on the slide. selection will typically involve experimenting with a variety of softwares to find the one that best suits the assay.

one of the advantages of threshold adjacency statistics   is that they may be calculated either for images containing multiple cells or for images in which individual cells have been selected. in  <cit>  it was noted that classification accuracies using support vector machines with tas on multiple cells per image or selected cells were comparable. hence images may be pre-processed before input to icluster using dedicated cell selection software to give individual cells, or raw images containing multiple cells may be directly utilised.

to avoid confounding results by variability in the success of cell selection, here we test on images for which no pre-processing for selection or cropping has occurred.

detecting outlier images
for each of the  <dig> classes of image from set a, outliers were detected by viewing that class of images within icluster and observing which images did not cluster with the main group. other approaches to outlier detection include removing those images at greater than  <dig> standard deviations distant from the mean  <cit> . a total of  <dig> images that were spatially distant from other members of their class were found, with between  <dig> and  <dig> outlier images per class. closer examination of the outliers showed each to be the result of either an imaging artefact or a poor selection of cellular regions . in the following, analyses will be performed on image set a both with and without outliers in order to gauge their effect on the statistical analyses.

image number
a key question in automated image analysis is how many images are required to achieve statistical significance in detecting difference. towards this, p-values for the null hypothesis for all pairs of the  <dig> image classes were generated as follows. for a given pair and an integer n, a random subset of n images of each was selected, and the p-value for the null hypothesis calculated. this was repeated  <dig> times for that pair  and integer n. hence for each pair of classes and integer n,  <dig> p-values were recorded. for each n, the worst  p-value over all the pairs and the  <dig> repeats then gives an indication of how well a set of n images of two distinct localisations may be distinguished. the results of this process are given in table  <dig> for image set a, both with and without outlier images.

for each pair of the  <dig> classes of image set a, a subset of n images was randomly selected from each, and a p-value calculated for the null hypothesis of no difference. this was repeated  <dig> times for each pair. for a given n, the highest p-value over all pairs and their  <dig> repeats is shown in the table. p-values are shown for the cases of removing or not removing outlier images before random selection.

it can be seen that the inclusion of outlier images significantly increases the p-value for a given image set size, hence reducing the confidence with which the null hypothesis may be rejected. to achieve a 95% confidence level  requires  <dig> images with outliers included, while only  <dig> images are needed when outliers have been removed. hence outlier removal while not essential if their number is relatively small, greatly improves confidence.

two classes of image from image set a that are visually and statistically similar are plasma membrane  and actin cytoskeleton . to gain an understanding of how well these might be distinguished for different numbers of images, a similar process to the above was tested on just this pair. random subsets of n images were generated, and p-values calculated. for each n this was repeated  <dig> times and the average p-value over those  <dig> was recorded, the results of which are given in table  <dig> 

for a given number n of images, random subsets of n plasma membrane and n actin cytoskeleton images were selected and a p-value calculated. for a given n, the average of  <dig> repeats is shown for the cases of removing or not removing outliers prior to selection.

again, it can be seen that outliers degrade confidence in rejecting the null hypothesis, though once  <dig> or more images are used both cases  achieve 95% confidence. overall the results of tables  <dig> and  <dig> suggest that outlier removal is to be recommended and that a reasonable number of images to collect to differentiate image sets of these types would be  <dig>  allowing that outlier removal might leave  <dig> 

detectability
two issues may arise in using image statistics to detect difference in imaging. the first potential problem is in whether the statistics are able to detect relatively subtle but discernable differences. the second is whether the statistics are overly discriminating, that is difference is detected when there is none or little, perhaps due to changes in imaging conditions rather than due to a redistribution of a protein within the cells. when testing for changes in a protein's subcellular localisation under treatment, over-sensitivity may be controlled by ensuring that microscope settings such as exposure time and imaging conditions are identical for all image sets compared.

to test the ability of the methodology to detect small changes in imaging, two image sets were created: the endosomal protein snx <dig> was fluorescently labelled using snx1-specific antibodies and imaged in cells treated with nocodazole  or the carrier control . see image set b in methods for experimental details. snx <dig> is an endosomal protein , and nocodazole disrupts the microtubule network that is involved in endosomal transport and subcellular distribution . hence untreated cells present a more clustered concentration in the peri-nuclear region, while nocodazole treated cells exhibit a more even distribution of endosomes throughout the cell. testing the snx <dig> imaging against snx1+nocodazole, gave a p-value for the null hypothesis of  <dig> , and hence the relatively subtle difference in images was readily detected . hence the statistical testing regime outlined shows a high degree of discrimination.

to test if the methodology might be sensitive to detecting random variability, repeat experiments were performed. using the procedure outlined in methods for image set c, cells expressing fluorescently labelled lamp <dig> were prepared. one set of cells was imaged on one day, and another on the consecutive day. the cells were divided into three separate populations corresponding to wells: two wells from day  <dig> and one well from day two. the images from the  <dig> wells were then compared pair-wise by randomly selecting  <dig> images of each well and generating a p-value for the null hypothesis of no change. repeating the random selection  <dig> times then gave an average p-value for each pair of wells. the wells imaged on the same day gave an average p-value of  <dig> , while comparing wells imaged on distinct days gave p-values of  <dig>  and  <dig> . while the p-values are lower when comparing wells from distinct days, they would not give cause to reject the null hypothesis. hence, with careful control of experimental conditions the chance of detecting change where there is none is reduced.

it should be strongly emphasised that as image statistics become more sensitive there is a real danger of detecting differences in the imaging conditions or the hardware setup rather than real changes in localisation. hence the ideal experiment is to compare image sets for which the classes to be compared are imaged at the same time on a single plate in distinct wells with identical technical specifications.

rejection of the null hypothesis
one potential problem with randomised permutation methods is rejection of the null hypothesis may occur at too high a rate  <cit> . to test the null hypothesis rejection rate, randomly chosen subsets of  <dig> images of the endoplasmic reticulum from image set a were selected. for two such  sets, a p-value for the null hypothesis was calculated. this was repeated  <dig>  times, to give  <dig>  p-values. of the  <dig>  p-values, the null hypothesis was rejected   <dig> times, which is close to the expected number of  <dig>  further, binning the p-values into intervals of length  <dig> , each bin contained  <dig> +/-  <dig>  showing that the distribution of p-values is relatively flat. hence it can be concluded that rejection of the null hypothesis is occurring at approximately the correct rate.

comparison to previous tests
as described in methods, in  <cit>  several statistical tests for difference were compared, and it was shown the most sensitive for subcellular image statistics was the 3-neighbour test  <cit> . it was shown that using around  <dig> images of individual cells of each subcellular localisation and applying this test, the null hypothesis could be rejected at a rate of 90%.

here we compare the centroid distance test and the 3-neighbour test using tas calculated for subsets of the plasma membrane and actin cytoskeleton image sets. random subsets of n images of each class, n from  <dig> to  <dig>  were selected and a p-value for both tests calculated. for each n,  <dig> tests were completed, and the averages are shown in table  <dig>  it can be seen that the p-values for the centroid distance test are up to a factor of  <dig> lower than the p-values for the 3-neighbour test, though for larger n both tests give small p-values for the null hypothesis. for each n, the table also shows how many of the  <dig> tests reported a p-value greater than  <dig> , ie a relatively large p-value for the null hypothesis. for all cases the centroid distance test gave a lower number of relatively high p-values for the null hypothesis. hence we conclude that the centroid distance test is more sensitive for detecting difference in subcellular imaging.

for a given number n of images, random subsets of n plasma membrane and n actin cytoskeleton images were selected and a p-value calculated for the centroid distance statistic and the 3-neighbours statistic. for a given n, the average of  <dig> p-values is shown. for each n, the percentage of the  <dig> tests that reported p >  <dig>  for the null hypothesis is also shown.

computational expense
to load the  <dig> images of image set a into icluster and calculate tas took  <dig> seconds. to calculate the spatial layout of the images  took approximately  <dig> minutes. it should be noted that while the calculation of tas is essentially linear in the number of images, the calculation of the sammon map it not. hence calculation of spatial layout for  <dig> images may only take 2– <dig> seconds. calculation of p-values  for moderate size image pairs set  is essentially instantaneous from the user's point of view. hence for moderate size  image sets, the images can be loaded, statistics and layout calculated, and p-values found in a few 10's of seconds.

testing was conducted on an intel core duo  <dig> t <dig> notebook with nvidia geforce go  <dig> gs graphic card under the fedora core  <dig> linux operating system.

CONCLUSIONS
the intention here has been to provide a new statistical test and a protocol for detecting difference in subcellar fluorescent microscopy imaging. it has been shown that the major subcellular localisations may readily be distinguished with as few as  <dig> images from high throughput microscopes, and that subtle shifts in localisation such as endosomal redistribution can be automatically detected. it has also been shown that outlier images may easily be detected from large image sets by visual inspection, and that their removal can significantly improve confidence in null hypothesis testing. in some experiments it may be the outliers that are the most interesting images in that an unusually high number of cells are not expressing the protein in the expected manner. further, the statistical testing framework utilising permutation testing has been rigorously evaluated to show that the p-values generated reject the null hypothesis at the expected rate and that the sensitivity is higher than previous approaches.

a significant advantage of the methodology outlined is in speed of computation. previous comparison of computing time for tas and the commonly used haralick measure showed tas to be  <dig> times faster to calculate  <cit> . few image statistics are as computationally simple as tas. hence for high throughput screening applications, an implementation of tas with the centroid difference test could detect those experiments in which treatment has changed protein localisation in days rather than months of computational time. it is also worth noting that as a simple, fast and sensitive test, the centroid distance test could readily be implemented in high throughput screening pipelines without utilising icluster. indeed, we plan to apply tas and the centroid difference test for screening applications in the near future. another advantage over previous approaches is that it can operate with or without cell selection, hence reducing computational expense and variability of results due to differing levels of success in the selection procedure.

it should be emphasised that care was taken to avoid human intervention in the preparation of the image sets, and to use microscopes and microscope settings commonly used for high throughput imaging. as far as we are aware this is the first study on testing for difference in subcellular imaging that utilises high throughput images that have not been selected by human intervention in any way. this gives strong confidence that the results obtained will be applicable and reproducible in "real" applications.

a feature of icluster is that it may equally well operate with user supplied statistics. a simple text file format outlined in the user manual may be used to describe each image and a set of statistics associated with it. icluster will then calculate spatial layout and do statistical testing just as has been shown here for tas. similarly, icluster can operate with user supplied statistics but without images being supplied, in which case each data points is represented as a simple sphere. hence the methodology is not limited to subcellular localisation imaging and could be applied to any data or image set for which the researcher has generated some form of statistics.

as such we foresee many applications of icluster to visual data exploration. as an example, in collaboration with other members of the institute for molecular bioscience, icluster has been used to explore data from tri-localisation experiments in cells . each data point corresponded to an endosome from a cell, with  <dig> numbers describing the degree of overlap of each of  <dig> fluorescent markers on that endosome. with some  <dig> endosomes in one data set, icluster was utilised to map the set of  <dig> dimensional vectors associated with the endosomes into  <dig> dimensions. in this representation the data naturally fell into a triangle, with each vertex of the triangle corresponding to one of the three markers used in the experiment, and points within the triangle corresponding to varying degrees of colocalisation of the proteins. in this way it was then possible to view and make sense of the whole data set and the diversity of the localisations of the proteins marked on each of the endosomes in a way that was not possible by viewing a spreadsheet of the data. as bio-data sets become increasingly larger there is an urgent need for tools to explore and make sense of them, and we believe that icluster will be invaluable in visual data exploration.

