BACKGROUND
transcriptome analysis is a common way of discovering differences in gene expression because regulation of gene activity occurs primarily on transcription level. numerous low-cost, simple methods are available for gene discovery projects, providing a limited set of transcripts more or less randomly selected from a pool of genes expressed differently between two samples . these methods include differential hybridization, subtractive hybridization, est sequencing and other gene discovery methods, which do not provide quantitative data nor do they aim at a complete coverage of the transcriptome.

dna microarrays became popular as a tool for genome-wide transcription analysis. microarray analysis of gene expression is only feasible when extensive sequence information and/or cdna libraries are available. therefore, dna microarrays do not satisfy a growing demand for "open-end" transcriptome analysis. proprietary high-end transcript profiling systems such as massive parallel signature sequencing  <cit>  and genecalling  <cit>  are excellent tools for genome-wide quantitative transcription analysis on any organism, but they are available to only a small fraction of researchers. serial analysis of gene expression  <cit>  is a free, open-end, quantitative transcription profiling system. the drawback of sage is that the size of the sequencing effort required to generate representative data sets limits the practical applicability of the method, particularly when transcripts expressed at low levels need to be covered.

mrna differential display   <cit> , cdna-aflp  <cit>  and different variants of these two methods  <cit>  are gel-based transcript profiling systems based on electrophoretic fingerprinting of amplified cdna fragments. both ddrt-pcr and cdna-aflp are open-end methods requiring only standard instrumentation and incurring low costs. they have been used in hundreds of published studies both on model and non-model organisms so far. the reproducibility of cdna-aflp patterns was reported to be superior to ddrt-pcr, but its drawback is a high fraction of cdna molecules escaping detection because of the lack of suitable restriction sites  <cit> . because of this limitation and a higher technical demand for cdna-alfp analysis as compared to ddrt-pcr, the latter method has largely dominated gel-based transcription profiling  <cit> .

the fundamental goal of transcriptomics is to generate and compare snapshots of mrna populations. in order to be suitable for comparisons with new data sets, these transcription profiles have to consist of quantitative values stored in a digital form and allowing for normalization procedures compensating for differences in the efficiency of mrna extraction, cdna synthesis and detection. neither ddrt-pcr nor cdna-aflp in their established forms fulfill these requirements. so far both methods have been used for gene discovery based on subjective band selection  <cit> , though different steps towards automatic large-scale transcription profiling have been undertaken, including the use of dna sequencers for cdna fragment analysis  <cit> , linking expression data to sequences  <cit>  and quantitative evaluation of autoradiographs of cdna-aflp gels  <cit> .

here we describe procedures for the conversion of fluorescent differential display results into quantitative transcription profiles, using a dna sequencer for cdna fragment separation and dna fingerprinting software for band matching, data normalization and densitometry. transcription profiles are represented by sets of intensity ratios calculated for band pairs  defined by the primer combination used and dna fragment mobility. we demonstrate the method by analyzing the effect of secondary metabolites of oilseed rape brassica napus on the transcriptome of the rape pathogen leptosphaeria maculans. to our knowledge this is the first report presenting a quantitative evaluation of a mrna differential display experiment.

RESULTS
frequency and size distribution of cdna amplicons
ddrt-pcr partitions transcripts into non-overlapping sets by synthetising cdna and amplifying their terminal parts with primer pairs consisting of an anchored poly-primer and a random primer. we used three anchored primers and  <dig> random primers , resulting in  <dig> primer combinations. amplification products were separated on a dna sequencer and detector signals were converted into virtual images . a total of about  <dig>  distinct fragments of leptosphaeria maculans cdna were detected.  <dig>  bands exceeded the thresholds set for the size  and intensity . the average number of detected bands produced by one primer pair were  <dig>  the minimum were  <dig> and the maximum were  <dig> bands per primer pair. 65% of arbitrary primers produced  <dig> –  <dig> bands each .

frequencies of bands produced with different anchored primers are compared in fig.  <dig>  all three anchored primers produced a similar number of bands, indicating that there is no preference for the last non-t nucleotide in the polyadenylation site of mrna in leptosphaeria maculans.

the size distribution of amplified fragments  shows that short fragments were amplified preferably, which is typical of methods based on randomly primed pcr. sequencing very short ddrt-pcr fragments is likely to detect 3'-noncoding sequences, which are not informative. fragments exceeding the length of  <dig> nt, which would preferable be chosen for cloning and sequencing, made up a half of all evaluated fragments.

coverage and reproducibility
to accurately estimate the coverage of the ddrt-pcr experiment, one needs to know the number of genes expressed under culture conditions used. because the genome of l. maculans has not been sequenced yet, we assume by analogy with other filamentous fungi that it harbours about  <dig>  <dig> genes. taking into consideration that many functions are not expressed in mycelial cultures used as the source of mrna , we assume that the transcriptome analyzed in this work consisted of  <dig> to  <dig> mrna molecules. ddrt-pcr generated  <dig> cdna bands,  <dig> of which were selected for evaluation. assuming poisson distribution, this corresponds to a  <dig> – 75% coverage of the transcriptome. the coverage of published dd and cdna-aflp experiments varies from less than 20% to 73%.

it has been reported that ddrt-pcr results are afflicted with a relatively high proportion of false positives  <cit> , which originate mainly from ribosomal rna. the reproducibility of quantitative changes in transcription levels determined by ddrt-pcr has not been reported so far. the fact that induction factors for the vast majority of data points calculated from normalized band intensities were close to  <dig>   indicates that the reproducibility of ddrt-pcr patterns was fairly good in this experiment, though we did not know which part of the differences is attributable to induction/suppression and which to random variance. to determine the reproducibility of the quantitative scoring, we repeated a set of ddrt-pcr reactions on rna extracted from a second untreated  culture. both cultures were inoculated with the same inoculum and grown in the same incubator to keep the differences in culture conditions at minimum. rna extraction, cdna synthesis and ddrt-pcr were performed in parallel, too, and care was taken to limit the variance introduced by handling. band intensities were normalized and the ratios of intensities for matching bands calculated. the results are summarized in tab.  <dig>  these data confirmed that reproducibility is an important issue in ddrt-pcr, as is the case with microarrays and other profiling methods. the variance in our experiment was comparable to microarrays .

changes in transcript levels after treatment of fungal cultures with phytoalexins
in order to detect specific effects of brassica napus phytoalexins on leptosphaeria maculans transcriptome and exclude general stress responses, we chose very mild treatment conditions. firstly, only a small fraction of brassica napus metabolites was used for the treatment. in the purification protocol for these metabolites from plant material we combined two liquid-liquid extractions . secondly, the concentration of metabolites in fungal culture medium was adjusted to be at most equal to their concentration in brassica napus stem. furthermore, a short treatment time was chosen to preclude secondary effects.

dna yield for each evaluated cdna fragment was determined as a densitometric value of the corresponding band, normalized to account for differences in loading volumes and used to calculate ratios between treated sample and control, designated as induction factor . fig.  <dig> summarizes induction factor values for all  <dig>  evaluated bands. the intensity of the majority of bands has changed to a lesser degree than three-times after the treatment. the induction factor was used to divide evaluated bands into five classes. as shown in fig.  <dig>  intensities of  <dig> bands  increased 3-times to 9-times upon treatment and  <dig> bands  were induced more than 9-times, the strongest induction observed being  <dig> -times. in a gene discovery project these bands would represent candidates for cloning.

in addition to bands appearing in both treated sample and control, a few bands were detected only in the control or only in the treated sample, representing transcripts which were either not present in detectable amounts in the control or fully suppressed by the treatment. these bands cannot be characterized by an induction factor, which amounts to infinity for induced bands without a counterpart in the control and zero for bands fully suppressed in the treated sample. in order to further assess the significance of these bands, we compared their intensities with the intensities of all evaluated bands in the experiment . the strongest band  amounted to 2451% of the mean peak intensity calculated for all bands in the experiment. the strongest suppressed band  amounted to 951% of the mean peak intensity.

*as compared to the average of densitometric values of all bands in the experiment ddrt-pcr bands in l. maculans cultures treated with brassica napus secondary metabolites vs. untreated control were matched and their intensities compared . for bands with no counterpart, the relative intensity as compared to the average intensity of all bands in the experiment was determined.

discussion
the main drawback of cdna differential display as compared to dna microarrays and industrial gel-based transcription profiling systems is a subjective evaluation of gels and the fact that data are not available in a quantitative form suitable for database storage and numerical manipulations. though different steps towards quantitative evaluation of ddrt-pcr gels have been undertaken, a practicable system for ddrt-pcr-based transcriptomics based on common equipment has not been described yet.

the system for quantitative evaluation of gel-based transcript profiles developed in this work relies on widely available equipment  and software . a crucial part of data processing is normalization, which compensates for differences in pipetting and in the efficiency of different steps from rna extraction up to loading samples on the sequencer. a central issue in normalization is the choice of bands originated from transcripts unchanged by the treatment. induced and suppressed bands have to be excluded from the calculation of a normalization factor, yet accurate distinction between induced/suppressed and constitutive bands is only possible with normalized data. we solved this problem by assuming that the majority of bands in each lane are not affected by the treatment and calculating a normalization factor from the middle quartiles of bands sorted by their uncorrected induction factor uif  the efficiency of this approach was proven by the fact that the vast majority of induction factors calculated from normalized data were close to  <dig>  . this result also demonstrated an excellent reproducibility of differential display patterns recorded on a dna sequencer.

cdna fragment patterns were originally recorded by autoradiography of radioactively labeled dna separated in polyacrylamide gels  <cit>  and radioactive labeling is still being used  <cit> . however, irregular background and typical artifacts of autoradiographs hampers automatic gel evalution. bauer et al.  <cit>  attempted to replace autoradiography by labeling cdna fragments with fluorophores and separating them on a dna sequencer. they used different fluorophores for controls and treated samples; because of the differences in fluorescence yield among fluorophores, quantification of the amount of dna in cdna bands was not possible. therefore, the authors depicted their protocol as merely "a qualitative method allowing to identify genes which are completely switched on or off".

in further development of fluorescent ddrt-pcr, labeling random primers  <cit>  was replaced by labeling anchored primers and capillary dna sequencers were used for cdna fragment detection  <cit> . although the use of genotyper genetic analysis software  facilitated semi-automatic recognition of unique bands , quantitative evaluation of data has not been demonstrated.

aittokallio et al.  <cit>  developed mathematical algorithms for the evaluation of ddrt-pcr patterns recorded on an alfexpress ii sequencer  as an alternative to transcript profiling by microarrays. their algorithms were written from scratch, comprising functions for fitting and smoothing densitometry traces, automatic band finding, band matching  and eventually identifying differently expressed bands. their work provides a solid basis for the development of software for automatic, quantitative processing of ddrt-pcr results, but it is not mature yet. the software is not freely available and it is not clear from the publication whether it is user-friendly enough to be used outside the laboratory of its creators. finally, certain aspects of the signal processing procedure needs scrutiny. for example, the difference in mobility between corresponding bands  affects the value of matushita distance  which is used for the computation of the dissimilarity score , though these differences reflect merely physical conditions during gel electrophoresis and are unrelated to transcription. in our procedure we completely separated band matching from the comparison of band intensities. another potential problem with signal processing in  <cit>  is the compensation for differences in loading volumes between lanes. instead of normalizing lane intensities, the authors attempted to achieve a "similar background" by dividing the "distance value" for each peak pair by the average distance of all other peak pairs in the lane. this procedure is likely to produce erroneous results when two or more bands in a lane originate from transcripts of differentially expressed genes. furthermore, it will introduce a bias into distance values of constitutively expressed  transcripts in lanes which contain strongly induced or suppressed bands. we avoided this problem by excluding 25% bands with the largest and 25% bands with the smallest induction factor from the computation of the normalization factor .

gellatly et al.  <cit>  recently studied the effect of methylbenzyldithiocarbamate  on leptosphaeria maculans. they used ddrt-pcr and observed on the average  <dig> bands for each primer combination, which is similar to our results. because the majority of gel-excised bands could not be amplified, the authors later abandonded ddrt-pcr and swiched to cdna-aflp. we successfully amplified and cloned bands selected from ddrt-pcr gels for leptosphaeria maculans by visualizing cy5-labeled dna on a fluorescence scanner . there are two differences in the treatment conditions used by gellatly at al.  <cit>  as compared to our work. the first difference concerns the composition of the inducing agent: a defined brassinin analogue was used by gellatly  <cit>  while we extracted metabolites from brassica napus stem. secondly, the treatment time was different: gellatly at al.  <cit>  induced l. maculans cultures for  <dig> h while we harvested mycelium just  <dig> h after the induction to prevent secondary effects. it will be interesting to compare genes identified as induced by the treatment in these two experiments.

the group of breyne et al.  <cit>  recently published an attempt to further develop cdna-aflp technique into a quantitative genome-wide transcript profiling system. the major drawback of their protocol as compared to ddrt-pcr is a high fraction of transcripts which escape analysis because of the lack of suitable restriction sites . this limitation casts doubts on the suitability of the system for genome-wide expression analysis. furthermore, the detection and quantification of cdna fragments was done by autoradiography of radioactively labeled dna rather than on a dna sequencer. the noise inherent to autoradiography is likely to increase statistical errors in intensity values assigned to bands. a crucial difference as compared to our approach concerns the normalization of band intensities. the authors calculated their normalization factor from the intensities of bands found to be expressed constantly during a time-course experiment while we automatized this process by calculating intensity ratios for all bands, sorting the bands by ratios and using bands from the 25% – 75% quartile for the calculation of a normalization factor. our procedure is suitable for automatization and does not require data from time-course experiments, which are not available in the majority of ddrt-pcr applications.

CONCLUSIONS
our protocol extends the application of cdna differential display  from a gene discovery tool to quantitative transcript profiling. the system is based on a combination of widely accessible hardware  and software . transcript profiles generated by quantitative ddrt-pcr according to our protocol consist of sets of numerical values  which can be stored in a spreadsheet and easily compared with each other and extended by new experiments. ddrt-pcr thus offers an open end alternative for microarray-based transcriptomics, which is particularly attractive in research on non-model organisms where microarray analysis is not available or economical.

