BACKGROUND
cloning vectors capable of being packaged into retroviral particles for transduction into mammalian cells provide efficient tools for stably altering the genome of dividing cells. in this regard, the moloney murine leukemia virus -based pbabe vector system  <cit>  has been widely utilized for highly efficient stable gene overexpression in a variety of different mammalian cells with negligible off-target cellular effects. the pbabe vector consists of a bacterial origin of replication, viral elements for gene packaging, transcription and processing, and a unique restriction enzyme sequence-based cloning site http://www.addgene.org/1767/. additionally it contains an ampicillin-resistance gene for selection in bacteria, and either puromycin, hygromycin or neomycin - resistance genes in order to select for stably transduced cell lines  <cit> . this is the first retroviral transduction system that does not require helper viruses. instead either amphotropic or ecotropic viral env gene-expressing and gag-pol gene-expressing plasmids are co-transfected along with the desired pbabe construct into an appropriate packaging cell line to produce high-titer, replication-incompetent viruses for the transfer and expression of exogenous genes in mammalian cells  <cit> . the ability to use pbabe constructs as part of a three-plasmid packaging system greatly reduces the probability of recombination events leading to horizontal transfer and live virus production in the transduced lines, making it a safe and effective retroviral gene transduction system.

a major disadvantage of the pbabe plasmid is its relatively limited cloning site http://www.addgene.org/1767/. to increase cloning efficiency, two different enzymes need to be selected from the cloning site so as to generate non-complementary overhangs in the digested dna, thus preventing self-ligation. when such a double digestion protocol is used, a series of conditions must be taken into consideration. besides the absence of each enzyme site in the target dna, the two enzymes should share a common set of optimal reaction conditions, including salt concentrations, digestion times and activation/inactivation temperatures. lack of such compatible digestion conditions necessitates tedious and time-consuming sequential digestions as well as loss of dna product during intermediate purifications. the enzymes that best fit these criteria in the pbabe multiple cloning site are sali, bamhi and ecori. in our experience  <cit> , using sali does not uniformly yield optimal digestion in combination with either bamhi or ecori, leading to reduced cloning efficiency. additionally if any of these three sites, particularly bamhi or ecori, are internally present within the target cdna, then the cloning process becomes extremely complicated.

ligation-independent cloning  technology was developed to remove the conventional requirements of compatible restriction enzyme sites and exogenous enzymatic ligation during the cloning process  <cit> . this methodology has been used for pcr-based amplification of genomic dna sequences  <cit> , to generate vectors for bacterial protein overexpression  <cit> , for high-throughput cloning of biocatalysts from prokaryotic genomes  <cit> , for the addition of variable-length c-terminal histidine tags  <cit> , and for gene silencing in plant cells  <cit> . however to our knowledge, there are no lic retroviral vectors available for stably overexpressing proteins in mammalian cells.

therefore, to increase cloning applicability and efficiency, we adapted the pbabe retroviral plasmid backbone into a lic version denoted as pblic . unlike pbabe, cloning into this vector no longer requires conventional restriction site-generated sticky ends but instead relies on a random 12/13-sequence comprised of  <dig> bases. the 12/13-mer sequences are designed such that overhangs are generated using the 3' exonuclease activity of t <dig> polymerase. the complementary overhang sequence can be added to target cdna inserts via pcr extension from a primer template. because the overhang is generated by exonuclease rather than endonuclease activity and requires a free 3' end, it will not be processed even if it does happen to be internally present in the target cdna.

here we outline the strategy we followed to modify the pbabe plasmid vector into pblic. we demonstrate successful cloning of three different cdna for proteins of different molecular weights, bax , catalase  and p <dig>  into the adapted vector, and protein overexpression from the transduced constructs in the lncap human prostate cancer cell line. thus our results support wide applicability of the modified pblic plasmid for mammalian retroviral transduction and protein overexpression without consideration of restriction enzymes sites or prior ligation during the cloning process. the rationale behind our basic protocol can be readily used to adapt other retroviral plasmids. thus our method provides an easy and rapid universal method of introducing any dna sequence of interest into the modified lic retroviral vector, enhancing the efficiency of laboratory-scale cloning. further the lic retroviral system can greatly facilitate high-throughput cloning processes such as those used for the creation and verification of retroviral gene overexpression libraries where screening individual inserts for internal restriction enzyme sites is impractical.

RESULTS
the goal of our study was to convert the pbabe retroviral vector into an lic version in order to remove the requirement for screening target cdna inserts for absence of desired cloning restriction enzyme sites and for more universally efficient cloning. eliminating restriction enzymes from the cloning process necessitates utilizing another means of generating complementary dna overhangs in the plasmid and target insert. this was achieved by using the 3' exonuclease activity of t <dig> dna polymerase and site-specifically inhibiting the competing 5' polymerase activity by leaving out a subset of deoxynucleotides from the reaction mixture, a technique that has been previously used to generate lic vectors  <cit> . the adaptor module added to convert pbabe into pblic  was designed to facilitate this manner of overhang generation. therefore it involved three elements: the addition of a blunt cutter enzyme site not present in the original plasmid, restriction enzyme sites corresponding to the cloning site in pbabe to allow ligation of the adaptor insert, and 12/13-mer sequences consisting of three randomly repeated bases  that would constitute the overhang.

the first step involved identifying a blunt cutter enzyme not present in the pbabe plasmid. accordingly, we added a pmli consensus sequence into the adaptor insert . thus once the adaptor was successfully inserted into the pbabe backbone, digestion with pmli yielded the linearized plasmid for the pblic version but not for the original pbabe version . the linearized form acts as a template for t <dig> exonuclease activity.

for the sequence overhangs generated upstream of the pmli digestion site , we used a random combination of a, t and c such that it was unlikely to correspond to a restriction enzyme site or coding dna. the overhang was maintained by leaving out dctp, datp and dttp from the reaction mixture, thus inhibiting t <dig> 5' dna polymerase activity from filling in the overhang. conversely, digestion past the desired overhang sequence  was prevented by addition of dgtp to the reaction mixture, allowing polymerase activity to proceed as soon as the bold italicized g in the adaptor sequence is encountered . the choice of which three bases to be used to generate the random overhang is dependent on the three bases 5' of digestion site in the restriction sequence of the single cutter enzyme. for instance the restriction sequence for pmli is cac-gtg, where the hyphen denotes the digestion site that leads to the blunt 3' end. thus c and a were necessarily included in the pblic adaptor sequence .

finally we added sali and bamhi overhang sequences to the ends of the adaptor module . note that only the overhang sequences that are generated via restriction digestion  were added. the pbabe plasmid was digested with these two enzymes in order to remove its original cloning site and to permit ligation of the adaptor insert into the plasmid to generate pblic. this process restored the full bamhi site but the palindromic nature of the sali site was destroyed .

conversion of the pbabe plasmid into pblic was also confirmed by digestion with pmli. subsequent to pmli digestion, as expected in the pbabe plasmid, the gel exhibited bands corresponding to the fully intact, nicked and linearized forms of the plasmids . in contrast, the vector with the ligated lic insert showed a single band corresponding to a linearized ~ <dig> kb plasmid . ligation of the lic module into the digested pbabe plasmid destroys the sali unique cloning site present in the original plasmid. accordingly, when both pbabe and pblic were digested with sali, pblic no longer yielded the linearized band . finally insertion of the lic adaptor was verified by sequencing with the sv <dig> promoter reverse primer 5' gaaatttgtgatgctattgc 3'.

once we verified conversion of pbabe to the pblic version, we wanted to validate its ability to be used as a gene overexpression vector that can be virally packaged and transduced in mammalian cells. to do so, we used the pblic vector to clone three cdna constructs that are of interest to our laboratory, the pro-apoptotic protein bax, the antioxidant protein, catalase and the tumor suppressor/dna damage-responsive protein, p <dig>  these had previously proved difficult to clone into the pbabe vector due to the presence of internal bamhi and/or ecori sites in their cdna sequences. as described in the methods section and outlined above, pcr primers were designed to add 12/13-mer sequences complementary to the t4-generated pblic overhangs  to the cdna to allow ligation of the plasmid and insert. this was accomplished by pcr elongation from the appropriate primer template . the resulting duplex segment was treated with t <dig> polymerase, with only dctp added to the reaction mixture, in order to produce complementary overhangs. the co-mixed insert and plasmid  were used to transform xl- <dig> gold recombination-deficient e. coli, and ligation was accomplished endogenously by the bacterial dna repair enzymatic machinery. the resulting constructs were purified from bacterial pellets and were verified both by internal digestion at a unique hindiii site to yield a fragment of lower mobility containing the insert  relative to the empty vector as well as by dna sequencing .

overhang sequences are bolded, the t <dig> exonuclease activity termination site guanine is bolded and italicized, and the kozak sequence is underlined.

the purified pblic cdna constructs were used to transduce the human prostate cancer cell line lncap, as described in methods. the modified construct appeared to be as efficiently packaged into viral particles as the parental pbabe plasmid judging by the lysed appearance of the packaging hek 293t cells . the transduced cells were continuously selected in g418-containing media. mock-transduced lncap cells were used as a "canary" plate - all cells in this plate died within a week whereas approximately 20% cells died in the transduced plates within the same time period. subsequently cells showed minimal death in g418-containing media, indicating that only the successfully transduced cells had survived. cells harvested from the empty pblic-neo and pblic-bax, pblic-catalase or pblic-p <dig> transduced samples were subjected to rt-pcr and western blotting to determine expression of the target cdna. both bax  and catalase  constructs showed robust overexpression of the respective full-length mrna and protein in the transduced lncap cells. however while the pblic-p <dig> construct yielded p <dig> mrna overexpression in lncap cells , we were unable to detect significant p <dig> protein overexpression in these cells . because the transcript was overexpressed and the lncap cells exhibited g <dig> resistance, we surmised that the excess p <dig> was being post-translationally targeted for degradation by mdm <dig> in the lncap cells, which possess a fully functional p <dig> pathway  <cit> . accordingly we also transduced the pblic-p <dig> construct in the p53-null  <cit>  h <dig> lung cancer cell line. in this background, we were able to detect a high degree of p <dig> protein overexpression from pblic-p <dig> .

CONCLUSIONS
in this study, we demonstrate successful conversion of the pbabe retroviral transduction vector into an lic version, pblic. the pblic vector retains the highly efficient transduction and overexpression capability of the original pbabe with the added advantages of ligation-independent cloning. although we present here the results demonstrating gene overexpression using the converted pbabe plasmid with neomycin  resistance, we have also converted the pbabe-puromycin plasmid by the same process . furthermore the general strategy outlined above can be easily utilized to convert other retroviral plasmids such as pwzl, plxsn or pmig into lic versions. given the popularity and efficiency of the pbabe vector system for retroviral transduction and overexpression of cdnas, we believe that the pblic version will simplify and extend its applications, for instance by making it a feasible vector for high-throughput cloning applications such as generation of cdna libraries.

