BACKGROUND
the mevalonic acid pathway  leads to the synthesis of sterol isoprenoids, with the final product cholesterol , and nonsterol isoprenoids, such as dolichols, the side chain of ubiquinone, farnesyl diphosphate  and geranylgeranyl diphosphate . statins are well-known inhibitors of 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme a reductase . this group of drugs is widely used in the treatment of hyperlipidemia and cardiovascular diseases  <cit> . however, the effects of statins extend beyond their cholesterol-lowering action. inhibition of hmg-coa reductase, the regulatory enzyme of the pathway, results in disturbances in practically all vital cellular processes, such as protein glycosylation and prenylation, cell signaling, functioning of the respiratory chain and integrity of cellular membranes  <cit> . the impairment of these processes may contribute to the pleiotropic side-effects of statins  <cit> .

the yeast saccharomyces cerevisiae is a valuable model for studying metabolic pathways and cellular mechanisms of human diseases as it is genetically tractable and shares many similarities with human cells  <cit> . as a eukaryote, s. cerevisiae has many of the advantages of higher eukaryotic expression systems such as protein processing, protein folding and posttranslational modifications, at the same time being as easy to manipulate as are bacteria. the use of yeast as a model of fundamental cellular processes and metabolic pathways of the human has improved the understanding and facilitated the molecular analysis of many disease-related genes. comparative genomics studies have shown that 40% of yeast proteins have at least one human homolog and 30% of genes involved in human disease pathology have an ortholog in yeast  <cit> . also, many regulatory pathways are conserved between yeast and humans. for example, the use of recombinant yeast to screen for new inhibitors of human acetyl-coa carboxylase has led to the discovery of potential drugs to treat obesity  <cit> . the mevalonate pathways in yeast and humans are highly similar. all the steps from hmg-coa formation to zymosterol synthesis are biochemically the same. the high degree of conservation of the mevalonate pathway – from unicellular organisms to human cells – justifies the use of s. cerevisiae to study the general principles of this pathway and its response to drugs  <cit> .

here, we investigated the effects of four statins widely used in the clinical practice – simvastatin, atorvastatin, fluvastatin and rosuvastatin – on the growth rate and metabolism of yeast cells. three yeast strains were constructed to express human hmgr or either of the yeast isoenzymes. we examined the levels of ergosterol – the yeast cholesterol analog – and its precursors after statin treatment. we also investigated the statin-induced changes in the expression of genes from the nonsterol branches of the mva pathway such as those involved in ubiquinone and dolichol biosynthesis and in protein prenylation. the impact of individual statins on the expression of genes encoding enzymes of the sterol biosynthesis pathway was analysed by real-time pcr. the effects of statins on the levels of selected proteins from those pathways were investigated by western blotting. finally, we evaluated the effects of the individual statins on the mevalonate and associated pathways.

RESULTS
the effects of statins on yeast growth
in this study we used a yeast expression system described earlier  <cit> . here we applied the following strains:

• h – yeast strain with double hmg1Δ hmg2Δ deletion  transformed with a plasmid carrying the human hmgr gene.

• y <dig> – double hmg1Δ hmg2Δ deletion yeast strain transformed with a plasmid carrying yeast hmg <dig> gene.

• y <dig> – double hmg1Δ hmg2Δ deletion yeast strain transformed with a plasmid carrying yeast hmg <dig> gene.

since the hmg-coa reductase activity is essential for yeast growth, we could investigate the relative sensitivity of the human hmgr to the various statins by comparing the growth kinetics of appropriate recombinant yeast strains in the presence of different concentrations of the statins. based on od <dig> readings growth curves were plotted for each culture. for further research we chose the concentration of 100 μm for all statins, which was the highest non-toxic dose for yeast cells.

as shown in figure  <dig>  statins exerted different effects on the yeast strains tested. the strongest inhibitory effect on yeast growth was observed in cultures supplemented with fluvastatin. atorvastatin and rosuvastatin caused milder yeast growth inhibition, whereas simvastatin only slightly affected yeast growth.

quantification of mrna for genes encoding selected enzymes from the sterol and nonsterol branches of the isoprenoid biosynthesis pathways
the effects of statins on the level of expression of genes encoding enzymes involved in isoprenoid biosynthesis were investigated for selected enzymes whose homologs can be found both in yeast and human cells. these included:

• genes from the mevalonate pathway: acetyl-coa acetyltransferase , hydroxymethylglutaryl-coa synthase , human  and yeast  3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme a reductase, farnesyl diphosphate synthase .

• sterol-specific genes encoding enzymes involved in sterol biosynthesis: squalene monooxygenase , c- <dig> sterol desaturase  and, additionally, the gene coding for delta-sterol c-methyltransferase , an enzyme absent in humans .

• nonsterol-specific genes encoding enzymes involved in ubiquinone biosynthesis: para-hydroxybenzoate-polyprenyl transferase ,  <dig> -dihydroxy-5-hexaprenylbenzoate-o-methyltransferase  and ubiquinone biosynthesis monooxygenase ; dolichol synthesis: cis-prenyltransferase  and dolichol kinase ; and protein prenylation: geranylgeranyl diphosphate synthase .

in general, the statins induced expression of the genes from the mevalonate pathway and its sterol-specific branch, although the magnitude of the stimulation differed greatly between the genes, and for a given gene, between the four statins . in the h strain carrying human hmgr the strongest effect was observed after simvastatin treatment, except for the human hmgr gene itself, whose expression was induced to the highest degree after rosuvastatin treatment.

in contrast, statins caused highly divergent changes in the expression of genes coding for the enzymes from the ubiquinone synthesis , dolichol synthesis  and protein prenylation  pathways . in strain h expression of all those genes was reduced by simvastatin, atorvastatin and fluvastatin. interestingly, rosuvastatin caused a diverse effect: expression of three genes  was induced, and three other genes  responded with a slight decrease of expression. in the y <dig> and y <dig> strains expression of those genes was generally reduced, except for the coq <dig> gene. notably, in the y <dig> strain rosuvastatin induced the expression of all the tested genes. a striking conclusion from this part of the study is that the effects of rosuvastatin on the expression of genes from the nonsterol isoprenoid pathways are clearly different from those of the other statins, regardless of the yeast strain investigated. in the strain carrying human hmgr the action of rosuvastatin is more ‘positive’: it is either the strongest, or the only inducer of expression, or the weakest repressor.

the level of selected proteins after statin treatment
in parallel to the transcript analysis western blotting was applied to follow the cellular levels of corresponding proteins. as shown in figure  <dig>  the level of human hmgr protein was higher after statin treatment compared to the control. the magnitude of that effect depended on the type of statin used: the lowest accumulation was observed after simvastatin treatment  and the highest one – in the presence of rosuvastatin . in contrast to the high increase of the human hmgr protein level after statin treatment, the levels of the nonsterol pathway proteins, rer <dig> and coq <dig>  were only slightly changed in response to the statins. in general, the response of those two enzymes at the protein level correlated well with the effects of the statins on their mrna levels.

efficiency of individual statins in decreasing the level of sterols
to investigate the effects of various statins on yeast cell sterol levels, the h strain was treated with the four statins or buffer, sterols were isolated and submitted to gc/ms analysis. the levels of ergosterol and its precursors squalene, lanosterol, zymosterol and fecosterol, as well as the total amount of identified sterols, were calculated. in statin-treated cells the total sterol pool and the levels of each sterol precursor identified were lower than in control cells . the most prominent decrease was noted for squalene, the content of which was between 24%  and 7%  of its content in control cells. of the sterols measured, the level of ergosterol was the least diminished . the four statins differed substantially in their overall inhibitory effects on sterol synthesis. simvastatin exerted the strongest inhibitory effect  and rosuvastatin the mildest .

data expressed as percentage of the amounts found in control  cells.

discussion
the use of yeast as a model organism for studying cell biology and a host for the expression of heterologous proteins is becoming increasingly popular in recent years  <cit> . in this study a yeast expression system was applied to investigate the effects of four statins widely used in the clinical practice – simvastatin, atorvastatin, fluvastatin and rosuvastatin – on a number of cellular processes. first, the effects of the statins on yeast growth were checked. the strongest inhibitory effect was exerted by fluvastatin, milder effects were noted for atorvastatin and rosuvastatin, whereas simvastatin did not significantly affect yeast growth. those results suggest that at the dose used fluvastatin is the most toxic while simvastatin is the safest of the hmgr inhibitors tested.

as statins are mainly prescribed to hypercholesterolemic patients to normalize the levels of serum lipoproteins, we focused on expression of the genes related to sterol biosynthesis. a comparative analysis of expression of genes from the mevalonate pathway  as well as sterol-specific genes encoding enzymes involved in sterol biosynthesis  revealed increased mrna levels for most of those genes in response to statins. statins also induced the expression of the hmgr-encoding genes  in the respective strains. however, the magnitude of the response varied substantially between the four statins and also between the strains. in the h strain expressing human hmgr, simvastatin was the strongest inducer of all the above genes except for human hmgr itself, for which it was the weakest inducer of all the statins assayed. our results indicate that the hmgr inhibitors affect the expression of practically all enzymes of the sterol branch of the mevalonate pathway and this effect depends on the type of statin administered but also, rather unexpectedly, on the type of hmgr expressed in the cell.

in general, in response to statin treatment cells develop an adaptive response compensating for the diminished level of sterols which include increased expression of mevalonate pathway genes. similar results were observed in human skeletal muscle-like cells  <cit>  and human hepatoma hepg <dig> cells  <cit> . in those studies statins increased the expression of numerous cholesterol synthesis-related genes. this is in accordance with the results of gerber et al.  <cit> , hagemenas and illingworth  <cit>  and ours  <cit>  proving that inhibition of hmgr activity by statin treatment stimulates an adaptive response in the cell in order to maintain sterol homeostasis, including up-regulation of genes involved in cholesterol biosynthesis, a compensatory increase in hmgr level and consequent partial reduction of the sterol lowering effect.

to investigate whether statins produce similar effects on the expression of genes involved in pathways branching off the main sterol biosynthesis pathway we chose six genes involved in ubiquinone synthesis , dolichol synthesis  or protein prenylation . surprisingly, the effects of statins on the expression of those genes were unlike those discussed above for the main pathway. highly divergent changes in the expression of the genes tested were noted after statin treatment, with the majority showing reduced level of transcripts.

our mrna quantification results show that statins generally decrease expression of ubiquinone synthesis-related genes in the h strain . the strongest such decrease was noted in yeast cells treated with atorvastatin. experimental data showed that atorvastatin significantly decreases the coenzyme q level in the blood of patient at risk for cardiovascular disease and stroke  <cit> . ample studies have demonstrated that, as a consequence of hmg-coa reductase inhibition, statins block the production of farnesyl diphosphate , serving as substrate for, among others, the synthesis of the side chain of ubiquinone. the direct effect through fpp depletion may not be the only mechanism whereby statins lower coq synthesis.

next, we checked the effects of statins on the expression of genes encoding yeast cis-prenyltransferase rer2p and dolichol kinase sec59p. in our study statins generally reduced expression of rer <dig> and sec <dig> genes, which suggests that the dolichol synthesis could be decreased in statin-treated cells. polyprenols and dolichols  are long-chain highly hydrophobic lipids broadly distributed in all tissues and cellular membranes of eukaryotic cells. moreover, dolichol affects the structure and fluidity of the cellular membrane and probably also influence the activity of membrane-associated proteins  <cit>  or protect components of biological membranes against oxidative stress  <cit> . dolichol has also been shown to delay the g <dig> cell cycle arrest in human fibroblasts  <cit> . furthermore, dolichol plays a role in the regulation of angiogenesis during tumor growth  <cit> .

in the protein prenylation branch we observed a significantly increased geranylgeranyl diphosphate synthase  mrna level after rosuvastatin treatment. protein prenylation is crucial for global cellular functions such as proliferation, differentiation, apoptosis and carcinogenesis. it requires the 15-carbon isoprenoid farnesyl diphosphate  or the 20-carbon geranylgeranyl diphosphate , both of which are intermediates of the mva pathway. prenylated rho and rac proteins are potent negative regulators of endothelial nitric oxide synthase . by inhibition of geranylgeranylation statins were found to inactivate the rho and rac proteins, causing enos up-regulation and subsequent no release  <cit> . moreover, inhibition of rac <dig> protein in the course of statin therapy accounted for a decreased development of cardiac hypertrophy  <cit> .

western blotting analysis showed clearly that statin treatment increases the steady state level of human hmgr protein in the h strain of yeast. the strongest increase was observed in rosuvastatin-treated cells, which is in accordance with the results of the gene expression analysis which showed the highest induction of human hmgr gene expression after rosuvastatin treatment. in contrast to the substantial increase of the human hmgr protein level after statin treatment, the levels of rer <dig> and coq <dig> proteins were only slightly changed in statin-treated cells. the response of rer <dig> and coq <dig> proteins is similar to the changes of the their transcripts level after statins treatment.

hmg-coa reductase inhibitors are highly potent at lowering ldl cholesterol. here, statins substantially lowered the level of ergosterol and  much more strongly the levels of all its triterpene precursors . this is in accordance with the results of fowler et al.  <cit>  showing a profound decrease of ergosterol level and an even deeper depletion of its precursors in lovastatin-treated yeast cells. both these results indicate that following hmgr inhibition the yeast cell, whether it expresses the native enzyme  <cit>  or the human one , increases the rate of precursor conversion into ergosterol in an attempt to maintain the supply of this vital sterol. it remains to be shown whether the same is also true of human cells. if so, the inhibition of hmgr by statins would result in a deeper depletion of cholesterol precursors than of cholesterol itself. such a disproportionately profound depletion could possibly account for some of the adverse effects of statin therapy  <cit> .

in our study simvastatin caused the strongest reduction in the content of sterols in the strain carrying human hmg-coa reductase. this observation correlates with the gene expression results which showed the strongest overexpression of genes encoding selected enzymes from the sterol-specific branch after simvastatin treatment in the h strain. on the other hand, rosuvastatin differed from the other statins in its effect on the mrna level of nonsterol-specific genes. in the strain carrying human hmgr expression of genes from nonsterol isoprenoid biosynthesis branches was strongly reduced after simvastatin, atorvastatin and fluvastatin treatment, while rosuvastatin caused only a mild repression or, for some of those genes, even a substantial induction. taken together, this proves that statins, although classified to the same therapeutic group, differ strikingly in terms of their potency of action on the cell metabolism.

it may be assumed that statins affect the cell on several metabolic levels. the presented data suggest that inhibition of hmgr activity by statins stimulates an adaptive response in the cell, including up-regulation of genes involved in sterol biosynthesis. genes from the pathways branching off the sterol-synthesis route appear to be less susceptible to the up-regulation, possibly because the levels of substrates for their enzymes are lower after statin treatment. moreover, the diverse effects observed for individual hmgr inhibitors could be of major importance in the clinical practice, as the statins are prescribed to patients of various health conditions and different settings of cardiovascular diseases.

CONCLUSIONS
the presented yeast expression system is suitable for studying the effects of hmg-coa reductase inhibitors on various cellular processes, such as sterol biosynthesis, gene expression and protein levels. we have shown that the statins differ in their potency of action on gene expression, protein levels and lipid content. they induce expression of genes from the main sterol biosynthesis pathway. genes from the pathways branching off the main one appear to be less susceptible to upregulation. statin treatment substantially reduces the overall level of cell sterols , with the final product ergosterol being less affected than its precursors.

