BACKGROUND
how organisms adapt to environmental conditions and how this process promotes speciation is a key question in evolutionary biology and speciation research. ecologically based selection promotes adaptive divergence between populations, which may lead to the evolution of reproductive isolation and, ultimately, to ecological speciation
 <cit> . much of the evidence for ecological speciation comes from examples of adaptive radiation such as in three-spined stickleback, darwin’s finches, hawaiian honeycreepers, anolis lizards, spiders on the galapagos and hawaiian archipelagos, and cichlid fishes
 <cit> . the extreme diversification of cichlids, in particular the emergence of hundreds of species in the great lakes of the east african rift valley, has been puzzling biologists for decades. they comprise the most diverse species flocks of vertebrates on earth
 <cit> . their adaptive radiations have been attributed to the interaction of extrinsic factors such as ecological opportunities
 <cit> , lake-level fluctuations
 <cit>  and habitat diversity
 <cit> , as well as intrinsic factors in the form of adaptively relevant traits
 <cit> . these include morphological, behavioural and physiological traits, and are targeted by natural or sexual selection.

few relationships are as intimate as those between a parasite and its host, leading to strong ecological and evolutionary associations
 <cit> . parasites are increasingly recognized as important drivers of host diversity
 <cit> . they also have been suggested to promote speciation
 <cit>  by triggering natural selection , as well as sexual selection . in vertebrates, both natural and sexual selection have been hypothesized to target the immune system
 <cit> . the vertebrate immune system therefore classifies as a so-called ‘magic trait’
 <cit> , which has the potential to initiate or accelerate speciation. indeed, under the combined challenge of parasitism and associated mating decisions, the immune system strongly determines individual fitness. the result is that species diversification in vertebrates might have an important parasite-driven basis
 <cit> . however, how often and how strong parasites are involved in speciation remains largely unknown
 <cit> .

apart from studies in lake malawi
 <cit>  and lake victoria
 <cit> , and despite recent renewed interest in cichlid parasites
 <cit> , the influence of parasitism and the immune system on cichlid speciation has hardly been considered. one reason is that parasite-driven adaptation at the immunogenetic or behavioural level might be hard to detect. nevertheless, most of the suggested drivers of cichlid radiations, such as habitat diversification , trophic diversification  and social interactions 
 <cit> , are likely associated with shifts in parasite selection pressure. indeed, diet
 <cit> ,  behaviour
 <cit> , and environmental conditions
 <cit>  have proven to be important factors structuring fish parasite communities.

in this study, we investigate the possibility of a role for parasitism in the diversification among the highly fragmented eco-morphologically similar colour morphs  of tropheus cichlids from lake tanganyika. species of the genus tropheus are obligate near-shore rock-dwelling philopatric fishes with low dispersal capacity
 <cit> . although currently six nominal species are recognized
 <cit> , the genus comprises more than  <dig> mostly allopatric colour morphs, which this taxonomical framework cannot unambiguously accommodate
 <cit> . therefore, and considering their stenotopy, populations are mostly referred to by their catch locality. the spatial distribution of the various tropheus lineages shifted during lake level fluctuations in the pleistocene
 <cit> , fragmenting populations during high stands, or forcing them into secondary contact during low stands
 <cit> . these fluctuations strongly influenced the diversification of tropheus populations
 <cit> . obviously, the same fluctuations might also affect communities of fish parasites. fragmentation might induce parasite community diversification through local extinction driven by drift, or through species sorting and adaptation driven by local differences in biotic  or abiotic  conditions. as a result, fragmented tropheus host populations likely end up with divergent parasite communities, experiencing differences in diversity or magnitude of infection. we hypothesize that, during episodes of isolation, these local parasite communities impose different selection pressures on their host populations, initiating or accelerating adaptive divergence. at subsequent phases of secondary contact between tropheus populations, parasites might then facilitate host speciation by enhancing the evolution of reproductive isolation. various mechanisms for parasite-driven speciation are possible
 <cit> , the likelihood of which depends on the composition of the merging parasite communities, as well as their effect on the fitness of parental types and hybrids.

we start our investigation by studying a first crucial prerequisite of parasite-driven speciation, i.e. that allopatric populations indeed experience different levels of infection. we also evaluate a second prerequisite, i.e. that these differences are stable in time, opening opportunities for consistent parasite-driven divergent selection and subsequent adaptive divergence. we do so by analyzing the spatial distribution of parasite taxa and the composition of parasite communities. for this purpose, we focussed on allopatric tropheus colour morphs along the zambian shore of lake tanganyika . these colour morphs could be regarded as potential founder populations of new species. this is reflected by their strong population genetic structure
 <cit> . eight populations, belonging to five different colour morphs, were screened in two consecutive years for metazoan ecto- and endoparasites in order to test for consistent parasite community diversification. differences in parasite communities were compared with the degree of geographical isolation and the genetic structure of the tropheus populations as assessed with microsatellite markers. we discuss the implications for the potential of parasite-driven speciation in cichlids. 

RESULTS
parasites infecting the zambian tropheus populations were classified into nine categories . parasites occurring at every single site included the gyrodactylid monogenean gyrodactylus on skin and fins, the ancyrocephalid monogenean cichlidogyrus and the copepod ergasilus on the gills, and intestinal acanthocephalans and nematodes. parasites which were not present at every single site included the monogenean urogyrus in the urinary bladder, branchiurans in the gill cavity or on the opercula, some intestinal digeneans, and a number of unidentified helminthic cysts in skin, fin or gill tissue. while all categories were included in the multivariate analysis of parasite community composition, only the five categories occurring at every single site were analysed in more detail with a univariate analysis of infection patterns. 

substrate type is categorized according to rock  and sediment . nt: total number of individuals screened for parasites. ng: number of individuals screened for parasites on the gills. groups of parasites which are known from lake tanganyika fishes
 <cit> , but which were not observed in this study, include pentastomids
 <cit> , cymothoid parasitic isopods, lernaeid copepods
 <cit> , cestodes
 <cit>  and leeches
 <cit> . of these, the isopods and copepods , pentastomids
 <cit> , cestodes  were also observed in cichlids, as well as bivalves on the gills  and the ancyrocephalid monogenean enterogyrus sp. in the digestive tract .

infection patterns
controlling for standard fish length, sex, day of dissection, sampling year and observer, significant differences in infection parameters between sites were detected for the five major parasite categories . for acanthocephalans, the differences were due to lower infection presence , abundance and infection intensity at tumbi and katoto  compared to all other sites . for nematodes, infection presence and abundance were significantly higher at chilanga, linangu and katoto  as compared to toby’s place, muzumwa and mbita island . for gyrodactylus, infection presence and abundance were significantly higher at muzumwa than elsewhere . for cichlidogyrus, there were various significant contrasts without an obvious association with colour variation or geography. for ergasilus, abundance was higher at chilanga  than at most other sites . finally, an analysis of differences between neighbouring sites revealed that all pairs of neighbours  differed significantly in infection parameters for at least one group of parasites . 

fixed effects included sampling site, processing day, sex, standard length , and sampling year . observer effects were included as random , except for gyrodactylus sp. for which there was only one observer. the model for infection presence assumes a binomial distribution and models the logit of the probability of infection. for the models for abundance and infection intensity, the dependent variable was square-root transformed. note that the denominator degrees of freedom  are higher for the infection presence and abundance model  than for the infection intensity model . p-values in bold indicate significance at α =  <dig> .

next to the effect of site, the analyses revealed a few other significant relationships . infection parameters increased with the standard length of the fish for acanthocephalans and cichlidogyrus , and for ergasilus . day of dissection affected the numbers of gyrodactylus . males harboured more cichlidogyrus individuals than females . finally, significant year-to-year variation in infection parameters within sites was detected for acanthocephalans, nematodes and cichlidogyrus. however, this variation was generally smaller than the variation observed between sites , and differences between neighbouring sites were often stable over time .

population genetics of tropheus spp
seven tropheus populations harboured comparable levels of genetic diversity , while the population of muzumwa had slightly lower values . analysis of genetic structure revealed significant global values for gst and d . all pairwise gst and d values  were also significant  and revealed a significant isolation-by-distance pattern . 

bayesian clustering analyses  showed an optimal ln likelihood value for k= <dig>  in the west, the chilanga population clustered with linangu , while tumbi clustered with katoto . in the east, mbita island and wonzye point  formed a cluster, while muzumwa clustered with toby’s place .

parasite community composition
a global analysis of relative differences in parasite community composition based on pairwise hellinger distances revealed strong differences between host populations for both sampling years . this analysis also revealed differences between all pairs of neighbouring populations, except between mbita island and wonzye point , and between wonzye point and the dark-olive population from muzumwa . 

the model included sampling site, processing day, sex, and standard length . p-values in bold indicate significance at α =  <dig> .

correlations between parasite community composition and the genetic structure of host populations were positive, but non-significant . the correlation between parasite community composition and geographical distance along the shoreline was non-significant in  <dig> , and significantly positive in  <dig> . hellinger distances in  <dig> were positively correlated with hellinger distances in  <dig> , indicating that parasite communities were stable over this period of time. accordingly, pairwise hellinger distances between parasite communities from the same site but different years were on average smaller than distances between neighbouring sites, and smaller than distances between all other site pairs . 

significant p-values are in bold.

discussion
there are three main prerequisites for parasite-driven speciation
 <cit> . first, different populations or ecotypes should experience divergent infection levels. second, divergent infection levels should cause divergent selection and facilitate adaptive divergence. third, parasite-driven adaptive divergence should facilitate the evolution of reproductive isolation. below we discuss indications for parasite-driven speciation in tropheus and other cichlid species by providing an overview of the support currently available for each of these prerequisites.

first prerequisite
divergent parasite communities have been described in closely related sympatric cichlid fish from lake malawi
 <cit>  and lake victoria
 <cit> . the differences in these systems were mainly caused by intestinal nematodes, and by gill parasites such as ergasilid copepods and the monogenean cichlidogyrus. our analyses of infection levels and parasite community composition revealed considerable variation in parasitism among eight tropheus populations from lake tanganyika, belonging to five allopatric colour morphs. two common groups of endoparasites  and three common ectoparasites  contributed to this effect. a number of less common parasite groups with a patchy distribution  further enhanced the differences between sites. the differences remained after correction for observer, hence representing a true biological effect. most of the differences also remained after correction for sex and standard length, which implies that they were not due to the size distribution or sex bias of the sampled populations. as all samples were collected within three weeks, and nearby sites were often visited in the same week or on the same day, it is unlikely that seasonal environmental fluctuations represented a main contributor to the observed variation. we conclude that the allopatric tropheus populations showed true parasitological differences, supporting the first prerequisite for parasite-driven speciation. this is a conservative conclusion, because the differences between host populations in parasite species composition are likely to increase with higher taxonomic resolution. preliminary data on cichlidogyrus do suggest this, as the tropheus populations concerned harbour at least seven cichlidogyrus species, most of which occur at different localities .

second prerequisite
divergent infection levels open opportunities for parasite-driven divergent selection and subsequent adaptive divergence, i.e. the second prerequisite for parasite-driven speciation. importantly, only consistent parasite-mediated selection might lead to adaptive divergence
 <cit> . this requires a reasonable degree of temporal stability of the parasite metacommunity. our analysis over a one year time span showed no major shifts in parasite distributions, and hence was indicative for temporal stability. the stability of communities of fish parasites is influenced by the environment, which for lake cichlid systems might include factors such as the availability of host species, substrate type, turbidity and temperature. our study sites certainly differ in these respects, some environmental characteristics of which are stable. substrate type , for instance, is a stable factor, and for tropheus as an algae scraping cichlid, the variation from pebbles to plain rock may highly influence infection risk. at the same time substrate type also influences hiding opportunities and predation risk, and hence it can strongly influence the chances of parasites to pass from intermediate hosts  to final hosts . furthermore, the stability of the parasite metacommunity might also depend on host dispersal. in confirmation of previous studies
 <cit> , our genetic analysis showed that host dispersal was limited, especially between populations from different colour morphs. furthermore, we observed a non-significant correlation between parasite community diversification and the genetic structure of host populations, suggesting that the relationship between parasite distributions and host dispersal is weak. this implies that host dispersal might be too low to homogenize parasite communities, or that the local environment is a stronger determinant of parasites distributions than host dispersal. either way, it is likely that at least part of the parasite community is restricted to local tropheus populations, imposing divergent selection.

reversing the arrow of causality, we might as well consider the possibility that contrasting parasite communities reduce host dispersal. however, as spatial isolation represents a much stronger factor reducing host dispersal, this relationship cannot be unambiguously analysed. it also remains unclear whether divergent infection levels can facilitate chromatic differentiation, as seems to be the case in a pair of cichlid species from lake victoria
 <cit> . interestingly, neighbouring populations belonging to different colour morphs had highly divergent parasite communities , but neighbouring populations belonging to the same colour morph were also rather divergent in parasitism . therefore it might be that parasites represent a stronger diversifying force than the factors underlying chromatic differentiation. alternatively, parasites themselves might be more influenced by spatial isolation or environmental heterogeneity than the factors underlying chromatic differentiation.

the potential to adapt to parasite-mediated selection might include adaptation at the behavioural as well as the immunological level. a number of studies provide evidence for the potential of adaptation to contrasting parasite environments in other teleosts, in particular through specialized immune functions  than females in this system
 <cit> , something which we also observed in this study.

the evolution of parasite-mediated reproductive isolation also depends on the fitness of parental types and hybrids
 <cit> . there is empirical evidence that hybrids differ from purebreds in parasite infection rates by being more or intermediately susceptible
 <cit> , or by being more resistant
 <cit>  to a particular parasite species. furthermore, hybrid genotypes within a population can differ from each other in parasite susceptibility
 <cit> . in tropheus, various scenarios with contrasting outcome may be observed, ranging from full reproductive isolation between colour morphs when parental types are able to deal better with parasites than hybrids, to considerable levels of introgression and even hybrid speciation when hybrids are able to deal better with parasites than parental types. the occurrence of at least two ancient tropheus hybrid zones within our study area is interesting for further investigation in this context
 <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
allopatric tropheus populations revealed considerable and consistent variation in parasite community composition. the observation of divergent parasite communities between distinct colour morphs suggests that tropheus represents a good system for parasite-mediated adaptive divergence and speciation. at the moment it is unknown whether the current diversification in tropheus has been influenced by differential parasite load in the past. neither do we know whether the current differences in parasitism contribute to adaptive divergence and speciation in the future. tropheus colour morphs have been subject to alternating episodes of isolation and secondary contact because of lake level fluctuations. our results imply that during phases of secondary contact, merging populations might come in contact with different parasite communities. the outcome of this process is hard to predict, but it will likely affect the fitness of different colour morphs and their potential hybrids differentially. this certainly influences the process of admixing; further studies are needed to evaluate how this might influence the evolution of reproductive isolation. our future work will aim at increasing the taxonomic resolution of parasite identification, improving our understanding of the factors structuring parasite communities, and evaluating the likelihood of immunogenetic adaptation.

