BACKGROUND
campylobacter jeuni is a foodborne pathogen and a major cause of bacterial diarrhoea worldwide  <cit> , yet its pathogenicity is poorly understood. the virulence attributes of c. jejuni include cell culture adherence and invasion, flagella and motility, iron-acquisition capability and toxin production  <cit> . known toxins include a cytolethal distending toxin , a cholera toxin-like enterotoxin , and a number of cytotoxins  <cit> . however, only the genes encoding the cdt have been identified so far  <cit> . there is uncertainty on the production of ctlt by c. jejuni. our recent work indicated that the major outer membrane protein  of c. jejuni cross-reacts with cholera toxin  which would likely have misled investigators that c. jejuni produces a ctlt  <cit> . it is believed that the cytotoxin may mediate inflammatory diarrhoea that is characteristic of infection in individuals in developed countries  <cit> . one major cytotoxin is a protein-sized molecule that is active on a number of cell lines such as hela and chinese hamster ovary , but is inactive on vero cells  <cit> . a previous report claimed that the momp of c. jejuni was responsible for cytotoxicity on mammalian cells  <cit> . however, in our previous work, the expressed pora protein from the cloned gene of a cytotoxin-producing c. jejuni strain did not have cytotoxic activity for mammalian cells and was also devoid of diarrhoeagenic activity in an animal model of infection  <cit> . in our continuing efforts to characterise this unknown cytotoxin, we investigated a series of chromatographic methods to enrich the cytotoxin from a cytotoxic c. jejuni strain. using previously established methods of detection as well as further modifications to these protocols, we have attempted to isolate and purify the cytotoxin. the results of further characterisation studies confirm that the likely cytotoxin candidate is a protein. the results are reported in this communication.

RESULTS
cytotoxicity assay
in this study, we have developed a methodology to detect and purify the toxin potentially involved in the diarrhoeagenic activity of c. jejuni, c <dig> strain. to detect and quantify cytotoxic activity during purification, we used an activity assay based on the lethal effects of the toxin on cho cells. the tcid <dig> of c <dig> strain for cho cells was similar at 1– <dig> μg for a freshly prepared protein extract as well as a reconstituted form of the lyophilised extract as estimated by the visual method by direct microscopic observation of cytotoxic effect on cells  <cit>  or by the indirect methyl thiazol tetrazolium  method by spectrophotometric measurement of formazin  <cit> . the cytotoxic effect of c <dig> toxin on cho cells is shown in figure  <dig>  the extract was devoid of any cytotoxic effect when tested on vero cells as described previously  <cit> .

extract fractionation and cytotoxin purification
we sought to employ a series of chromatographic methods to enrich and isolate the cytotoxin as a prelude to proteomic analysis to identify it. the key to this strategy was the cho cell cytotoxicity assay to monitor the presence of the cytotoxin in various fractions obtained by our purification techniques. we initially exposed the protein extract to the various buffers and conditions likely encountered throughout the course of the enrichment procedure to determine which conditions were suitable for maintaining the stability of the cytotoxin . in these initial tests, we found that activity was maintained in buffers containing up to  <dig> m nacl, allowing the use of ion-exchange and size-exclusion chromatography. we also found that exposure to low ph and organic solvents such as acetonitrile did not reduce activity, thereby allowing the expansion of our enrichment procedures to the use of reversed phase chromatography. in addition to classical chromatography, we also used offgel electrophoresis, a recently developed technique, separating proteins based on their isoelectric point into discrete fractions; however after no activity was recovered in these experiments ,we then focused on the use of classical chromatography.

after sample preparation using size- exclusion based desalting, we performed cation- exchange chromatography collecting individual fractions of which every  <dig> fractions were pooled. table  <dig> shows the results of the first three pooled fractions including protein recovery in comparison to the starting protein extract. figure  <dig> shows an example hplc trace of the protein elution profile from the ion-exchange column with increasing salt concentration with the pooled collected fractions overlaid. pool a essentially consists of the first  <dig> minutes where no uv absorbance was observed, pool b consists of the weakly charged early eluting proteins, as seen by the rise in uv absorbance. cytotoxic activity was also observed in pool b and this fraction was thus used for further analysis. pool c fractions consisting of fractions between  <dig> and  <dig> minutes contained some high abundance proteins as observed by the large peaks eluting at  <dig> and  <dig> minutes.

stability of fraction b cytotoxin to protease digestion and heat treatment
pool b was used for further analysis as it contained the highest level of cytotoxic activity. to further characterise the toxin and confirm that it is a protein, we examined the effect of protease digestion on cytotoxin activity. incubation with trypsin reduced the toxicity of the partially purified cytotoxin for cho cells . this finding likely reflects that the cytotoxic component of the preparation is a protein. the partially purified cytotoxin was subjected to incubation at elevated temperatures and the observed cytotoxic activity was compared with the unincubated control samples  and we found that activity was unaffected at 50°c, but was reduced at higher temperatures  suggesting that the cytotoxin is relatively heat- stable .

cytotoxin activity confirmation in vivo
to further confirm that the activity isolated in pool b was due to the cytotoxin, the rabbit ileal loop assay was employed to detect the presence of diarrhoeagenic activity. the positive e. coli control induced a large amount of fluid , c. jejuni c <dig> whole cell lysate and the pool b fraction induced moderate amounts of fluid . the negative control, sorensen’s buffer, and fractions a and c did not induce any fluid secretion. on histopathology, the intestinal loops injected with the pool b fraction or c. jejuni c <dig> whole lysate showed oedema, congestion, haemorrhagic necrosis and inflammation of the mucosa , whereas the loops injected with sorenson’s buffer and fractions a and c appeared normal . the fluid accumulation and mucosal changes are similar to the findings of a previous study using c. jejuni isolates from patients with inflammatory diarrhoea  <cit> . this shows that fluid secretion and mucosal inflammatory changes are mediated by the cytotoxic pool b. previous studies with crude lysate of c <dig> showed fluid accumulation in the rabbit ileal loop assay  <cit> .

proteomic identification of pool b
as the potential cytotoxin co-purified in pool b exhibited cytotoxic activity, pool b was subjected to ms analysis for protein identification. this was done using a combination of sds- page and lcms as well as the lcms analysis of a complete trypsin digest of pool b to identify any lesser abundant proteins. forty-one proteins were isolated and identified from fraction pool b . of these,  <dig> were predicted to reside in the cytoplasm and most have conserved functions in metabolic processes, redox reactions, transcription/translation control and protein processing and turnover. blast searches were performed to identify homologues or conserved domains in other species to assist in defining a role for potential candidate cytotoxins. the online program psortb was used to predict localisation of the identified proteins. one uncharacterised protein, a7h5h <dig> contains a cupin- <dig> domain which is characterised by the presence of a double stranded beta helix. the function of this protein and domain are unknown, although as it is predicted to reside in the cytoplasm, it is unlikely to be a cytotoxin candidate.

*gene designation refers to the best match identified in campylobacter jejuni nctc  <dig> .

a the programme signal was used for protein localisation prediction; non-cytoplasmic localisation refers to proteins whose localisations are unknown, but a cytoplasmic localisation is ruled out as a n-terminal signalling sequence is present.

b the uniprot annotation was used for protein localisation prediction.

c the identification data obtained from the gel based analysis.

prediction of protein localisation was determined using the program psortb, and table listings are sorted by localisation.

of the  <dig> non-cytoplasmic proteins identified,  <dig> are conserved amongst the proteobacteria and have roles in oxidation/reduction processes. other conserved proteins are involved in protein synthesis and turnover , metabolism  and atp synthesis . of the remaining proteins predicted to be non-cytoplasmic,  <dig> are structural proteins involved in flagella biosynthesis, and are unlikely to be involved in cytotoxin biosynthesis or activity. the remaining proteins are predicted to have roles in protein-protein interactions or are involved in binding and transport of lipids  or cations .

a short list of six potential cytotoxin candidates is summarised in table  <dig>  peb <dig>  was identified in the pool, and this protein has been previously characterised as a glycoprotein and adhesion protein involved in transport of phosphate-containing molecules  <cit> . peb <dig> , a major antigenic peptide of c. jejuni on the other hand, is a protein of unknown function which contains a similar signal sequence to peb <dig> suggesting similar localisation  <cit> . it is conserved in c. jejuni and c. coli and blast hits return with matches to the accessory colonisation factor protein  of vibrio cholerae  and a “conserved domain search” on ncbi matched to domains involved in extracellular solute binding and transport systems. based on these inferences, it is unlikely to be the cytotoxin of interest, although further study of this protein is warranted.

*gene designation refers to the best match identified in campylobacter jejuni nctc  <dig> 

a protein localisation prediction was determined using the program signalp.

prediction of protein localisation was determined using the program psortb.

proteins a1w0m <dig> and a1vzy <dig> are hypothetical proteins and potential candidates for the cytotoxin, although their predicted sizes  are relatively smaller than the high molecular weight cytotoxin previously characterised  <cit> .

one prospective cytotoxin candidate , a  <dig> amino acid residue protein is a tpr family protein which indicates that it is involved in protein:protein interactions . a tol/pal/ybgf domain at its c-terminus  is also present. proteins with this domain are required for stabilisation of the outer membrane of gram-negative bacteria. no hypothetical functions or domains could be located to the n-terminus  of this protein. perhaps, the c-terminal portion allows direct contact with a protein receptor on the host cell, and the n-terminus contains a cytotoxin function.

the protein most likely to be involved in cytotoxic function is a8flp <dig>  a  <dig> amino acid residue protein which contains ankyrin repeat domains near its c-terminus . a blast search identified mainly c. jejuni and c. coli strains with a similar protein, and only the ankyrin repeat domain returned hits to ankyrin repeat domains of eukaryotes.

ankyrin repeat domains are traditionally associated with eukaryotic cellular functions, but more recently many intracellular pathogens have been discovered to secrete  ankyrin repeat-domain containing proteins into their hosts which act to subvert the eukaryotic host functions and allow for their survival . it has been suggested that cytotoxin induced cho cell rounding could involve the reorganisation/inhibition of the cytoskeletal network of the cell  <cit> , and several ankyrin-repeat containing proteins of legionella pneumophila have the ability to interfere with microtubule-dependent vesicle transport  <cit> . perhaps, this c. jejuni ankyrin repeat protein may also interfere with the cytoskeletal network of cho cells. further characterisation of this protein is required to identify its function.

in this study, we have sought to isolate the protein responsible for cytotoxic activity. we have successfully developed a protocol to extract proteins from the lysate of a suspension of cells retaining the activity of this protein. we have partially purified the protein possessing cytotoxic activity through the development of a protocol for the preparation of the protein extract followed by fractionation by hplc using ion- exchange chromatography. this protocol resulted in the partial purification and enrichment of the active protein. further experiments will be required to further purify the protein using chromatographic techniques additional to cation- exchange, such as reversed phase chromatography, although chromatography alone may not be sufficient to achieve absolute purity. this however, may not be necessary as from the proteins identified in the purified fraction, we could establish a short list of candidate proteins and through additional experiments, such as mutant knockout studies, confirm the identity of the cytotoxic protein. interestingly, the pooled fraction b did not contain the major outer membrane protein, pora. this suggests that pora is not contributing to cytotoxic activity of fraction b  <cit> . we have shown that the fraction pool b, was shown to induce fluid secretion in the rabbit intestinal loop assay causing cytotoxic damage to the mucosa. we further characterised the toxin showing that, although the toxin is stable at elevated temperatures , activity was reduced with increasing temperature and activity was lost after trypsin digestion, confirming that toxic activity is a result of a specific protein function. however, our data do not exclude the possibility that cytotoxic effects may be mediated by a mixture of proteins.

guerrant et al.  <cit>  reported that the cytotoxin is a periplasmic protein as it can be extracted by polymyxin b. however, in our hands, polymyxin b interfered with the cho cell assay, as it produced cytotoxic effects similar to the c. jejuni cytotoxin .

CONCLUSIONS
even though c. jejuni is a major foodborne diarrhoeal pathogen causing significant morbidity and mortality, its pathogenesis is poorly understood. it is important to purify and characterise its major cytotoxin to define its role in pathogenesis. we have succeeded in developing a method  for enriching and partially purifying the cytotoxin. further studies are required for a complete purification of the cytotoxin.

the cytotoxin may be highly active at very low concentrations, low enough to remain undetected by our current proteomics identification procedures, removing most of the contaminating proteins via sub-fractionation of the cell should increase the chances of isolating and identifying this cytotoxin. one other option is to purify the supernatant of broth culture of c. jejuni, although given its fastidious nature and slow growth rate, high levels of active cytotoxin may be difficult to purify from the supernatant.

in this paper, we present preliminary data in our attempt to isolate, purify and identify the protein involved in cytotoxic activity of c. jejuni. we have employed an activity assay based on the lethal effects of the toxin on cho cells to rapidly screen for activity and used this assay to screen chromatographic fractions to locate the presence of the active protein. we have been unable to unequivocally identify the protein as the sample remains too complex although we have identified some previously uncharacterised non-cytoplasmic proteins which with further experimentation potentially may be attributable to the cytotoxin. we will attempt further isolation of the protein so that we are then able to sequence and identify the protein. the activity of the toxin containing fraction was validated by performing the rabbit ileal loop assay.

