BACKGROUND
well before the first eukaryotic genome was sequenced, the notion that chromatin is partitioned into larger than gene-size domains  was conceived  <cit> . genes that are functionally related and co-regulated are often located close to each other. these include the hox and the β-globin gene clusters  <cit> . more generally, unrelated spatially proximal genes can still be co-regulated, and such co-regulation can in part be explained by long-range chromosomal interactions  <cit> . however, a major barrier for understanding the mechanism for long-range gene regulation is the difficulty of generating high-resolution long-range chromosomal interaction data on a genomic scale  <cit> .

the fundamental unit of chromatin is the nucleosome, which is a histone octamer wrapping up ~ <dig> bp dna. the amino acid residues on the n-terminal tails of the histone proteins can be covalently modified in a number of different ways, and different biochemical modification marks may have very different biological functions  <cit> . in recent years, genome-wide distributions of various histone modifications in several eukaryotic organisms have been mapped using chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by either microarrays  or dna sequencing   <cit> . it is thought that different combinations of histone modifications result in different functional specificities  <cit>  and that several modifications form broad domains  <cit> , which is helpful in stabilizing chromatin state and transmitting the states in cell division  <cit> . integration of multiple histone modification marks has identified distinct epigenetic patterns, associated gene activities, and regulatory elements  <cit> . however, most of these earlier studies are done on a gene-by-gene basis and have ignored the spatial correlation of epigenetic patterns.

because it is difficult to detect long-range chromosomal interactions through experimental methods, it is valuable to develop computational methods to identify long-range correlations such as epigenetic domains based on histone modification data. this can be used to infer such interactions. here we use the term "epigenetic domain" to refer to a large-scale region containing multiple genes with epigenetic patterns. for the rest of the paper, we will use the terms "epigenetic domain" and "domain" interchangeably. such epigenetic domain methods should provide mechanistic insights into coordinated gene regulation. several approaches have already been developed in recent years  <cit> . however, two of the studies  <cit>  partition the genome without any constraint, making the results hard to interpret. other studies consider only a single histone modification mark, which can only give partial epigenetic information  <cit> . or the researchers only examined a certain pattern of two modifications  <cit> , simply small regions  <cit> , or were not looking at neighboring regions, only clusters as a whole  <cit> . therefore, further improvement is still needed.

here, we developed a novel method that uses genome-wide histone modification data to identify epigenetically consistent, multi-gene domains. we applied our method to analyze a recently published chip-seq dataset for mouse embryonic stem  cells  <cit>  and found that we were able to identify a number of domains that are significantly large . we validated our predictions by integrating a number of data sources. we also explored these histone modifications in the neural progenitor  cell line to determine what, if any, changes in domain size, structure, and/or function occur during early cell differentiation. our method provides a useful tool to investigate the role of epigenetic domains in development.

RESULTS
data type, preliminary manipulation and clustering
genome-wide location data for five different histone modification marks, h3k4me <dig>  h3k4me <dig>  h3k27me <dig>  h3k9me <dig>  and h3k36me <dig>  was taken from two chip-seq datasets  <cit> . since our goal was to identify multi-gene regions with consistent histone modification patterns, we treated each gene as a unit and summarized the local distribution of each histone modification by a single score. we arrived at a five-dimensional summary score for each gene, corresponding to the average of the sequence tag counts over the promoter  or coding region  .

we clustered the genes based on their histone modification patterns and determined the number of clusters via calculations of a "gap" statistic  <cit> , which compares the observed within-cluster dispersion for one run with that expected by chance . the maximum gap value is achieved at k =  <dig>  where k is the number of clusters, and the two-cluster partition also corresponds to a relatively high gap statistic . in the two-cluster scenario, there is a cluster of genes associated with high h3k4me <dig> and h3k4me <dig> levels; while the other is associated with moderate h3k27me <dig> level. in the three-cluster scenario, there is an additional cluster characterized by moderate level of the other modifications.

prediction of epigenetic domains
to constrain on spatial correlation of histone modification patterns, we applied a hidden markov model  to partition the genome into epigenetic domains based upon the five-dimensional summary histone modification scores. in accordance with previous methods  <cit> , we assumed that the emission probability can be approximated by multivariate gaussian distribution. this gives a better fit than a poisson distribution .

for hidden-state assignment, we compared the results from two commonly used methods: the viterbi and forward-backward algorithms, on ch <dig>  the results from the methods were  <dig> % identical . since the viterbi method is more computationally efficient and essentially as accurate, it was used to assign our hidden gene states.

we considered two model configurations, corresponding to two and three hidden states. for the rest of this paper, we will further explore these two choices and compare the corresponding results.

we used a likelihood ratio test to evaluate the statistical significance of a detected domain. with a false discovery rate  cutoff of  <dig> , we found  <dig> and  <dig> significant domains based on their likelihood ratio test statistics for the two- and three-state hmms respectively . the average size of each domain was  <dig>  genes for the two-state model and  <dig>  genes for the three-state model . both models found domains over the length of  <dig> genes and had a minimum domain size of  <dig> 

as expected, the two-state hmm resulted in an active state  and a non-active state  . for the three-state hmm, we also identified three distinct epigenetic patterns: an active cluster characterized by high h3k4me2/me <dig> and low h3k27me <dig> level, a non-active cluster characterized by high h3k27me <dig> and moderately low h3k4me2/me <dig> level, and a null cluster characterized by low level of all histone marks . this null state cannot be captured by the two-state hmm.

functional coherence of the predicted domains
it is intrinsically difficult to define a 'gold-standard' set of epigenetic domains. to test whether our predicted domains are biologically meaningful, we examined a number of properties that are associated with chromatin domains, as explained below.

first, we tested whether the histone modification patterns were indeed consistent within each predicted significant domain. to this end, we calculated the within-domain variance of the summary score for each modification in our significant domains, and tested whether this is significantly lower than expected by chance. using permutation tests, we found that both the two- and three-state hmms had significantly lower variances in the histone modifications considered in this study , with the exception of h3k9me <dig> . this suggests that h3k9me <dig> does not play a major role in determining our domain states.

second, we reasoned that genes that are embedded in the same epigenetic domain are likely to be activated or repressed together. therefore, the gene expression levels should be more correlated within an epigenetic domain than what we would expect by chance. to test this property, we compared the within-domain variance of expression within a predicted domain with that for random neighboring gene sets of the same size . for both models, the within-domain variance in gene expression was lower than expected by chance  . also, the variance for the three-state hmm is lower than the two-state hmm, further supporting the notion that the three-state hmm is a more appropriate model.

third, we asked whether the genes that are embedded in the same domain tend to have similar biological functions. to this end, we examined the gene ontology  patterns within and between domains. we used fleiss' kappa  <cit> , an accordance statistic, to measure the coherence of go terms within our significant domains. compared to a random selection of domain bounds, our predicted significant domains had a more concordant go structure  for the two- and three-state models . again, the three-state hmm had a higher level of accordance, suggesting that it is a better fit of the data.

finally, we recognized that the histone modification patterns within a predicted domain are consistent, but substantial variance still remains. as a further validation, we asked whether our hmm was expected to provide reliable predictions under such circumstances. to this end, we designed numerical simulations mimicking the parameters for the real data . for the two-state hmm, we were 98% accurate in predicting the true states when using the observed variances, and 97% accurate when using twice the observed variances . for the three-state hmm, we were 99% accurate in our simulations . this suggests that if such domain patterns actually exist in the data, our model would be sufficiently able to detect them.

validation against known domains
the hox gene clusters are a well-described epigenetic domain family. these genes regulate the anterior-posterior axis of metazoan organisms and are expressed in a sequential order during cell differentiation. in es cells, the hox genes are targeted by the polycomb group  proteins and associated with bivalent domains  <cit> . our method correctly detected each of the four hox clusters to be in a non-active and significant domain. the results for the hoxa cluster on chromosome   <dig> are shown in figure 6a. simple k-means clustering failed to capture these state assignments.

surprisingly, six of the ten largest predicted domains in each model are null domains enriched with olfactory receptor  genes. for example, the largest or gene cluster on ch  <dig> , also showed a clear distinction between hmm assignments and gene function . that is, all the  <dig> or genes in this  <dig> gene region are assigned to the same domain type, while their neighboring genes  are found to be in different domain types. the state assignments also correspond nicely with expression level changes .

the or genes are only expressed on in sensory neurons, and only a single gene  is activated in each cell  <cit> . we searched the literature for domain-level regulation of or genes and noticed a recent paper showing that the selectivity of or gene activation is established by the long-range chromosomal interaction between a single enhancer element and its target promoter  <cit> . due to the lack of sequence specificity of such an interaction, it is reasonable to assume that the maintenance of an open chromatin environment over a large domain plays an important role in the regulation of or genes. a comparison of the domain organization between sensory neurons and other cell types may provide further insights into the unique feature of or gene regulation.

we investigated the enriched biological functions associated with each domain type by exploring the top three significant david clusters  <cit>   for genes in each domain. we found that the active domains are enriched with genes involved in key cellular processes, such as protein localization and transport. in contrast, the genes embedded in null domains tend to be associated with functions of a terminally differentiated cell-type, e.g. keratin and olfactory receptors. non-active genes tend to be involved with development, e.g. limb morphogenesis and homeobox. thus, each domain type is characterized by a different function. our analysis suggests that the epigenetic information provides useful insights into cell-type specific regulation.

domain changes in neural progenitor cells
previous studies have identified dramatic epigenetic changes during cell differentiation  <cit> . to test whether the epigenetic changes also occur at the domain level, we applied our three-state hmm to infer domain states in the np cells and compared the results for es cells . while the overall change is moderate, we noticed some important changes at specific loci. for example, we found that the non-active hoxa domain shrank significantly in np cells , consistent with a previous time-course study  <cit> . such change is accompanied by activation of certain hoxa genes in np cells . the loss of h3k27me <dig> is accompanied by a moderate increase of h3k4me <dig> and expression levels. little changed for the or genes between the es and np cell lines .

in total, we found that  <dig> of the  <dig> domains in es cells contain at least one gene that changes epigenetic state in the np cell line. for each significant es domain, if any genes within the domain have a new state in the np cell line, then those genes would represent a domain change. note that there may be smaller np domains than their corresponding es domains, and that one es domain could be multiple np domains. thus our  <dig> significant es domains were  <dig> np domains . for these np domains changes, we again used david to analyze the functions of the genes that change state during this early stage of development by examining the top three significant david clusters  for each of our  <dig> types of change . eight domains are non-active in es cells but become active in np cells. these domains are enriched with developmental regulators. on the other hand, six domains, containing  <dig> genes, switch from null to active states during differentiation.

some of the non-active domains in es cells remain non-active in np cells, and they may be important for further development. on the other hand, a number of domains switch from the active to the non-active state in np cells, and the functions of these domains are typically related to early embryonic development. they are enriched with functions such as sex differentiation and apoptosis. thus, the early developmental genes are epigenetically marked in es cells rather than at a later developmental stage.

CONCLUSIONS
as the nucleosome level chromatin states become increasingly well described  <cit> , the next frontier becomes the characterization of higher-order chromatin structure. numerous studies have suggested that epigenetic domains play important roles in gene regulation  <cit> , yet the detection of genome-wide long-range chromosomal correlations remains technically challenging  <cit> . on the other hand, genome-wide histone modification data provides important information about long-range gene regulation  <cit> . thus it is valuable to develop computational methods to detect large-scale domains based on histone modification data.

here we developed an hmm-based method to predict epigenetic domains. a similar method has recently been used to characterize the epigenetic states associated with gene promoters  <cit> . however, we extend this approach to identify large-scale epigenetic patterns. compared to previous domain detection methods  <cit> , our model can easily accommodate additional histone modification marks and provide easily interpretable prediction outcomes.

our model detects three distinct types of epigenetic domains, two of which are transcriptionally inactive, which we call non-active and null. these two domain types are also distinct functionally in terms of both activation potential and biological functions. for example, both the hox and or gene clusters form epigenetic domains that are transcriptionally inactive in es cells. yet the hox genes are critical for the overall development and are found in non-active domains in the es cell line, whereas or genes are expressed only in specific adult cell types and are found in null domains in the es and np cell lines. therefore the epigenetic patterns provide more regulatory information than can be appreciated by gene expression data alone, signifying the importance of characterizing domain types.

recent studies have shown that spreading of histone modification marks is an important epigenetic signature of cell differentiation  <cit> . our work can be viewed as an extension in terms of considering the combinatorial patterns of multiple histone modifications instead of focusing on a single modification alone. indeed, we found changes of epigenetic domains from es to np cells, which are accompanied by coordinated activation of neuron-specific genes. our analysis suggests that epigenetic domain-level changes may play an important role in neuron differentiation and organismal development.

we recognize that our model still has a number of limitations. for example, the reduction of the spatial epigenetic patterns by gene-level summary scores precludes us from pinpointing the exact locations of domain boundaries. in addition, we have ignored the correlation between different histone modification marks, which may important if data for a large number of marks is available. we plan to overcome these limitations in future studies.

