BACKGROUND
hospitals are environments where both, infected and non-infected people, group. how microbial communities persist and change in indoor environments is of immense interest to public health. recent work showed that humans alter the microbiome in a space when they occupy that space
 <cit> . building materials and equipment seem also to influence the community composition. for instance, recent studies show that materials made of copper have lower surface burden than stainless steel or plastic materials
 <cit> .

the potential for contracting a microbial pathogen is highest within a hospital environment
 <cit> . hospital acquired infections  are significant contributors to morbidity and mortality, with no values attributed , the center for disease control defined the baselines for hai as those occurring more than 48 h/72 h after healthcare admission and within 10 days after hospital discharge
 <cit> . despite the lack of direct evidence to prove that environmental contaminants are responsible for hais, there is an increasing evidence suggesting that the environment may act as a reservoir for at least some of the pathogens causing hais
 <cit> . therefore, by touching contaminated surfaces and noncritical equipment, hands may acquire and transfer microorganisms to other inanimate objects or to patients
 <cit> . guidelines on treatment of surfaces in hospitals take into account parameters which are considered to be relevant for preventing the transmission of nosocomial pathogens, such as the type of ward or the expected frequency of hand contact with a surface
 <cit> .

the presence of susceptible patients in hospital makes more important the adverse impact of the environment on the incidence of health-care–associated infections. data from the world health organization show that nowadays in every  <dig> hospitalized patients  <dig> to  <dig> are expected to contract, at least, one health care-associated infection
 <cit> . hospital-associated pathogens are commonly found on physician’s and nursing staff’s clothing
 <cit> , cell phones
 <cit> , stethoscopes
 <cit> , computer keyboards
 <cit> , telemetry leads
 <cit> , electronic thermometers
 <cit> , blood-pressure cuffs
 <cit> , and gels for ultrasound probes
 <cit> . the outbreaks of pseudomonas aeruginosa <cit>  linked to water and aqueous solutions used in health-care facilities are examples of these health-care–associated infections. additionally, clinically important opportunistic organisms linked to water are pseudomonas spp., acinetobacter baumannii burkholderia cepacia, ralstonia pickettii, stenotrophomonas maltophilia, and sphingomonas spp. modes of transmission for waterborne infections include direct contact, ingestion of water, indirect-contact, inhalation of aerosols dispersed from water sources and aspiration of contaminated water
 <cit> .

in this work, we hypothesizes that the existing microbial communities, associated with the surfaces and noncritical equipment, do influence the colonization of other organisms as pseudomonas aeruginosa, one of the major agents for nosocomial infections, and make them available to be transferred. the aim of the present work was to evaluate the diversity of microorganisms able to grow in selective medium for pseudomonas including p. aeruginosa that persists on noncritical equipment and surfaces in a hospital.

RESULTS
general level of contamination of the equipment in each ward
the study included  <dig> of wards, sampled during 9 months, between february  <dig> and september  <dig>  the samples were recovered from 10 cm <dig> area using a swab soaked in tryptic soy broth. a total of  <dig> environmental samples were analyzed for bacterial colonization. the samples were plated in pseudomonas isolation agar medium  which is a selective medium used for the isolation of p. aeruginosa and other pseudomonas species
 <cit> . the number of colonies growing on pia medium varied in the different equipment sampled. however, a pattern could be defined when considering three classes of level of contamination defined from the amount of counts obtained on pia medium, based on the accuracy of plate counts enumeration
 <cit> . the first level of contamination included equipment with less than 10 cfu per plate , 10 cfu per plate are considered the minimum cfus for statistical significance, the second included equipment with cfu between  <dig> and 200 cfu per plate , and the equipment with more than 200 cfu per plate were included in the third level , cfu counts over  <dig> are considered uncountable due to spatial growth restrictions.the percentage of equipment in each ward that showed low contamination level varied between 22% and 38% . equipment with a surface number of cfu varying between  <dig> and 200 cfu were a minority in all wards  and, in all wards, more than 50% of the equipment sampled had more than 200 cfu per sample. the level of colonization of the equipment was similar in the uci compared to the medicine i and ii and urology wards.

the majority of the samples collected in taps and sinks showed high level of contamination . this pattern of contamination was observed during the 2 years of sampling. high level of contamination was also detected in the showers but in a low number of samples. on the other hand, contamination on surface countertops and trays was detected only in spring samples . the noncritical equipment manipulated mostly by the medical personnel as workbenches, stethoscopes and other medical equipment was either not contaminated or low contaminated , but when the oxygen flask was found contaminated , the contamination level was high.

results show only high and low levels of contamination per sampling.

the contamination level of the different taps analyzed showed a correlation of  <dig>  and  <dig>  with the contamination level of the hand gels support and with the soaps and sinks, respectively . the correlation of tap contamination was only of  <dig>  with the samples collected in the showers . on the other hand, tap contamination level correlated in less than  <dig>   with the contamination of the workbenches and the trays of the clinical personnel, and with the contamination of the bed and bedside table.the equipment that showed persistently a high level of contamination were the surface of sinks, the taps, the hand gels and soaps and the showers. the number of highly contaminated samples from these equipment increased in samples collected during summer and fall, in both years, except for the samples collected on hand gels. the number of positive samples on hand gel/soap was high but only during a short period  .

diversity of isolates recovered on the equipment and identified by 16s rrna gene sequence
pia medium recovered strains of p. aeruginosa but also strains belonging to  <dig> different bacterial genera, although its formulation was conceived to be a selective medium for pseudomonas. the medium was able to isolate bacteria belonging to the family pseudomonas as well as gram positive bacteria as bacillus aryabhattai and neisseria subflava.

strains of p. aeruginosa were isolated in all equipment showing a high number of samples with high level of contamination . p. aeruginosa was repeatedly isolated in the sinks , in the biofilm of the taps , in the showers and bedside tables . the analysis of rep profiles suggest the existence of  <dig> clones. clone a included  <dig> strains from sampling time f <dig> , isolated from a sink and a tap, and from sampling time f <dig>  also from a tap but from a different ward. clone b included two strains  from different sampling times  isolated from the same tap .


pseudomonas aeruginosa 

sphingobium yanoikuyae 

stenotrophomonas maltophilia 

enterococcus faecalis 

pseudomonas aeruginosa 

serratia nematodiphila 

stenotrophomonas maltophilia 
pseudomonas aeruginosa 
pseudomonas aeruginosa
pseudomonas aeruginosa
pseudomonas aeruginosa
pseudomonas aeruginosa 
pseudomonas aeruginosa
.

the isolation of strains from the species p. aeruginosa was expected since the isolation conditions favoured its recovery. however, stenotrophomonas maltophilia, enterococcus feacalis, sphingobium yanoikuyae and serratia nematodiphila were also repeatedly isolated on the same equipment, on different times. seven different species of pseudomonas were isolated on the sinks surfaces. some of these species were also isolated on other surfaces as p. beteli on hand gel/soap, workbench and bedside table. p. montelli was also isolated on the sink surfaces, taps, showers and bedside tables.

some of the organisms isolated were already reported as pathogenic. this is the case of citrobacter braakii, c. freundii, e. faecalis, p. mosselii, p. putida, s. maltophilia, neisseria subflava, p. alcaligenes or isolated from hospital environment as p. monteilii.the principal component analysis was carried to correlate the level of contamination of the equipment with the bacterial diversity present during the sampling period. the cumulative percentage variance of species was  <dig> . the pca analysis grouped the samples in two major groups: moistened samples , with a sub-group of samples directly contacting with tap water  and samples manipulated mostly by the hospital personnel  ; table for meal and work, handrail and bedside  were not grouped.

discussion
microorganisms are ubiquitous in our environment, including indoor air, and do not necessarily constitute a health hazard. depending on the individual, the concentration at which contamination becomes a threat to health is unknown
 <cit> . inanimate surfaces and noncritical equipment have often been described as the source for outbreaks of nosocomial infections
 <cit> . the aim of this work was to evaluate, in a portuguese hospital facility, the number and diversity of microorganisms that persist on inanimate surfaces and noncritical equipment, able to grow on the selective media for p. aeruginosa and relate them with the presence of the opportunistic pathogen p. aeruginosa.

data is available on the microbial composition of dust from different environments, showing gram-positive as dominants, with the most abundant phylum being firmicutes
 <cit> . however, other studies on the microbial diversity of the environmental surfaces are mainly evaluating the bacterial counts on cloths and other equipment from medical personnel
 <cit> .

in the present study, pia medium was used to recover microorganisms from noncritical equipment and from surfaces, dry or wet. pia is an isolation medium selective and differential for p. aeruginosa, since this species has innate resistance to low irgasan concentrations
 <cit> . nevertheless,  <dig> different bacterial genera of gram negative and gram positive bacteria were isolated in the medium which seems to indicate that these organisms are resistant to the biocide and could possibly have multidrug efflux systems to extrude the antimicrobial triclosan  as it occurs in p. aeruginosa <cit> . this conclusion is supported by the detection of clonal isolates from different sampling times. the presence of this toxic in many household antibacterial products and antiseptics can probably select for microorganisms able to resist to low concentrations of this biocide
 <cit> . many gram-negative species were isolated, which is according to previous reports showing that strains from acinetobacter spp., klebsiella spp., shigella spp., e. coli, p. aeruginosa, or s. marcescens are able to survive for months on surfaces
 <cit> . these species are among the most frequent isolates from patients with nosocomially acquired infections
 <cit> . moreover, all isolates from this work are resistant to the disinfectant triclosan, on the other hand, not all the microorganisms present in the environment were isolated.

p. aeruginosa is described to persist from 6 hours to 16 months on surfaces and its persistence was related with humidity conditions
 <cit> . p. aeruginosa was also found in the present work, as part of the microbial community of surfaces with high moister and also in the biofilm of taps. even though, ubiquitous in the environment, the prevalence of this species in the community is less than in the hospital, and cases of severe community-acquired infection are rare
 <cit> . pseudomonas have been implicated in different clinical syndromes and diseases transmitted mostly directly by aerosols or indirectly by moist environmental surfaces via hands of health-care workers
 <cit> . in the present work, biofilm tap water was the major environmental source of pseudomonads in the healthcare facility. this conclusion is in agreement with previous findings where biofilms, sink and patient room design were involved in the propagation of a p. aeruginosa outbreak
 <cit> . moreover, humidity  improved the presence of high numbers of different bacteria species which are clinically important opportunistic organisms as other pseudomonas as p. mosselii, p. putida, p. alcaligenes, citrobacter braakii, c. freundii, e. faecalis, s. maltophilia, n. subflava, as found before
 <cit> .

in the hospital studied s. maltophilia was isolated nine times in the sinks and in the biofilm of the taps, e. faecalis and s. nematodiphila were repeatedly isolated, two times each, in tap water biofilms, and s. marcescens and enterobacter spp. were also isolated during the present study. the described genera were reported to be responsible for healthcare–associated episodes of colonization, including respiratory and urinary tracks, bloodstream infections and pneumonia
 <cit> . e. faecalis, s. nematodiphila, s. marcescens and enterobacter spp. are commonly associated with transmission by hand carriage and hand transfer
 <cit> 

the different type of materials tested did not reveal a consistent  contamination level. some investigators reported that the type of material has no influence on the persistence of bacteria, other described a longer bacterial persistence on plastic, others on steel, or a shorter survival on copper
 <cit> . the statistical analysis of the results based on the contamination level, number of times contaminated and type of material, grouped samples on the base of the group of persons that manipulated the equipment, on the presence or absence of humidity and contact with tap water, but not based on their type of material. this study used a selective medium with a disinfectant to evaluate the microbial colonization of the surfaces and noncritical equipment, revealing the prevalence of a diverse group of microbial species with mechanisms of resistance to the antiseptic, most of them with potential to be involved in nosocomial infections.

CONCLUSIONS
the potential for contracting a microbial pathogen is highest within a hospital environment and hospital acquired infections are significant contributors to morbidity and mortality. despite the lack of direct evidence to prove that environmental contaminants are responsible for hospital acquired infections, there is an increasing evidence suggesting that the environment may act as a reservoir for at least some of the pathogens causing nosocomial infections. this work showed that many different bacterial species can persist on surfaces for months and years. the level of bacterial contamination was related with the presence of humidity on the surface, and tap water  was a point of dispersion of bacterial species, usually involved in nosocomial infections as pseudomonas aeruginosa, stenotrophomonas maltophilia and enterococcus feacalis. their presence in the environment, as it seems to be pointed by the analysis of the diversity, increases the risk of transmission to the different materials during hand manipulation.

