BACKGROUND
mrna levels in cells are determined by the relative rates of rna production and degradation. transcript levels at steady state therefore reflect equilibrium of rna synthesis and decay. gene expression microarrays, and more recently rna deep-sequencing, are valuable means for genome-wide profiling of the cellular transcriptome and its modulation during normal development and in response to external perturbations. standard microarray analyses on total cellular rna provide a measure of mrna abundance but cannot discriminate whether changes are due to alterations in rna transcription or decay. new techniques have been developed to allow the measurement of actual rates of transcript production. when these are carried out in parallel to recording overall rna abundance, they can reveal the relative contribution of alterations in gene transcription and mrna stability to the observed net change in rna abundance  <cit> .

despite the above, to date, the contribution of rna degradation to global changes in cellular transcriptome was largely overlooked. this was mostly due to the fact that most microarray studies, explicitly or implicitly, ascribed alterations in rna levels to correlated changes in gene transcription. however, several pioneering studies have shed light on the critical role that modulation of mrna stability plays in the regulation of cellular transcriptome in response to various stresses  <cit> .

time-course analysis is a very common design for microarray analysis, which allows researchers to follow the dynamics of the cellular response to perturbations. clustering analysis applied to time-course data partitions the response into distinct kinetic waves, distinguishing between early-, intermediate- and late- responding genes. such kinetic waves can be the result of sequential activation of primary and secondary transcription factors   <cit> . nevertheless, mathematical modeling of changes in rna levels predicts that mrna degradation rate plays a pivotal role in shaping the kinetics of genes' response  <cit> . a standard measure for the speed of a transition between two steady states is t1/ <dig>  which is the time at which half of the change between the new and the former steady-state levels is achieved. . importantly, a simple kinetic model predicts that t1/ <dig> is determined by rna degradation rate not only in decay of expression but also in the phase of induction. the model assumes that mrna is produced at a constant rate  while the rate of its degradation is proportional to its concentration. accordingly, the rate of change in mrna concentration  is given by the equation: dx/dt = β-αx . at steady state mrna concentration reaches equilibrium , and therefore, the steady state level  is determined by the ratio between the synthesis and degradation constants: xss = β/α. solving the above equation gives the change in mrna concentration over time: Δx = * . of note, according to this solution, the rapidity of a transition between former and new steady states  is determined only by α, and is inversely proportional to it: t1/ <dig> = ln2/α; therefore, genes with unstable rna are predicted to respond in fast kinetics, whereas genes with stable rna should respond more slowly . furthermore, this model predicts that the time it takes a transcript whose transcription rate is increased by a factor l to achieve a k-fold induction in expression is a linear function of t1/2: tk = -log2*t1/2; where f = /  <cit> ; that is, for a similar increase in transcription rate in response to a stimulus, genes encoding unstable mrnas are predicted to achieve a certain fold of induction faster than genes which encode stable transcripts.

recently, the critical role for mrna stability in the induction kinetics of genes encoding inflammatory proteins was demonstrated at single-genes level  <cit> . here, we set out to examine this role on a large-scale utilizing a global atlas of mrna stability recently generated in mammalian cells and analyzing numerous gene expression time-course datasets that collectively cover many different aspects of the cellular physiology.

RESULTS
relationship between mrna stability and induction kinetics in response to il2
to examine the role of mrna stability in determining the dynamics of transcriptional networks in mammalian cells, we scanned expression microarray repositories for time-course datasets that profiled cellular transcriptome in human and murine cells at dense kinetics. as a test case, we first analyzed a dataset that recorded expression profiles at multiple time points  after stimulation of murine t cells with il <dig>  <cit> . we partitioned the genes that were induced by this treatment into distinct kinetic clusters according to their response time  . a clear distinction between early-, intermediate- and late- responding genes emerged.

next, we tested if there is a relationship between the observed kinetics of gene induction and mrna stability. namely, we tested whether fast responding genes were characterized by high instability , while late responders were more stable . in these tests we utilized a global atlas of mrna stability in mammalian cells that was recently generated in murine fibroblast and human b cells  <cit> . importantly, these reports noted that mrna half-life times were generally well conserved between the examined cell types and species . using this data source, we found a striking correlation between response time and transcript stability: t half-lives of early-induced genes were significantly shorter than those of late-induced genes , as predicted by the kinetic model.

global relationship between mrna stability and induction kinetics
next, we examined the generality of the association between kinetics of induction and rna stability. we analyzed a variety of time-course expression datasets recorded in human and murine cells, collectively covering many different aspects of cellular physiology. in the vast majority of the datasets analyzed, we found a highly significant anti-correlation between rapidity of induction and mrna stability . this widespread relationship points to the critical role played by mrna stability in shaping the dynamics of gene induction in complex transcriptional networks. it also indicates a broad conservation of rna stability under different conditions, which therefore reflects, to a large extent, an intrinsic property of the mrna molecules. inspection of the early-induced genes revealed a core set of genes whose induction-response was very rapid in many different datasets and which encode highly unstable transcripts .  however, the broad relationship between mrna stability and induction kinetics is not merely explained by this common core set of rapidly induced genes, as the relationship remained highly significant also after the removal of this core set from the analysis . this indicates that many other genes with an unstable mrna were rapidly induced in a stimulus-specific manner.

mrna stability is regulated mainly by cis-regulatory elements embedded in the transcript 3'-utr  <cit> . seeking for major mechanisms that control stability in the datasets that we analyzed, we searched for enriched sequence patterns in the 3'-utrs of the core set of early-induced genes. in agreement with previous reports  <cit> , we found that these highly unstable mrnas are significantly enriched for the au-rich element ; the most highly enriched 7-mer in the 3'-utrs of these genes was uauuuau, which appeared in 52% of the 3'-utrs in this set compared to background frequency of 18% in all 3'-utrs of mouse genes .

relationship between genomic transcribed length and induction kinetics
another physical factor which limits the rapidity at which genes are induced is the genomic transcribed length. the earliest time in which a transcript can be induced is bound by the length of its encoding gene and the velocity at which the rna polymerase elongates along it. therefore, we expected that genes which are induced at a very rapid kinetics would be characterized by short genomic transcribed length. indeed, in the vast majority of the datasets that we analyzed we detected a significant correlation between rapidity of induction and genomic transcribed length . however, in contrast to mrna stability that affected the induction kinetics over a wide range of time points, the effect of genomic transcribed length was noticeable only in the very early time points after stimulation . furthermore, no correlation was observed between response time and length of mature transcripts , and there was no overall correlation between mrna stability and genomic transcribed length . yet, the core set of early induced genes was characterized by both very short t half-lives and very short genomic transcribed length . therefore, to achieve very rapid gene induction, a combined strategy that couples substantial increase in transcriptional rate with rapid degradation rate and short genomic transcribed length is undertaken. of note, this core set is enriched for tfs , as agile regulation of the regulators is a critical property of networks.

relationship between mrna stability and kinetics of gene suppression
the mathematical kinetic model also predicts a similar relationship between rna stability and kinetics of gene suppression. genes whose expression is down-regulated rapidly are expected to encode rnas with lower stability than genes whose expression is down-regulated at slower rate . interestingly, while in several datasets we observed a very good agreement with this expectation, deviations from it were frequent. in five out of the ten datasets that we analyzed, we observed no relationship between mrna stability and kinetics of gene suppression, while this relationship was highly significant for the induced genes . in those cases, the expression of many mrnas which have high t half-life under standard conditions  was already down-regulated by at least a factor of  <dig>  after only 1- <dig> hrs post treatment. such a rapid down-regulation of stable rnas cannot be explained even by a complete shut-off of transcription, and therefore suggests intense modulation of mrna stability of the rapidly suppressed genes. we could not detect statistically enriched sequence motifs in the 3'-utr of these genes that might point to the mechanism  which controls this stability modulation.

discussion
two mechanisms which underlie the temporal order of gene induction are sequential activation of primary and secondary tfs and mrna stability. these mechanisms operate in parallel, and therefore the observed induction kinetics is the result of their superposition. the kinetic model we used in our study is oversimplified as it assumes constant rates of transcription and degradation over time. in practice, however, most genes are regulated by modules of transcriptional activators and repressors rather than by single tf, the activity of tfs themselves is modulated over time and they often form interlocked feedback loops. therefore, the kinetic patterns exhibited by responding genes are much more complicated than the simple exponential pattern predicted by the model. yet, much insight can be gained on the dynamics of transcriptional networks using the simplified description. while many studies delineated the way various transcriptional networks are propagated by sequential cascades of tfs  and b-cells ). even a complete turn-off of transcription is not enough to achieve such a rapid reduction in the concentration of stable mrnas. therefore, those mrnas that need to be down-regulated at a very high speed require regulatory mechanisms that decrease their stability. key regulators of mrna stability are rna binding proteins  and micrornas , and ample information on the activation of these regulators in response to various stresses has been already accumulated. we speculate that activation of stimulus-specific rbps and mirs is a major factor that underlies the deviation from model's prediction in the case of gene suppression.

CONCLUSIONS
comprehensive understanding of gene expression networks can be gained only once we obtain a global delineation of the orchestrated modulation of transcription and degradation rates carried out by cells in normal development and in response to perturbations. in this study, we elucidated the key role of mrna stability in shaping the kinetics of gene induction in intricate gene networks in mammalian cells.

