BACKGROUND
the widespread introduction of non-native species has long been regarded as one of the major anthropogenic global changes and threats to biodiversity  <cit> . the remarkable economic and ecological costs of biological invasions make the management of invaders one of the leading challenges in conservation biology  <cit> . standard methodologies implemented in population biology and new statistical tools recently developed in genetic analysis could help elucidate features and patterns relevant to invasive biology  <cit> . likewise, a comprehensive investigation of ecology and phylogeography of native source populations may suggest new insights into colonization and rapid evolutionary dynamics of invasive species  <cit> . the scarcity of genetic data on the native range of successful aliens has recently been highlighted, along with the suggestion that further comparative studies could address these data in order to recognize some common evolutionary features among invaders  <cit> .

recently, a general warning on the importance of long-term perspective in invasion biology studies has been raised. indeed, many researches have dealt with the acute phase of an invasion , often lacking an adequate temporal context . in particular, scientific efforts should be directed to better understand the long-term changes that occur in the environment and community of both invading and invaded species  <cit> . in order to clarify the patterns and the evolutionary consequences of biological invasions, long-term perspective studies should focus on different aspects of the introduced populations, such as their genetic diversity and structure, population size at introduction , growth rate and demographic trend  <cit> . considering the usefulness of molecular investigations in such retrospective studies  <cit> , in this paper we focus on the analysis of genetic diversity, population structure and demographic trend of a putative ancient european invader, the crested porcupine hystrix cristata.

three species of the old world porcupines , morphologically grouped in the hystrix subgenus, occur all over asia  and africa . the cape porcupine  inhabits the south africa region, from cape of good hope to the borders of central africa tropical rainforests, while the crested porcupine  lives in north central africa, from the mediterranean coast to northern zaire and tanzania, and in mainland italy and sicily  <cit> . these species are characterized by an extremely wide ecological tolerance: they can be found in arid grassland and semi-desert habitats, in mediterranean shrub lands and deciduous forests, as well as on the atlas and kilimanjaro mountains, up to  <dig>  m  of altitude. the origins of the italian populations of h. cristata have long been debated. based on the timescale of fossil and archaeological records  <cit>  and on historical chronicles , it was hypothesized that this species was introduced from africa, in the late roman age, as a game animal. however, such hypothesis has recently been questioned, and a native european origin of the italian porcupine has been suggested  <cit> . a recent spread in north and central-east italy over the last century has been well documented, and the presence of archaeological and distributional records from areas where the species is now absent has also been recorded  <cit> . given a maximum density of 2– <dig> specimens/km <dig> <cit>  and the current area of occurrence, the population living in north-central italy can be estimated as ca.  <dig> – <dig>  individuals.

the main aim of this study is to highlight the geographical origin and the history of the italian hystrix cristata populations by means of genetic analyses, considering the hypothesis of their introduction in recent times. we also investigate the demographic parameters that characterize this putative invasion, on the basis of the genetic diversity and structure of the italian populations. moreover, preliminary genetic data on the african native range are shown.

RESULTS
a total of  <dig>  mitochondrial bp, including  <dig> bp of the cytochrome b  gene,  <dig> bp of the control region  and  <dig> bp of trna-phe and partial rrna 12s genes, were successfully sequenced and aligned in  <dig> individuals of h. cristata,  <dig> of h. africaeaustralis and one of h. indica . the summary statistics of the molecular diversity, considering different geographical and phylogenetic partitions, were calculated for the whole mtdna fragment as well as for each gene, separately . as a whole,  <dig> segregating sites in h. africaeaustralis and  <dig> in h. cristata identify  <dig> and  <dig> different haplotypes, respectively. the cyt b fragment is characterized by a 36/ <dig> synonymous/non-synonymous substitutions ratio in h. cristata, 1/ <dig> in h. africaeaustralis and 63/ <dig> in the pooled sample. considering the whole mtdna fragment, net genetic distances are:  <dig>   between h. cristata and h. africaeaustralis;  <dig>   between h. cristata and h. indica;  <dig>   between h. africaeaustralis and h. indica. the italian populations of h. cristata have the lowest values for each statistic, with a total of  <dig> segregating sites and  <dig> haplotypes, haplotype diversity  ranging from  <dig>  to  <dig>  and average nucleotide diversity per site  ranging from  <dig>  to  <dig> . all newly recognized haplotypes have been submitted to genbank database .

hystrix cristata haplotypes were organized in two well-supported clades as evidenced by both maximum likelihood and bayesian  analyses: a mediterranean clade, including the samples from italy, tunisia and morocco, and a sub-saharan clade, comprising those from east africa, burkina faso, libya and a tunisian haplotype . a clear separation of the two african hystrix species is also supported. tree topology reveals a close relationship between the italian samples and tunisian haplotype tun-a and an association between this group and the moroccan sub-clade. tunisia samples show a particular phylogeographical structure, as the haplotypes from this region were both found in the moroccan sub-clade and in the sub-saharan clade; moreover, tunisia-libya samples formed a well-supported group with eritrean samples. the whole h. indica mtdna fragment and partial rrna 12s sequences of h. brachyurus, aterurus macrurus and a. africanus were used as outgroup .

median-joining network of the mediterranean haplotypes is shown in figure 3a, applying a  <dig> % parsimony threshold  <cit> . in italy, two common haplotypes  are present in the north-central and sicilian populations; three less common haplotypes  were found in central italy population, while haplotype ita-e has a broad area of occurrence in the north-central region . another haplotype , was sampled only in south italy. as stated above, tun-a is the closest relative of the italian haplotypes and it was found in the north and in the centre of tunisia. a close relationship between the other mediterranean haplotype  sampled in tunisia and those from northern morocco was identified. here, mor-b and mor-c were sampled in west-central morocco while mor-a and mor-d belong to the northern mediterranean coast. extended branching links, correlated with an extremely wide geographical distribution of the samples, characterize the sub-saharan haplotypes median-joining network . global fst of african h. cristata native source populations is  <dig>  .

the timescale of italian invasion was inferred by means of coalescence-based bayesian analyses, under two different tree priors which model population size changes through time. only cr data were used in these analyses. the time to the most recent common ancestor  posterior densities of all introduced haplotypes and of two subgroups are shown in figure 3b and figure 3c. given an intraspecific cr substitution rate of  <dig>  subs/site/myr , the root of all samples ranges from  <dig>  kyrbp , under the cons_s model, to  <dig>  kyrbp , under the expa_g model.

north-central italy population was used to investigate the demographic parameters that might have characterized the italian expansion. neutrality tests did not give significant results . similarly, mismatch distribution in the cr sequences  did not agree with a sudden expansion model, being the sum-of-squared-differences  statistics equal to  <dig> , with p =  <dig>  . genetic traces of past demographic trend were also inferred in a bayesian framework. the demographic analysis using the bayesian skyline plot as tree prior  did not give significant results. in particular, there was no evidence of demographic expansion of the north-central italy h. cristata population in the recent past. a bayes factor  evaluation between pairs of three analyses, which employed different coalescent tree priors, allowed us to fully reject the expo_g model , but did not significantly prefer either of the two other models . indeed, the demographic reconstruction under the expa_g tree prior suggested a population size increase only in very recent times, after a long period of size stasis post-introduction .

discussion
our results confirm the ancient non-native origin of the italian h. cristata populations: i) the summary molecular statistics, derived from three mitochondrial genes, highlights the african genetic diversity as being more complex when compared with the italian; ii) the phylogenetic analysis shows the close relationship between the italian and the tunisian populations; iii) the median-joining network analysis suggests that a tunisian and the most widespread italian haplotypes share a common ancestor. these results indicate the tunisian area as being the most probable source of the italian introduced populations. in our sample the native geographic range is represented by only five individuals with a global native range fst of  <dig> . this supports the assignation of introduced haplotypes to a particular source region with a confidence index of  <dig>   as shown by muirhead et al.  <cit> . the median-joining network analysis also reveals the simple genetic structure of the introduced italian populations i.e., a single mitogenetic clade of strictly related haplotypes. both central-north italy and the sicilian populations share the common haplotypes , while ita-b seems to be absent from southern italy.

archaeological records and historical chronicles  do not support an introduction of this species in italy before the late roman empire. the first calibrated sub-fossil of h. cristata was found in south italy  and dates back to  <dig>  kyrbp  <cit> . since we found a close relationship between the italian and the tunisian haplotypes, a putative time frame for introduction could span from the early colonization of sicily by the phoenicians   <cit>  to the first italian sub-fossil record. in the light of these considerations, h. cristata could have been introduced in sicily or in mainland italy during this  <dig> ky-time frame as a game species, as threatening beasts in circus games or as exotic animals in rich roman country homes. considering the coalescent-based bayesian approach, the time-measured phylogeny of introduced haplotypes partially agrees with this historical framework. however, even if the molecular clock was calibrated using a very fast intraspecific substitution rate  <cit> , the mean value of italian haplotypes tmrca was dated back to ca.  <dig> kyrbp, farther than the above hypothesized time span. conversely, the two recognized italian subgroups seem to have evolved in situ, during the early phases of colonization and spread . nevertheless, this scenario would need to be supported by a rare event of molecular diversity retention in the bottlenecked population during the founding event  <cit> , since genetic drift reduces genetic variation in small populations  <cit> . likewise, since central-north italy and sicily share the common ita-a and ita-b haplotypes, this rare genetic event during introduction might have occurred in both regions. the possibility of a further acceleration of the molecular substitution rates in extremely recent events as this could also be taken into account  <cit> . in fact, a time-dependency of the molecular clock rates has been recently proposed and discussed  <cit> . as for h. cristata introduction, a substitution rate of  <dig>  –  <dig>  subs/site/myr in the mtdna cr has to be accepted if we consider that the whole italian molecular diversity was generated in situ.

a review of the most recent literature of the demographic parameters that characterize the colonization dynamics does not provide clear evidence of a common pattern during colonization. a successful invasion can take place as a multiple introduction of few individuals from genetically differentiated native populations  <cit> , or as a single founder event from extremely bottlenecked gene pools  <cit> . being an invasive species, the present population size of italian h. cristata is the result of a demographic and spatial expansion though the genetic signature of this remarkable growth is not revealed by molecular statistics. although there is evidence of an extremely recent demographic increase, the coalescent-based bayesian analysis does not clearly support a population expansion model. since this demographic analysis is based on the assumption of a single panmittic population at mutation/drift equilibrium, the results may be better explained by hypothesizing more than one event of introduction of isolated propagules.

as for the genetic background of h. cristata native range, the phylogenetic reconstruction highlighted the existence of two different haplogroups, sub-saharan and mediterranean. the high level of genetic differentiation of the sub-saharan clade advocates for a complex evolutionary history, probably related to the broad geographical area of occurrence. indeed, the haplotypes belonging to this clade were sampled in central africa as well as in tunisia and libya. the close relationship between the tun-b/lib-a and the eritrean haplotypes suggests the existence of an ecological connection going from east to north africa, encompassing the sahara region. this hypothesis is supported by strong evidence of humid phases characterizing north african climate   <cit> . as for the second haplogroup, a low level of genetic differentiation can be detected. this could be the consequence of a less complex evolutionary history or a more recent diversification from a common ancestor when compared with the sub-saharan haplogroup. however, the evolution of native range h. cristata should be analyzed along with the environmental changes which occurred in africa over the late pleistocene and the holocene  <cit> . as widely acknowledged in the palaearctic region  <cit> , the distribution and the phylogeographical structure of several african taxa have largely been shaped by these past climatic shifts  <cit> . further investigation in the north african native range would help to clarify the relationship between the evolutionary history of the african populations and the high invasive potential of the propagules coming from such populations.

CONCLUSIONS
molecular data strongly evidenced the invasive origin of the italian hystrix cristata populations from north africa  introduced during the roman age. although demographic analyses failed to support a population size expansion from a single introduced propagule, they suggest a different scenario in favour of a multi-invasion event. moreover, this study produced preliminary data on the genetic diversity of native range populations, and provides a useful contribution for further comparative studies on successful aliens.

