BACKGROUND
patterns of genetic and geographical structure in natural populations have been strongly influenced not only by intrinsic factors, such as life histories and ecological traits, but also by extrinsic factors including habitats and historical events  <cit> . population geneticists have been interested in illustrating the factors determining genetic structure over the long term  <cit> . during the past two decades, the phylogeographic histories of a broad spectrum of animal and plant species have been reconstructed, and phylogeographical analysis has proven to be a powerful method in searching for congruent geographical patterns of genetic variation and determining the roles that historical events have played in shaping the present spatial genetic structure of a species  <cit> . the elevation of the qinghai-tibetan plateau and quaternary glaciation were key geological events that significantly affected asian topography, atmospheric circulation, and even global climate. these events influenced floristic distributions, and therefore it is important for biologists to seek out responses of organisms to the uplift of the qinghai-tibetan plateau and the climatic fluctuations during glacial periods to better understand current species distributions  <cit> . until very recently, numerous phylogeographical studies have outlined quaternary evolutionary histories of european and northern american floras , but relatively few investigations have focused on population divergence and phylogeography of plants in the qinghai-tibet plateau  <cit> . in this study, we concentrated on elucidating the spatial genetic structure of an attractive herb, incarvillea sinensis lam., which is widely distributed from the southwest china through to the northeast china and the russian far east , whose biogeographic history was proposed to be closely related to the uplift of the qinghai-tibet plateau and to quaternary climate oscillations  <cit> .

incarvillea sinensis is the type species of incarvillea juss.  including  <dig> species, and it also is the type of the subgenus incarvillea including two species. compared with other members of the genus centered in the himalaya-hengduan mountains, this species has a broad range and altitudinal distribution . it is very rich in morphological variation, such as flower color, habit, and leaf characteristics, and its broad spectrum of morphological variants bewildered taxonomists in their attempts to propose intraspecific subdivisions; therefore, two classifications were established due to the discretionary priorities of morphological characteristics  <cit> . based on habit , grierson  <cit>  subdivided i. sinsensis into two subspecies: i. sinensis subsp. sinensis and subsp. variabilis. the former is an annual herb with simple roots, while the latter is a perennial herb with woody, branched roots and often bears the remains of the previous year’s stems. in another system described in flora reipublicae popularis sinicae  <cit> , two variants were recognized, i. sinensis var. sinensis and var. przewalskii. the former is characterized by red flowers and the latter by yellow flowers. both intraspecific classifications seemed reasonable given that straightforward characters  were used to distinguish intraspecific taxa, but the annual populations with red flowers were confusing owing to the disjunct distribution between the northern region and the southernmost lancangjiang valley . the distribution was split due to the occurrence of perennial groups with yellow and red flowers in the middle of the entire species distribution.

after investigating all of the specimens of incarvillea sinensis in cdbi, e, k, kun, pe, and sz, and exploring its distribution in china, we found that its variation in morphology was regional and that all populations can be classified into three types . type  <dig> is an annual with red flowers, distributed from the eastern gansu province to the northeast china and the russian far east, with one population in the lancangjiang valley. type  <dig> is a perennial with yellow flowers and is found in the western gansu province and the eastern qinghai province. type  <dig> is a perennial with red flowers found in the southeastern qinghai-tibet plateau, mainly in sichuan province. the morphological variations within i. sinensis can be correlated with their geographic distribution, while the eastern qinghai-tibet plateau  contain all three morphological types, and appears to be the center of diversity for this species. we suspected that the spatial pattern of morphological characteristics likely dropped a hint to the potential divergence in genetics.

po, populations; c, flower colors; r, red flowers; y, yellow flowers; h, habits; a, annual; p, perennial; t, number of individuals; lat., latitude; long., longitude; f, frequency of haplotype.

a study on the biogeography of incarvillea suggests that its evolution may be related to the uplift of the qinghai-tibet plateau. in addition, the continuous distribution of the subgenus incarvillea, from the eastern qinghai-tibet plateau to the russian far east, could partially be the result of the quaternary expansion since part of its range was glaciated  <cit> . incarvillea sinensis occupies almost the full range of the subgenus except in mongolia. considering the morphological variations correlative to geography, we proposed that the uplift of the qinghai-tibetan plateau potentially resulted in the genetic variations between populations within and outside of the qinghai-tibetan plateau. furthermore, the pleistocene glaciation possibly induced the extinction of some northern populations and the modern distribution likely resulted from the postglacial and interglacial expansion. in order to test the hypothesis, we examined the genetic diversity of populations within and outside the qinghai-tibet plateau and identified potential genetic lineages within this species.

since the colonization of new habitats occurs through seeds, and chloroplast dna is generally maternally inherited in angiosperms   <cit> , chloroplast dna  markers provide information on past changes in species ranges that are unaffected by subsequent pollen movements  <cit> . we investigated patterns of cpdna diversity in incarvillea sinensis using phylogeographical methods that can indicate how historical events such as range fragmentation, range expansion, and long distance dispersal, as well as current levels of gene flow, have influenced present-day distributions. the goals of this study are to provide new insights into the population genetic structure and responses of i. sinensis to geological events and reveal the imprints of geological events on the spatial pattern of the genetic diversity.

RESULTS
sequence variation and haplotype distribution
a matrix of  <dig>  characters was obtained from concatenated alignments of trnh- psba  and trns- trnfm  sequences from  <dig> individuals representing  <dig> collections, in which  <dig> polymorphic sites were confirmed by sequencing in both directions. sequences with polymorphisms between each other were deposited in genbank . of these polymorphisms, five were indels . two indels were single nucleotides and the other three were six bp, five bp and seven bp long respectively. in subsequent analysis, indels with length more than one base were considered as a single mutation. all five indels were coded as binary characters, 1 s and 0 s, so that the matrix was shortened to  <dig> characters in length:  <dig> sites from trnh- psba and  <dig>  sites from trns- trnfm. the adjusted matrix included  <dig> variable sites, five of which were due to the presence of indels, and all of variable sites were informative and involved in all analysis. all of the sequences from the  <dig> localities contained  <dig> unique haplotypes when indels were included . haplotypes and their frequency from each locality are shown in table  <dig> and their spatial pattern is portrayed in figure  <dig> 

np, nucleotide position; # = cttcta * = tatta † = gattagg.

genealogical relationships among haplotypes of incarvillea sinensis
in our phylogenetic analysis, a data set including haplotype and outgroup sequences was used to reconstruct the relationships among the haplotypes. this matrix was  <dig>  sites in length, and contains  <dig> informative sites. the consensus tree resulting from bayesian analysis is presented in figure  <dig>  the ingroup sequences clustered into two major clades, the southern and northern clades, concordant with geography . the northern clade accommodated six haplotypes  from the northern distribution, and  <dig> haplotypes  from the southern distribution were nested in the southern clade. moreover, a subclade was formed within the southern clade to accommodate six haplotypes  from the southeastern qinghai-tibet plateau, situated in the southernmost range of i. sinensis.

compared with the phylogenetic tree, the haplotype network with 95% connection constructed using the tcs program was better resolved in genealogical relationships among the haplotypes, but the network showed a loop indication ambiguous connections involving haplotypes h <dig>  h <dig>  h <dig>  and h <dig>  following the rules of crandall & templeton  <cit>  in combination with the genetic distances between haplotypes and the phylogenetic tree, the loop was resolved and the network was shown in figure  <dig>  two lineages from the southern and northern regions were connected by  <dig> mutations. the northern lineage contained six haplotypes  from the northern region , and the southern lineage contained  <dig> haplotypes  from the eastern qinghai-tibet plateau .

the net averaged population genetic distance per site between two regional lineages calculated using arlequin was  <dig> , and the divergence of these two major clades within this species was dated at  <dig>  mya.

population genetic parameters and phylogeographical structure
the total gene diversity ht was  <dig>  and the average within-population gene diversity hs was  <dig>  at the species level. the indices of population structure gst and nst were  <dig>  and  <dig> , respectively. the permutation test showed that nst was significantly larger than gst . the gst and nst at the regional level implicated that significant structures existed in the seqpt, neqtp and their combined regions, but not in the northern region. genetic parameters at different levels are listed in table  <dig> 

neqtp: the northeastern qinghai-tibet plateau; seqtp: the southeastern qinghai-tibet plateau; qtp: the qinghai-tibet plateau.

the analysis of molecular variance  of the data from the two cpdna fragments indicates the presence of a strong differentiation in genetics among the lineages and regions . when populations were grouped by three geographical regions, a statistically significant structure was detected by amova. the comparison among the three regions shows that  <dig> %  of the genetic variations occurred between these regions. only  <dig> %  of the variance was distributed within each of these regions, and less variance  can be attributed to the variations within the populations. when populations were grouped by two lineages, once again, the results show a similar pattern. once the populations were grouped by subspecies and variants on taxonomy, the genetic variations between the groups decreased, and the remaining variations from the other two sources increased accordingly. the least amount of variance was contributed by the variations within populations, and this value is less than  <dig> %.

* p <  <dig> .

correlation between genetic and geographic distances
the mantel test quantified the correlations between the two distance matrices, allowing for the determination of the relationships between the genetic and the geographical distances. the results of this test did not show a significant effect of isolation by distance at the species level . the distributions of haplotype showed that only six haplotypes were detected in  <dig> populations from the northern region, and  <dig> of them possessed the same haplotype , so we performed this test once again after replacing the fsts with pairwise nei’s genetic distances. the positive correlation between genetic difference and geographic distance  was encountered in the species . furthermore we found significantly positive and monotonic relationships across all of the pairwise fst measures and spatial distances separating the populations of regions in seqpt, neqtp, and their combination , whose pattern of scatterplots were consistent with case i proposed by hutchison & templeton  <cit> . this pattern describes the scenario of regional equilibrium between gene flow and drift . in contrast, the null hypothesis of the regional equilibrium was rejected in populations from the northern region, and the scatterplot approximated case Ш of hutchison & templeton  <cit> , indicating that drift is more influential than gene flow.

discussion
conflict between the phylogeny and intraspecific classifications previously proposed
we found neither of the intraspecific subdivisions of the two subspecies and the two variants was supported by phylogenetic analysis, although the species was proven to be monophyletic by the cpdna trnh- psba sequence . because the haplotype h <dig> was detected in the dq population, the annual dq population with red flowers phylogenetically clustered together with all of the other perennial populations with red flowers from the southeastern qinghai-tibet plateau, not together with the annual populations with red flowers from the northern region . according to the system described by wang et al.  <cit> , the dq population should be classified into i. sinensis var. sinensis, while the other populations from the southeastern qinghai-tibet plateau should be classified into i. sinensis var. przewalskii. likewise, the perennial gw population  with red flowers was most closely related to the perennial populations with yellow flowers from the northeastern qinghai-tibet plateau . based on the grierson’s system  <cit> , the former should be classified into i. sinensis subsp. sinensis, while the latter should be i. sinensis subsp. variabilis.

our study provides evidence in support of parallel evolution of morphological characteristics in allopatric populations . character convergence within this species apparently resulted from adaptation to similar niches. from the genetic data, we found no evidence warranting the suggestion of monophyly for any of the recognized taxa. we therefore propose to view this species as a species complex that should not be subdivided into intraspecific units in taxonomy.

genetic diversity and structure at species and regional levels
the mean within-population genetic diversity is low compared with the total diversity at both species and regional levels. the amova results also showed that most of the genetic diversity was attributed to the among-population effects. the global indices of population differentiation were very high, up to  <dig>  and  <dig>  for gst and nst, respectively. when nst is significantly higher than gst, this usually indicates the occurrence of a phylogeographical structure  <cit> . through random permutations, a significant difference between these two measures was detected within this species. on the other hand,  <dig> haplotypes were clustered into two lineages or three groups harmonious with geography , and none of them was shared among the regions . these results reveal that the cpdna variation of this species is highly structured.

the southern clade consists of four haplotypes from the neqtp and six haplotypes from the seqtp. two predominant haplotypes  are widely distributed in neqtp, except in wenxian and diebu in gansu province, and the remaining eight haplotypes are relatively rare and endemic to one valley or locality . the indices of genetic differentiation show that geographic structure exists both in the lineage and in the subdivided regions . the northern clade is distributed in the northern region where six haplotypes  are scattered erratically, and no geographic structure was detected . we note that both the differentiation index  and the diversity index  of the sorthern clade is higher than those of the southern clade. the degree of subdivision of the cpdna diversity  reflects the dispersal ability of the species and the effect of long-term range fragmentation, while the low gst value is indicative of high levels of gene flow through seeds  <cit> . once capsules of incarvillea sinensis split, the seeds are ejected and the seed wings contribute to seed dispersal by wind. in the southern region accommodating the southern clade, orogenesis resulted in range fragmentation, and populations of i. sinensis were distributed in valleys, except for those populations with haplotypes h <dig> and h <dig> . the connections between these populations were severed by towering ridges and peaks. as a result, efficient seed dispersal was reduced and the gene flow through seed dispersal was confined within the valleys, or between the neighboring populations.

in contrast, the analogous limiting factors of seed movement did not exist in the northern region, and we could not identify the existence of a significant geographic structure in the northern clade . distantly related haplotypes were more often found in the same populations, as case  <dig> proposed by pons & petit  <cit> , which indicates that the relative geographic distribution of the haplotypes may have nothing to do with their genetic distances, in this case old lineages have had ample time to become geographically redistributed since they first appeared as products of mutation. based on the comparison of the indices of genetic diversity and differentiation between two lineages, we consider the topographical barriers in gene flow through seed dispersal to be the most likely factors leading to the higher divergence in the southern clade. the diverse niches in the eastern qinghai-tibet plateau created a wide spectrum of habitats to accumulate and accommodate new mutations.

distinctive evolutionary histories between lineages
the two major cpdna lineages were revealed by means of reconstructing the phylogenetic tree and the haplotype network, which can be recognized by a connection of  <dig> mutations. the deep gap between these two clades indicates the early origin of the corresponding lineages in the evolution of the species, and the long-standing separation thereafter. we dated the divergence between the two lineages at approximately  <dig>  mya, which corresponds to the early pliocene. the uplift of the himalaya-hengduan massifs was a complicated geological event, and the chronology of this process is still under debate  <cit> . it is believed that the plateau underwent its most recent dramatic uplift after the early pliocene  <cit> . the two lineages of incarvillea sinensis most likely originated because of decreased effective gene flow due to topographic isolation after orogenesis and long term adaptation to the distinct habitats . the long evolutionary history allowed this species to accumulate not only mutations relative to diversity, but also high differentiation between regions.

for the northern lineage, the long history should be enough for localized gene flow to interact with drift to produce a pattern of isolation by distance across the region , but the correlation estimation of pairwise genetic and geographical distances show that drift was much more influential than gene flow on the distribution of genetic variability . populations were not at equilibrium, either because conditions required or the populations themselves have not existed long enough for regional pattern of isolation-by-distance to have been achieved  <cit> . the northern lineage was composed of six haplotypes detected in  <dig> collections from the northern region. the basal and predominant haplotypes  was distributed randomly and the other five haplotypes were concentrated on the haplotype h <dig> in the network . the starlike shape of the network of the six haplotypes reflected the extremely low level of the sequence divergence and the low frequency of rare haplotypes. the lack of regional equilibrium, the lower diversity and starlike shape network of the northern lineage likely indicated that possible extinction during the glacial and the interglacial and postglacial recolonization.

on the contrary, within the southern clade, including all haplotypes from the eastern qinghai-tibet plateau, a significant association between the genetic variability and the geographical distribution was revealed by the mantel test. the mantel tests also showed that there was a significant effect of isolation by distance, which means that a regional equilibrium was reached and that more closely situated populations tended to communicate and be more genetically similar to one another  <cit> . obviously, gene flow was more easily accomplished on the alpine platform than in fragmented landscapes, such as the southeastern qinghai-tibet plateau. we conclude that the populations from the southeastern qinghai-tibet plateau suffered severe isolation owing to orogenesis, which significantly reduced seed dispersal, so that gene flow through the seeds was confined between neighboring populations within areas without strict topographical barriers. allopatric fragmentation became a theme throughout the evolutionary history of the southern lineage. significant ridges and peaks of the local landscape formed permanent spatial barrier that intensified and fixed genetic isolations.

CONCLUSIONS
we detected two lineages connected by a deep gap within the species, and significant difference in genetic diversity between them. the significant genetic divergence concordant with geography and the features of genetic diversity seemed to reveal the imprints of geological events on the plant evolution. we preferred the significance of the uplift of the qinghai-tibet plateau and the quaternary glacial in the distribution of the genetic diversity and differentiation of incarvillea sinensis, as mentioned by chen et al.  <cit> .

the qinghai-tibet plateau and its adjacent areas have been listed as one of the world’s biodiversity hotspots  <cit> . two processes may contribute to the formation of biodiversity centers: the elevation of local speciation rates  and a greater accumulation of species formed elsewhere . available studies in this area have focused mainly on traditional taxonomy, botanical inventory, and phylogeny-based species radiation  <cit> , and as evidence mounts, it becomes increasingly clear that both the origin and the accumulation hypotheses have acted in concert to form this biodiversity hotspot  <cit> . only a few plant species in this region, however, have been phylogeographically studied . in the absence of phylogeographical investigations on a multitude of plants, it is very difficult to uncover the common microevolutionary patterns of the extant organisms within this area. the pattern of genetic variation within the widely distributed incarvillea sinensis populations, however, offers clues to the mechanisms of the evolutionary of the diversity of plants in the qinghai-tibet plateau. our present study not only shows that the spatial genetic structure within this species likely is the result of tectonic events and long term adaptation to distinct habits, but also supports an evidence on the higher diversity in the qinghai-tibet plateau influenced by origins.

