BACKGROUND
the bacterial genus spiroplasma contains a group of arthropod- and plant-associated endosymbionts  <cit> . phylogenetically, the genus spiroplasma belongs to the class mollicutes, which are close relatives of bacilli and other free-living firmicutes  <cit> . within mollicutes, spiroplasma are more closely related to the animal-pathogenic genus mycoplasma than to the plant-pathogenic ‘candidatus phytoplasma’. however, spiroplasma are more similar to ‘candidatus phytoplasma’ in terms of the ecological niches occupied, because both groups have complex life cycles that involve insect and plant hosts  <cit> . for this reason, comparative analysis of gene content among these three groups of mollicutes can provide insights into host adaptation in these parasites  <cit> .

while most of the spiroplasma species that have been characterized to date appeared to be harmless commensals, some species have evolved pathogenicity toward their plant or arthropod hosts. most of the pathogenic spiroplasma species belong to the citri-chrysopicola-mirum clade  <cit> , notable examples include s. citri that causes the citrus stubborn disease  <cit> , s. kunkelii that causes the corn stunt disease  <cit> , s. phoeniceum that infects periwinkle  <cit> , s. penaei that infects pacific white shrimp  <cit> , s. eriocheiris that infects chinese mitten crab  <cit> , and s. melliferum that infects honeybee  <cit> .

to improve our understanding of these pathogenic spiroplasma species, whole genome shotgun sequencing has been utilized as a powerful tool to investigate their metabolic capacity and possible interactions with hosts. the initial surveys of s. kunkelii genome revealed that this species has more genes involved in purine and amino acid biosynthesis, transcriptional regulation, cell envelope, and dna transport than lineages from mycoplasmataceae  <cit>  and also a unique arrangement of genes in its ribosomal protein operon  <cit> . furthermore, a comparative study within mollicutes has identified several proteins that are shared between the phytopathogenic s. kunkelii and phytoplasma but absent in the animal-pathogenic mycoplasma and ureaplasma spp.  <cit> . more recently, draft genome sequences have been published for s. citri gii3-3x  <cit>  and s. melliferum kc <dig>  <cit> . these more comprehensive investigations of spiroplasma genomes revealed that their chromosomes harbor a large amount of viral sequences and also allowed for detailed characterization of their metabolic capacities. importantly, these draft genome sequences provided a valuable resource for identification of putative virulence factors and elucidation of possible pathogenicity mechanisms  <cit> .

in this study, we isolated a novel strain of s. melliferum from a honeybee collected in taiwan and investigated its genetic composition by whole-genome shotgun sequencing. through comparative analyses with other available mollicutes genome sequences, our aims were to characterize the genetic differences among the various lineages and to understand the evolutionary processes involved in shaping the genomes of these bacteria.

RESULTS
species identification and phylogenetic inference
based on the molecular phylogeny inferred from the 16s ribosomal rna gene, the two strains of s. melliferum  form a monophyletic group and s. citri is the most closely related species . serological tests were confirmatory for the molecular phylogeny and supported the close association of s. melliferum ipmb4a with other s. melliferum strains. the deformation test showed a strong cross-reactivity between s. melliferum ipmb4a and the type strain bc-3t <cit> . positive deformation was observed up to  <dig> -fold dilution. against its own antisera, s. melliferum bc-3t showed positive deformation up to  <dig> -fold dilution, but only up to 320-fold dilution with the closely related s. citri r8a2t <cit> . this indicates that s. melliferum ipmb4a is a strong candidate for inclusion into spiroplasma group i- <dig> with the other strains of s. melliferum.

genome assembly and annotation
the whole genome shotgun sequencing of s. melliferum ipmb4a produced an assembly that contains  <dig> chromosomal contigs . consistent with the previous studies of spiroplasma genomes  <cit> , we found a large number of phage sequences in the chromosome of s. melliferum ipmb4a. most of these phage sequences showed high similarity to plectrovirus spv1-c <dig>  spv1-r8a2b, and svts <dig>  the presence of these long repetitive sequences was the major obstacle in obtaining a complete genome assembly. moreover, the divergence among different copies of these repetitive plectrovirus fragments generated many single-nucleotide polymorphisms . most of these snps cannot be resolved confidently with the short 101-bp illumina sequencing reads used in this study. to be conservative, ~ <dig> kb of the plectrovirus-related regions that contained these snps were excluded from our final assembly. if these phage fragments were included, the assembly coverage would be similar to s. melliferum kc <dig> and higher than s. citri gii3-3x . this result highlights the limitation of relying on short-read sequencing technologies for de novo assembly of highly repetitive genomes. however, the traditional approach of using clone libraries for sanger shotgun sequencing has a much higher cost and may not be a good choice if the main focus is on the unique regions of the genome.

1for s. melliferum ipmb4a, putative pseudogenes were annotated with the’/pseudo’ tag in gene feature as suggested by the ncbi genbank guidelines and were not counted in the total number of protein-coding genes. for s. melliferum kc <dig> and s. citri gii3-3x, putative pseudogenes were annotated by adding the term ‘truncated’ in the cds product description field and were included in the total number of protein-coding genes.

the exclusion of phage fragments reduced the number of annotated plectrovirus proteins in the s. melliferum ipmb4a assembly compared to the closely related s. melliferum kc <dig> . with the elimination of these short plectrovirus proteins and other potential false-positive gene predictions  from the annotation, we observed a shift in the length distribution of the annotated protein-coding genes compared to the other two spiroplasma genomes . nonetheless, our conservative approach in assembly and annotation mainly removed viral proteins and short hypothetical proteins, thus was not expected to introduce biases in the downstream metabolic analysis. intriguingly, in contrast to the abundance of plasmids in s. melliferum kc <dig>  <cit>  and s. citri gii3-3x  <cit> , we did not recover any plasmid-like contig in our draft assembly of s. melliferum ipmb4a genome . this lack of plasmid-like contig is consistent with the negative result from our plasmid extraction tests. this finding may reflect the true absence of plasmids in this particular strain. alternatively, it is possible that the plasmid had been lost during the process of initial isolation or subsequent culturing in the laboratory.

among the  <dig> annotated protein-coding genes in the s. melliferum ipmb4a genome,  <dig> have specific functional assignments according to the cog categories . genes involved in translation and ribosomal structure  represented the most abundant functional category, mostly due to the large number of ribosomal proteins and trna synthetases found in the genome. the second most abundant category contained genes involved in replication, recombination, and repair . in addition to the dna replication machinery such as dna polymerases  and other related proteins , we also found genes involved in nucleotide excision repair  and several dna topoisomerases . however, the machineries for mismatch repair  and homologous recombination  appeared to be missing.

comparative analysis with s. melliferum kc <dig> and s. citri
the alignment among the three draft spiroplasma genomes revealed extensive rearrangements between the closely related s. melliferum and s. citri . this low level of conservation in synteny was unexpected for several reasons. first, the average nucleotide sequence identity between these two species was ~99%, suggesting that the divergence time was quite short  <cit> . for comparison, two other groups of related bacteria with similar  or even higher  levels of divergence both had a higher level of conservation in their chromosomal organization. second, in a previous study that compared the physical maps of s. melliferum and s. citri, the authors found that the overall organization was similar between these two species  <cit> . however, this discrepancy may be due to the higher resolution in detecting genome rearrangements provided by genome sequencing compared to pulsed-field gel electrophoresis . finally, these two species lack several genes that were involved in homologous recombination. for example, the recombinase a  was reduced to  <dig> a.a. in s. melliferum by a premature stop codon and  <dig> a.a. in s. citri by one or more truncations of its coding region  <cit> ; for comparison, the full length reca protein in mycoplasma mycoides contains  <dig> a.a. . although these spiroplasma genomes contain a large number of direct and inverted repeats originated from the invasion of plectroviruses, the pesudogenization of reca was expected to promote genome stability  <cit> . one possible explanation of this paradox is that these extensive genome rearrangements were facilitated by the large number of repetitive sequences  <cit>  and had occurred soon after the species divergence, while the independent losses of homologous recombination in these two species were relatively recent events. more extensive taxon sampling of spiroplasma genomes, including additional strains from these two species and appropriate outgroup species, are required to investigate this hypothesis.

to compare the gene content between s. melliferum and s. citri, we identified the homologous genes among the three available genomes from these two species and classified these genes based on their patterns of presence and absence . examination of these results can improve our understanding of the genetic differentiation between these two species. however, two caveats exist due to the nature of these data sets. first, all three spiroplasma genomes used in this comparison were incomplete draft sequences, such that the absence of genes from any particular genome cannot be confirmed. second, due to the lack of an appropriate outgroup , we cannot establish the directionality of evolutionary changes based on the patterns of presence and absence. when the ongoing genome sequencing of s. kunkelii <cit>  reaches completion in the future, combined analysis using a phylogenetic framework will provide more insights into the gene content evolution of these pathogenic spiroplasma species.

despite these potential shortcomings, inspection of the gene lists suggested that this comparison of gene content provided results that were consistent with our expectations. we found that both s. melliferum kc <dig> and s. citri gii3-3x contained large numbers of genome-specific genes and also shared  <dig> homologous gene clusters that were absent in s. melliferum ipmb4a. the majority of these genes encoded hypothetical proteins and proteins of viral origin. these observations were expected due to our exclusion of most plectrovirus fragments from the assembly of s. melliferum ipmb4a genome . furthermore, examination of these gene lists provided insights into the biology of these bacteria. both species have phosphotransferase system  transporters and enzymes for the uptake and utilization of trehalose, glucose, and fructose . these findings were consistent with our current knowledge of spiroplasma biology. for example, trehalose exists in higher concentration than glucose or fructose in insect haemolymph  <cit>  and may be an important carbon source for spiroplasmas during their life stage in insect vectors. in addition, both species were known to utilize glucose and fructose  <cit>  and the preferential uptake of fructose by s. citri is linked to its phytopathogenicity  <cit> .

intriguingly, compared to the plant-pathogenic s. citri, the insect-pathogenic s. melliferum has additional genes involved in the utilization of cellobiose, chitin, and n-acetylmuramic acid  . the presence of these genes may be linked to its adaptation to the honeybee host. for example, the ability to degrade chitin can facilitate its invasion of the host tissues  and the ability to utilize cellobiose may enhance its fitness by allowing access to the partially hydrolyzed pollen cell walls in honeybee diet for additional carbon sources. more interestingly, several of these s. melliferum-specific genes  were adjacent to plectrovirus fragments on the chromosome, suggesting that these genes may have been acquired through phage-mediated horizontal gene transfers. the sequence similarity search against the genbank database revealed that the chitinase in s. melliferum has no putative homolog within the class mollicutes and the most similar genes were found in the order lactobacillales, including the genera lactococcus and enterococcus.

comparative analysis with mycoplasma and phytoplasma
for comparative genomics analysis at a deeper divergence level , we compared the gene content of s. melliferum ipmb4a with two other representative mollicutes species: mycoplasma genitalium g <dig>  and ‘candidatus phytoplasma asteris’ oy-m . the inclusion of the m. genitalium, which has the smallest genome among sequenced mollicutes, is useful for defining the most conserved core gene set in these bacteria. among these three genomes, s. melliferum ipmb4a is the largest one and contains the highest number of genome-specific genes . examination of these genes revealed that spiroplasma possesses more flexible metabolisms and consequently a lower degree of host dependence. in the initial isolation and characterization, s. melliferum was reported to ferment glucose and to hydrolyze arginine  <cit> . our pathway analysis revealed that these two features may be important in its physiology. in addition to the pts transporter for glucose uptake, s. melliferum possesses all genes required for glycolysis to convert glucose-6-phosphate into pyruvate . pyruvate may be used for the production of cysteine by an aminotransferase  and the biosynthesis of fe-s clusters by other downstream genes . alternatively, pyruvate may also be converted into acetyle-coa by the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex . other than glycolysis, s. melliferum also has the genes in the pentose phosphate pathway  for producing 5-phosphoribosyl diphosphate , which is a precursor for pyrimidine metabolism .

the ability to uptake and metabolize arginine provides s. melliferum with a source of nitrogen and also precursors for de novo nucleotide biosynthesis. the possession of the entire gene set  for converting arginine to uridine monophosphate  is rare among mollicutes. other than s. melliferum, we only found that mycoplasma penetrans <cit>  contains all these genes as well. however, result from database searches demonstrated sporadic distribution patterns of individual genes among different mycoplasma species . in addition to the de novo biosynthesis of ump, s. melliferum may acquire xanthine and uracil by permeases . these nucleobase transporters were also rare among mollicutes. other than s. melliferum, these permeases were only found in s. citri and mesoplasma florm. although these findings may indicate independent gene acquisitions by horizontal gene transfers, a more plausible explanation is that the common ancestor of the sem  clade may have maintained these genes for nucleotide transport and metabolism following its divergence from the aaa  clade. subsequently, the nutrient-rich environments provided by the eukaryotic hosts reduced the selective pressure for maintaining these genes in the genome and allowed parallel gene losses in most sem lineages. in addition to the genes discussed above, we also found several spiroplasma-specific genes that are associated with its unique biology among mollicutes. for example, s. melliferum ipmb4a has five copies of mreb  and two copies of spiralin . furthermore, s. melliferum ipmb4a has several genes involved in lipid metabolism, such as the non-mevalonate pathway for terpenoid backbone biosynthesis .

among the three genomes included in this comparative analysis, m. genitalium contained the fewest number of protein-coding genes . given these numbers, one might expect that s. melliferum would shared more genes with ‘candidatus phytoplasma asteris’ than with m. genitalium. however, the homologous gene cluster identification showed that s. melliferum and m. genitalium actually shared more genes to the exclusion of ‘candidatus phytoplasma asteris’ . this finding is consistent with the close evolutionary relationship between spiroplasma and mycoplasma. many of the genes in this list represented gene losses in the phytoplasma lineage. for example, the absence of f0f1-type atp synthase  and pentose phosphate pathway  were noted in the initial genome sequencing of phytoplasmas  <cit> . furthermore, the phytoplasma-specific losses of purine salvage pathway , pyrimidine metabolism , formylation of methionyl-trna , and potassium ion uptake  were noted in our previous large-scale comparative analysis between mycoplasmas and phytoplasmas  <cit> .

according to the phylogenetic relationship among these three lineages, the genes that are shared between s. melliferum and ‘candidatus phytoplasma asteris’ but absent in the m. genitalium genome would be of particular interest . although some of these genes may reflect accelerated sequence divergence or gene losses in m. genitalium, others may provide insights into the adaptation of spiroplasmas and phytoplasmas to their similar ecological niches. examination of the  <dig> homologous gene clusters identified in this study mostly confirmed the results of a previous study that investigated this topic  <cit>  and also provide additional candidate genes for future characterization.

in the initial survey of an 85-kb segment of the s. kunkelii cr2-3x genome, it was reported to have a unique arrangement of ribosomal protein genes  <cit> . compared to m. capricolum, bacillus subtilis, and escherichia coli, the intergenic regions are much shorter in s. kunkelii. when we compared this region across the available mollicutes genomes, we found that the compactness of this operon is not necessarily a defining feature of spiroplasma genomes. for example, the highly reduced m. genitalium genome has similar or even shorter intergenic regions between neighboring genes. however, we noted that the three spiroplasma species examined  all have the same set of three genes  located downstream of ribosomal protein l <dig> . in contrast, several phytoplasma and mycoplasma species, including m. mycoides that is nested within the spiroplasma clade , all have an additional methionine aminopeptidase  located between adk and infa. as the taxon sampling of available spiroplasma genomes continues to improve, it will be interesting to investigate if this relocation of the map gene is specific to the citri clade or shared by other spiroplasma lineages.

CONCLUSIONS
the genome survey by shotgun sequencing revealed that several spiroplasma species harbor abundant plectrovirus fragments in their genome. because of the repetitive nature of these viral sequences and the limitations of current sequencing technologies, obtaining the complete genome sequence of these bacteria has remained extremely challenging. nonetheless, our analysis of the partial genome sequences of s. melliferum and s. citri provided glimpses into the genome architecture and metabolic capacity of these bacteria. furthermore, comparative analysis with other mollicutes demonstrated that the availability of spiroplasma genome sequences is of fundamental importance in improving our knowledge of the evolutionary history in this class. through comparison with the animal-pathogenic mycoplasma and the plant-pathogenic ‘candidatus phytoplasma’, results from this study suggested that the extensive gene losses observed in these bacteria may have occurred independently among different lineages, rather than mainly in their common ancestor as previously thought  <cit> . for future study, additional taxon sampling of spiroplasma genomes would further improve the reconstruction of ancestral states and the inference of evolutionary history in these important pathogenic bacteria.

