BACKGROUND
genes are not distributed randomly within a genome  <cit> ; in mammals, housekeeping genes and tissue-specific genes show a strong tendency to be clustered together  <cit>  and genes that participate in the same biochemical pathway tend to be located close together in the genome  <cit> . moreover, similar expression levels or expression patterns have been found in neighboring gene pairs in various eukaryotic genomes  <cit> .

the coexpression sharing similar regulatory elements and chromatin environment have been proposed as two major factors responsible for coexpression of neighboring genes but the underlying mechanism is unclear  <cit> . during transcription, transcription factors  regulate gene expression by binding to the cis-regulatory elements. neighboring genes have more chance to share promoters or regulatory elements and to be coregulated and coexpressed  <cit> . alternatively, factors in the chromatin environment, such as histone modification, nucleosomes etc., can modulate gene expression within a local region. neighboring genes are more likely to be located within the same chromatin domain and to share a similar chromatin status, thus having a greater likelihood of coexpression than non-neighboring genes  <cit> .

neighboring gene pairs in the budding yeast saccharomyces cerevisiae exhibit stronger coexpression than random pairs  <cit> . sharing 5' regulatory elements was suggested to result in the coexpression  <cit> ; however, the results of later studies disagreed with this hypothesis. whole-genome expression data analysis has shown that divergent pairs  do not exhibit significantly higher levels of coexpression than parallel pairs , although divergent pairs are more likely to share the same regulatory system  <cit> . moreover, from an evolutionary perspective, tsai et al.  <cit>  reported that adjacent pairs with a shared transcription factor-binding site  have no higher rate of coexpression than those without. that result was confirmed by batada et al.  <cit> , who showed that when the similarity of tf regulation between gene pairs is controlled at the same level, adjacent gene pairs have much higher coexpression rates than unlinked pairs. all of these findings taken together indicate that the commonly shared cis-regulatory system cannot solely account for the coexpression of adjacent gene pairs in yeast. it is strongly suggested that other mechanisms, e.g. regulation at the chromatin level, might play a more important role in the coexpression of neighboring pairs of genes  <cit> .

several models have been proposed to explain how chromatin regulation affects coexpression in neighboring genes  <cit> . according to the model proposed here, histone-modifying enzymes might be propagated along the chromatin fiber and form an extended domain. neighboring genes within a domain share the same molecular environment and thus might be coexpressed  <cit> .

a localized distribution of silencing-associated histone modifications, such as h3k9me and h3k27me, has been found in fission yeast , fly  and in mammals  <cit> . in budding yeast , sir proteins  might be clustered in chromatin and mediate the formation of silent chromatin  <cit>  and the hda1-deacetylated domains have been observed in subtelomeric regions  <cit> . furthermore, histone deacetylation sites have been reported to serve as possible partitions of chromatin domains in yeast  <cit> . besides silencing, a range of modifications associated with activation has been reported for some individual genes. for example, acetylation of h <dig> and methylation of h3k <dig> can diffuse to the neighboring transgenic promoters in a transgenic experiment with human cells  <cit> . in aspergillus parasiticus, acetylation of h <dig> can occur continuously and regulate the activation of genes within the aflatoxin cluster  <cit> .

in the yeast genome, the vast majority of genes are generally in an active or potentially active state, and most chromatin regions are in an open or half-open status and marked by the activation-associated histone modifications, such as h3k9ac, h3k4ac, h3k4me <dig> etc. these modifications are highly associated with transcriptional activity  <cit> ; therefore, the activation-associated modifications in yeast might play an extensive and predominant role in regulation of the chromatin level.

it is not known whether clustering of modifications is prevalent or to what extent this affects the coexpression of neighboring genes. to address this issue, we systematically investigated the relationship between the coexpression and co-modification of neighboring genes in s. cerevisiae. this study has provided clear evidence that activation-associated histone modifications have an effect on the coexpression of neighboring genes; however, the effect can be limited to only  <dig> or  <dig> neighboring genes.

RESULTS
co-modifications occur in  <dig> or  <dig> neighboring genes
the degree of co-modification between neighboring genes was measured by the autocorrelation coefficient, which is a general concept in signal processing and describes the degree of similarity between a given time series and a lagged version of itself over successive time intervals. the degree of autocorrelation was calculated for each chromatin region that included an equal number of genes  in the whole genome. the averaged autocorrelation over all regions was used to estimate the extent of co-modification .

to test whether there was a systemic bias inducing co-modification, we computed the autocorrelation of the no-antibody control data. as shown in figure 1a and 1b, the control data had a greater degree of autocorrelation than random in immediate neighboring genes . however, the autocorrelation was significantly lower than that of h3k9ac , which means that although there could be a systemic bias, it is not the main source of co-modification. there was no significant difference of the degree of autocorrelation between h3k9ac and control data in the neighboring genes with  <dig> gene between , which indicates that the co-modification in neighboring genes with  <dig> gene between could be caused by the systemic bias. similar results were observed for h3k14ac, h4ac, h3k4me <dig>  h3k4me <dig> and h3k79me <dig>  but not for h3k4me <dig> or h3k36me <dig> .

we applied the autocorrelation analysis to the change of h3k14ac  and h4ac  when the cultures were changed from ypd to hyperoxic conditions. the higher degree of autocorrelation was found in the immediate neighboring genes and in neighbors with  <dig> gene between . when the gene interval was > <dig>  however, there was no significantly higher degree of autocorrelation; i.e. genes showed similar changes of histone acetylation only with  <dig> or  <dig> neighbors.

we used the composite profiles to further illustrate similar histone modifications of neighboring genes to show the co-modification more clearly. the composite profiles revealed the similarity of modifications by displaying different distributions of modifications in a local region . in contrast, the composite profiles of the control data did not show any similarity in neighboring regions . however, h3k9ac and Δh3k14ac showed a clear similarity between the observed gene and its neighboring regions . similar results were observed for h3k4ac, h4ac, h3k4me <dig>  h3k4me <dig>  h3k79me <dig>  and Δh4ac , but not for h3k36me <dig> or h3k4me <dig> . these results further confirm the findings obtained from the autocorrelation analysis described above.

the change of acetylation exhibited a more significant similarity than the acetylation occupancy within neighboring  <dig> and  <dig> genes . we suspected that the dynamic status of the histone acetylation might occur also in the neighboring regions more easily than the static status. the work described in what follows was focused on the change of acetylation instead of the occupancy and we designate a similar change of acetylation as coacetylation.

the coacetylation of neighboring genes is associated with gene directions and distances
genes in a genome can be transcribed in one of two directions and therefore pairs of genes can be orientated in one of three alternative combinations; divergent transcription , parallel transcription  or convergent transcription . to test whether the gene directions of neighboring pairs had an effect on co-modification, we assigned the immediate neighboring gene pairs to divergent, parallel or convergent group according to their transcribed directions. here, co-modification was defined as the pearson correlation coefficient between gene modifications across gene pairs within the group, and we used a bootstrap analysis to compute it. the results are shown in figure 3a and 3b, where it can be seen that co-modification of Δh3k14ac in the parallel and the divergent groups was very close, but the convergent group had significantly lower co-modification than the other two .

we found that the 5' distances of the gene groups described above were significantly different , and we speculated that the difference of coacetylation was due mainly to the gene separation distance. when we removed the gene pairs with too short or too long a distance between them and the 5' distances of the groups were almost equal, coacetylation in the parallel group was significantly higher than that in the divergent group or the convergent group . similar results were observed for the co-modification of Δh4ac . these results demonstrated that the level of co-modification in parallel gene pairs was higher than that of the divergent or convergent pairs. moreover, parallel gene triplets  showed greater similarity of acetylation change than the other directions, according to the composite profiles . all of these results indicate that the coacetylation of neighboring genes might benefit more from the parallel transcriptional structure than the other two cases.

to investigate the effect of gene distance on coacetylation, we assigned the immediate neighboring gene pairs to different groups according to their 5' distance and compared the level of co-modification between the groups. considering the effect of gene directions, all pairs were first assigned to  <dig> of  <dig> groups according to their directions . we found that co-modification was inversely correlated to gene distance; i.e. it declined with increased 5' distance in all direction groups . we plotted the composite profiles of Δh3k14ac to explore the range of coacetylation with base-pair distance . the profiles of different gene groups were indistinguishable in the regions beyond  <dig> kbp, meaning that coacetylation will occur within  <dig> kbp from the orf 5' start site.

taken together, our results show that the histone coacetylation in neighboring genes is highly correlated with both gene direction and distance.

gene expression is correlated with histone modifications of the neighboring  <dig> and  <dig> genes
the correlation between the change of a gene's expression  <cit>  and the acetylation change of its neighboring genes was measured by the pearson correlation coefficient across all genes in the genome. as shown in figure 5a and 5b, the closest  <dig> genes upstream and the immediate neighboring genes downstream were significantly correlated . the correlation with more distant genes was not significant . we plotted the composite profiles of acetylation changes according to the change of gene expression to show the correlation in detail. the profiles showed clearly that the change of gene expression was correlated with the changes of acetylation in the gene region itself and in its neighboring  <dig> and  <dig> genes . these results indicate that the co-modification has an effect on the coexpression of neighboring  <dig> or  <dig> genes.

+: the correlations were measured by the pearson correlation coefficient between the gene expression change and the acetylation change of up <dig> ~ down <dig> gene in their orfs and promoter regions, respectively.

*: p-value is the significant of the correlation coefficient by compared with the random.

it is noteworthy that the degree of correlation in the immediate upstream neighboring genes was much higher than that in the downstream immediate neighboring genes , which might be attributed to the shorter distance between the upstream genes and the 5' end of the gene. when the 5' distance upstream and downstream was almost equal , the correlation with the downstream and the upstream gene had no significant difference . therefore, the 5' distance might play a key role in the effect of coacetylation on coexpression.

coacetylated domains in chromatin
the autocorrelation analysis and composite profiles revealed the co-modification of neighboring genes from a global aspect, but they could not concretely tell which of the neighboring genes is/are co-modified. to find these coacetylated genes, we used a hmm to determine the continuous chromatin regions  that showed a similar change of acetylation . coacetylated neighboring genes were shown to be within the same domains. an overview of the coacetylated domains in chromosome iii is shown as a paradigm . there were  <dig> co-Δh3k14ac domains  and  <dig> co-Δh4ac domains  in the whole genome . over 20% of domains  covered  <dig> or more orfs  and  <dig> ~ 30% of genes in the whole genome showed changes of acetylation similar to that of their neighbors . the domains that included coacetylated genes were clusters of 2- <dig> genes . this result is in-line with the results of the autocorrelation analysis described above; i.e. that co-modification generally occurred within  <dig> or  <dig> neighboring genes.

gene pairs in coacetylation domains are coexpressed
we chose gene expression data under the conditions of h2o2-stress to be consistent with the histone acetylation experiments  <cit> . the coexpression of gene pairs was measured by the pearson correlation coefficient of expression profiles between the two genes. after removing some special genome structures, including orf-overlapping pairs and tandem duplicate pairs , there were  <dig> co-Δh3k14ac pairs and  <dig> co-Δh4ac pairs. these co-modified pairs showed a significantly higher level of coexpression than random cis-pairs, which were defined as gene pairs within the same chromosomes . the level of coexpression of co-Δh3k14ac pairs was significantly higher than that of normal immediate neighboring pairs .

to exclude the possibility of a higher level of coexpression under the hyperoxia stress condition being by chance alone, we collected the expression data from  <dig> different sources to repeat the analysis . gene pairs in coacetylated domains still showed a higher level of coexpression than random pairs  and normal immediate neighboring pairs .

sharing regulatory elements can lead to coexpression  <cit> , so we excluded the immediate neighboring pairs of divergent transcription and gene pairs regulated by the same transcription factor  from the coacetylated pairs , which still showed a higher level of coexpression than random or normal immediate neighboring pairs . these results indicate that co-modification is the sole contribution to the coexpression of neighboring genes.

according to our hmm method, there are two types of coacetylated domains, up-domains and down-domains . in the up-domains, acetylation in most probes was increased when conditions changed and the acetylation was decreased in down-domains. we computed the coexpression of gene pairs in up-domains and in down-domains to determine whether coacetylated pairs in the up-domains and those in the down-domains contributed equally to coexpression. gene pairs in both domains showed a significantly higher level of coexpression than random cis-pairs .

taken together, these results demonstrate that coacetylated neighboring pairs are indeed coexpressed.

gene pairs in coacetylation domains share similar functions
here, we used the method of semantic similarity  in gene ontology   <cit>  to estimate the function similarity  of gene pairs . the co-function was computed in three go categories, process, component and function. similarly, orf-overlapping and tandem duplicate pairs were excluded from the analysis. as shown in figure 8b, coacetylated neighboring pairs had higher co-functions than random cis-pairs  test) and normal immediate neighboring pairs  in both go process and component, but no significant difference was found in go function. after removing the divergent immediate neighboring pairs and gene pairs regulated by the same transcription factor , coacetylated pairs still showed a higher level of co-function . however, the coacetylated pairs did not always contribute to the co-function. gene pairs in down-domains showed a higher level of co-function than random cis-pairs , but gene pairs in up-domains did not , indicating that only pairs in down-domains contributed to the co-function of coacetylated neighboring pairs. the results of this study show that neighboring genes of similar modification can selectively share their functions and neighboring genes without similar functions can also be co-modified.

discussion
we have investigated the co-modification occurring in neighboring genes in the s. cerevisiae genome, and examined the relationship between co-modification, coexpression and co-function in neighboring gene pairs. the results show that neighboring genes indeed have similar histone modifications, and neighboring pairs of similar modifications exhibit similar expression.

in this study, autocorrelation analysis, composite profiles and hmm were used to explore the similarity of histone modification in neighboring genes. the results showed that histone modification in yeast exhibited a stringent similarity within only a small distance . these findings were quite different from those expected; i.e. that histone modification might have an effect on the coexpression of neighboring genes in a large range  <cit> .

why the co-modification was restricted to a small range
according to the model proposed earlier, histone modification can generally occur within a region of about  <dig> kbp  <cit> , which is much larger than the range of co-modification observed in this study. there are two possible reasons for the great difference between the results of these two studies.

first, we supposed that activation-associated modifications might have a different mechanism of spreading from silencing-associated modifications, and it might be distributed within only small local regions. modification associated with silencing, such as h3k9me and h3k27me, could form long continuous domains in chromatin  <cit> . the model proposed earlier could well explain the spread of these modifications. however, the modifications analyzed in this study are associated mainly with activation, such as h3k9ac, h3k14ac and h3k4me <dig>  etc. these modifications do not form long chromatin domains in yeast; therefore, a model of small-range spread might be more appropriate for the histone modification associated with activation.

second, the interaction between different modifications could block the propagation of further modifications. methylation of h3k <dig> has been found to inhibit acetylation in 3' coding regions  <cit> , and dimethylation of h3k <dig> can lead to deacetylation in 5' transcribed regions  <cit> . in addition, our analysis showed that co-modification of h4ac in neighboring genes would significantly increase when its inhibitor, set <dig> , was deleted from the yeast genome . the inter-inhibition between histone modifications might impose stringent control of the distribution of modifications.

coexpressed neighboring genes tend to be clustered within a narrow range. in yeast, highly coexpressed neighboring pairs and triplets, but not quadruplets, occur more frequently than expected by chance alone  <cit> . in mouse-ear cress , the local coexpression domains generally cover only 2- <dig> genes  <cit>  or the chromatin regions within  <dig> kbp  <cit> . fukuoka et al.  <cit>  showed that the increased frequency of coexpression of neighboring genes is associated with chromatin within a short distance  in various eukaryotes. all of these findings show that the highly coexpressed neighboring genes occurred mainly within only a small region, which is consistent with the co-modification found in this study. therefore, a small-range model of histone modifications appears to be more appropriate to explain the coexpression of neighboring genes and might be crucial for gene regulation. if activation-associated modifications could always spread over a long distance, many genes would be expressed inappropriately.

factors that might be responsible for co-modification of neighboring genes
the co-modification of neighboring genes is generally considered to be a result of common histone modification but several other factors might also lead to co-modification.

sharing 5' regulatory elements or having similar regulatory elements, such as tfbs, might lead to co-modification. when tfs are bound to the gene promoter, histone-modifying enzymes recruited by the tfs might simultaneously change the modification of a gene and its neighbors that share the tfs. however, when neighboring pairs that shared tfs were included in our analysis, there were many neighboring genes with a similar change of acetylation. moreover, although divergent pairs have a greater chance to share regulatory elements than parallel pairs, they do not exhibit a higher co-modification than parallel pairs. therefore, although sharing regulator elements could lead to the co-modification of neighboring genes, it is far from being the main source.

all of the modification data in this study are normalized to the density of histone h3; therefore, the co-modification might be caused by histone h <dig>  indeed, we observed a similar change of h <dig> in neighboring genes . however, there was little correlation between the change of acetylation and the change of h <dig> density across all probes in arrays . moreover, the change of h <dig> density did not show any correlation with gene expression change, but the acetylation change did . therefore, there is no evidence to support the possibility that normalization to h <dig> density can result in the co-modification of neighboring genes.

systemic bias could be the cause of co-modification. one source of systemic bias has been found to strongly influence the coexpression of neighboring genes  <cit> . that is, when the probes of genes were printed in chips according to their position in the genome, regional bias around the chips could provide artifactual signals of coexpression  <cit> . when we examined the arrangement of probes in the chips that provided the modification data used in this study  <cit> , we could not find any correlation between the location of probes in chips and their position in the genome. if there was a systemic bias induced by chips, all histone modifications and the control data should show the same result. however, h3k36me <dig>  h3k4me <dig> and the control data did not show similarity in neighboring genes. therefore, the co-modification found in our study cannot be attributed to the arrangement of probes in chips. to further test whether there was some unknown systemic bias, the autocorrelation analysis was applied to another histone modification data set  <cit>  and gave the same results . all of this evidence indicates that the co-modification found in this study cannot be attributed to systemic bias.

it is not clear whether other factors are involved in the co-modification but the factors we have identified, such as sharing regulatory elements, data normalization or systemic bias, are not the main causes. this indirectly supports the suggestion that similar histone modification of neighbors might play a key role in the co-modification of neighboring genes.

the effect of gene direction on co-modification
in yeast, the earliest study of this issue found that divergent genes have a higher degree of coexpression than convergent genes  <cit> . however, a later study provided clear evidence that it is the 5' distance, not the gene directions, that results in the difference of coexpression in gene pairs with different transcription directions  <cit> . unlike coexpression, co-modification in neighboring genes might be sensitive to the gene direction. in our study, after eliminating the difference of the 5' distance, the parallel gene pairs still showed a higher correlation than convergent or divergent pairs.

it is difficult to understand why the divergent pairs did not show more co-modifications because their promoters might be more likely to share the modifying enzymes. in fact, sharing regulatory elements encounters the same problem. shared tfs were not significantly relevant to the coexpression of divergent pairs, although divergent pairs have a greater chance to share tfs  <cit> . we speculate that there might be some other mechanism that balances the effect of co-modification or sharing tfs on neighboring genes with different directions. for example, tfs might be orientation-dependent and regulate only  <dig> gene of a divergent pair  <cit> , or some tfs could affect the transcription of genes that are not immediate downstream neighbors  <cit> .

the relationship between coexpression, co-modification and co-function
the functional meaning of coexpression between neighboring genes in yeast was investigated in earlier studies. fukuoka et al. reported only that more than ten highly correlated neighboring pairs share the same go function  <cit> . a more recent study showed that there is a difference from a random null model in the fraction of gene pairs in the same go-slim process only for neighboring pairs with a high level of coexpression   <cit> . these studies indicated that, except for highly coexpressed neighboring pairs, most neighboring genes did not show similar functions.

in this study, immediate neighboring gene pairs did not show a higher level of co-function than random pairs  although they exhibited a higher level of coexpression than random pairs . the results indicate that coexpression in the neighboring genes is far from being a sufficient condition for their co-function. this conclusion is consistent with the finding that coexpression of linked genes in several mammalian genomes is generally disadvantageous  <cit> . moreover, although the coacetylated gene pairs in both up-domains and down-domains had a higher level of coexpression than random pairs, only gene pairs in down-domains showed similar functions. this indicates that the coexpression driven by co-modification is independent of co-function.

we asked why gene pairs in the down-domains show similar functions but those in the up-domains do not. to address this question, the go term finder  was used to find significant go terms of genes in co-modification domains . we found that genes in down-domains have many go terms whose frequency of occurrence is significantly higher than the background . many of them are ribosomal genes and participate in gene expression, ribosome biogenesis, translation etc. these genes tend to be clustered in the genome  <cit>  and show similar functions. however, there are few go terms in genes in up-domains. some stress-responsive genes , such as hsp <dig>  hsp <dig>  hsp <dig>  hsp <dig>  hsp <dig>  mga <dig>  sym <dig> and gre <dig>  were found in up-domains. the formation of up-domains might be associated with the genes that were activated under h2o2-stress conditions. however, these genes are not clustered in the genome and genes in up-domains do not show similar functions.

CONCLUSIONS
this study, for the first time, used the autocorrelation analysis to investigate the similarity of histone modification between neighboring genes. we found that histone modifications h3k9ac, h4ac, h3k14ac, h3k4me2/ <dig> and h3k9ac had similarities between neighboring genes. in contrast to expectation, these activation-associated modifications might be spread along the chromatin fiber within only a small region. several hundred domains of similar acetylation changes covered more than one gene. gene pairs in these domains showed high levels of coexpression in multiple data sets, but only pairs in the domains of increasing acetylation share similar functions. these findings suggest that a significant proportion of the coexpression of neighboring genes might be driven by the distribution of histone modification. the coexpression associated with co-modification, however, might be independent of the functional relationship of neighboring genes.

