BACKGROUND
speciation rates of teleost fishes are likely to be influenced by a combination of abiotic  and biotic factors. ecological factors that play an important role vary dramatically in coral and temperate reef habitats where overall number of species and their resulting biotic interactions are very different  <cit> . in addition, vast differences are found within the same habitat between regions, such as the caribbean, where the fish fauna is relatively depauperate, and the indo-pacific, or the coral triangle, where marine fish diversity peaks  <cit> .

evolutionary history and speciation dynamics are difficult to compare directly between habitats and geographic regions because few groups of marine fishes span these entities. haemulids, however, provide such an opportunity and are therefore a choice system to evaluate the mechanisms that are responsible for generating differences between habitats and regions. in addition, the presence of some putative geminate pairs of new world grunts  <cit>  allows for an internal hypothesis testing of temporal patterns of speciation in this group of fishes.

haemulidae is one of the ten most diverse, widespread, and conspicuous families within the largest sub-order of teleost fishes, the percoidei  <cit> . they are commonly called grunts, due to their ability to produce loud sounds by rubbing their pharyngeal teeth together  <cit> . haemulids tend to congregate during the day and then spread out for foraging at night. the family contains about  <dig> extant species currently classified in  <dig> nominal genera  <cit> , grouped, based on morphological data, in two sub-families   <cit> . these two groups differ greatly in diversity and distribution. haemulines, include most of the genera and are primarily distributed in the new world with the exception of pomadasys . haemulines are diverse in shape , ecology , and habitat   <cit> . in general, haemulin grunts tend to be greyish and drab, with some exceptions such as the caribbean porkfish, anisotremus virginicus, which is mostly bright yellow with a few conspicuous black bars . on the other hand, sweetlips , are mostly restricted to the coral and rocky reefs of the indo-pacific and eastern atlantic, and include approximately  <dig> species  <cit> . they are morphologically uniform, with an elongated body, a round head, and a subterminal mouth  <cit> . sweetlips, colouring and patterning changes dramatically throughout their lives, and tend to be very distinctive, especially when compared to their haemulin counterparts.

systematic and evolutionary history of haemulids has received little attention. the relationship between haemulidae and other families, as well as its placement among percomorph fishes have varied through time according to different authors . several attempts to include broad percomorph taxon sampling were done early on  <cit> , however few of the characters found among percomorphs and their relatives were confirmed as uniquely derived  <cit> .

orrell and carpenter  <cit>  in their study of the phylogeny of porgies  included haemulidae, and some other percomorph families as outgroups. a parsimony reconstruction based on two mitochondrial genes , recovered the branch ) as sister to the sparids, however under maximum likelihood, the position of haemulidae changed, placing it as sister to moronids and lutjanids. caesionids and sparids clustered together as the sister group.

one of the first molecular studies that included haemulid species, with the particular intention of broadly examining percomorph relationships, was that of dettai and lecointre  <cit> . they found a weakly supported branch including pomadasys and syngnathus sister to  )).

chen et al.  <cit>  recovered a polytomy of lutjanidae, scaridae, and haemulidae using four different gene regions. smith and craig  <cit>  used five genes fragments  with a broad panel of perciform fishes and recovered a monophyletic group that included the families lutjanidae, haemulidae, lethrinidae, priacanthidae, moronidae and lobotidae. li et al.  <cit>  used the gene rnf <dig> as well as a combined matrix of three different nuclear genes , to build a supertree where haemulidae appeared sister to sciaenidae, a relationship that was not found in any previous molecular study  <cit> .

haemulidae and inermiidae were included by johnson  <cit>  in the superfamily haemuloidea. the bonnetmouths  are a very small family of fishes with only two known species in two genera   <cit> . these two species share derived highly protrusible jaws and elongated oval body conspicuously different from haemulidae  <cit> . rocha et al.  <cit>  found inermia nested within haemulon. this result challenges the taxonomic status of emmelichthyops atlanticus, it was suggested that this species may be placed provisionally in the family emmelichthyidae , and inermiidae should no longer be considered valid  <cit> . however emmelichthyidae is an extant valid family  <cit>  not closely related to emmelichthyops despite its sharing the same etymological root, hence assigning emmelichthyops to emmelichthyidae is not a proper option.

the genus hapalogenys, currently placed in its own family hapalogenyidae   <cit> , has been commonly placed in haemulidae  <cit> , although johnson  <cit>  included it as “incertae sedis” within the percoidei, as he found similarities with other non-haemulid groups. different affinities on larval characters with lobotes and datnioides allowed leis and carson-ewart  <cit>  to place hapalogenys in a group they informally called lobotes-like, suggesting a possible relationship of hapalogenys to lobotids. clearly, more effort is needed to clarify the familial position of hapalogenys, even though some authors have decided to leave it within haemulidae in spite of being aware of strong dissimilarities  <cit> .

haemulidae relationships are controversial and have received little attention. a reassessment of the phylogenetic relationships of the family haemulidae is therefore timely since neither morphological nor molecular studies have produced consistent results  <cit> . our analysis includes representatives from lineages that have been found related to haemulids, however we did not include those families that have been inconsistently recovered as their relatives, although we included sillaginidae following the advice of a colleague . one of the objectives of this study was to use molecular data to test the monophyly and evaluate the intra- and inter-relationships  of haemulidae.

within haemulidae, molecular studies have attempted to elucidate relationships of two closely related genera, haemulon <cit>  and anisotremus <cit> . recent morphological studies  <cit>  suggests that the latter is not monophyletic. indeed, anisotremus seems to be an assemblage of at least three different lineages with two previously recognized anisotremus  being reassigned to genyatremus. the monophyly of haemulon was also shown to depend on the inclusion of inermia vitatta. in summary, despite the sparse efforts to resolve the taxonomy of the haemulidae, its generic nomenclature is still unstable.

this study provides the most inclusive phylogeny of haemulidae and new world grunts using molecular data. these data were utilized for hypothesize haemulid intra and inter relationships discuss current classifications in the light of molecular phylogenies; and to explore the ecology, evolution, and speciation history of new world haemulids. these data allow to assess the monophyletic status of the two subfamilies, haemulinae and plectorhynchinae, determine their relationship, and set the groundwork to explore the relative roles of biotic and abiotic factors in the history of diversification that occurred in this group.

RESULTS
dataset structure
two independent data sets were assembled: all mitochondrial genes together, and a combined-matrix of mtdna, and nucdna. the final mitochondrial alignment was 1789 bp long, with  <dig> variable sites. the combined-data consisted of  <dig> aligned base pairs , of which  <dig> were variable. detailed data set attributes are summarized on table  <dig> 

n stands for number of taxa; bf model, best fit model; and pic, parsimony informative characters.

phylogenetic analysis
maximum likelihood trees obtained from independent runs in both raxml and garli were identical, differing only in support values for which just one topology is presented. different partition scenarios were separately analyzed and widespread congruence between them was found.

mitochondrial genes share the same evolutionary history, its inheritance is clonal, which means that the whole genome behaves as a single, non- recombining locus  <cit> . this considerably simplifies their analysis as they have a common genealogy changing only individual gene patterns of evolution.

mitochondrial phylogenetic information resulted in a newly uncovered relationship with the sillaginidae sister to the haemulidae, and both sisters to the branch lobotidae). however, the relationships among these percomorph taxa were poorly supported .

a different branch was found, where emmelichthyidae was related to priacanthidae with high nodal support and both together were recovered as sister to )). lutjanidae was highly supported as sister to caesionidae. terapontidae and kuhlidae grouped together with a high nodal support and are positioned as the sister-species to all the previously mentioned families. finally sciaenidae appears as the basal branch among the families included in this study .

the putative sister relationship between the two subfamilies haemulinae  and plectorhynchinae  was recovered by all analyses  with high support values . a relatively deep divergence  existed between these two clades. corrected genetic distances within haemulinae genera ranged from  <dig> to 34% whereas in plectorhynchinae they ranged from  <dig> to 15%. however, for sweetlips, these values were likely to be underestimated due to the small number of species included. indeed, while sampling was comprehensive for the haemulines, including all but some local endemic species, the amount of sweetlips species sampled was not an extensive representation of their diversity. however, and in spite of the few species included, the genus plectorhinchus was found to be paraphyletic by the nested inclusion of diagramma picta . the type species of the genera plectorhinchus  and diagramma , were included in our study and were found to be sister species, with their clade embedded within plectorhinchus, and closely related to p. vittatus with a high nodal support . our data placed parapristipoma trilineatum as the sister species to the remaining plectorhinchus used in this study .

within haemulinae, all the topologies obtained with different methods were largely consistent with the existence of several clades with high nodal support throughout . however, relationships among some of them were not well resolved . comparing p-values of the sh test, the mean estimate from the five genes combined matrix falls within the confidence limit of each individual gene and partition scheme, even though the individual estimates differ. this can be attributed to stochastic variation, and the combined matrix can be accepted as a good estimate of the parameters  <cit> .

*beast topology  was highly similar to that of the beast supermatrix  , however the position of anisotremus moricandi, genyatremus dovii, xenichthys xantii, and that of the branch including pomadasys argenteus, p. macracanthus and p. panamensis differed among these methods.

twelve genera were sampled, eight of them comprising more than one described species. out of those eight, the monophyletic status of five genera, conodon, haemulopsis, genyatremus, microlepidotus, and orthopristis was consistent with our data. in contrast, the monophyly of the largest new world genus, haemulon, was challenged by the inclusion of one species. the second largest new world genus, anisotremus, was composed of a monophyletic assemblage of seven species. in the concatenated methods the southern caribbean and brazilian brownstriped grunt, anisotremus moricandi, did not cluster with any other species, but was closely related to the main anisotremus clade. however the *beast search placed it as sister to genyatremus pacifici and g. cavifrons, yet with a very low posterior probability. the former two anisotremus species, now g. dovii and g. pacifici grouped together with the previously monotypic genyatremus in the supermatrix analyses . these results are consistent with those presented by tavera  <cit>  and bernardi  <cit> . nevertheless in multilocus coalescent analysis, g. dovii was recovered as the sister species to the branch including remaining genyatremus +  anisotremus moricandi and the clade .

the largest genus of the subfamily, pomadasys, which contains an estimated  <dig> species with a very wide distribution, was found to be paraphyletic , with species being widespread in the tree in three different branches. ml reconstructions forcing pomadasys into a monophyletic group resulted in topologies that were significantly worse than those obtained under unconstrained searches .

the presence of new species, and the polyphyly and paraphyly of several genera underscores the necessity for a thorough systematic revision of the family at this stage.the subfamiliy haemulinae was found to be monophyletic, and a single origin for new world grunts was recovered, but the inclusion of two old world species, pomadasys argenteus and p. striatus , suggests that not all species were retained in this geographical area, yet the position of these species within the new world clade was not strongly supported. an extensive sampling of old world “pomadasys” would be needed to properly address this issue.

haemulinae saturation analyses revealed some saturation at the third codon position in the mitochondrial gene cyb at large genetic distances  but not within the ingroup. no saturation was observed for other genes in any position.

time of evolutionary divergence
evolutionary divergence times in haemulinae was evaluated using four trans-isthmian geminate pairs , anisotremus interruptus – a. surinamensis, anisotremus taeniatus – a. virginicus, conodon nobilis – c. serrifer, and haemulon steindachneri pacific – h. steindachneri atlantic. pomadasys branickii – p. crocro were also described as a geminate pair  <cit> , and although, our data place them taxa as sister species, the absence of samples from p. bayanus, a species that is morphologically and ecologically similar to p.crocro, precludes us from conclude if p. branickii and p. crocro are true geminates. the species pairs, haemulon scudderi – h. parra and h. sexfasciatum – h. album, were also considered as trans-isthmian sisters  <cit>  but morphological similarities in these pairs were found to be morphological convergence rather than common ancestry. all analyses consistently found reciprocal monophyly for the four bona fide geminate pairs, but the magnitude of genetic divergence  among them is inconsistent with simultaneous isolation, in spite of the overlapping of high credibility intervals in the nodes, as shown in figure 4‐ <dig> 

these differences can be associated with two different hypotheses: i) an issue of differential substitution rate across lineages; or ii) a difference in time of divergence between geminate species, which in turn has three possible scenarios. smaller divergence may be attributed to a secondary contact between two former species during the recent breaching of the isthmus of panama that occurred approximately  <dig> mya  <cit> , as opposed to  <dig> - <dig>  mya the generally accepted time of the final closure of the isthmus  <cit> , or speciation in some pairs began before the definitive emergence of the isthmus. under a time relative run , rates were found to be similar across all four pairs, favouring the second assumption, where divergence events are not occurring simultaneously in time. to test this hypothesis, every tmcra value of all geminate pairs was extracted from the posterior density of trees and compared among them. in 69% of the trees the tmcra of the sister pair a. taeniatus + a.virginicus was older than that of a. interruptus + a.surinamensis with a ln bayes factor of  <dig> ; while in 99-98% of the trees the tmcra of haemulon sister pair was older than any anisotremus pair ; and in 98% conodon tmcra was older than hamulon ln bf =  <dig> . yet, ci tmcra nodes overlap among all but anisotremus pairs, differences among relative divergence times were identified as shown on figure  <dig> 

reconstruction of habitat and ancestral distribution areas
the ml reconstruction for ancestral habitats  in haemulinae is shown in figure  <dig>  this reconstruction was based on a discrete character for which two possible rate models were tested. er, which implies one single rate and ard that allows directionality. model likelihoods were − <dig>  for er and − <dig>  for ard. er and ard models likelihood test yields a p-value of  <dig>  favouring the later; ard includes more parameters that the er, and it is well known that adding parameters to a model generally increases its likelihood.

new world grunts evolved over large geographic areas in two main habitats, soft bottoms  and hard bottoms . this ecological separation is highly concordant with recovered phylogenies of major lineages. the ancestral habitat of the most recent common ancestor for new world grunts is most likely soft bottom. the hard bottom habitat state occurs in haemulon, anisotremus  and microlepidotus., according to these results, haemulinae grunts shifted their habitats from soft to hard bottom, and not vice versa, and they independently invaded hard substrates from soft bottoms three separate times .

the inferred historical biogeographic scenarios from analyses using lagrange  and rasp  are presented in figure  <dig>  the inferred ancestral areas at internal nodes estimated using the bayesian rasp correspond largely to the results obtained from the ml habitat reconstruction . rasp also estimated less combined ancestral areas than dec and s-diva. the maximum likelihood reconstruction of ancestral areas for the basal node of haemulines differs from rasp reconstructions in that the most recent common ancestor  of this clade most likely appeared in a broad area including the eastern pacific and the indo-pacific , while in the other two methods the eastern pacific was the most probable region from which this lineage could be originated. range expansion into the western atlantic occurred later, mainly with the mcra of haemulongenyatremus, and anisotremus moricandi. more recent transition events across eastern pacific and western atlantic occurred in new world grunts evolutionary history, when the final closure of the panamian isthmus had not yet occurred. this geological event has been widely related to species divergence and its final closure estimated during the mid pliocene about  <dig> - <dig>  mybp, however it has been demonstrated that the isthmus became an ecological barrier much earlier  <cit> .

discussion
taxonomic remarks
haemulids have been included among the so-called “lower percoids” and both molecular and morphological phylogenetic hypotheses have been proposed  <cit> ‐ <cit> . nevertheless haemulid familial relationships were never the main focus of any of these studies.

our results differed from all previous works in placing the sillaginidae as sister to haemulidae . sillaginidae and haemulidae have been included in previous studies, as that of smith and craig  <cit>  who recovered a branch including ) inside a basal group distant from haemulidae. on the other hand, li et al.  <cit>  recovered sillago as a single branch among a large politomy that also included haemulidae + sciaenidae.

our study consistently recovered a branch comprising lobotidae  as the sister group to haemulidae + sillaginidae. a closer relationship between hapalogenys and haemulidae has been speculated upon phenotypic resemblance. however, johnson  <cit>  found morphological affinities with other groups , such as the rugosity on the frontal bone surface similar to a few apogonids, bramids, and serranids as well as to acanthocepolalobotespseudopentaceros and sphyraenops, and the shape of the spine-like crest that projects beyond the posterior margin of the cranium that is well-developed in preflexion larvae. this type of crest characterizes larval cepolids, leiognathids, lethrinids, , pentacerotids, priacanthids, and scombrops. this piece of evidence along with previously published results  <cit>  and our molecular data suggest a possible relationship between hapalogenys and lobotidae, in spite of low support .

lutjanidae and caesionidae were found as a clade with high support values, in both search methods, , which is consistent with the morphological lutjanoidea  <cit> . these two families  were found to be related to sparidae and lethrinidae, two of the four families proposed by johnson  <cit>  to be members of the super-family sparoidea. this putative group was not recovered as a monophyletic assemblage by our data. within this same branch and in a basal position, we recovered priacanthidae and emmelichthyidae as sister taxa with high support, for both search methods . this finding differs from smith and craig  <cit>  who suggested a relationship between priacanthidae and lethrinidae. not only did our data fail to recover them as sibling groups, but also placed them in very different positions along the tree .

terapontidae and kuhliidae were recovered together in a strong supported clade, sister to all other aforementioned families . this relationship is entirely consistent with data from smith and wheeler  <cit> .

finally sciaenidae was recovered as a single branch, sister to all other groups included in this study , which disagrees with li et al.  <cit>  where sciaenids are sister to haemulids . our results differed from those of chen et al. <cit> , orrell and carpenter  <cit> , and smith and craig  <cit>  , while partially concur with those presented by rosen  <cit>  who concluded that johnson’s  <cit>  sparoidea and hamuloidea were related to his vision of pharyngognathi including gerreidae .

this study is consistent with previous morphological division of haemulids into two major lineages, plectorhynchinae  and haemulinae  <cit> . indeed, both groups were found to be reciprocally monophyletic for all five molecular markers used.

within the sweetlips, diagramma picta  was nested inside plectorhinchus. this finding suggests that diagramma oken  <dig> may be considered synonym of plectorhinchus lacepède  <dig>  a possibility first raised by konchina  <cit> .

within haemulinae, the bayesian coalescent search  recovered an early split of pomadasys macracanthus and p. panamensis from the remaining species, followed by p. argenteus as a single branch, while the concatenated method  places them in the same clade. regardless of this topological difference, data suggest that these three species  represent early basal haemulines.

the clade including the remaining haemulines was split in two different lineages, which match ecological differences. one group included species associated with soft bottom environments, and the other clade included mainly species inhabiting hard bottom  .

within the soft bottom clade, the circum-globally distributed genus pomadasys has the largest number of species , but our results show it to be polyphyletic . lacépède  <dig> designated pomadasys argenteus  as the type species; therefore any species clustered together may be ascribed to pomadasys. according to the coalescent tree method , p. argenteus did not cluster with any other old or new world “ pomadasys” species sampled. in contrast, standard concatenated method  grouped together ) indicating that further efforts are needed to extensively sample this genus, mainly old world species which were left out of this study. still our data are sufficient to designate some new generic names in order to keep natural groups concordant with taxonomic rules, like, p. crocro and p. branickii clustered in a monophyletic assemblage. these species were originally described as pristipoma quoy and gaimard   <dig>  however, this genus name is not valid for any haemulid as its type species, pristipoma sexlineatum, belongs to the family terapontidae. on the other hand rhonciscus, erected by jordan and evermann  <cit> , as a subgenus under pomadasys was already used to include these two species and is an available name, and thus eligible.

conversely, some pomadasys species may be included in pre-existing genera. for example, pomadasys corvinaeformis, is recovered within the otherwise paraphyletic haemulopsis. in fact, p. corvinaeformis was originally designated by steindachner  <dig> as the type species of haemulopsis, an observation that is consistent with our own findings and the complex taxonomic history of the genus  <cit> .

our data recovered a well-supported clade that included anisotremus, haemulon, genyatremus, and xenistius . relative positions of each genus were only weakly supported in ml methods while strong posterior probabilities support genyatremus as sister to haemulon + xenistius + h.chrysargyreum. on the other hand a. moricandi was recovered as an intermediate single branch, sister to these two lineages with  <dig>  posterior probability, finally anisotremus  was found as the basal sister branch of this clade.

haemulon is the most speciose taxa within the new world grunts including two undescribed, cryptic species . haemulon was recovered as paraphyletic due to the inclusion of xenistius californiensis, which clustered with h. chrysargyreum as deeply divergent basal branches. the relationship between these two species remains unclear as weak support was found in both methods as to preclude definitely conclusions, however topology indicates they are single units and additional data  are needed to address this issue, yet if they belong or not to haemulon is a open question and depends on whether splitting or lumping philosophy is followed. our data therefore suggest that either xenistius is to be considered a haemulon, or h. chrysargyreum be taken out of haemulon . the remaining haemulon species are monophyletic with high support values.

the genus genyatremus sensu tavera et al.  <cit>  was recovered as monophyletic by including two former anisotremus species . in contrast, anisotremus  was polyphyletic, with a. moricandi nested among other clades . anisotremus moricandi exhibits morphological characters of both haemulon and anisotremus, and has specific ecological requirements distinct from other tropical grunts  <cit>  and also present a very unique biogeographical distribution, which make it a very interesting case among new world grunts and deserves further attention.

haemulinae evolutionary history
all analytical approaches, including the two different time-relative methods  based on a relaxed molecular clock , produced a well-resolved and congruent phylogeny of the  <dig> haemulid species. concatenation methods  assumes that all the data have evolved according to a single evolutionary tree, ignoring the occurrence of different evolutionary histories at different loci which in turn may result in well supported but incorrect species tree, while in coalescence methods  the inferred species tree is the one that minimizes the number of deep coalescences needed for the species tree to be compatible with each gene tree  <cit> ‐ <cit> . our results are consistent in recovering the same well-supported clades under both methods, with the exceptions treated above; however branch lengths, node heights, and hpd node intervals are substantially sensitive to the method used .

in previous studies, different levels of genetic divergence have been observed for multiple trans-isthmian species pairs  <cit>  such as snapping shrimp  <cit> , bivalves  <cit> , and now grunts . we positively identified at least three different stages for divergence among geminate species, in both concatenation and coalescence tree species method.

new world grunts present a unique opportunity to study the role of habitat, geographic origin, genetic divergence, and diversification times. very early in the history of haemulidae, sweetlips  diverged from other grunts . in addition to genetic and morphological diversification, ecological diversification plays an important role in the evolutionary history of a lineage  <cit> . sweetlips radiated in the indo-pacific into a group of approximately  <dig> species that are homogeneous in body shape and habitat  but differ greatly in color pattern, a feature that is typical of coral reef species where vision, in clear water, plays an important role in predator avoidance and mate recognition  <cit> . during the same period of time, haemuline grunts diversified into more than  <dig> species by invading a wide array of regions  and habitats .

ml ancestral reconstruction of haemuline recovered three independent hard bottom-invading events . accordingly, the ancestral lineage was a soft bottom inhabitant distributed somewhere on the pacific ocean . this ancestor would have been distributed in habitats much like those existing throughout much of the eastern pacific today. with respect to ancestral areas, although inferences differed in respect to some details, the methods converged upon a pacific origin of the group, with a later dispersion into the western atlantic with some recent vicariant events . however, our approach does not allow a precise determination of the origin of the new world grunts’ most recent common ancestor, perhaps an extensive sampling of old world pomadasys would shed light on this topic. additional time node calibrations will also further our understanding of the timing of the haemulidae evolution.

geography and habitat association may have had a synergistic impact in shaping haemuline diversity. indeed, the two basins  were a single unit during most of the time of diversification of this group, and there is no evidence of limited dispersal capability in this family. moreover, as shown by the genus pomadasys , where indo-pacific species are nested within new world representatives, even broader geographic barriers have been breached several times during grunt evolution, but perhaps habitat and not geography affected grunts after invading western atlantic with striking differences in substrate, which may in turn have caused a shift in rate diversification, as shown in figures  <dig> and  <dig>  in general, western atlantic species live in relatively clear waters, as opposed to their eastern pacific counterparts. speciation in the two oceans followed different paths, more lineages but with fewer species emerged in the pacific ocean . in the eastern pacific, water turbidity may have shaped speciation processes of the group. indeed, while coral reef species are colorful, species that live in turbid water are not. perhaps sound evolution may have had an unknown impact and need to be studied. sound is used in mate recognition in several groups of fishes, including hamlets  and in damselfishes   <cit> . similarly, grunts, which have the ability of producing sound, are good candidates for the study of mate recognition based on sound production.

speciation in grunts might follow the stages of evolutionary radiation proposed by streelman and danley  <cit> . the first stage involves habitat utilization, followed by morphological specializations related to trophic resources and finally sensory communication.

current geographic distribution of sister species exhibits a pattern perhaps related to habitat choice and shared evolutionary history. whereas most haemulon sister pairs are sympatric  <cit> , sister species from microlepidotus and orthopristis have ranges that do not significantly overlap but are adjacent to each other, sometimes with species occurring together only in narrow zones. in the absence of geographic barriers this may suggest that parapatric speciation was the more likely mode of divergence for these clades. on the other hand, anisotremus, conodon, and genyatremus exhibit an allopatric pattern where diversification could be related with different stages of the rise of the panamian isthmus. this pattern is mirrored in gobies, where sympatric sister species are common in tigrigobius and risor and mostly absent in elacatinus <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
this work strongly supports the monophyly of the previously proposed subfamilies haemulinae and plectorhynchinae. while our phylogenetic hypotheses are robust at the subfamily and generic level, some questions remain unsolved. the inclusion of additional samples will test the existence of monotypic lineages , and will allow exploring the relationships within sweetlips . however, we do not expect the general picture of the evolution of the grunts to be radically modified by the inclusion of such missing taxa.

our work provides a framework to understand the factors that played a role in the diversification of the group. new world grunts were clustered in two major ecological groups, however hard bottom affinity seems to have independently evolved three times during haemuline history. diversification events appear to be related with that ecological division, generating more lineages with less species in soft bottom habitants, while few but specious taxa populate the hard bottom environments, suggesting more specialization than previously suspected.

new world grunts may have originated in the pacific ocean with later dispersal into the western atlantic with some recent reversal invasions, followed by vicariant events. the closure of the isthmus of panama, which resulted in allopatric divergence in a large array of marine organisms, played a role in grunts; yet geminate haemulids seem to have diverged at three different stages of this geological event.

