BACKGROUND
in addition to mapping canonical transcription factor  binding sites, chromatin immunoprecipitation  experiments have revealed genomic loci at which many dna-binding proteins display a signal of enrichment despite the absense of an in vitro binding site in the underlying dna sequence. these regions have been alternatively called “tf colocalization hotspots”
 <cit>  and “high-occupancy target  regions”
 <cit> . their existence was first demonstrated in a study profiling seven drosophila melanogaster tfs with diverse functions using the damid method in cultured embryonic cells
 <cit> . in that study, dna at the hotspots was predicted to have affinity for three of the seven proteins , but was bound by all seven. the hotspots were associated with increased expression at neighboring genes, suggesting that they are functionally relevant. subsequent chip studies in whole embryos have confirmed that such hotspots are a general feature of the drosophila
 and the c. elegans
 <cit>  genomes. the tf colocalization phenomenon has also been observed in mammalian cells. an analysis of chip profiles for  <dig> tfs collected in mouse embryonic stem cells revealed extensive colocalization of these proteins along the genome
 <cit> . similarly, analysis of  <dig> sequence-specific tfs in a variety of human cell types
 <cit>  identified many hot regions
 <cit> .

a number of mechanisms have been proposed to explain the observed co-enrichment across chip experiments. chromatin loops could cross-link to multifunctional “transcription factories” or enhanceosomes
 <cit> . non-sequence-specific binding can also be driven by a locally permissive chromatin structure
 <cit> . the authors of the fly damid study
 <cit>  argue against non-specific binding, because two non-endogenous proteins  do not localize to the hotspots, but rather to their predicted in vitro binding sites. direct protein-protein interactions between the involved fly tfs have also not been observed, complicating any model involving a transcription factory. the authors of the mouse study
 <cit> , by contrast, suggest that the mouse hotspots represent enhanceosomes, due to their ability to drive transcription in a luciferase assay and their recruitment of the p <dig> coactivator. a feature shared by both organisms is that hotspots are associated with increased expression at neighboring genes, but are often located far from traditionally-defined proximal promoters.

the present study was motivated by the fact that, although extensive genome-wide in vivo protein binding data has been collected for the yeast saccharomyces cerevisiae
, no analogous colocalization of sequence-specific regulators has been reported for this organism. significantly, however, in the large-scale compendia by lee et al.
 <cit>  and harbison et al.
 <cit> , the authors subtracted, for each probe separately, the mean across all arrays in order to account for biases in the immunoprecipitation reaction. this normalization procedure was certainly appropriate given the goal of these studies, namely, to determine the specific transcriptional target genes of each individual transcription factor. however, it would also have largely removed any true collective genomic enrichment pattern shared by many tfs. this insight motivated us to perform a detailed re-analysis of the original microarray data in a manner that omitted the probe-specific normalization step. this revealed that a collective pattern of chip enrichment also exists in yeast.

unlike in higher eukaryotes, the collective enrichment patterns in yeast are not associated with sequence-predicted protein-dna binding affinity for any of the tfs involved. rather, sequence and functional analysis reveals that the most significant features of co-enriched probed regions are:  the extent of nucleosome depletion,  expression of proximal genes, and  the proximity to noncoding rna genes, the majority of which encode trnas and snornas. additionally, the co-enrichment hotspots are occupied chiefly in rich-media  conditions, while, strikingly, the phenomenon is abrogated in the majority of environmental perturbation and stress conditions.

RESULTS
quantifying collective chip enrichment in rich media conditions
first, we performed a detailed re-analysis of the raw chip-chip data from lee et al.
 <cit>  and harbison et al.
 <cit> , but without performing their normalization procedure across experiments . to characterize the shared component of the chip profiles collected in rich media , we computed the median log <dig> fold-enrichment  across  <dig> tfs as a measure of co-enrichment for each probe. the distribution of mlfe across probes was skewed heavily to the right , a shared enrichment profile that was evident in the authors’ original analysis but not fully characterized. the re-analyzed chip landscapes were also more correlated with each other than the normalized profiles from the original paper . we proceeded to investigate the location of the co-enrichment phenomenon relative to genomic features.figure  <dig> 
chip co-enrichment. distribution of tf chip co-enrichment across probes. co-enrichment is quantified as median log <dig> fold enrichment  across all analyzed rich media experiments from harbison et al.  <cit> . the distribution of the original normalized published data is in gray, and the distribution of the reanalyzed data is in red.
chip enrichment profiles from published and reanalyzed data. chip-chip enrichment profiles across all analyzed rich media experiments and correlations among them. an enrichment profile heatmap and correlatogram is shown for both the original normalized published data of harbison et al.  <cit>  and our reanalysis. tfs in all four matrices were sorted by their enrichment at ncrna genes in the reanalyzed data; probes in the heatmaps were sorted by their median log <dig> fold enrichment  in the reanalyzed data.



collective enrichment is strongly associated with noncoding-rna genes
a first glance at the most highly co-enriched probed regions revealed a preponderance of telomeres and noncoding rnas  . to systematically determine whether specific genomic features were associated with co-enrichment, we tested whether the distribution of mlfe for probes corresponding to each annotated genomic feature was different from that corresponding to the rest of the genome . the most significantly co-enriched were the  <dig> probes corresponding to ncrna genes . the more specific ncrna categories of trnas, snornas, and snrnas were all significantly co-enriched as well. there were not enough probes corresponding to rrna genes to establish statistical significance.table  <dig> 
probes with highest median chip-chip fold-enrichment  across rich media experiments


*probe sequence does not map uniquely to the genome.

. list of probes with highest median chip-chip fold-enrichment  across rich media experiments from harbison et al.
 <cit> .
comparison of tf co-occupancy in each probe family vs. all other probes.




probes were mapped to a feature if there was any overlap between the probe and feature. for each probe, the co-occupancy was defined as the median log <dig> chip-chip fold enrichment  across all rich media experiments. for each feature, the probe family co-occupancy ΔĀ was defined as the difference in mean co-occupancy within each probe family and mean co-occupancy at all other probes. the p-value was determined using a t-test. significant p-values are highlighted.

a subset of yeast trna genes have been demonstrated to colocalize to the nucleolus. we therefore asked whether tf co-enrichment is associated with nucleolar localization. we used the classification of yeast trna genes as nucleolar or non-nucleolar based on a three-dimension model of the yeast genome derived from chromatin conformation capture data by duan et al.
 <cit> . however, we found no significant difference in rich media mlfe between the two sets of genes . therefore, nucleolar and centromeric trna genes seem to participate in the collective enrichment phenomenon to an equal degree.

evidence that collective enrichment is not due to technical artifact
because telomeres and trna genes are associated with repetitive elements
 <cit>  in addition to having a high genomic copy number, we suspected that their consistently high enrichment across experiments could be an artifact of cross-hybridization
 <cit> . to test for this, we inspected spot intensities and performed a more finely-grained classification of probes . we decided to exclude probes corresponding to telomeres or overlapping ncrna genes by more than 25 bp from the remainder of our analysis .figure  <dig> 
comparison of tf co-occupancy and absolute intensity among selected probe families and sub-families and different mapping criteria. tf co-enrichment m was defined for each probe as the median log <dig> fold enrichment across all rich media chip-chip experiments, and the family as the difference in mean m among probes in a family and all other probes. the p-value was calculated using a t-test. similarly, the absolute intensity a for each probe in each experiment was defined as the mean  intensity between the red and green channels; the median a was calculated across all experiments for each probe; and the family was reported as the difference in mean a among probes within a family and all other probes. probe mapping and categories for comparison are as follows :  probes with high overlap vs. all other probes.  probes with any overlap vs. all other probes.  probes with low overlap or neighboring vs. non-neighboring probes .  neighboring probes vs. non-neighboring probes . significant co-enrichment p-values are highlighted yellow; significant intensity p-values, which may signify cross-hybridization, are highlighted red.



tf co-enrichment m was defined for each probe as the median log <dig> fold enrichment across all rich media chip-chip experiments, and the family
 as the difference in mean m among probes in a family and all other probes. the p-value was calculated using a t-test. similarly, the absolute intensity a for each probe in each experiment was defined as the mean  intensity between the red and green channels; the median a was calculated across all experiments for each probe; and the family ΔĀ was reported as the difference in mean a among probes within a family and all other probes. probe mapping and categories for comparison are as follows :  probes with high overlap vs. all other probes.  probes with any overlap vs. all other probes.  probes with low overlap or neighboring vs. non-neighboring probes   neighboring probes vs. non-neighboring probes  significant co-enrichment
p-values are highlighted yellow; significant intensity  p-values, which may signify cross-hybridization, are highlighted red.

a plot of mlfe versus distance between the center of each probe and the center of the nearest ncrna gene  shows a gradual and approximately exponential decay with increasing distance. the decay length is similar to a typical ip fragment length
 <cit> . by contrast, cross-hybridization would appear as spikes as a function of genomic position with no such decay around peaks, as was discussed by orian and colleagues
 <cit> . we conclude that cross-hybridization is not responsible for the observed signal.figure  <dig> 
chip co-enrichment at ncrna genes. tf co-enrichment, defined as the median log <dig> chip-chip fold enrichment , as a function of distance to the nearest ncrna gene. plotted in black is a fit to y = b
0 
+ b
1e. top to bottom:  co-enrichment across ypd experiments from harbison et al.
 <cit> : b
0 = − <dig> , b
1 =  <dig> , d =  <dig> ; p for each parameter <  <dig> × 10−16; r
2 =  <dig> .  co-enrichment across non-ypd experiments from harbison et al.
 <cit> : b
0 = − <dig> , b
1 =  <dig> , d =  <dig> ; p for each parameter >  <dig> ; r2 =  <dig> .  co-enrichment across ypd experiments from pokholok et al.
 <cit> : b
0 = − <dig> , b
1 =  <dig> , d =  <dig> ; p for each parameter <  <dig> × 10−16; r
2 =  <dig> .  chip-chip log <dig> fold enrichment for no-antibody control from pokholok et al.
 <cit> ; b
0 = − <dig> , b
1 = − <dig> , d =  <dig> ; p for each parameter <  <dig>  × 10−10; r
2 =  <dig> .  chip-chip log <dig> fold enrichment for anti-rabbit igg control from pokholok et al.
 <cit> : b
0 = − <dig> , b
1 = − <dig> , d =  <dig> ; p for each parameter <  <dig>  × 10−8; r
2 =  <dig> .



biases in ip efficiency and shearing based on chromatin state have been shown to be important in the interpretation of chip experiments
 <cit> . to check whether such biases affected immunoprecipitation or hybridization efficiency of ncrna genes, we inspected control experiments that used no antibody or a nonspecific antibody
 <cit> . we observed a weak depletion of ncrna genes in the mock ip samples relative to the whole-cell extract . these controls suggest that any immunoprecipitation bias at ncrna genes would cause us to underestimate rather than overestimate the magnitude of the hotspot effect.

the chip-chip experiments that we re-analyzed for this study all relied on myc-tagged proteins. in humans, the c-myc protein is localized to the nucleolus, raising the possibility that myc-tagged proteins in the chip experiment would be artificially biased towards trnas genes, some of which cluster in the nucleolus
. to rule out this possibility, we performed the same analysis on a set of chip-chip data that employed flag tagging rather than myc tagging, and high-density tiling probes
 <cit> . the kinases assayed in this experiment again showed shared ip at ncrna genes and exponential decay with increasing distance between the probed region and the ncrna gene, and a comparable quantitative enrichment near ncrna genes . taken together, the above results make it unlikely that shared ip is dues to a tag-specific artifact.

for most tfs, in vitrodna binding specificity is a poor predictor of in vivooccupancy
the canonical view holds that the dna-binding domain  of a tf is responsible for its recruitment to specific sequences in the genome. however, highly specific yet dbd-independent recruitment to sites of co-occupancy has been demonstrated using recombinant bicoid protein in drosophila
 <cit> . the landscape of co-enrichment that we have characterized represents an independent contribution to the chip enrichment landscape of any given tf, which complements the sequence-specific targeting via its dbd. we were interested in contrasting these two predictors and quantifying the extent to which each of them contributes to the overall genomic enrichment profile for a tf. to this end, we calculated the pearson correlation, across all probes, between the log <dig> fold enrichment  for each tf and  the median log <dig> fold-enrichment  over all other tfs profiled in rich media, and  the regional in vitro binding affinity predicted from dna sequence using a position-specific affinity matrix for the tf from protein-binding microarray  data from badis et al.
 <cit>  and zhu et al.
 <cit>  . for almost all tfs, the correlation with mlfe is significant , indicating that the co-enrichment signal contributes to their ip profile to a significant extent. a notable exception is yap1p, whose lfe is significantly anticorrelated with the mlfe of all of other factors. for a smaller number of tfs, lfe correlates with predicted affinity, but always to a lesser extent than with mlfe , with the exception of abf1p.figure  <dig> 
correlation of chip enrichment for individual factors with co-enrichment and predicted affinity. left to right:  shared enrichment for each factor measured as the pearson correlation between the tf’s genomewide enrichment landscape  and the median log <dig> fold enrichment  across all other rich media chip-chip experiments.  sequence-specific enrichment for each factor measured as the pearson correlation between the tf’s genomewide enrichment and the predicted genomewide affinity for that tf from the pbm data of either badis et al.
 <cit>  or zhu et al.
 <cit>  .  scatter plots showing the correlations described above  for each of four factors: met31p, reb1p, abf1p, and yap1p.



co-enriched loci are associated with nucleosome depletion and high expression
to explore other relationships between genome function and tf co-enrichment, we looked for gene ontology  categories of proximal genes . for every go category, we compared the distribution of mlfe within probes corresponding to promoters of genes in that category with the rest of the probes. the most enriched protein functions are for translation  and accordingly, ribosomal proteins as a whole are strongly enriched . because ribosomal protein  promoters are known to be particularly active
 <cit> , we were interested in whether expression globally correlates with co-enrichment, and found that it does . we also found that co-enrichment is even more strongly anticorrelated with nucleosome occupancy .table  <dig> 
gene ontology  enrichment analysis of genes by level of tf co-enrichment at neighboring probes

correlation of tf co-enrichment with gene expression and nucleosome occupancy.  scatter plot of tf co-enrichment vs. gene expression in ypd from huebert and gasch
 <cit> . each point is the expression level for a gene and the co-enrichment  of neighboring regions; expression values are log <dig> of quantile normalized intensity values. plotted as a black line is a fit of all the data to a linear model .  scatter plot of tf co-enrichment vs. nucleosome occupancy by nucleosome chip from bernstein et al.
 <cit> . each point is a probed region assayed both by harbison et al. and bernstein et al. plotted as a line is a fit of all the data to a linear model .



we were also interested in whether the tf co-enrichment profile was correlated with affinity for tfs. we calculated the predicted affinity of each probe for a compendium of tfs. among tf affinities predicted from protein binding microarray  data, only affinity for rsc30p, rsc3p, and rap1p correlated with mlfe . binding by these factors has previously been shown to drive nucleosome depletion at rp promoters
 <cit> , consistent with the correlation with nucleosome depletion described above.

collective enrichment at ncrna genes is largely eliminated in perturbed conditions
so far, our analysis has been restricted to rich media  conditions, providing a uniform chromatin context for comparison across factors. examining ncrna loci in experimental perturbation  conditions reveals dramatically reduced co-enrichment . using the median tf enrichment across all non-ypd conditions, the elevation in co-enrichment at ncrna genes drops from  <dig>  to  <dig> . to further investigate this general observation by focusing on chip enrichment of individual tfs in their rich media and stress conditions. for each particular stress-tf combination , we calculated the enrichment at ncrna genes relative to all other probes . as expected from our pooled analysis, in the majority of stress conditions the enrichment at ncrna genes is greatly reduced. for two tfs, viz. kss1p and gal4p, ncrna genes are preferentially chip enriched in ypd, while in stress the enrichment at ncrna genes is lower than elsewhere in the genome. kss1p shows a negative relative occupancy of ncrna genes in alpha mating factor and 1-butanol conditions. gal4p shows decreased preferential enrichment at ncrna genes in galactose and avoidance of these loci in raffinose.figure  <dig> 
comparison of tf co-enrichment for ncrna families in rich media and stress conditions.

condition specificity of co-enrichment at ncrna genes.  each row is a tf, and experimental conditions for that tf are plotted on the same row with letters indicating the condition. conditions are: “y”, rich media; “s”, sulfometuron methyl; “r”, rapamycin; “h”, hydrogen peroxide; “1”, 1-butanol; “a”, succinic acid; “g”, galactose; “v”, vitamin deprived medium; “m”, alpha mating factor; “f”, raffinose; and “p”, phosphate deprived medium. chip enrichment at ncrna genes is expressed as the difference between the mean log <dig> fold enrichment of ncrna gene probes and the mean log <dig> fold enrichment of all other probes.  leu3p, ste12p, and mot3p enrichment at ncrna genes in rich media vs. sulfometuron methyl treatment. for each factor and condition, an empirical cumulative distribution function is shown contrasting the distribution in log <dig> fold enrichment  for ncrna gene probes and all other probes.



criterion for probe mapping is the same as in figure 
4c: probes with low overlap or neighboring vs. non-neighboring probes  significant p-values are highlighted in yellow.

interestingly, those tfs that do not participate in chip co-enrichment at ncrna genes as strongly in rich media conditions are more likely to be chip-enriched at ncrna genes in other conditions. the most notable example of this is ste12p, which is enriched at ncrna genes upon exposure to alpha mating factor, but not in the absence of alpha factor or in the presence of 1-butanol. dig1p, which is also associated with the mating response, behaves differently: it is not enriched at ncrna genes in rich media, and is also not enriched at them in the presence of alpha mating factor and 1-butanol. finally, among the other tfs that exhibit ncrna depletion in rich media, mot3p shows a loss of this depletion in the presence of hydrogen peroxide or sulfometuron methyl. the fact that enrichment at ncrna genes is both factor and condition specific supports that the chip co-enrichment is not solely determined by the chromatin state at the co-enriched loci, and is dependent on the identity and activity of the binding proteins.

co-enrichment during oxidative stress is reduced, not moved to other loci
to directly compare co-enrichment between ypd and perturbed conditions, we looked at the hydrogen peroxide condition, which has the highest number of factors assayed in common with ypd. we then calculated mlfe in each condition using only the subset of factors that was assayed in both, and performed go analysis  and expression correlation analysis . analyzing this subset, we again found the strongest co-enrichment at promoters of ribosome-associated genes, in both ypd and hydrogen peroxide conditions . however, the enrichment was greatly reduced during oxidative stress, to the extent that only one go category  in the h2o <dig> condition showed an enrichment surpassing a threshold of p < . in addition, the correlation between co-enrichment and expression is much weaker during oxidative stress .figure  <dig> 
gene ontology  enrichment analysis of genes by level of tf co-enrichment in both ypd and h
2
o
2
conditions at neighboring probes.

correlation of tf co-enrichment with gene expression in different conditions. scatter plots of tf co-enrichment vs. gene expression in ypd from huebert and gasch
 <cit> . in each case, the co-enrichment  is defined by using only data from tfs assayed in both ypd and h2o <dig>  each point is the expression level for a gene and the co-enrichment  of neighboring regions; expression values are log <dig> of quantile normalized intensity values.  ypd,  h2o <dig> 



tfs in this analysis were restricted to the subset shared between ypd and h2o <dig> conditions, and the top go enrichments are shown for ypd. the highlighted row is the only category that is significant in h2o <dig> after bonferroni correction. expression values were obtained from huebert and gasch  as described in methods.

validation by chip-seq
for validation purposes, we compared three ste12p chip-seq datasets, one of which was performed in pseudohyphal conditions and two in exposure to alpha mating factor
 <cit> . both showed enrichment near ncrna genes, although the magnitude was greater during exposure to alpha mating factor, consistent with the experiments of harbison et al.
 <cit>  . these data further support that the hotspot effect is not an artifact of microarray technology.figure  <dig> 
validation using chip-seq data. density of ste12p chip-seq reads relative to the genome-wide coverage for the two parents tested under exposure to alpha mating factor in zheng et al.
 <cit>  and the strain tested under pseudohyphal growth conditions in lefrancois et al.
 <cit> .



discussion
other evidence for tf colocalization in the yeast literature
our reanalysis of the chip-chip compendia of lee et al.
 <cit>  and harbison et al.
 <cit>  has revealed co-enrichment of yeast tfs at ncrna genes. in a more recent study, venters and colleagues used low-density tiling microarrays to assay the occupancy of a broader range of factors
 <cit> . because of differences in probe design, their occupancy data are not directly comparable to those of lee et al.
 <cit>  and harbison et al.
 <cit> , and are not suited to the interrogation of transcribed regions; however, the authors noted a surprising association of pol ii-associated factors with trna promoters. two recent studies in yeast have recognized non-canonical binding in light of the known biological roles of tfs. fan and struhl
 <cit>  found condition-specific mediator binding over many gene bodies, rather than upstream promoter regions where it is known to act; they argued based on the low enrichment and reproducibility that these targets represent indirect binding due to chromatin state. teytelman and colleagues
 <cit> , motivated by finding components of the sir silencing complex at actively-transcribed regions, found that exogenously expressed gfp also immunoprecipitated with these regions in a condition-specific manner.

possible mechanisms underlying dynamic co-enrichment at ncrna genes
genomic recruitment of transcription factors is usually conceptualized as binding of the dna-binding domain of the protein to high-affinity consensus sequences in the dna, contingent on the local accessibility of the dna. our finding that many studied yeast transcription factors preferentially immunoprecipitate with nucleosome-depleted dna is consistent with previous observations that tfs will nonspecifically bind to naked dna at a low level
 <cit> . within the nucleus, nucleosome-depleted regions may most closely resemble naked dna in vitro, in which case they ought to display a higher level of nonspecific binding relative to nucleosome-occupied and heterochromatic regions. however, we have shown here that the hotspot phenomenon can only be partly explained in terms of chromatin accessibility, because even when using the same antibody, the chip enrichment at hotspots depends on which tf carries the affinity tag. this is consistent with the recent observation in fly kc cells
 <cit>  and in cultured human cells
 <cit>  that the optimal chromatin context – i.e., the chromatin type for which the highest degree of occupancy is observed at a given level of sequence-predicted dna binding affinity – is different for each tf, and that none of the chromatin states is globally permissive.

both the chip and damid method can detect tfs that are near dna but not necessarily contacting it. consequently, the observed co-enrichment signal could be due to the proximity of probed regions to the tfs rather than due to direct interactions with them. indeed, for individual yeast tfs, indirect interactions have been proposed in order to account for the poor correlation between in vitro sequence specificity as measured by protein binding microarrays  and in vivo occupancy as measured by chip-chip
 <cit> . fly and mouse hotspots have been hypothesized to reflect both direct interactions mediated by the dna-binding domain of certain tfs and indirect, protein-protein interactions involving the other co-enriched tfs
 <cit> . our sequence analysis does not provide any evidence of direct sequence-specific interactions with tfs. nucleosome depletion and proximity to ncrna genes both predict co-enrichment significantly better than local regional binding affinity predicted from dna sequences using either known binding specificities or de novo motif discovery. the co-enrichment could also be the result of competitive binding by different tfs in different subsets of cells and at different times, as has been suggested by recent work
 <cit> .

several lines of cytological evidence from mammalian cells suggest that transcription by polymerase ii occurs at nuclear foci comprising many polymerase molecules and transcription factors, termed “transcription factories”
 <cit> . if such factories exist in yeast, it is conceivable that nucleosome-free regions and ncrna genes – which are associated with high levels of transcription  – are in close proximity to multiple tfs as a result of transcription factories. indeed, it was recently discovered that pol ii-associated transcription factors tightly associate with pol iii-transcribed genes in human cells
 <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
our results show that the median enrichment across all tfs is far more predictive of the chip landscape of a typical individual yeast tf than dna sequence is. this agrees with a recent study of the interaction between chromatin accessibility and sequence specificity
 <cit> . while the normalized enrichment data of the original yeast chip-chip compendia
 <cit>  have proven immensely valuable for understanding and modeling regulatory networks, any other chip experiment not subjected to the same normalization will display both sequence-specific as well as hotspot targeting. as genomic protein occupancy mapping technology increases in resolution and sensitivity, understanding the structure, origin, and possible function of co-enrichment hotspots will become increasingly important to interpreting the data they generate.

