BACKGROUND
throughout the last  <dig> years, several thousand spalax individuals have been housed and studied in the animal facility at the institute of evolution of haifa university. despite this small rodent’s  long lifespan , none of the animals have ever developed spontaneous tumors, nor do they show any aging-related phenotypic changes. the mole rat, spalax ehrenbergi, is a wild, solitary rodent of the eastern mediterranean region. spalax inhabits a system of poorly ventilated, dark, sealed underground tunnels protected from climatic extremes, pathogens and predation. during the mediterranean rainy season animals are engaged in intensive digging to collect food, mate, and repair and extend their territory under extreme hypoxic conditions. spalax has evolved a unique adaptive complex mechanism for surviving underground, including a special ability to cope with extreme hypoxia and hypercapnia  <cit> . spalax can conduct intensive aerobic work under low o <dig> pressures  due to increased muscular mass, and high density of blood vessels and mitochondria, resulting in reduced oxygen diffusion distance and efficient oxygen delivery even at low capillary po <dig> <cit> .

hypoxia can result in a failure to maintain essential cellular functions and contributes to cardio- and cerebrovascular failure, pulmonary diseases and cancer, which together are the primary sources of morbidity in the western world. a long and growing list of genes exhibits hypoxia-related adaptations in structure and function in spalax <cit> . noteworthy are vegf, constitutively highly expressed as compared to rats  <cit> ; p <dig> that harbors substitutions in the dna-binding site, identical to the most common p <dig> mutations in tumors; however, in spalax it renders a bias against apoptosis but favors cell cycle arrest/dna repair both in vitro and in vivo <cit> ; and a unique spalax heparanase splice variant that was shown to decrease tumor size in mice by a factor of  <dig> and reduce metastatic activity compared to native mice heparanase  <cit> . furthermore, assessment of spalax transcriptome assembly and expression data has revealed enrichment of genes that overlap cancer resistance, apoptosis, angiogenesis pathways and hypoxia-tolerance  <cit> . this suggests that spalax is potentially resistant to malignant transformation. elucidating the mechanisms evolved in this wild, non-inbred, naturally cancer resistant rodent should have great importance as preventative measures and may present an efficient way of dealing with increasing cancer incidence.

tumors contain malignant cells and tumor stroma consisting of fibroblasts, extracellular matrix  and vasculature with endothelial cells  <cit> . cancer progression requires a permissive stromal environment in which mutant cells can survive, proliferate and invade. fibroblasts are ubiquitous stromal cells interlinked with tumors via regulation of growth factors and cytokines, and through reassembling of the ecm  <cit> . the majority of published studies report the cancer-enhancing effects of fibroblasts in their activated form  <cit> . however, early studies from co-culture experiments indicate that normal fibroblasts may have a tumor suppressor function  <cit> . unfortunately, little attention has been given to the protective role of normal fibroblasts.

based on our earlier observations that spalax is resistant to spontaneous cancer, and assuming that normal fibroblasts apparently play a role in this phenomenon, we took two experimental approaches in the present study:  to directly confirm the hypothesis that spalax is highly resistant to induced tumorigenesis, we used a two-step  <dig> -dimethylbenz  anthracene/12-o-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate  skin carcinogenesis protocol  <cit> , and 3-methylcholantrene  protocol for local fibrosarcoma induction  <cit>  in mice, rats and spalax; and  co-culture experiments were conducted to study the interactions between normal primary fibroblasts isolated from different rodent species , with human hepatocellular carcinoma  and breast cancer cells , as well as 3mca-induced, spalax-derived fibrosarcoma cells .

we provide evidence that  spalax is extremely resistant to experimentally induced cancer, and  spalax’s normal fibroblasts, originated from adult or newborn animals, target tumor cells and restrict malignant behavior either through direct fibroblast-cancer cell interaction or via soluble factors produced by a monolayer of spalax fibroblasts.

RESULTS
spalax is resistant to chemically-induced cancer
to assess experimentally if spalax is resistant to chemically-induced carcinogenesis, we treated animals from different rodent species according to the following protocols:

dmba/tpa treatment
spalax and c57bl/ <dig> mice were treated with dmba/tpa to induce skin cancer  <cit> . spalax animals developed skin lesions within  <dig> days . histological examination of hematoxylin and eosin-stained tissue sections demonstrated skin necrosis involving the deep parts of the dermis, massive infiltration of the affected areas with neutrophil leukocytes, and ulcerated epidermis focally covered with fibrino-purulent exudates . the subcutaneous skeletal muscle and bone tissues were not affected, and no tumor was identified. the wounds completely healed within seven to nine weeks, resulting in epidermal thickening , and no further progression to skin tumors was observed, even though tpa treatments were extended to six months . in the control group, spalax animals treated with acetone only did not show any changes in their skin macro- and microstructure, similar to non-treated animals . following  <dig> to  <dig> days of dmba/tpa treatment, mice demonstrated small intra-epidermal blisters; some of them ruptured, forming superficial erosions with extensive crusting , which subsequently underwent transformation into multiple skin tumors within two to three months . histological examination revealed papillary and flat epidermal outgrowths with dysplastic features, focally similar to squamous cell carcinoma .

3-mca treatment
the ability of a single subcutaneous 3-mca injection to induce fibrosarcoma is well documented  <cit> . the expected tumors appeared within two to three months in mice, and in four to six months in rats. hypercellular spindle cell tumors with highly pleiomorphic, extensively proliferating cells  arranged into intersected bundles or wide sheets were identified. scant, partially myxoid stroma and areas of hemorrhagic necrosis were typical findings . all examined tumors developed in 3-mca-treated mice and rats were histologically identified as fibrosarcomas. importantly, spalax did not show any pathological process for over a year. however, by  <dig> to  <dig> months following the 3-mca treatment,  <dig> of the spalax animals  developed a tissue overgrowth at the site of the injection. these lesions were well circumscribed in shape, unlike the ill-defined tumors found in mice and rats . histological examination revealed benign spindle cell proliferation most probably reflecting fibrosis at the site of an incompletely resolved inflammatory reaction.

a case of fibrosarcoma development in spalax
a single, old spalax individual developed a 3-mca-induced tumor  <dig> months after initial treatment . a biopsy was performed, and the histological examination revealed a partially necrotic and heavily inflamed, spindle and epithelioid cell tumor with infiltrative borders and myxoid stroma. cells demonstrated dyscohesion, polymorphism in size and shape  and prominent nuclear atypia . this hypercellular tumor demonstrated high mitotic activity  with abundant atypical mitotic figures. transmission electron microscopy revealed fibrosarcoma-like findings  <cit> : deformed nuclei, some with monstrous appearance; long branching and dilated rough endoplasmic reticulum and abundance of extracellular collagen fibers . myofibroblastic differentiation features were not observed. an immortal cell line was established from the tumor sample. the cultured adherent cells show a typical fibroblast phenotype , which has remained unchanged throughout a long culture time .

the remaining treated spalax individuals showed no phenotypic or behavioral changes, and were still under observation in the animal house over two years following treatment .

spalax fibroblasts suppress growth of human cancer cells in vitro
to compare the effects of normal fibroblasts isolated from different rodents on the growth of human cancer cells, we used a co-culture approach, where fibroblasts were cultured together with cancer cells on a shared surface . in these experiments, hepatoma-derived hep3b cells as well as breast cancer mcf <dig> cells were tested. obvious inhibition of cancer cell growth was found when hep3b cells were co-cultured with spalax normal lung and skin fibroblasts: the foci of destroyed cancer cells were visible after six days of co-culture . prolonged co-cultivation up to  <dig> days resulted in further destruction of cancer cell colonies by the presence of spalax fibroblasts and the spaces previously occupied by hep3b cells were invaded by fibroblasts . in contrast, the number of cancer cells co-cultured with mouse fibroblasts increased gradually, and on day  <dig>  hep3b cells surrounded by mouse fibroblasts reached approximately 80% confluence, similar to control . overgrown hep3b colonies were found after 11-day co-culture with mouse fibroblasts. an obvious inhibitory effect was demonstrated when spalax normal skin fibroblasts were co-cultured with breast cancer mcf <dig> cells as well . after  <dig> days of co-culture with spalax fibroblasts, massive rounding and detachment of cancer cells were observed. on the other hand, mouse fibroblasts stimulated proliferation of mcf <dig> cells, and by day  <dig> densely populated colonies of cancer cells developed.

in vitro anticancer activity by other wild, natural rodents’ fibroblasts
since we compare a wild mammal with laboratory animals that are sensitive to cancer, we conducted co-culture experiments using hep3b cancer cells with skin fibroblasts isolated from two different wild, natural rodents: acomys, a short-lived, wild, above-ground rodent; and naked mole rat , a long-lived cancer-resistant wild subterranean rodent  <cit> . as shown , no growth inhibitory effect was found when acomys fibroblasts were co-cultured with hep3b cells. on the contrary, acomys fibroblasts promoted cancer cell invasion similar to the effect of rat fibroblasts. heterocephalus cells, similar to spalax, evidently destroyed cancer cell growth .

conditioned medium generated by spalax fibroblasts induces cancer cell death, but does not affect normal primary fibroblasts
to determine whether the anti-cancer activity of spalax fibroblasts was mediated by fibroblast-secreted soluble factors, conditioned media  obtained from spalax, mouse and rat monolayers were tested. cancer cells of different origins were incubated under cm of normal fibroblasts, which had never been exposed to cancer cells or other stimuli. effects of cm generated by cancer cells were also tested . as demonstrated in figure 7a, exposure of hep3b cells to cm from cultured newborn spalax fibroblasts decreased cancer cell viability as measured by mitochondrial respiratory function. exposure to mouse cm hardly had an effect on cancer cell viability. similarly, nine-day exposure of hep3b cells to cm generated by adult  spalax fibroblasts obviously reduced cancer cell viability as was determined by a trypan blue extrusion assay : cancer cells exposed to spalax fibroblast-conditioned cm reached 49% death, whereas unexposed cells remained completely adherent and viable .

we next evaluated the reversibility of the inhibition of cancer cells initiated by spalax cm. hepg <dig> and hep3b were grown with spalax cm for four days, then the medium was changed by either fresh unused regular media or with fresh spalax cm. cancer cell viability was measured after another two days. recovery of the cancer cells was demonstrated when the cm was changed with fresh unused regular media . importantly, growth of spalax-derived fibrosarcoma cells  was gradually suppressed by cm generated by spalax normal fibroblasts, but was not affected by normal, full medium and cm derived from hep3b cells or cm derived from the spfs <dig> cells themselves . noteworthy, no inhibitory effects were detected on mouse, rat and spalax normal fibroblasts following exposure to homologous or heterologous cm . to get a preliminary idea of the nature of the secreted factors responsible for cancer cell growth inhibition, cm from spalax and rat fibroblasts, and the regular medium of fibroblasts  were heated to 56°c for  <dig> minutes, and  <dig> minutes. the different heat-treated media was mixed 1: <dig> with rpmi  and was added to hep3b cancer cells. after seven days, the viability of the cancer cells was measured. the heat-treated cm generated from spalax fibroblasts reduced its anticancer activity, expressed as a partial increase in hep3b cells viability .

soluble factors generated by spalax fibroblasts cause cell cycle arrest, nuclear fragmentation, and impair mitochondrial dynamics in cancer cells
to investigate the mechanisms by which spalax fibroblasts induce cancer cell death, we examined nuclear and mitochondrial shape dynamics, as well as cell cycle distributions in hep3b and hepg <dig> cells. no changes in the morphology of cells, nuclei and mitochondria as well as in cell cycle distribution were found when hep3b cells were incubated with rat cm  compared to hep3b grown with their own medium . in contrast, following exposure to spalax cm, hep3b cells undergo phenotypic changes observed under phase contrast microscopy: cellular shrinkage, irregularities in the plasma membrane and blebs formation . cell cycle analysis revealed a noticeable accumulation of dead cells in sub-g <dig> , a reduction in the number of cells in g0/g <dig> , and a modest arrest of proliferation in g2/m  . nuclear staining with dapi of hep3b cells that were grown with spalax cm for eight days, revealed heterogeneous chromatin appearance within irregularly shaped nuclei, and in many cells extensive chromatin condensation and nuclear fragmentation were conspicuous . on the other hand, homogeneous patterns with regular-shaped nuclei were mainly represented in the cells incubated with rat cm as well as in the control cells . to examine whether spalax fibroblast cm could induce mitochondrial dynamic changes in cancer cells, hep3b cells were stained with mitotracker-red® probe after eight days of incubation. compared with control and rat cm, the mitochondrial network of cells after eight-day growth with spalax cm demonstrated the presence of damaged fragmented mitochondria . similar to hep3b cells, hepg <dig> cells under spalax cm also showed morphological changes and accumulation of cells in sub-g0/g <dig> whereas mouse and rat cm did not affect cellular morphology and cell cycle distribution . brdu incorporation into dna, a marker for cell proliferation, confirmed a time-dependent anti proliferative effect of spalax cm on hepg <dig> cancer cells .

spalax normal fibroblasts inhibit colony formation in soft agar of the breast carcinoma cell lines mda-mb- <dig> and mcf <dig> as well as spalax-derived fibrosarcoma
to study whether soluble factors generated by spalax fibroblasts may influence colony formation in soft agar, breast cancer cells were cultivated for three weeks in the absence or presence of spalax fibroblasts . spalax fibroblasts strongly reduced the formation of mda-mb- <dig> colonies . the ability of mda-mb- <dig> to form large colonies was completely inhibited by spalax fibroblasts , while rat fibroblasts had no effect on colony formation . cells from another human breast cancer cell line, mcf- <dig>  were incubated with monolayers of spalax and mouse fibroblasts . remarkably, after  <dig> days, and compared to the control, more colonies were formed when human mcf <dig> cells were co-cultured with mouse fibroblasts, whereas a monolayer of spalax fibroblasts significantly reduced mcf <dig> colony-formation.

importantly, spalax normal fibroblasts suppressed growth and colony formation of the homologous tumor, spalax-derived fibrosarcoma  . in contrast, both rat and mouse normal fibroblasts stimulated growth of spalax tumor cells in soft agar . integrating the number of colonies and their total occupied area, calculated from five independent fields, revealed a 36% reduction when spfs <dig> were grown above a spalax fibroblast monolayer compared to blank plates . in contrast, mouse and rat fibroblasts enhanced colony formation by factors of  <dig>  and  <dig> , respectively, compared to the blank plates .

discussion
notwithstanding the importance of laboratory mice in comprehension of carcinogenesis mechanisms, this cancer-prone model organism failed to provide satisfactory knowledge of cancer preventive mechanisms and treatment strategies in humans. . therefore, elucidating mechanisms employed by a wild, non-inbred mammal that is naturally cancer-resistant raises promising opportunities.

spalax has been thoroughly investigated at the institute of evolution of haifa university as a model for adaptation to environmental hypoxia . during the last decade a growing number of genes involved in hypoxic response have been studied and exhibited spalax-specific features  <cit> . directly related to this study on cancer-resistance of spalax are the tumor suppressor p <dig> favoring cell cycle arrest over apoptosis  <cit>  and a unique spalax heparanase splice variant that was shown to significantly decrease tumor size and metastatic activity compared to native heparanase  <cit> . furthermore, despite the extremely long lifespan of spalax , even after studying thousands of individuals for decades, we have never observed animals that developed spontaneous tumors, nor show any aging-related phenotypic changes.

in vivo studies of carcinogen-induced tumor
we report here that spalax is resistant to two-stage dmba/tpa, and 3-mca carcinogen treatments. dmba/tpa is commonly used to study malignant transformation, resembling formation of human squamous cell carcinoma  <cit> . a single dose of dmba induced substantial oxidative stress  <cit> , and when followed by repetitive application of tpa led to persistent inflammation supporting tumorigenesis  <cit> . in the present study, mice treated with dmba/tpa initially developed benign papillomas, which subsequently transformed to squamous cell carcinomas. in contrast, treatment of spalax led to necrotic wounds, which completely healed with no signs of malignancy. the carcinogen 3-mca is known to produce fibrosarcomas through persistent inflammation and reactive metabolites causing severe oxidative damage  <cit> . in our study, 100% of 3-mca-injected mice and rats developed tumors at the injection site within two to three and four to six months, respectively. one year after 3mca treatment no spalax animals showed any pathological process. however,  <dig> out of  <dig> old individuals  developed benign fibrotic overgrowths after  <dig> and  <dig> months, respectively, and only one case of malignant transformation in a > <dig> year-old spalax animal was recognized,  <dig> months after 3-mca injection.

it is well established that oxidative stress drives tumor progression and metastasis  <cit> . thus, the mechanisms that spalax evolved to survive hypoxia might be related to resistance to induced or spontaneous cancers. spalax have recently been shown to have higher levels of reactive oxygen species  processing enzymes compared to hypoxia-intolerant rodents  <cit> . nrf <dig>  a transcription factor critical for defense against oxidative stress, has a unique structure in spalax. whereas it is highly conserved among most mammals  <cit> , spalax nrf <dig> carries  <dig> specific amino acid replacements,  <dig> within the neh6-domain, which is critical for stabilizing the protein under ambient oxidative stress and for its transcriptional activity  <cit> . studies performed on nrf2−/− mice have shown the essential role of nrf <dig> for detoxification of dmba metabolites and protection against dmba-induced carcinogenesis  <cit> . unraveling the molecular mechanisms resulting in the healing of spalax skin and inhibition of progression to tumor formation is the goal of our ongoing research. hence, we have just initiated a comprehensive repetition of dmba/tpa treatment where we will have a representative sample of animals from different stages following the application of this carcinogen in order to answer this question through quantification of apoptosis and senescence of spalax skin and muscle tissue at the area of the carcinogen application. furthermore, considering the high tolerance of spalax to oxidative stress and the fact that dmba is metabolized among others into ros that cause oxidative dna damage in the skin  <cit> , the above experiment will allow us to compare the ros levels upon dmba application in spalax and mice.

another antioxidant enzyme, heme oxygenase- <dig> , was shown to be elevated in spalax tissues, and further increased under hypoxia  <cit> . ho- <dig> is involved in the degradation and catabolism of heme and supports synthesis of ferritin, an iron storage protein, thus preventing oxidative damage caused by free heme and ros  <cit> . indeed, most spalax individuals, showing no external lesions following exposure to carcinogens, have probably resolved the initial inflammatory insult without excessive fibroplasias which can be attributed to more efficient anti-oxidation mechanisms. the benign fibroblastic proliferations observed in two 3-mca-treated spalax animals after  <dig> and  <dig> months suggest that spalax is able to effectively arrest cancerous transformation. nonetheless, whether spalax tissues are able to prevent conversion of the 3-mca pro-carcinogen into an active carcinogen, overcome its effect, or to inhibit previously transformed cells, remains to be clarified in future studies.

in vitro studies of spalax cancer resistance
tumor growth and invasion are dependent on growth factors and cytokines produced by stromal cells  <cit> . normal stroma contains a relatively small number of fibroblasts associated with ecm. however, during wound healing, fibrosis or malignant transformations, stromal fibroblasts proliferate, intensively produce growth factors and cytokines, express α-smooth muscle actin and become cancer-associated fibroblasts   <cit> . cafs are removed from the granulation tissue rapidly after healing, though in cancer stroma they persist, contributing to epithelial mesenchymal transition of cancer cells. the later phenomenon is important for cancer progression and is mediated, at least in part, by metalloproteinases secretion and ros generation  <cit> . although the reports published to date have been mainly addressed to a cancer-promoting role of stromal fibroblasts, evidence suggests that normal stroma and normal fibroblasts could impede tumorigenesis  <cit> . early studies  <cit>  demonstrated that normal dermal fibroblasts suppressed development of malignant phenotypes of ras-transformed keratinocytes when grafted into animals. similarly, normal fibroblasts were able to retard melanomagenesis in its early stages  <cit> . inhibition of growth and induction of differentiation were found in breast cancer pre-neoplastic mcf10-at1-eiii <dig> cells when co-cultivated with normal fibroblasts, even in the presence of estrogen  <cit> . it is still unclear what events in the stroma, along with its interaction with precancerous cells, lead to a transition of the stromal function from cancer-protective to cancer-promoting, or, as in the present case of spalax, what are the molecular mechanisms that spalax evolved to escape cancerous transformation and to develop anti-cancer ability.

in a recent study  <cit> , cancer resistance in spalax was discussed. it was suggested that pro-growth signals originating from the fetal bovine serum, routinely added to culture medium, are conceived as cancerous transformation-like stimuli, driving spalax fibroblast necrotic death, triggered through release of interferon-β . nonetheless, in the same study, higher and earlier death rates were also shown in serum-reduced or serum-free media. furthermore, the possibility that cm from “dying” cells may lack beneficial nutrients, or contain toxic metabolites, or other factors beyond ifn-β, was not addressed. additionally, measurements of ifn-β in spalax cm were performed indirectly using human cell lines  <cit> . the first, vsv -gfp  gene assay, measures ifn-β expression levels by vsv-gfp reporter assay. in this assay, ht <dig> cell line  had been incubated with spalax cm, and then infected with a gfp-encoding vsv. the level of ifn-β in the media corresponds to the reduction in the number of gfp positive human ht <dig> cells. in the second assay, ifn-β release by “dying” spalax cells is determined by hek -blue cells assay. in this assay the induction of β-gal reporter in human ek cells under ifn-β-inducible promoter is measured. both assays use human cells for indirectly measuring spalax ifn-β, which is inconsistent with the authors’ declaration that human cells are nonresponsive to spalax cm stimuli possibly due to species divergence of ifn-β  <cit> . likewise, no proof was given that the ability to kill “dying” fibroblasts is unique to spalax’s cm, for example, by trying to compare the fate of the cells when grown with cm of the other species tested in the study, namely, mice or human. additionally, the method used in this study for declaring necrotic death is based on the annexin v/propidium iodide assay  <cit> . briefly, floating and adherent cells were harvested, stained with annexin-v and propidium iodide, and analyzed by flow cytometery. the known disadvantage of this method is that it cannot conclusively prove that cell death is solely the result of necrosis, nor eliminate the possibility of apoptotic mechanisms. also, the authors have not provided evidence for interrelations between their three declared observations . overall, it is our impression that the above mentioned study  <cit>  does not provide direct evidence to spalax cancer resistance, certainly not its anti-tumor properties. alternatively, we show here that viable, proliferating spalax fibroblasts, from adult and newborn animals, inhibit growth of cancer cells derived from different tissues and species, most importantly human, but do not affect non-cancerous cells, including those of spalax , thereby highlighting a strategy used by spalax to identify and target malignancies. this unique interaction is further strengthened by the observation that the growth of cancer cells is regained once the immediate interaction with spalax cells is terminated . importantly, no inhibitory effect on cancer cell growth was found when fibroblasts from above-ground species  were tested.

recently, several studies investigated the unique cancer-resistance properties of the naked mole rat , another subterranean, long-lived, rodent species. the most recent study suggested a connection between a high viscosity of media conditioned by heterocephalus fibroblast cells due to exceptional secretion of high-molecular mass hyaluronan   <cit> , which was suggested to mediate what was named by the authors “early contact inhibition”, previously described by the same group as an anticancer mechanism in heterocephalus cells, and was initially ascribed to p <dig> and p <dig> activity  <cit> . in the same paper  <cit> , it is reported that hmm-ha was detected also in spalax fibroblasts even in higher levels compared to heterocephalus fibroblasts, though no experiments were carried out to clarify its role in spalax fibroblasts. nevertheless, this may explain the prevalent high viscosity of the medium of cultured spalax fibroblasts we noticed, though we find that it does not prevent spalax cells from reaching confluence or influences their anti-cancer properties. furthermore, cm from spalax with apparent normal viscosity was also able to inhibit cancer cells proliferation . in light of the fact that hyaluronan-cancer cell interactions were shown to promote, and not inhibit, cancer invasion  <cit> , the correlation between hmm-ha, the potential of cells to reach confluence and the resistance to oncogenic transformation or anti-cancer activity, requires further direct experimental support, especially in the case of our model organism, the spalax. another study endorsed heterocephalus cells’ cancer-resistance to rapid cell crisis following oncogenic transformation, which is characterized by abnormal chromatin material and nuclei, leading to a failure to successfully complete cell division, hence the inability of the cells to progress into malignancy  <cit> . these observations are somewhat similar to our findings of fragmented and deformed nuclei and chromatin condensation , disturbed cell division and proliferation  of human cancer cells, as well as the 3mca-induced spalax and mice fibrosarcoma cell line, upon their interaction with spalax fibroblasts. in view of the similar ability of heterocephalus fibroblasts to kill cancer cells , and as the efficiency of experimental oncogenic transduction of cells is never 100%, it is possible that the heterocephalus cells that escaped malignant transformation killed the oncogenic-transduced ones.

our findings demonstrated that spalax fibroblasts or their cm target human cancer cells growth machinery, triggering programmed cancer cell death . following co-culture with spalax fibroblasts or their cm, cancer cells  undergo morphological changes typical of apoptosis  <cit> : swelling, rounding, detachment, shrinkage and floating. moreover, nuclear condensation and abnormal mitochondrial fission as well as accumulation of cells in sub-g <dig>  also suggest apoptotic modes of cancer cell death. brdu incorporation, reflecting cell proliferation, confirmed that spalax cm contains anti-proliferative factors, inhibiting cell division in a time-dependent pattern. we further showed that the effect of spalax cm on cancer cells is transient and reversible. that is, replacing the cm with regular fresh medium leads to recovery of those cancer cells that had not been affected by the cm. last but not least, spalax fibroblasts presumably impair the aggressive behavior of tumor cells: the invasive phenotype of highly metastatic mda-mb- <dig> breast carcinoma cells was markedly reduced . noteworthy, the ability to form colonies in soft agar by 3mca-induced, spalax-derived fibrosarcoma was significantly suppressed by homologous fibroblasts, whereas heterologous fibroblasts  increased tumor formation . spalax fibroblasts also inhibited colony formation in soft agar by 3mca-induced, mouse-derived fibrosarcoma.

in order to strengthen our findings of spalax cells’ anti-cancer activity, compared to cells from laboratory, in-bred, aboveground mice and rats, we decided to follow the cancer activity pattern of two other, wild, out-bred, species. hence, fibroblast cells were propagated from the aboveground, wild, short-lived rodent acomys, and the subterranean, wild, long-lived heterocephalus. we have shown here that, similar to spalax cells, heterocephalus fibroblasts restrict growth and effectively kill cancer cells, while acomys cells behave similarly to rat and mice, that is, have no anti-cancer activity . we may assume that this anti-cancer ability might be shared by species living under extreme conditions and adapted to stress, such as hypoxia, which is directly related to cancer initiation and progression. it would be interesting to investigate this phenomenon in other hypoxia-tolerant species, such as other subterranean, high altitude and diving mammals.

previous studies showed that key hypoxia-regulatory genes in stromal fibroblasts, such as hif1-α and vegf, negatively influence tumorigenesis  <cit> . hif1-α is a known tumor-promoting transcription factor in most malignancies  <cit> ; however, its expression in tumor stromal fibroblasts could suppress cancer cell growth  <cit> . we have previously shown that hif1-α <cit>  as well as ros-scavenging enzymes  <cit>  are constitutively highly expressed in spalax. similar to our explanations of the failure to induce cancer in vivo in live spalax animals, in vitro studies, using fibroblast cells, demonstrated a significant role in adaptive response to oxidative stress, at least in part, via expression of ho- <dig>  <cit> . high levels of mitochondrial ros produced by cancer cells were shown to drive tumor development via remodeling of the stromal environment and enhancing invasion. recently, the roles of ros produced by fibroblasts in their trans-differentiation to myofibroblasts and in cancer cell invasiveness were reported  <cit> . ros-generating cm of mutated fibroblasts promoted metastasis of a <dig> melanoma through the increasing of ros and hif1-α stabilization in melanoma cells. however, when n-acetyl cysteine, a ros scavenger, was added to the system, hif1-α accumulation and melanoma cell invasion were inhibited  <cit> .

adaptive tolerance to hypoxia stress in spalax, both in vivo and in vitro, may grant the unique resistance to cancer through strong antioxidant mechanisms, among others , that quench ros before they spread and damage dna and other macromolecules, thus providing cellular homeostasis and cancer protection. as such, they are a milestone in our efforts in understanding the mechanisms by which the long-lived, hypoxia-tolerant spalax hinders cancer initiation and progression.

collectively, we have shown here an outstanding cancer resistance of the whole, live spalax, and not just in cultured cells, and anticancer activity of spalax cells on human cancer cells, and not just resisting transformation of its own healthy cells. this phenomenon extensively described here using different methodologies on cells from different ages of spalax, together with our initial observation of a similar ability of cells originated from another subterranean, long-lived, hypoxia- and cancer-resistant animal, the heterocephalus, highlight the importance to adopt such animal models with exceptional genetic-embedded tolerance to environmental stress, in cancer research.

our ongoing research is focused on identifying the factors secreted by spalax cells, and their selective interaction with cancer cells to suppress tumorigenesis. our first step to exploring the nature of the secreted factors was the heat-inactivation preliminary experiment presented here . the heat treatment of spalax cm caused only partial loss of the anti-cancer activity of spalax-generated cm. although not conclusive, this may indicate the involvement of protein factors in the observed phenomenon. we are also studying the signaling mechanisms and death receptors whose activation triggers cancer cell death. these studies will hopefully contribute to the identification of new anti-cancer mechanisms and future tumor preventive or therapeutic strategies. to our knowledge, the present study demonstrates, for the first time, spalax tolerance to chemically induced carcinogenesis along with direct anticancer effect of spalax fibroblasts on human cancer cells.

CONCLUSIONS
during  <dig> years of studies, with thousands of animals that crossed our animal house, we have never observed spontaneous tumors in spalax. similar phenomenon was observed also in another subterranean long-lived rodent, heterocephalus. based on this observation, a few studies  <cit>  have tried to explain cancer resistance in heterocephalus through testing known molecular mechanisms of malignant transformation on healthy fibroblast cells. though different molecular mechanisms were suggested, none of these studies dealt with anti-cancer properties of the whole, live animal in vivo, or on the direct interaction of its normal cells with cancer cells. hence, our presentation is a pioneering, genuine, breakthrough study. we have tried to induce cancer in spalax with chemical carcinogens that induced cancer in 100% of mice and rats, and the results allow us to state that spalax is extremely resistant not only to spontaneous cancer but also to induced cancer. furthermore, fibroblast cells from spalax inhibit growth and kill cancer cells from various species and cell lines. this is exhibited in both the co-culture system or by exposure to conditioned media harvested from spalax fibroblasts. cancer cell death was accompanied by decreased cancer cell viability and proliferation, reduced colony formation in soft agar, disturbed cell cycle progression, chromatin condensation, nuclei deformation and mitochondrial fragmentation.

this phenomenon is prominent in spalax fibroblasts, regardless of the animal age, from newborns a few days old to animals over  <dig> years old, as proved by the reversibility of cancer cells death, once their immediate interaction with spalax fibroblasts is terminated. the anti-cancer activity of spalax is specific to cancer cells and not to normal cells. it may be shared by other stress-adapted mammals as we initially showed here by co-culturing heterocephalus fibroblasts with cancer cells that also leads to cancer cell death.

“the classical mice model for cancer research has little predictive value and a negligible relation to that of human. far more than anything else, the lack of good animal models has become the rate-limiting step in human cancer research” . therefore, it would be extremely useful to study naturally cancer-resistant animals, as models to find ways to prevent cancer before it occurs. our results may lead to a breakthrough in the conservative paradigm of cancer research, completely dependent on laboratory, inbred rodents, and place spalax as the ‘missing’, appropriate candidate model for such studies. we anticipate that the long lived, hypoxia- and cancer-tolerant spalax will turn out to be a significant biological resource to biomedical research as a model organism for understanding cancer and its prevention.

