BACKGROUND
tes, or mobile genetic elements, are integral components of the eukaryotic genomes. because they have the ability to replicate and spread in the genome as primarily "selfish" genetic units  <cit> , tes tend to occupy significant portions of the genome  <cit> . recent evidence suggests that the "selfish" property may have enabled tes to provide the genome with potent agents to generate tremendous genetic and genomic plasticity  <cit> . tes transpose through either rna-mediated or dna-mediated mechanisms  <cit> . dna-mediated tes generally transpose by a cut-and-paste process, directly from dna to dna. rna-mediated tes transpose by a replicative process that involves transcription, reverse transcription, and integration of cdna molecules. tes in this category include the long terminal repeat  retrotransposons, non-ltrs, or long interspersed nuclear elements , and short interspersed nuclear elements .

it has been proposed in models of the lifecycle of dna-mediated tes  <cit>  that most tes will eventually become inactivated in a given species, which underscores the importance of horizontal transfer for te survival, a mechanism that allows tes to invade a naïve genome. horizontal transfers dna-mediated tes are well documented  <cit> . there have also been cases of non-ltr horizontal transfer proposed  <cit> , the most convincing case involving rte clade elements  <cit> . rte non-ltrs were first found in c. elegans and encode a single open-reading frame  containing reverse transcriptase and endonuclease activities  <cit> . in contrast, it has been argued that there is no reliable evidence of non-ltr horizontal transfer between eukaryotes in the last  <dig> million years according to age vs. divergence analysis  <cit> . research involving arthropod r <dig> and r <dig> families, which are site-specific non-ltrs that insert into 28s ribosomal rna genes, shows vertical inheritance of these elements since the origin of the drosophila melanogaster species subgroup, approximately 17– <dig> million years ago   <cit> . even multiple lineages have been found to coexist in the rrna loci and be maintained by vertical descent  <cit> . other studies on r <dig> and r <dig> lineages concluded that they have been vertically transmitted since the inception of the drosophila genus, approximately  <dig> mya or longer  <cit> . the site-specificity of r <dig> and r <dig> may result in a bias toward vertical transmission as site-specificity could offer a "safe haven", protecting the genome from deleterious insertions elsewhere.

juan-a, a jockey clade non site-specific non-ltr from ae. aegypti has been reportedly involved in potential horizontal transfer between the non-sibling species ae. albopictus and ae. polynesiensis  <cit> . however, crainey and colleagues  <cit>  recently suggest that vertical transmission explains the evolutionary relationship between juan elements in ae. aegypti, ae. albopictus, and culex pipiens quinquefasciatus . they also did not find evidence to support horizontal transfer of cr <dig> clade elements q and t <dig> in mosquitoes, although an earlier report suggested horizontal transfer could conceivably explain the identities and distributions of cr <dig> families in diverse taxa  <cit> . here we report a detailed evolutionary study of juan in the mosquito family culicidae. sequences of full-length juan elements have been reported from the yellow fever mosquito ae. aegypti  <cit>  and the house mosquito c. quinquefasciatus  <cit> . in this study, we have obtained sequences of juan elements from  <dig> mosquito species of six genera. our results support that non-ltrs are able to sustain their activity over long periods of evolutionary time relying primarily on vertical transmission while not excluding the possibility of rare horizontal transfer. our whole-genome analysis suggests that juan-a has been retrotransposing recently in evolutionary history, and it occupies approximately 3% of the ae. aegypti genome. we have also discussed the potential evolutionary impacts of juan-a in the ae. aegypti genome.

RESULTS
juan in aedes aegypti: abundance and recent activity
juan-a contributes significantly to the genome size of ae. aegypti, determined to be approximately 3% by repeatmasker . a highly variable copy number is found depending on what query region and identity criteria are used . juan-a appears to be the only juan-type element in ae. aegypti. after masking the genome sequence for juan-a  with repeatmasker  <cit> , tblastn  <cit>  with juan-a amino acid  sequence was used to identify closely related families. the two closest families found, aajockeyele <dig> and aajockeyele <dig> have approximately 37% aa identity to juan-a in the same region used for phylogenetic inference . aajockeyele <dig> and aajockeyele <dig> are part of divergent jockey clade families, not juan-type elements .

a includes sequences having 90% length compared to a full-length juan-a 

analysis of juan-a in ae. aegypti reveals that the family has undergone recent amplification, evidenced by a high degree of homogeneity between copies . we have chosen to look at groups of sequences having various identities to the juan-a query to obtain a more comprehensive picture of juan evolution in the genome. using lower identity criteria should allow the identification of both older retrotransposed copies as well as copies from more divergent juan-a-related sequences. there are  <dig> copies of full-length or nearly full-length juan-a, defined as having at least 90% length and at least 70% nucleotide identity compared to the  <dig>  kb published juan-a sequence. all  <dig> copies are at least 95% identical to juan-a, suggesting that there are no divergent subgroups among these nearly full-length juan elements. three hundred seventy-eight of the  <dig> copies are 99% identical to juan-a, indicating that the juan-a family has been transposing recently in evolutionary history. there is no appreciable difference in copy numbers between using 80% and 70% nt identity cutoffs . as stated in the methods, many gaps exist  in the ae. aegypti genome sequence assembly. we did not determine how many juan-a copies were truncated by these gaps so it is possible that many more full-length copies exist in the genome. in addition, we used a gap parameter value of  <dig> bp for our blast processing program. therefore, juan sequences with insertions of over  <dig> bp are not counted as full-length sequences.

we also used 5' and 3' end regions as queries to get a general impression of juan representation and activity in the genome. a higher number of 5' ends were found than 3' ends when looking at those copies that had greater than 97% identity to the query, a curious result. using blast through ncbi, many juan-a hits were found to est sequences from full-length cdna libraries . several hits to the 3' end of juan-a were from sequencing reactions using oligo dt primers, indicating that these are from polyadenylated transcripts.

juan is widely distributed in culicinae
juan family sequences were obtained by pcr from  <dig> species of six genera including aedes, ochlerotatus, psorophora, culex, deinocerites, and wyeomyia . pcr products from each species were cloned and sequenced. additional sequences were obtained from ae. albopictus and c. quinquefasciatus genomic libraries. pcr with  <dig> other species either yielded no product, or bands of the expected size that corresponded to other retrotransposons. these  <dig> species are: anopheles gambiae, an. stephensi, an. freenborni, an. quadrimaculatus, an. albimanus, armigeres subalbatus, culex erraticus, culiseta melanura, mansonia dyari, mansonia titillans, psorophora ferox, and toxorhynchites amboinensis. most but not all of the juan "negative" species were distantly related to the juan "positive" species. failure of pcr amplification could result from mutations in the primer target sequences or the absence of a "true" juan in the species. no pcr products were obtained from any anopheline species. when juan-a aa sequence is used for blast vs. the an. gambiae genome sequence, the most significant hit retrieved is ag-jen- <dig>  having only ~36% amino acid identity in the same region used for pcr. additional sequences added from the ae. aegypti and an. gambiae genome show the presence of several divergent jockey families that are paralogous to juan .

note: an asterisk indicates that sequences were obtained by both pcr and library screening.

juan appears to have been active throughout the mosquito family
six species have  <dig> or more juan sequences that share a high degree of intragenomic nt identity . values shown in table  <dig> are the mean of comparisons of each sequence vs. the consensus generated from that group of sequences. sequence identity of pcr clones ranges from approximately  <dig> % in ae. aegypti to  <dig> % at the nucleotide level in c. quinquefasciatus. four sequences from c. quinquefasciatus have over 99% identity. these do not appear to come from the same copy of juan in the genome since a deletion is present in one sequence and substitutions can be found at various positions among the different sequences. pcr and library clones from  <dig> of  <dig> species yielded sequences that do not have frameshifts or stop codons within this analyzed portion of the orf . altogether, these results indicate recent activity of juan in both closely related and divergent species.

note: only sequences in the same lineage are compared

negative selection has been acting on juan
the rates of synonymous  and nonsynonymous  codon substitution have been commonly used as a measure of selection pressure. a value of ds/dn close to  <dig> is taken to indicate neutral selection as would be expected for a pseudogene. values below and above  <dig> indicate positive and negative selection. vitellogenin-c , a single copy yolk protein-encoding gene  <cit>  was used as a comparison to juan, because we had vg-c sequences available for many species. it should be noted that vg-c is known to be a relatively fast-evolving gene  <cit> , but the fact does not affect the interpretation of juan ds/dn values. the ds/dn ratio was calculated for all juan sequences of the aedes/ochlerotatus and culex genera that had intact reading frames. juan sequences analyzed show a significant bias toward synonymous substitution, over  <dig> times that of the nonsynonymous rate. ds/dn values for juan from the aedes/ochlerotatus and culex genera were  <dig>   and  <dig>  , respectively. vg-c sequences from the aedes genera had a value of  <dig>  . this is consistent with the interpretation that juan has been retrotransposing in mosquito genomes, and this region is under negative selection due to functional constraint.

vertical transmission of juan and a few cases of phylogenetic incongruence
comparison of host phylogeny with te phylogeny is one method used to address the question of vertical vs. horizontal transmission. a detailed mosquito phylogeny has been previously constructed using vg-c  <cit> . we have only included vg-c sequences from species for which juan sequences were obtained in this study . in addition, we have also obtained sequence for vg-c from ae. simpsoni, which was not available from the previous dataset  <cit> . we used nt sequences for phylogenetic inference as in the previous study, and our phylogeny is consistent with the phylogeny based on the larger vg-c dataset  <cit> .

phylogenetic inference using bayesian methods shows support for the vertical transmission of juan in the mosquito family as comparison of juan and host phylogenies shows overall congruence of tree topology with few exceptions . w. michelli is basal to the culex genus and d. cancer group in the vg-c phylogeny  while the juan phylogeny  shows w. michelli as a sister group to d. cancer. the d. cancer sequence is degenerate  and therefore may complicate phylogenetic resolution here. furthermore, p. ciliata is basal to the aedes and ochlerotatus genera in the host phylogeny. however, the juan sequences isolated from p. ciliata are found within the ochlerotatus genus. there are also indications of two sets of paralogous juan sequences from o. taeniorhinchus .

the juan phylogeny suggests that horizontal transfer could have occurred in a few cases but the support is weak. one case involves ae. aegypti and ae. albopictus, in which  <dig> cloned pcr products from ae. albopictus were nearly identical to sequences from ae. aegypti. sequences obtained by screening an ae. albopictus genomic library are found grouped with ae. polynesiensis sequences as expected according to known mosquito phylogeny. another case involves c. quinquefasciatus, for which we also have sequences from both pcr and a genomic library. the two library sequences group with c. molestus and c. pipiens , as expected according to host phylogeny. however, the pcr sequences group most closely with c. nigripalpus. o. atropalpus  and o. epactius  sequences are almost identical with over 99% nucleotide identity, but they come from species that are in the same species complex where introgression may exist.

discussion
genomic impacts of juan-a in ae. aegypti
juan contributes approximately 3% to the ae. aegypti genome sequence while the entire te complement is estimated to be 47% . with its significant contribution to genome size and the presence of hundreds of highly homogeneous full-length or near full-length copies, a natural question concerns the genomic impact of juan. tes can cause chromosomal inversions by providing sites for ectopic homologous recombination and by other mechanisms  <cit> . it might be thought that the hundreds of highly homogeneous copies might contribute to genomic instability.

most non-ltr families usually consist of a large majority of 5' truncated copies, which has been attributed to incomplete reverse transcription, template switching, or other mechanisms  <cit> . however, when using higher stringency for copy number determination , there is a higher copy number of 5' ends of juan-a sequences than 3' ends . this could be a result of selection for 5' ends, selection against 3' ends, or possibly a distribution bias of 3' end insertion into regions that are underrepresented in the genome sequence. full-length non-ltrs have been shown to contain their own self-sufficient internal pol ii promoter in the 5'utr  <cit> . it is interesting that so many 5'utrs of juan-a are present in the genome. these 5' utrs, if functional as internal promoters, may produce a transcriptional burden. it is interesting to note that our reporter assays have not demonstrated promoter activity of the juan-a 5'utr in cell lines from three mosquito species, while 5'utrs of mosquito non-ltrs from  <dig> non-ltr clades have proven active in all  <dig> lines . perhaps juan-a is dependent on upstream promoter elements for transcription, as upstream sequences have been found to greatly influence the activity of the human l <dig> promoter activity  <cit> . past analysis of juan-c transcripts from cell culture showed that all transcripts analyzed were transcribed from upstream of the juan element  <cit> . with its recent amplification and recent activity, the study of juan may offer a good opportunity to increase our understanding the competing forces of non-ltr activity and host regulation.

juan evolution
to address the topic of vertical transmission and to analyze the distribution and evolution of juan in culicidae, a detailed phylogeny of the host species was needed. most phylogenetic inferences of mosquitoes based on molecular data have been focused on the anopheles genus due to its medical importance. more comprehensive analyses have been performed using the white gene  <cit>  and vg-c  <cit> . the vg-c sequences available to us offered the most comprehensive phylogeny with many species from the aedes and culex genera, where juan was discovered.

the jockey clade is comprised of highly divergent families which have been found in several insect species  <cit> . representatives of juan have been reported in mosquitoes and in drosophila  <cit> . however, those elements are distant relatives of the juan-a and juan-c elements , which we are investigating in this study. we have focused on juan-a and juan-c  because use of paralogous sequences can lead to erroneous conclusions of phylogenetic relationships. results from crainey and colleagues  are consistent with vertical transmission but they also included many paralogous sequences from three mosquito genera. as mentioned above, we focus on juan sensu stricto and survey many mosquito species to investigate the question of juan evolution. it is important to note that our results indicate that juandm  <cit>  is not actually a juan element, strictly speaking, since it groups with three divergent ae. aegypti jockey elements, having 99% support . this underscores the importance of including many divergent representatives while performing phylogenetic inference.

regarding the cases of potential horizontal transfer, there are alternative explanations. for the ae. albopictus  and o. epactius  sequences, the first suspicion is genomic dna contamination of the pcr reaction. the ae. albopictus sequences obtained from a genomic library were found grouped with ae. polynesiensis, as expected. it should be noted that the library was constructed from the nepal strain and pcr was performed on the oahu strain. bensaadi-merchermek, salvado, and mouches  reported the absence of juan-a from ae. albopictus oahu strain . if our pcr results can be corroborated using other methods, this would suggest the horizontal transfer of juan-a to this strain of ae. albopictus. however, juan-a was also reported absent from strains of ae. polynesiensis and o. triseriatus  <cit> , both species of which we were able to obtain pcr products that grouped phylogenetically as expected, supporting vertical transmission of these elements. for c. quinquefasciatus, sequences obtained from library screening correspond with the host phylogeny, being grouped in the c. pipiens species complex. in contrast, sequences obtained from pcr are found outside this group and placed closely with c. nigripalpus with approximately 94% nucleotide identity to nig <dig> . although possible, the nucleotide identities between the c. quinquefasciatus sequences and the c. nigripalpus sequence are not close enough to suspect genomic dna contamination of the pcr. another possibility is that different sublineages of juan could have been sampled by pcr versus library screening. for example, there are two sublineages represented in o. taeniorhinchus. the amplification of juan sequences from contaminating genomic dna cannot be ruled out, especially when using degenerate primers with low stringency pcr conditions. this seems unlikely in the case of c. quinquefasciatus, because these multiple sequences form their own homogeneous group with high nucleotide identity. if they resulted from contaminating genomic dna, then they would be expected to group with sequences of the contaminating species. in summary, there is evidence for multiple juan lineages, which could explain some of the observed phylogenetic incongruence. however, further analysis is required to determine whether the phylogeny of the suspect sequences is due to horizontal transfer, genomic dna contamination, or sampling of different sublineages.

CONCLUSIONS
it has been proposed that the horizontal transfer of non-ltrs are rare events and few reported cases have strong supporting evidence without alternative explanations  <cit> . in contrast, there are many cases documented for the horizontal transfer of dna-mediated tes. without excluding the possibility of horizontal transfers, we find that juan family members do mirror their host's phylogeny closely, supporting the vertical transmission of these elements. our results suggest the juan family was able to sustain its activity in the mosquito family over long periods of evolutionary time. estimates of the time since aedes and culex divergence would suggest that juan has been maintained for at least 22– <dig> million years  <cit> . furthermore, the presence of multiple culicinae lineages approximately  <dig> mya has been proposed  <cit> , suggesting that juan may have persisted for at least this time. detailed studies involving the site-specific non-ltrs r <dig> and r <dig> in drosophila showed that they are vertically transmitted and are maintained in their respective genomes  <cit> . it may be argued that vertical transmission of r <dig> and r <dig> over a long evolutionary time could be unique to site-specific non-ltrs. this study, which was performed in a different insect group using a non-ltr that does not exhibit site-specificity, strengthens the hypothesis that non-ltrs are able sustain their activity without the need of horizontal transfer. it will be interesting to see if other non-ltrs behave in a similar fashion, especially those from other clades and divergent taxa that have not been studied in detail.

