BACKGROUND
myosins are a tremendously diverse family of actin-binding atp-dependent molecular motors that appeared and diversified early during eukaryotic evolution 
 <cit> . all myosins share a homologous myosin head domain containing the atpase and actin-binding activities, while particular combinations of additional domains define the various myosin “classes” or “types”. in their recent comprehensive analyses of myosin diversity, odronitz and kollmar 
 <cit>  identified  <dig> myosin classes at the eukaryote scale, of which  <dig> were present in the last common eukaryotic ancestor. the most intensively studied myosins, class-ii myosins  are characterised by the insertion of a glycin  in the head domain, the presence of a sh <dig> domain n-terminal to the head domain, and a long c-terminal tail mostly comprised of a coiled-coil domain. class ii myosins originated in unikonts, i.e. eukaryotes ancestrally bearing a single flagellum or no flagellum, including the amoebozoans, fungi and holozoans  
 <cit> .

myosin ii is a phylogenetically well-defined and diversified class 
 <cit> , to which notably belong the well-known myosins that provide the physical force for muscle contraction in animals. beyond these crucial functions in animal muscle cells, a wide range of non-muscle myosin ii functions is documented. myosin ii is for example involved in amoeboid motility in the unicellular life stage of the amoebozoan dictyostelium discoideum <cit> . in metazoans, various myosin ii proteins play pivotal roles in cytokinesis 
 <cit> , cell migration 
 <cit> , cell-cell adhesion 
 <cit> , or cell polarity 
 <cit> . therefore, myosins ii regulate fundamental aspects of cellular shape morphology 
 <cit> , cytokinesis 
 <cit> , cell differentiation 
 <cit>  and more generally, many aspects of cellular behaviour 
 <cit> . whatever the context , mhcii are integrated within macromolecular complexes notably through direct interaction with smaller proteins called “myosin light chains”  .

previous analyses of myosin ii proteins in bilaterian animals have recognised two phylogenetic groups, the first containing genes expressed in smooth muscle cells and in non-muscle cells, while genes of the second group are specifically expressed in striated  muscle cells 
 <cit> . this major dichotomy has been thought to reflect independent evolutionary origin from non-muscle cells for each major type of muscle cells, i.e. smooth muscle cells and striated muscle cells 
 <cit> , through independent co-option of different myosin ii paralogues. however, this suggestion was based on data from bilaterian animals only and remained highly speculative.

outside from the bilaterian clade, muscle cells are present in two animal phyla, cnidaria and ctenophora, and this cell type is classically viewed as a synapomorphy  of the eumetazoa , together with nerve cells. most cnidarian muscle cells are in fact multifunctional myoepithelial cells 
 <cit> , integrated within the ectoderm and endoderm 
 <cit> , although there are some reported instances of mesogleal muscle cells in cnidarians 
 <cit> . the myoepithelial cell of cnidarians typically comprises a contractile portion  attached to a globular cellular body involved in other functions  
 <cit> . in contrast, ctenophores are commonly considered to have true muscle cells, i.e. their muscle fibres lack a cellular body with filament-free cytoplasm . in addition, part of the ctenophore musculature is located in the mesoglea and develops from a mesodermal-like germ layer 
 <cit> . therefore, comparative studies using ctenophores have a great potential for improving our understanding of the early evolution of muscle cells and muscular protein families.

the phylogenetic position of ctenophores is still debated. some recent phylogenomic analyses have placed them as the sister group to all other metazoans 
 <cit> , but this result was probably due to an artefact of long-branch attraction 
 <cit> . according to the phylogenomic analyses of philippe et al. <cit> , ctenophores and cnidarians form a coelenterate clade, sister-group to the bilaterians, within monophyletic eumetazoa.

ctenophores are marine animals with a highly original biradially-symmetrical body plan and featuring unique anatomical traits  
 <cit> . their main distinctive feature is a locomotory system consisting of eight distinctive meridional rows of comb plates , each made of the many fused giant cilia of “polster cells”. at their aboral pole, ctenophores possess an apical sensory organ involved in equilibration and flanked by two elongated ciliated areas called polar fields. there are two distinct nerve nets extending throughout the body, the epithelial  nerve net and the mesogleal nerve net 
 <cit> . the gastro-vascular system, of mainly endodermal origin, opens at one extremity by the mouth and at the other by two anal pores. the ramified gastro-vascular canal system allows water circulation and distribution of nutrients throughout the body. ctenophores are hermaphrodite, with paired male and female gonads housed in the walls of eight endodermal meridional canals, placed under each of the comb rows. most ctenophores catch prey by using a pair of long and contractile tentacles which bear lateral branches or tentillae on their oral side. the epidermis of tentacles and tentillae is densely covered with adhesive cells called colloblasts, to which the prey adheres. tentacles can extend from and retract into a tentacular sheath whose epithelial lining is continuous with the outer epidermis.

in the ctenophore order cydippida, to which belong our model species pleurobrachia pileus, two fundamental categories of muscle cells can be distinguished: parietal muscle fibres are located in the basal part of the ectodermal epithelium, above the basal lamina , while mesogleal muscle fibres are positioned below the basal lamina and run through the mesoglea  
 <cit> . in addition, a special mesogleal musculature is housed in the core of tentacles and tentillae . the very particular “mesogleal giant smooth fibres” of ctenophores belonging to the order beroida  have been the subject of specific studies 
 <cit> , while other muscle cell types, and muscles of other ctenophores, are much less known. ctenophore muscles are considered to be of the smooth type due to the absence of a striation pattern on electronographies , but their mesogleal muscle cells are multinucleated 
 <cit> , which represents a fundamental difference with the mononucleated smooth muscle cells of bilaterians.

in tentaculate ctenophores, myogenesis is particularly intense throughout the life span in the thickened tentacle base , where histogenesis continuously compensates for the loss of tentillae and tentacle pieces that are damaged upon feeding. experimental data indicate that  <dig> hours are sufficient for regeneration of an entire tentacle 
 <cit> . putative stem cells of the colloblasts and muscle cells have been recently characterised in the tentacle root of the ctenophore pleurobrachia pileus by expression analyses of piwi and vasa genes and dna-labelling experiments . the muscle putative stem cells and progenitors are localised along a median ridge in the symmetry plane of the tentacle root on its internal face 
 <cit> . thanks to these characteristics, the tentacle root is a particularly suitable model to investigate myogenesis in ctenophores.

we studied the expression of three paralogous class ii myosin  genes in the adult of the cydippid ctenophore pleurobrachia pileus. in parallel, the complex organisation of muscle fibres throughout the pleurobrachia pileus body was investigated using phalloidin staining to help understand the gene expression patterns. one of the mhcii paralogues was specifically expressed in muscle cells  while the other two had non-muscle expression. several evolutionary scenarios are proposed to interpret the ctenophore mhcii expression data in light of our reconstruction of the mhcii gene phylogeny and of the known functions of bilaterian mhcii genes.

methods
specimen collection
adult specimens of pleurobrachia pileus were collected in villefranche-sur-mer and in roscoff  between march and june using specific plankton nets. they were kept at 16°c in filtered natural seawater, under continuous water circulation and fed daily with artemia nauplii.

blast searches and phylogenetic analyses
mhcii sequences were retrieved by tblastn searches using mus musculus mhcii sequences on two pleurobrachia pileus transcriptome assemblies:  phrap assembly of a collection of about  <dig>  <dig> ests, sequenced from animals collected in villefranche-sur-mer  by the sanger method at the genoscope  , and publicly available in dbest  and  newbler assembly of one run of  <dig> sequencing of total rna extracted from mixed embryonic, larval, and adult stages with starting material obtained from roscoff .

the alignment was constructed using published sequences and sequences retrieved by tblastn searches on public databases for a representative taxon set. sequences were aligned using muscle 
 <cit> . ambiguous regions of the alignment were removed using gblocks 
 <cit> . the initial alignment  is provided in additional file 
 <dig>  this alignment contains the head domain of several myosins belonging to classes other than class ii . after pruning of ambiguously-aligned sites, two final sub-alignments were extracted to take into account the absence of sequence data for the head domain in one of the ctenophore sequences :  a first alignment containing the outgroup sequences . the ppimhciib <dig> gene was excluded from this alignment because its partial sequence contains only the tail and therefore it has no alignable residues with non-class ii myosins ;  a second alignment, in which non-class ii myosin sequences have been eliminated, thus allowing inclusion of ppimhciib <dig> . maximum-likelihood analyses were performed using the phyml program 
 <cit> , with the wag model of amino-acid substitution and a bionj tree as the input tree. a gamma distribution with eight categories was used. the gamma shape parameter and the proportion of invariant sites were optimised during the searches. the statistical significance of the nodes was assessed by bootstrapping .

in situ hybridisation
adults were fixed at 4°c in 4% paraformaldehyde in 50% seawater and 50% pbst , for  <dig> hour then washed three times in pbst and dehydrated through a graded series of ethanol and stored in methanol at −20°c. the in situ hybridisation  protocol was as described in 
 <cit>  but colour was developed with nbt/bcip . after ish, samples were stained with dapi  for 15 min to visualise dna, and then washed  <dig> times for 15 min in pbst. before mounting in citifluor solution , animals were dissected. longitudinal and transverse sections were performed to clarify the precise distribution of the gene expression patterns. for longitudinal views of the median expansion of the tentacle root, the lateral expansions were removed with forceps. negative controls  performed in parallel showed no staining after extensive revelation, except occasionally in a few isolated cells in the general epithelium . for this reason, staining of isolated epithelial cells occasionally obtained with mhcii probes was not taken into account.

immunofluorescence
animals were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde in 50% seawater and 50% pbst for 30 min, at room temperature, then samples were washed several times in pbst, dehydrated through a graded series of ethanol and stored in methanol at −20°c. after re-hydration to pbs, samples were permeabilised with triton-x <dig> . after blocking with 1% bovine serum albumin, samples were incubated with the rat monoclonal anti-tyrosylated α-tubulin or yl1/ <dig> antibody ,  for  <dig> hours at room temperature. after washing with pbs triton-x <dig>  <dig> %, samples were incubated overnight at 4°c with the alexa fluor  <dig> goat anti- rat igg secondary antibody. dilutions of primary and secondary antibodies were made using 1x pbs containing  <dig> % triton-x <dig> 

phalloidin staining
for phalloidin staining, specimens were not dehydrated after fixation. they were incubated for 45 min in a dilute phalloidin-tritc  solution  and rinsed three times in pbst. all specimens were finally stained with dapi  for 15 min for dna visualisation, and then washed three times for 15 min in pbst. they were micro-dissected and mounted in citifluor solution .

edu labelling of dna-replicating cells
edu  is a thymidine analogue similar to the classical brdu but quicker and easier to use 
 <cit> . edu incorporation assays were done using the click-it edu alexa fluor  <dig> imaging kit from invitrogen . the protocol was as described in 
 <cit> . we performed  <dig> hours of pulse and no chase to visualise proliferating cells in the aboral region.

sections for light and transmission electron microscopy 
two types of sections  were performed. for cryosectioning, tentacle roots extracted after whole mount ish were incubated for two days in pbst 1x, 15% sucrose at 4°c, then for  <dig> hours in pbst 1x, 15% sucrose,  <dig> % pig gelatine. then, blocks were frozen at −65°c in 2-methyl-butan. cryosectioning was done on a leica cm <dig> s cryostat or on a jung frigocut 2800e cryostat, at a thickness of 14 μm. slices were mounted in citifluor .

pleurobrachia pileus living specimens for ultra thin sections were fixed for  <dig> minutes at room temperature in 3% glutaraldehyde,  <dig>  m sodium cacodylate ph  <dig> ,  <dig>  m sodium chloride,  <dig> % oso <dig> . they were then transferred to the same solution without oso <dig> for  <dig> hours. specimens were then post-fixed for  <dig> hour in 1% oso <dig>   <dig> k-ferricyanide,  <dig> % nahco <dig> ph  <dig>  and  <dig>  m sodium chloride . finally, material was dehydrated through an ethanol series, and embedded in spurr. sections were done using a leica ultracut r ultra-microtome, at a thickness of 60 nm for ultra thin sections.

imaging
pictures of pleurobrachia pileus entire specimen and tentacle root observed in toto were acquired on a stereo-microscope olympus szx <dig> using a q-imaging qicam with image pro software . all fluorescence and dic images were acquired on an olympus bx <dig> microscope using a q-imaging camera with image pro plus software . to enhance some details, higauss filter was used on some pictures . tem images were acquired on a jeol jem- <dig> equipped with a morada  camera at the “centre commun de microscopie appliquée”  .

RESULTS
ancestral duplication of class ii myosin heavy chain genes in metazoans
by blast searches on pleurobrachia pileus ests and phylogenetic analyses we could identify three ctenophore myosin heavy chain ii genes . although these searches were conducted on relatively extensive transcriptomic data, and myosin genes are expected to be expressed at a high level, we cannot exclude the existence of additional paralogues in the pleurobrachia pileus genome. of these three identified pleurobrachia pileus paralogues, one  falls in a clade containing all bilaterian mhcii genes expressed in smooth muscle cells and/or non-muscle cells , while the two remaining genes  branch with bilaterian mhcii genes expressed in striated muscle cells . we conducted two phylogenetic analyses with different outgroup gene samplings, providing essentially similar results: an analysis rooted using the mhcii sequence of the amoebozoan dictyostelium discoideum  and another analysis, rooted with sequences of myosin classes v, vii and x  .

the presence of genes from ctenophore, cnidarians  but also sponge  and placozoan  in both mhcii clades indicates that the duplication happened before the last common ancestor of metazoans. other holozoans  each have one orthologue of mhciia but no mhciib gene, suggesting that the mhciia/mhciib duplication occurred in the last common ancestor of holozoans and was followed by independent mhciib losses in the various unicellular holozoan lineages. an alternative explanation could be that the duplication took place in a metazoan ancestor, but that sequences of mhciib are misplaced in the tree due to a higher subsequent sequence divergence. in vertebrates, the subdivision of mhcii genes into mhciia and mhciib orthology groups is clearly correlated with functional specialisation, mhciib genes being associated with striated muscle cells and mhciia genes being expressed in either non-muscle or smooth muscle cells. in addition, independent diversification within both groups occurred in vertebrates . finally, the two ctenophore mhciib paralogues ppimhciib <dig> and ppimhciib <dig> are quite divergent but they clearly originated from a ctenophore-specific duplication within the mhciib group .

the three mhcii paralogous genes are differentially expressed in the pleurobrachia pileus tentacle root
in the tentacle root, ppimhciia is expressed in the putative stem cells/undifferentiated progenitors of colloblasts and muscle cells. the morphology of the tentacle root  is summarised in figure 
4a-a”. the expression of ppimhciia closely looks like that of the “stem cell genes” investigated in alié et al. <cit> . on the internal side of the tentacle root, the ppimhciia antisense rna probe stains three longitudinal lines running from the oral to the aboral pole of the tentacle root : one median line and two lateral lines. in longitudinal section , the median staining appears confined to the distal extremity or ridge of the median expansion, although it is more diffuse towards both poles. in transverse sections of the tentacle root after whole-mount ppimhciia ish, transcripts appear clearly confined to the three ridges of the tentacle root expansions , where putative stem cells are localised according to a previous study 
 <cit> : muscle stem cells in the median ridge and colloblast stem cells in the lateral ridges. transcript distribution appears more diffuse when the sectioning plane is closer to the oral pole , consistent with staining distribution in longitudinal view.

our tem observations of the median ridge in transverse section  identify muscle putative stem cells as elongated, undifferentiated cells with a high nucleo-cytoplasmic ratio and some mitochondria, as described for muscle cell progenitors by franc 
 <cit> . these cells are organised in two symmetrical and closely tightened adjacent rows . in the lateral ridges, colloblast putative stem cells are more irregularly arranged ; their cytological characteristics have been described elsewhere 
 <cit> . differentiating colloblasts, originating from these stem cells, can be traced on transverse sections thanks to their brownish colour which appears approximately where ppimhciia expression vanishes .

the ppimhciib <dig> gene is expressed in the differentiating muscle cells of the tentacle root. in internal view , transcripts are detected in two neighbouring but disconnected regions, corresponding respectively to the muscle differentiation zones of the tentacle and of the tentillae:  two wide bands  positioned on both sides of the median expansion;  an additional domain towards the oral pole , where the tentillae are produced. in the longitudinal view section, these two expression domains are also clearly distinct , with the first here appearing as a wide fan-shaped stained area converging to the base of the tentacle , in addition to a thin stripe located just above the median ridge . these two ppimhciib <dig> expression domains are also shown in transverse section : expression in differentiating muscle cells of the tentacle axis is visible on the two aboral-most sections  and expression in differentiating muscle cells of tentillae is visible on the two oral-most sections .

this interpretation of ppimhciib <dig> expression patterns in the tentacle root is supported by our tem observations, which identify four distinct stages of tentacle muscle differentiation from stem cells to fully differentiated muscle cells . the first step corresponds to cell multiplication in the median ridge . the 2nd step is represented by spindle-shaped mononucleate progenitors found laterally and aligned in an oblique orientation . these cells are connected to each other by cytoplasmic bridges . a more advanced cell stage  is represented by multinucleated cells , located closer to the symmetry plane of the tentacle root , indicating that progenitors have undergone cell fusion. these cells contain well-developed endoplasmic reticulum and many mitochondria, but are still devoid of myofilaments. finally, mature muscle cells are observed in two symmetric and median bundles , externally surrounded by the two preceding less differentiated cell populations. these differentiated muscle cells are multinucleated and contain dense longitudinal myofilaments as well as many mitochondria . the first expression domain of ppimhciib <dig> described above closely matches the differentiation zone of tentacle muscle , an interpretation also supported by the strong expression observed for the muscle differentiation marker gene tropomyosin in exactly the same zone .

the formation of tentillae is an independent process occurring at the oral pole of the tentacle root. the second domain of ppimhciib <dig> expression  corresponds to the production zone of the tentillae, and therefore the gene is also expressed in differentiating muscle cells of the tentillae. more aborally, ppimhciib <dig> shows a striped pattern in the youngest formed tentillae .

in the mature tentacular apparatus, ppimhciib <dig> is expressed in the muscle masses housed within the tentillae, but not in those of the tentacle itself . in longitudinal and transverse sections of mature tentillae, ppimhciib <dig> expression is seen in two parallel bundles corresponding to the position of muscle fibres . these muscle bundles are separated by an unstained central nerve cord, revealed by counter-staining using the structural marker yl1/ <dig>  , known to stain nerve cells with high intensity in pleurobrachia pileus <cit> . the expression pattern of ppitropomyosin in the tentilla is identical to that of ppimhciib <dig> , supporting the muscular nature of ppimhciib1-expressing cells. the fact that ppimhciib <dig> and ppitropomyosin genes  are expressed in the mature muscles of tentillae but not of the tentacle  indicates that these two kinds of contractile structures have muscle fibres of different types. it is therefore clear that in spite of their topological relationships, tentillae are not just ramifications of the tentacle but instead are original organs, both ontogenetically and structurally.

the expression pattern of the other mhciib paralogue ppimhciib <dig> is sharply different from that of ppimhciib <dig> in the tentacle root, as it seems to associate with neural cells instead of muscle cells. in internal and longitudinal views, ppimhciib <dig> expression is visible as a thin stripe above the median ridge, which becomes broader at the aboral pole and does not reach the oral extremity . in transverse sections, transcripts were detected in a median group of cells located between the two bundles of differentiated muscle cells . counter-staining of these transverse sections using the anti-tyrosylated-α-tubulin antibody  reveals that the ppimhciib2-expressing zone corresponds to a nerve plexus . a closer examination of this area reveals the presence of two symmetrical layers of nerve cells sandwiched between tentacle muscles . this nerve plexus also runs through tentacle and tentillae ; it is depicted  in figure 
 <dig> 

towards the oral pole, ppimhciib <dig> is also expressed in the production zone of the tentillae , in the form of a thin external stripe of positive cells at the interface between the lateral and median expansions . yl1/ <dig> and dapi counterstaining reveal the presence of densely packed neural cells with small nuclei on a thin layer corresponding to the zone of ppimhciib <dig> expression . at the level of the youngest formed tentillae, ppimhciib <dig> is expressed in a striped pattern, probably corresponding to the nerve cords of each tentilla . however, mature tentillae do not show any ppimhciib <dig> expression signal, suggesting that ppimhciib <dig> is expressed in a sub-population of neural cells, or at a particular stage of neuron differentiation.

other sites of ppimhciia expression are associated with putative stem cells and proliferating progenitors
the expression of ppimhciia is consistently associated with undifferentiated dividing cells in the adult pleurobrachia pileus. within the aboral sensory complex, ppimhciia is expressed in eight patches of cells at the proximal extremities of the polar field marginal and central zones . these cells present a high nucleocytoplasmic ratio and are densely packed . the four internal-most patches  correspond to the four stem cell pools identified by alié et al. 
 <cit> . therefore, ppimhciia expression encompasses these stem cell populations but is not restricted to them. in fact, the distribution of ppimhciia expression in the aboral sensory complex closely matches the distribution of proliferating cells as revealed by edu incorporation experiments with a 12-hour pulse and no chase .

the ppimhciia gene is strongly expressed in both female and male gonads. in pleurobrachia pileus, eight meridional canals located under the eight comb rows contain the gonads in their walls. the male and female germlines are spatially segregated at both sides of each canal. expression is observed in the entire female gonad  where young and mature oocytes as well as nurse cells are stained . in the male gonad, transcripts are restricted to spermatogenesis stages, in the most peripheral part of the gonad, while the internal-most part of the canal wall  is not stained . to conclude, ppimhciia is expressed in the germ cells of pleurobrachia pileus, at all stages of oogenesis and during spermatogenesis but not in mature spermatozoids.

within the comb rows, ppimhciia is expressed in the forming combs and at both extremities of the mature combs . recognisable by their small size and characteristic position , oral and aboral baby combs are entirely stained . in mature combs, transcripts are restricted to two crescent shape areas at both extremities of each comb . the observation of dapi counter-staining indicates that positive cells possess a round nucleus with prominent nucleolus, whereas the unstained poster cells have elongated and twisted nuclei . these expression sites correspond to progenitors of the polster cells  as identified in a previous work 
 <cit> .

ppimhciib <dig> is specifically expressed in various kinds of muscle cells
ppimhciib <dig> is expressed in both kinds of muscle cells described in pleurobrachia pileus: parietal and mesogleal muscle fibres. using phalloidin-stained preparations, we could reconstruct the complex arrangement of these muscle fibres throughout the pleurobrachia pileus body . an important observation  is that the parietal musculature consists mainly of fibres placed in a circular orientation  and present throughout the body wall, whereas longitudinal parietal fibres are restricted to a few particular regions of the body:  aborally, the four areas delineated by the four pairs of adjacent ciliated grooves;  in the tentacular plane, two symmetrical muscle bands extending from each tentacle sheath opening to the mouth region;  in the oral region, the area comprised between the oral extremity of the comb rows and the mouth. at least for the two latter sites, the presence of longitudinal fibres is clearly linked to a functional requirement for strong and relatively rapid contractions allowing changes in mouth orientation and shape during feeding 
 <cit> . the arrangement of mesogleal fibres is more complex and is only outlined in figure 
 <dig> for those located in the equatorial plane. these mesogleal fibres can notably connect two adjacent meridional canals , a meridional canal and the external epithelium  or the apical organ and the tentacle sheath .
 <dig> 

after a short time of ish-signal development, ppimhciib <dig> expression in the parietal musculature is detected only in longitudinal fibres . notably, ppimhciib <dig> is strongly expressed in the two symmetrical muscle bands that run from the tentacle sheath openings to the mouth . a neural condensation called the juxta-tentacular nerve cord 
 <cit>  is located in the centre of these muscle bands . there is also strong ppimhciib <dig> expression in the numerous short longitudinal fibres that surround the mouth opening . when the ish signal is allowed to develop for a longer time, the whole parietal musculature  becomes stained . the observed difference in terms of staining intensity between latitudinal and longitudinal parietal fibres might reflect either different levels of ppimhciib <dig> gene expression, or an optical effect due to the smaller diameter and looser organisation of latitudinal fibres compared to longitudinal ones . our observation of phalloidin and dapi stained preparations revealed that parietal muscle cells are multinucleated  .

ppimhciib <dig> is also expressed in mesogleal muscle fibres . strong ppimhciib <dig> staining is notably observed in mesogleal muscle fibres attached to the meridional canals . some of the ppimhciib <dig> expressing mesogleal fibres are shorter and connect the two paragastric canals to the mouth . phalloidin and dapi staining confirmed that the mesogleal fibres are multinucleated  . these observations furthermore indicate that mesogleal muscle fibres are on average much thicker than parietal muscle fibres and are ramified at both extremities where they attach to the epidermis or to the meridional canals .

finally, our data on ppimhciib <dig> expression provide interesting insights into the nature of an enigmatic type of fibres  tightly associated with the combs . these fibres are conspicuously stained with phalloidin and they extend medially from one comb to the following one, with shorter lateral fibres occurring only on the oral side of each comb . these structures have been observed previously by chun 
 <cit> , erroneously interpreted as extensions of the polster cells in hormiphora by samassa 
 <cit> , and more recently observed by hernandez-nicaise 
 <cit> . although they closely resemble muscle fibres in phalloidin-stained preparations, inter-comb fibres do not show any ppimhciib <dig> expression and recent observations suggest that they do not contract following stimulation . therefore, they are probably not muscular but could represent supporting fibres, possibly maintaining the mechanical cohesion of the comb row against the tension generated by comb beating.

outside the tentacle root, ppimhciib <dig> is expressed in various types of non-muscle cells
ppimhciib <dig> is expressed in different cell types in pleurobrachia pileus but apparently not in muscle cells. close examination of the floor of the aboral organ reveals the presence of two distinct sites of expression: two peripheral spots close to the epithelial papillae , and two paired internal stripes, located between the balancers . cells surrounding the anal pores are also stained by ppimhciib <dig> .

moreover, ppimhciib <dig> is also expressed in the female gonad , but here the staining is restricted to growing oocytes and their surrounding nurse cells  unlike ppimhciia which is expressed throughout the ovary . oocyte and nurse cells are known to belong to the same cell lineage 
 <cit> . another site of ppimhciib <dig> expression are the paragastric canals, where staining is restricted to particular clusters of cells  on the edges of the canals .

in addition, ppimhciib <dig> has a complex expression pattern within mature combs, in  both lateral extremities of the comb , which might reflect ppimhciib <dig> expression in polster cell stem cells/progenitors,  a subterminal spot  and  two small symmetrical groups of cells in the centre of each comb . these latter two cell sub-populations have not been previously distinguished morphologically. a last expression site of ppimhciib <dig> is observed in the ectodermal epithelium along the tentacular plane . this stripe of ppimhciib <dig> expression is located close to the juxtatentacular nerve cord and of the longitudinal muscle expressing ppimhciib <dig> and ppitropomyosin . however, the ppimhciib2-expressing cells in this region are not muscle cells but round-shape epithelial cells of unclear nature .

discussion and 
CONCLUSIONS
conserved expression of mhciia genes in the germ line, in stem cells and in proliferating cells
the bilaterian orthologues of ppimhciia are expressed in smooth muscle cells or in non-muscle cells 
 <cit> . some of the vertebrate members of this group of myosin ii are classically known for their role in the contractile activity of smooth muscle cells, but other members are essential for mitosis, in all cell lineages, being involved in the formation of the contractile ring during cytokinesis. recent findings demonstrate that smooth/non-muscle myosin ii also play an active role in various other cellular activities such as generation of cell polarity, cell migration and cell-cell adhesion . moreover, a recent work based on specific inhibition of non-muscle myosins ii demonstrated their involvement in self-renewal programmes in human and mouse pluripotent stem cells 
 <cit> .

in pleurobrachia pileus, the expression pattern of ppimhciia is strikingly similar to that of the “stem cell markers”: vasapiwibruno and pl <dig> <cit>  and the sox genes ppisox <dig> and ppisox <dig> <cit> . its expression territories include the male and female gonads and several spatially restricted pools of stem cells / progenitors involved in somatic cell renewal, within the comb plates, aboral sensory complex and tentacle root. expression of ppimhciia throughout the ctenophore germ line  suggests a conservative role for non-muscle myosin ii  in gametogenesis, as proposed in different studies of vertebrate meiotic chromosomes 
 <cit> . in somatic territories, ppimhciia is consistently expressed in the various populations of stem cells that were recently identified in the adult ctenophore using a combination of gene expression data and dna-label incorporation and long-term retention assays 
 <cit> . this is particularly obvious in the tentacle root, where ppimhciia expression is restricted to the three parallel ridges known to house stem cells. it is furthermore significant that ppimhciia expression in the tentacle root is not limited to muscle stem cells  but also includes the colloblast stem cells , suggesting a link with stemness/undifferentiated state/cell proliferation rather than with muscle cell identity. this conclusion finds additional support from ppimhciia expression in stem cell pools located at both extremities of the combs  as well as in the four internal stem cell pools previously identified around the apical organ.

when examined in detail, some aspects of the ppimhciia expression pattern further suggest that beyond stem cells, this myosin is associated with cell proliferation, including in progenitors that are already committed to undergo differentiation. in the aboral sensory complex, after a 12 h edu pulse and no chase, eight discrete patches of nuclei are labelled around the apical organ  . when a 5-day chase is added after the pulse, only four of these patches remain labelled. a likely explanation for this observation is that cells of the four other patches have become differentiated and therefore were proliferating progenitors but not stem cells. whereas genes like piwi and vasa tend to have their transcripts highly concentrated in the four stem cell patches 
 <cit> , ppimhciia is equally expressed in eight patches whose position matches the eight labelled cell groups obtained after edu pulse and no chase. ppimhciia expression might also extend to proliferating progenitors in other tissues  but the continuous spatial gradient of cell differentiation from stem cells in these tissues makes it more difficult to distinguish expression in stem cells vs. in progenitors. the suggestion that ppimhciia expression is associated with all kinds of proliferating cells in pleurobrachia pileus is consistent with its involvement in the movements of the contractile ring upon cytokinesis in bilaterian models.

finally, whereas vertebrate smooth muscle cells express mhciia genes 
 <cit> , in ctenophore ppimhciia is apparently not expressed in muscle cells, even if all of them are said to be of the smooth type 
 <cit> . the only case of ppimhciia expression in a muscle cell lineage concerns the muscle progenitors along the median ridge of the tentacle root, but as explained above this has probably nothing to do with muscular identity but rather with stemness and/or cell proliferation.

independent functional specialisation of mhcii myosins and the possible convergent origin of ctenophore muscles
at least some of the non-muscular functions played by mhciia proteins are certainly very ancient since myosins are cellular motors involved in various cellular processes  throughout eukaryotes including members of unicellular lineages 
 <cit> . the mhciia/mhciib duplication predated the divergence of sponges and placozoans and therefore occurred well before the origin of muscle cells, implying that both mhcii subfamilies were initially working in a non-muscular context. the ctenophore data furthermore suggest that mhciia genes were not involved in muscle contraction but had retained the plesiomorphic non-muscular expression in the last common ancestor of ctenophores and bilaterians, although muscle cells are generally thought to have been present in this ancestor  smooth and striated muscles of the foot express two different splicing variants of the same mhcii gene, closely related to vertebrate striated muscle myosin ii  
 <cit> , indicating that functional specialisation of myosins according to muscle cell types  occurred independently through different paths in different bilaterian lineages.

the expression of one of the ctenophore mhciib paralogues, ppimhciib <dig>  shows several striking similarities to that of ppimhciia and other metazoan myosins of the mhciia subfamily. first, in contrast to the other paralogue ppimhciib <dig> , ppimhciib <dig> has strictly non-muscular expression. like ppimhciia, this gene is expressed in putative stem cells and/or progenitors cells at both extremities of the comb rows, and also in the germ line. here ppimhciib <dig> is expressed in a more restricted territory than ppimhciia . this might reflect functional specialisation between ppimhciia and ppimhciib <dig> during gametogenesis, perhaps in cell proliferation for the former vs. formation of the cytoplasmic bridges that link the oocyte and the nurse cells  and/or cytoplasmic transport from the nurse cells to the oocyte, as documented for non-muscle myosin ii in drosophila oogenesis 
 <cit> , for the latter. additionally, distinct subpopulations of nerve cells express ppimhciib <dig> in at least two regions of the body: a nerve plexus in the symmetry plane of the tentacle root, and several territories in the epithelial floor of the apical organ, exactly matching the previously-reported distribution of anti-vasopressin immunoreactive neuro-sensory cells . this neural expression of ppimhciib <dig> reminds the involvement of some mhciia genes in the nervous system of various vertebrates and drosophila, where they promote synaptic vesicle assembly and movements through interactions with f-actin partners, neuronal migration, neuronal morphogenesis and growth cone motility 
 <cit> .

the apparently odd mhciia-like expression pattern of ppimhciib <dig> can be easily explained if ctenophore muscle cells evolved independently from those of cnidarians and bilaterians. under this scenario, when the ctenophore lineage originated, the two single-copy genes mhciia and mhciib would have still retained the plesiomorphic non-muscular functions.

then mhciib duplicated in ctenophores, and one of the resulting parologues  underwent neofunctionalisation in the context of a newly-evolved type of contractile fibre cell. yet it is possible to imagine alternative scenarios, not assuming independent muscle cell origins. if muscle cells emerged only once in a eumetazoan ancestor with mhciib correlatively becoming exclusively muscular, then the observed non-muscular expression of ctenophore ppimhciib <dig> must be interpreted as derived, and we would face a unique and rather weird instance of a formerly muscular myosin having shifted to non-muscular function. furthermore, in that case, shared expression features between ppimhciib <dig> and ppimhciia find no explanation and must be considered fortuitous. a last plausible scenario assumes that in the last common ancestor of eumetazoa, mhciib had pleiotropic expression in both non-muscle cells  and newly acquired muscle cells . then bilaterians lost the non-muscular mhciib expression, whereas in the ctenophore lineage the mhciib duplication was followed by functional specialisation of the two copies, one taking over the muscular function and the other the non-muscular roles, a scenario conforming to the duplication-degeneration-complementation model 
 <cit> . it is finally quite clear that, albeit non-parsimonious with respect to the taxon phylogeny, the hypothesis of convergent muscle origins offers the most straightforward explanation to the observed ctenophore myosin expression patterns.

it is nevertheless important to underline that data from cnidarians will be essential to evaluate these scenarios but are insufficient at the moment. in the hydromedusa podocoryne carnea, a mhciib group gene seems to be specifically expressed in the striated muscle layer of the medusa, located on the inner side of the bell 
 <cit> , but expression data for cnidarian mchiia genes are critically lacking.

the originality and interest of ctenophores for studying muscle differentiation
a first striking characteristic of the ctenophore musculature is the diversity of muscle cell types and the complexity of their spatial arrangement , as exemplified by our tem observations combined with expression analyses of the mhciib <dig> gene and phalloidin staining. the existence in ctenophore of two fundamentally distinct musculatures, epithelial  and mesogleal, parallels the similar distinction recently confirmed using immunofluorescence 
 <cit>  for the nervous system, and represents a fundamental difference with cnidarians. while the later are fundamentally epithelial animals, ctenophores have a fully developed mesogleal compartment with proper nervous and muscle systems, a condition more alike that of the triploblastic bilaterians. furthermore in ctenophores, within each of the two main muscle categories, there is a significant diversity of muscle fibre subtypes differing by their size, position within the body, orientation, organisation and mode of formation .

among these ctenophore muscles, those of the tentacular apparatus  represent an autonomous muscle system not only from a functional point of view, but most importantly in terms of ontogeny and cell lineages. the ctenophore tentacle root is a highly promising model for studying cell differentiation and particularly myogenesis. indeed, it is the only site of muscle cell production within the body where progenitors are easily identifiable and thereby are amenable to experimental approaches, whereas for parietal muscle cells and for other mesogleal muscle cell, we do not know where are the reservoirs of stem cells and progenitors. tem observations and histological cryosections, combined with expression analyses of the three mhcii and tropomyosin genes lead us to propose an original myogenic model implying spatially ordered regionalisation of muscle cell differentiation stages . this model is furthermore consistent with recent analyses of the progenies of somatic stem cells based on stem cell gene expression and edu dna labelling and long-term retention 
 <cit> . whereas the main axis  of the tentacle root is essentially a centre of muscle production, the two lateral expansions are mostly dedicated to the differentiation and maturation of colloblasts , a ctenophore-specific cell type 
 <cit> . at the oral pole of the tentacle root, we identified an additional and independent centre, responsible for the production of tentilla muscles. thus, the tentacle root contains at least three autonomous cell lineages, each with its particular niche of stem cells .

the high renewal rate of tentacle cells  makes this system highly suitable not only for studying regeneration processes but also for analysing the role of key regulators, such as myogenic genes, yet unknown in ctenophores. the spatial segregation of muscle cell stages in the tentacle root in transverse section should facilitate the identification of genes involved in the various steps of myogenesis. therefore, the tentacle root is a promising experimental system to study stem cell regulation, cell specification and cell differentiation in ctenophores.

the limits of the “smooth” vs. “striated” classification of muscle cell types
the mode of muscle cell differentiation described here in the ctenophore tentacle root is strikingly similar to that of striated skeletal muscles in vertebrates. in both cases, muscle development passes through four main stages: multiplication of myoblasts, alignment, fusion into myotubes, and finally maturation of the multinucleated muscle cells. in the ctenophore tentacle root, these myogenesis stages are distributed in four distinct areas along the proximal-distal axis on both sides of the tentacle root symmetry plane . a different mechanism operates in vertebrates for smooth muscle cells, which are mononucleated and whose formation does not involve a phenomenon of myoblast fusion. it is therefore surprising that although ctenophore muscle cells are of the smooth type , their multinucleate condition and their mode of development is more alike vertebrate striated muscle cells than vertebrate smooth muscle cells. expression of mhciib is another shared characteristic of ctenophore muscle cells and vertebrate striated muscle cells. the evolutionary significance of these observations remains unclear: ctenophore muscles could have acquired these characteristics by convergence, or the similarities might reflect ancestral features of eumetazoan muscle cells, consistent with a scenario suggested previously in which smooth vertebrate muscle cells would be a derived  cell type 
 <cit> .

in any case, these observations imply that a classification of muscle cell types based solely on presence or absence of a striation pattern  captures only part of the variation existing among animal muscle cells. a more comprehensive classification of muscle cell types at the eumetazoan taxonomic scale therefore remains to be elaborated, by integrating not only cytological characteristics but also molecular and developmental features. in this perspective, it will be crucial to obtain data from a wide sampling of early-branching metazoans concerning the expression and function of myogenic and muscle differentiation genes, including the various forms of myosins.

authors’ contributions
the work presented here was carried out in collaboration between all authors. cd performed the experiments, analysed the data and drafted the paper. eq and mm designed analytical strategies and revised the paper. aa, pc and cd carried out the tem investigations. mj assisted cd in the in-situ hybridisation and immunofluorescence experiments and revised manuscript. hlg provided all facilities. all authors have read and approved the final manuscript.

supplementary material
additional file 1
alignment of myosin amino-acid sequences. this file contains the initial alignment  in graphic view. note that for myosins of classes other than class ii , only the sequences of the motor domain have been included . for saccaromyces cerevisiae mhcii, the portion of the protein sequence downstream from position  <dig> has been likewise omitted for the same reason. 

click here for file

 additional file 2
final sequence alignment  including non-class ii myosins. the corresponding tree is shown in additional file  <dig> . the alignment is provided in phylip  <dig> format.

click here for file

 additional file 3
phylogenetic analysis rooted on non-class ii myosins. amino-acid sequences were analysed using the maximum likelihood  method. numbers associated with the branches are ml bootstrap values . sequences from pleurobrachia pileus are indicated in bold and green. branches within the mhciia clade are in blue and within the mhciib clade in purple. the tree was rooted with sequences of myosin classes v, vii and x . the letter between parentheses after the name of mouse genes of the mhca clade indicate whether the gene is expressed in non-muscle cells  or in smooth muscle cells . the ppimhciib <dig> gene was excluded because its partial sequence contains only the tail and therefore it has no alignable residues with non-class ii myosins . abbreviations for species names: aae: aedes aegypti; aqu: amphimedon queenslandica; asu: ascaris suum; cow: capsaspora owczarzaki; ddi: dictyostelium discoideum; dme: drosophila melanogaster; hma: hydra magnipapillata; lgi: lottia gigantea; lpe: loligo pealei; mbr: monosiga brevicollis; mmu: mus musculus; nve: nematostella vectensis; ppi: pleurobrachia pileus; sar: sphaeroforma arctica; sce: saccharomyces cerevisiae; sro: salpingoeca rosetta; tad: trichoplax adhaerens.

click here for file

 additional file 4
final sequence alignment  including only class ii myosins. the corresponding tree is shown in figure 
 <dig> . the alignment is provided in phylip  <dig> format.

click here for file

 additional file 5
expression pattern of ppitropomyosin gene in pleurobrachia pileus muscles.  internal view of a dissected tentacle root stained with the ppitropomyosin antisense probe .  longitudinal view of the tentacle root  showing ppitropomyosin expression in tentacle and tentilla muscle progenitors. forming tentillae are also stained.  transverse cryosection ) of a tentacle root after ppitropomyosin whole-mount ish. the tentacle base is also sectioned transversally . note that the musculature of the tentacle sheath lining is also stained .  transverse cryosection of a tentilla after ppitropomyosin whole-mount ish .  expression of ppitropomyosin in longitudinal muscle fibres  in the tentacular plane.  expression of ppitropomyosin in mesogleal muscle fibres connected to a meridional canal.  higher magnification of ppitropomyosin expression in a mesogleal muscle fibre. c: comb; coll: colloblasts; f tt: forming tentillae; lm: longitudinal muscle fibres; mc: meridional canal; me f: mesogleal muscle fibre; mr: median ridge; m tcl: tentacle muscle progenitors; m tt: tentilla muscles progenitors; mu: muscle fibres; ots: orifice of tentacle sheath; tcl: tentacle; ts: tentacular sheath; tt: tentilla. scale bars: a, b, c, e: 200 μm; f: 100 μm; d: 25 μm; g: 10 μm.

click here for file

 additional file 6
pleurobrachia pileus musculature .  drawing of the arrangement of pleurobrachia pileus musculature, with areas corresponding to pictures  indicated by black boxes.  phalloidin staining of muscle fibres in selected regions of the body ).  a large mesogleal muscle fibre connecting two meridional canals. inter-comb fibre cells are also visible.  dense parietal muscle fibres along a ciliated groove.  parietal muscle fibres in the aboral region, in the pharyngeal plane.  parietal muscle fibres in the aboral region, in the tentacular plane.  parietal muscle fibres in the epidermis between two comb rows. all fibres have circular orientation.  parietal muscles fibres in the epidermis between two comb rows in the tentacular plane: a dense band of longitudinal fibres is superimposed on the circular fibres.  epithelial muscle fibres around the opening of the tentacle sheath. note that some mesogleal fibres are visible connecting the apical organ area to the tentacle sheath.  epithelial muscle fibres around the oral extremity of the comb row.  higher magnification of epithelial muscles fibres at the oral extremity of the comb row. the light coloured structure visible at the top of the picture is the oral extremity of the meridional canal underlying the comb row. c: comb; cg: ciliated groove; cr: comb row; fi c: inter-comb fibrous cells; m c: meridional canal; me f: mesogleal muscle fibre; ots: opening of tentacle sheath. scale bars: b-j: 100 μm.

click here for file

 acknowledgements
we are particularly grateful to ulrich technau  and patrick steinmetz  for stimulating scientific ideas, for sending their mhcii gene alignment, numerous data and for a powerful collaboration. we thank the directors and staff of the “station zoologique” in villefranche-sur-mer  and of the “station biologique” in roscoff  for welcoming us. we thank evelyn houliston  and sylvie mazan  for providing lab facilities. we are grateful to the sailors of the roscoff and villefranche-sur-mer zoological station: fabrice ruggiero, jean yves carval, gilles maron and laurent lévêque for their help in the animal collection. we thank sophie pagnotta and the “centre commun de microscopie appliquée” , université de nice sophia-antipolis, for access to their transmission electronic microscope, the bruce shilito group for giving us the opportunity to use their ultra microtome, and l. moroz for interesting discussions. est sequencing was performed by the “consortium national de recherche en génomique” at the génoscope . this work was supported by grants from the “gis-institut de la génomique marine” and from the “agence nationale de la recherche” anr “programme blanc” nt_nv_ <dig> genocnidaire and anr-09-blan- <dig> diplodevo.
