BACKGROUND
most flowering plants have undergone genome duplications during their evolution. sequencing plant genomes has revealed that most eudicot genomes descended from an ancient hexaploid ancestor and then underwent lineage-specific whole genome duplication . although this polyploidization has not occurred in grape
 <cit> , it has occurred once in poplar
 <cit> , legumes
 <cit> , and potato
 <cit> , and twice in arabidopsis <cit>  and brassica, the latter of which has undergone additional whole genome triplication  since its divergence from the arabidopsis lineage
 <cit> . polyploidy results in the accumulation of homologous genes in the genome leading to increased complexity and redundancy. redundant copies of amplified genes in the duplicated genome can diverge soon after duplication, and they might become pseudogenes , or gain additional or novel functions . in addition, duplicated genes may play a role in preventing potential harmful mutations . regardless of their alterations, the ultimate fate of duplicated genes vary according to the individual plant and species
 <cit> . recent studies of several species have demonstrated that a broad range of genetic and epigenetic responses also occurred soon after polyploidization, including dna deletions, chromosome rearrangements, cytosine methylation, gene silencing, the activation of transposons, and the modification of parental imprinting
 <cit> . these events have been associated with small rnas
 <cit> , indicating that changes in the small rnas of polyploidy genomes provide insight into the control of the genetic and epigenetic mechanisms that occur in response to genome duplication.

small rnas are short noncoding rnas typically 19– <dig> nucleotides  in length with two prominent sizes of  <dig> and  <dig> nt. in general, micrornas  correspond to the  <dig> nt class of small rnas and short-interfering rnas  comprise the  <dig> nt class. small rnas have been shown to be involved in a broad range of functions including heterochromatin formation, dna methylation, and gene silencing
 <cit> . by targeting genes for cleavage or repressing protein translation, plant mirnas play an essential role in various biological and metabolic processes, including tissue identification, developmental control, and response to environmental stress. in contrast, sirnas seem to function as guardians against transposable elements during plant development
 <cit> . while both classes of small rnas have been characterized, recent studies have focused mainly on mirnas because they regulate diverse developmental processes through the direct cleavage of target messenger rna . the biogenesis of mirna takes place in a stepwise manner. mirna is initially transcribed by rna polymerase ii. a long primary transcript , which forms a hairpin-like secondary structure, is then processed by the nuclear localized dicer-like  <dig>  in the plant nucleus to release a 60~ <dig> nt intermediate. the intermediate, known as precursor mirna , has a hairpin structure with base-pairing that is not perfectly complementary, resulting in many mismatches and bulges that are further processed into a mirna/mirna* duplex. after undergoing 3’-methylation, a paired set of mirnas are then exported from the nucleus to the cytoplasm by hasty
 <cit> . subsequently, the mature mirna is loaded onto the rna-induced silencing complex  and guides the risc to recognize complementary sites on target mrnas, resulting in transcript cleavage
 <cit>  or translational repression
 <cit> .

many mirnas have been identified by computational or experimental approaches in various plants. genome-wide analyses of mirna have revealed that several mirna families are highly conserved among plant genomes , though individual species also possess highly specific and evolved  mirnas genes . it has been reported that conserved mirna families have been expanded by duplication followed by subsequent reduction of redundant homologs whereas novel mirnas, which are often expressed only in restricted species, might initially evolve neutrally but develop more specialized roles
 <cit> . sequence similarity-based approaches can be used to identify conserved mirna candidates from newly-sequenced genomes. however, due to their species-specific nature, it is difficult to identify novel mirnas by computational or hybridization-based methodologies. recent advances in high-throughput sequencing technologies have facilitated the discovery of both conserved mirnas and the less abundant novel and non-conserved mirnas in plants
 <cit> . despite their importance in plant development, the genomic origin and evolution of mirnas in polyploid genomes have not been well-described.

brassica rapa, one of the two ancestral species of oilseed rape, is a member of the brassicaceae family, which includes the model plant arabidopsis thaliana and over  <dig> other genera. b. rapa shows great morphological plasticity, which has led to its domestication and selective breeding into a range of different crop types, such as kimchi cabbage , turnip, mizuna, and rape mustard. this morphological diversity makes b. rapa an excellent species for the study of plant morphology evolution as well as the process of domestication and directed selection. an annotated draft genome sequence for brassica rapa ssp. pekinensis cv. chiifu was recently reported by the multinational brassica rapa genome sequencing project consortium
 <cit> . comparative genomic analyses showed that the b. rapa genome had extensive collinearity with the genome of a. thaliana, evident in its triplicated and rearranged genome blocks. the extent of gene loss  varied between the related genome segments of b. rapa, with one copy containing a greater proportion of genes expected to have been present in its ancestor  than the remaining two 
 <cit> . a rapid evolutionary rate and the specific copy number amplifications of particular gene families are believed to contribute to the remarkable morphological plasticity of brassica species. therefore, the b. rapa genome sequence provides an important resource for studying the evolution of polyploidy genomes and the epigenetic regulation of duplicate genes.

to study epigenetic control in a triplicated crop genome, the genome-wide identification of b. rapa mirnas is highly essential. recent studies have identified a limited number of small rnas in b. rapa. most of these sequences were conserved mirnas based on computational similarity searches with restricted sequence datasets, with very few novel mirnas identified
 <cit> . the main objective of this study was to identify putative mirna candidates of b. rapa using a draft of its whole genome sequence. we identified mirnas based on small rna deep sequencing along with similarity searches, and then characterized the genomic organization and evolutionary origin of the mirnas. in addition, we predicted the target genes of the candidate mirnas and analyzed the putative function of mirna targets. we constructed a web interface for the public to access the data generated in this study in order to provide a resource for studying the epigenetic control of gene expression in brassica species.

RESULTS
preparation of small rna dataset
in this study, we tried to identify mirnas from the whole genome of b. rapa based on small rna sequencing along with similarity searches using conserved mirnas. to identify the mirnas expressed in b. rapa, we performed high-throughput small rna sequencing of five libraries constructed from seedlings, roots, petioles, leaves, and flowers using illumina ga iix sequencing technology. the number of sequence reads  obtained from each library was different presumably because of the quantitative differences in small rna expression in each tissue type. from the raw sequence reads, the 5’- and 3’- adapter sequences were computationally removed and the remaining reads of 17– <dig> nt in length were collected. after collapsing redundancies, we obtained a total of  <dig> , <dig> unique small rna sequence reads from the five libraries . the size distribution of the unique reads in each tissue is summarized in additional file
1: figure s <dig>  small rnas of  <dig> nt in length were the most abundant class among the sequences, accounting for 41%  to 54%  of all the small rnas. this result was consistent with previous reports for other plant species such as a. thaliana <cit> , medicago truncatula <cit> , and oriza sativa <cit> , where the  <dig> nt class dominated the small rna transcriptome. the second most abundant small rna in all five libraries was the  <dig> nt class, which covered approximately 7% to 9% of the unique reads and were the typical length of plant mature mirnas.

a one mismatch is allowed, b non-redundant unique reads.

identification of b. rapa mirna genes
to predict b. rapa mirnas from the sequencing data, we followed the procedure shown in figure
 <dig>  in general, the small rna libraries generated for sequencing have complex rna compositions. in addition to mirnas and sirnas, the libraries contain large numbers of intermediate forms of small rnas, rrnas, trnas, and fragments derived from other coding and noncoding transcripts
 <cit> . therefore, to differentiate the small rnas from the contaminants, we matched the unique reads to the reference genome sequences of b. rapa using a novocraft aligner package with high stringency . approximately 30% of the unique reads were mapped to the reference genome sequences, representing  <dig> , <dig> unique small rna reads from  <dig> , <dig> loci. in addition, 40% of the reads were mapped to unassembled genome sequences  or sequences in the ncbi nucleotide database , suggesting that they were transcribed from genomic regions that are not covered by the current reference genome sequences of b. rapa. the remaining 29% of the reads did not match any of the available sequences, presumably due to sequencing error or rna modifications. this anticipation is based on the fact that approximately 97% of small rna reads matched the available sequences under less stringent conditions , . in addition to the small rna sequencing, similarity searches also identified known b. rapa mirnas that are evolutionary conserved within the mirnas of a. thaliana. because only mature mirnas are usually conserved in plants
 <cit> , we used  <dig> mature mirnas of a. thaliana downloaded from the mirbase
 <cit>  to find conserved mirnas in b. rapa through sequence comparison. blastn searches against the b. rapa genome predicted  <dig> genomic loci that matched  <dig> a. thaliana mirnas.

the mirna prediction procedure using pre-processed reads was based on the structural features of the mirna and precursor sequences, as well as the expression levels obtained from the sequencing data. because mirnas are derived from hairpin-like precursors originating from a single-stranded rna transcript after sequential processing by dicer or dcl proteins
 <cit> , mirna precursors should have a characteristic fold-back structure. to identify candidate precursor from false positives, we used a sequence and structural feature filter designed based on a. thaliana mirnas and their precursors. putative precursors were regarded as positive mirna candidates if they met a set of criteria based on gc content, the size of the hairpin-loop, the number of hairpin-loops, the size of the bulge-loop, the number of bulge-loops, and the negative minimal folding free energy  of the hairpin. we searched potential precursor sequences surrounding  <dig> , <dig> loci of  <dig> , <dig> unique reads obtained from small rna sequencing, as well as the  <dig> loci matched to  <dig> a. thaliana mirnas. a total of  <dig>  loci from the small rna sequencing data initially passed the structural feature filter. after removing sequences from redundant genomic positions, this number was collapsed to  <dig>  loci. to better identify true mirna candidates, expression levels were also analyzed. considering the potential for sequence errors, sequences with fewer than  <dig> reads per million  in the total read counts from the five libraries were discarded. afterward, sequences from  <dig> loci  remained as mirna candidates from the small rna sequencing data. these sequences were integrated with the  <dig> conserved mirna sequences identified based on the comparison with a. thaliana mirna sequences that also passed the structural feature filter. all candidate mirnas were clustered based on their sequences and genomic positions, and then cross-referenced with known plant mirnas sequences in the mirbase. in total, we identified  <dig> mirna candidates predicted to be in the b. rapa genome, of which  <dig> are conserved with mirnas from other species while  <dig> represent novel mirna sequences .

prediction of mirna target genes
identifying the genes targeted by mirnas is crucial to understanding their biological functions. we searched the transcribed regions of the b. rapa genome to find sequences complementary to the mirna candidates. a total of  <dig>  genes  were predicted to be potential targets of the  <dig> mirna candidates . this is consistent with previous reports from plant
 <cit>  and animal genomes
 <cit> . conserved mirnas had nearly twice as many target genes as novel mirnas . to better understand the functional roles of the predicted mirna targets, we performed functional annotation of the target genes based on gene ontology  in molecular function and biological process, and metabolic pathway mapping using the kegg pathway
 <cit>  . molecular function was classified into  <dig> reference terms, with the most frequent terms being “other enzyme activity,” followed by “transporter,” “transferase activity,” “other binding,” “hydrolase activity,” and “kinase activity.” biological process was also classified into  <dig> reference terms. the five most frequent terms were “other biological processes,” “developmental processes,” “other metabolic processes,” “protein metabolism,” and “other cellular processes.” in addition, the target enrichment test of the mirnas using metabolic pathways demonstrated that “protein modification” was the most represented pathway followed by “carbohydrate degradation,” “glycan metabolism,” “biosynthesis,” and “phospholipid metabolism.” interestingly, almost 12% and 7% of the putative target genes of mirnas encoded transcription factors and kinases, respectively, suggesting that mirnas may play important roles in regulating transcriptional and post-transcriptional networks and signaling processes. although the functional classification of mirna target genes in b. rapa showed a similar pattern of go categorization as the mirna targets in a. thaliana, several categories were under- or over-represented in b. rapa. for example, b. rapa mirnas had a reduced number of target genes with “other enzyme activity” or involving the “developmental process,” “other cellular processes,” and the “protein modification” pathway. on the other hand, b. rapa mirnas had approximately two times as many predicted target genes with “transporter activity,” “hydrolase activity,” “rna binding,” and “lipid metabolism” compared to a. thaliana mirnas. there were no functional differences between the target genes of conserved and novel mirnas in b. rapa .

expression profiles of b. rapa mirnas
quantitative analysis of mirna expression revealed that only  <dig> members of the conserved mirnas were expressed in the five types of b. rapa tissue we examined . however, their expression levels were significantly higher than those of the novel mirnas. while the expression levels among all the mirnas ranged from  <dig> to  <dig>  rpm, the mean rpm value of conserved mirnas  was approximately  <dig> times higher than that of novel mirnas  . this finding is consistent with previous studies reporting that evolutionarily conserved mirnas were often among the most abundant mirnas, and that some non-conserved mirnas may be in low abundance because they recently evolved in specific species
 <cit> . the expression profiles from the different tissue types also showed that  <dig> mirnas were expressed in all five types of tissue, suggesting that they are ‘housekeeping’ mirnas important for regulating basic cellular functions in all tissues.

currently, the mirbase lists  <dig> b. rapa mirnas that can be grouped into  <dig> mirna families. our prediction methods successfully identified nine of the  <dig> families . surveying the expression levels of these families shows that most of the known mirna families are expressed in all five tissue types . moreover, a total of  <dig> novel mirnas appeared in multiple libraries, though the flower and petiole libraries included  <dig> and eight tissue-specific mirnas, respectively . of particular interest, all the flower-specific mirnas were novel and had target genes that include transcription factors and kinases related to flowering, suggesting that they may play roles in the development of floral organs. in addition, most of the petiole-specific mirnas were members of the conserved mirna families mir <dig> and mir <dig>  although there was one novel mirna . both the mir <dig> and mir <dig> families were identified as stem-specific mirnas from a. thaliana and tobacco
 <cit> .

synteny comparison of mirna genes between b. rapa and a. thaliana
comparing the genomic positions of mirna genes in b. rapa and a. thaliana provides insight into the origin and evolution of b. rapa mirna genes. considering its shared ancestry with a. thaliana and its recent wgt event, the b. rapa genome was predicted to contain approximately  <dig> conserved mirna genes. however, we could identify only  <dig> conserved mirna genes in the b. rapa genome. to investigate this discrepancy, we compared syntenic blocks between the two genomes. a circos plot between orthologous mirna gene pairs revealed that  <dig> of the  <dig> b. rapa mirna genes had their syntenic counterparts in the same ancestral karyotype genome building blocks of the a. thaliana genome, indicating that the conserved mirna genes share a common ancestry . in general, syntenic relationships were found among the conserved mirna families, with the exception of mir <dig>  mir <dig>  mir <dig>  and mir <dig>  which are absent in b. rapa. interestingly, most of the conserved mirna genes in b. rapa were present in only one or two copies relative to their a. thaliana mirna counterparts. this suggests that the deletion of one or more redundant paralogs has occurred throughout the b. rapa genome since its wgt. in addition to sharing conserved mirna genes, it was evident that more than 50% of the mirna genes of b. rapa and a. thaliana were species-specific in each genome. the genomic position of mirna genes showed that they mainly resided in the intergenic regions , with several clusters on chromosomes a <dig>  a <dig>  a <dig>  and a <dig> of b. rapa and chromosomes  <dig> and  <dig> of a. thaliana.

database access
we developed the bramrs
 <cit>  web interface for the public to access the b. rapa mirnas dataset. this database integrates all the data generated in this study, including b. rapa mirna identification, target gene prediction, and functional annotation for the targets. figure
 <dig> provides examples of database searches and search outputs from a web implementation of bramrs. bramrs consists of two major search units, “mirna prediction” and “mirna target prediction,” which are tightly inter-connected. the main search page of “mirna prediction” allows the user to search two classes of mirnas, those with supporting expression data  and those predicted based on sequence conservation . the user can identify mirnas based on their chromosomal or genomic position, or by their predicted target gene. various filtering options for mirna predictions can be customized by the user . the query result displays a list of predicted mirnas with links to mirna and target gene sequences . the search results also include both the genomic position of the mirna along with the secondary structure of candidate pre-mirnas and the mirna expression levels in the five tissue types. each predicted mirna is also linked to a page of potential mirna targets. alternatively, the user can directly identify putative mirna targets by providing a mirna sequence in the “mirna target prediction” window. the stringency of this search can be customized by adjusting various parameters affecting the alignment . the output page lists putative target genes, mirna binding sites, alignment scores, and the number/type of mismatches . importantly, bramrs facilitates the functional enrichment analysis of predicted mirna targets, allowing the user to develop hypotheses regarding mirna function. links to pfam domain information and expressed sequence tag  records are also provided.

discussion
the progress being made in genome sequencing has allowed for the identification of the mirnas of various plant genomes ranging from mosses and ferns to flowering plants. one popular strategy used to predict potential mirnas from plant genomes is to run similarity searches based on previously identified mirnas. as a result, a large number of mirnas and their target genes are available in public databases such as the mirbase
 <cit>  and the pmrd
 <cit> . however computational methods often identify only evolutionary conserved mirnas and sometimes candidate mirnas are misannotated due to incomplete sequences and the lack of expression data. several previous studies have identified b. rapa mirnas using computational approaches. for example, dhandapani et al.  reported  <dig> mirnas while wang et al. identified  <dig> mirnas, all of which were evolutionarily conserved
 <cit> . in contrast to these computational approaches, high-throughput sequencing of small rnas using next-generation sequencing technology provides more reliable predictions of mirnas based on empirically-derived expression data, enabling researchers to discover many recently-evolved novel mirnas. in the current study, we successfully identified conserved mirnas as well as a large number of novel mirnas from the b. rapa genome using a combination of small rna deep sequencing and similarity-based mirna predictions. a total of  <dig> mirnas were identified, of which  <dig> were novel mirnas. this is the first report to identify novel mirnas from brassica crops using high throughput methods. considering that the draft genome sequence of b. rapa covers only 50% of the span of the genome representing gene space
 <cit>  and that approximately 40% of small rna reads can match to unassembled genome sequences, additional novel mirnas can be identified from the genomic regions that has not yet been characterized.

recent studies have demonstrated that evolutionary conserved mirnas exist as gene families whereas recently evolved or evolving mirnas are frequently found to have a single locus in the genome
 <cit> . based on the identification of conserved mirnas across multiple species, it has been suggested that the gene regulation mediated by conserved mirnas is ancient, systemic, and shared in many plant genomes. recently evolved novel mirnas, on the other hand, are present in relatively low abundance and are expressed in specialized tissues
 <cit> . these observations are consistent with our study, which found that 88% of conserved mirnas existed as gene families whereas 76% of novel mirnas were found to have a single locus in the b. rapa genome . furthermore, our quantitative expression analysis indicated that almost 14% of the novel mirnas  were expressed in a single tissue compared to only 4% of the conserved mirnas . approximately 10% of both the conserved  and the novel mirnas  were expressed in all of the tissue types investigated. we compared the genomic position of the mirna genes of b. rapa and a. thaliana and found that approximately 50% of the mirna genes are shared between the genomes and the remaining 50% are specific to each species. these species-specific mirnas are dispersed throughout the genomes and enriched within the intergenic region. similar findings have also been reported when comparing the genomes of related species of legumes and grasses. for example, 29% of rice mirnas  are conserved in maize, while only 19% of m. truncatula mirnas  have homologs in soybean. these findings suggest that novel mirnas have independently emerged in plant genomes after speciation. several different mechanisms have been proposed for this mirna evolution, including the duplication of protein coding genes, the duplication of pre-existing mirna genes, and the modification of transposons
 <cit> . the b. rapa genome contains a large number of repetitive sequences including mites and inverted repeats. the modification of these sequences may give rise to hairpin structures which can become new mirna genes. considering the fact that most plant genomes have experienced transposon invasion, the abundance of novel mirna genes in each plant genome strongly suggests that mirna gene repertories rapidly change during genome evolution, lending credence to a birth and death model of mirna gene evolution.

the identification of a large number of novel mirnas in b. rapa provides an opportunity to study the unique epigenetic control of target genes. the expression patterns of mirnas have been reported in multiple plant species and are regulated by development, tissue type, and stress treatment
 <cit> . it is noteworthy that the  <dig> novel mirnas we identified showed flower-specific expression. consistent with previous reports, most of the genes targeted by these novel mirnas included transcription factors, protein kinases, and genes related to signaling . for example, mir6004*, mir <dig>  and mir <dig> could target transcription factors related to flowering including agamous-like , vernalization factor  <dig>  and mads affecting flowering  <dig>  the up-regulation of these novel mirna genes in flowers could suppress the corresponding target genes during flower development. therefore, the comprehensive functional analysis of these mirnas and their target genes can provide novel insight into mirna-mediated epigenetic control during the development of flowers and reproductive tissues in b. rapa.

CONCLUSIONS
this work has contributed to an increased insight into the b. rapa genome. deep sequencing of small rnas has proven to be an effective approach that allows for the genome-wide discovery of novel mirnas in b. rapa. the finding of numerous novel mirnas, many with few target genes and low expression levels, suggests the ongoing birth and death of mirna genes. the systematic characterization of small rnas from additional tissue types and developmental conditions will further enrich this mirna collection and provide a valuable public resource for studying the epigenetic control of the brassica genomes. furthermore, the functional study of novel mirnas will increase our understanding of the epigenetic regulation of polyploid genomes. in this regard, bramrs, the b. rapa mirna database developed here, will provide fundamental information for the epigenetic study of b. rapa and other closely related species.

