BACKGROUND
microbial genome sequences are being determined with increasing frequency and speed. nearly  <dig> bacterial genomes have been fully sequenced, and nearly  <dig> more such projects are underway  <cit> , with several current and planned large-scale metagenomic projects adding to the gathering avalanche of data  <cit> . a major motivation for this sequencing avalanche is the possibility of learning about a bacterium's physiology or pathogenesis, without resorting to either labor-intensive classical analyses or the still-expensive tools of systems biology. increasingly effective methods are available to generate a "parts list" of genes and pathways from genome sequences of poorly-characterized bacteria  <cit> . however understanding the physiology of an organism, in terms of gene regulatory mechanisms and network connections, is currently much more difficult to achieve from sequence analysis alone.

considerable research is focused on inferring gene regulatory networks from microarray analyses, following genetic or environmental disturbances  <cit> . however some microbes, for which the genome sequence is available from metagenomic studies, cannot even be grown in the laboratory. particularly for poorly understood bacteria, it is unclear which experimental disturbances would be most physiologically relevant and would meaningfully probe the regulatory architecture  <cit> .

predicting gene regulatory networks from genome sequences alone is difficult, but can yield useful hypotheses about the conservation and evolution of regulatory networks  <cit> . such prediction is typically accomplished by extrapolating from a well-characterized reference organism such as e. coli, if three criteria can be satisfied. the first two criteria are whether valid orthologs for a target  gene and its regulator  are present in both organisms. though it is unclear exactly how similar orthologous sequences must be for functional and regulatory predictions to have a sufficiently high probability of being accurate  <cit> , these determinations are relatively straightforward from a computational perspective.

the third criterion, identifying a putative binding site for the regulator upstream of the orthologous target gene, is more complex  <cit> . among other problems, many regulators have degenerate binding motifs and commonly-used approaches have limited sensitivity and specificity  <cit> . in addition, the relative strength of a binding site can be as important to the resultant regulatory pattern as the site's existence  <cit> , but binding strength is difficult to predict from sequence alone  <cit> , especially where the structure of the regulator is unknown  <cit> . these difficulties have led some bioinformatic analyses to focus on the regulator-target gene connection alone, without attempting to predict the sign or strength of the interaction, and such approaches can provide useful information, if limited from the perspective of predicting or modeling cell physiology.

an even more basic issue is how similar two bacterial species have to be for the underlying hypothesis, which for brevity we refer to as the "regulatory extrapolation hypothesis," to be usefully applied. even if orthologous genes and binding sites could be identified unambiguously, to what extent do a matching regulator, target gene and binding site correctly predict regulation? there are several potential concerns that, while not ruling out extrapolation, could place limits on its applicability. first, regarding the orthologous regulators, extrapolation implicitly assumes that they are similar in both dna binding and in response to coregulators . second, it is implicitly assumed that the amounts of both regulator and coregulator vary in similar ways in the two organisms. third, regarding the promoter regions for the orthologous target genes, regulatory patterns are flexible  <cit>  and can be profoundly changed by limited mutation. for example, a single nucleotide change in the soxs promoter results in repression by soxr, which normally activates, regardless of the redox signal  <cit> ; and just 1– <dig> amino acid replacements in a regulatory protein can alter the range of coactivators or change the effect of an inducer to that of a corepressor  <cit> . fourth, some regulatory extrapolations involve species that are, ecologically at least, quite different from one another, and  the environment to which an organism is adapted affects its regulatory architecture  <cit> . developing more robust computational approaches requires a fuller experimentally-based understanding of the extent to which regulatory architecture is conserved among related bacteria adapted to different environments.

the aim of this study is to assess conservation of regulatory architecture by studying a model regulator, and the network of target genes it controls , in three related bacteria with fully-sequenced genomes. e. coli k- <dig> is the well-studied reference organism  <cit> . proteus mirabilis is, like e. coli, among the enterobacteriaceae, but is a relatively distant member of that family  <cit> . vibrio cholerae is a member of a different family within the γ-proteobacteria – the vibrionaceae  <cit> . these organisms share some basic properties. all three grow on mucosal epithelia, and all three are capable of differentiating into elongated, hyperflagellated swarmer cells that spread across solid surfaces  <cit> . e. coli, however, is adapted to growth in the mammalian or avian intestine, while p. mirabilis is a urinary tract pathogen, and v. cholerae is primarily a marine microbe that is an opportunistic pathogen of the human ileum  <cit> .

a bacterium's transcriptional regulatory architecture is particularly dependent on its "global regulators". the number of genes controlled by a given transcription factor follows a power law distribution, and in e. coli about half of all genes are responsive to one or more of seven key global regulators  <cit> . any meaningful understanding of an organism's gene regulation requires an understanding of the roles played by its global regulators. for this reason, we chose as our model one of the seven key regulators: lrp, the leucine-responsive regulatory protein  <cit> . lrp is highly conserved among the enterobacteriaceae and vibrionaceae . the lrp regulon has been extensively mapped in e. coli by microarray analyses, two-dimensional gel electrophoresis, and lacz fusion libraries  <cit> . the microarray analyses revealed that lrp influences the expression of nearly  <dig> genes, at least  <dig> of which are directly controlled . the regulondb database  <cit>  currently recognizes  <dig> genes as being directly controlled by lrp, based on literature surveys.

the lrp regulon is a good model for comparison among species for at least three reasons. first, the regulon is large and includes genes having a range of functions . second, lrp can generate diverse regulatory patterns that include both activation and repression, and differing sensitivities to the coregulators l-leucine and l-alanine  <cit> . third, while lrp is abundant  compared to many other transcription factors, it is present at much lower concentrations than the major nucleoid-structuring proteins fis , hu  and h-ns   <cit> . despite the ability of lrp to bind dna semispecifically  <cit> , expression of the great majority of genes is unaffected by deletion of lrp , so its generalized effects as a histonelike protein are limited.

to compare the architecture of the lrp regulons of e. coli, p. mirabilis, and v. cholerae, we began by addressing four general questions. first, are the effects of lrp disruption on complex phenotypes such as growth and swarming comparable in the three species? second, are the lrp genes functionally interchangeable in complementation assays? third, do the lrp genes themselves have the same expression pattern in the different species? fourth, are the orthologs of what, in e. coli k- <dig>  are lrp-controlled genes regulated by lrp in the same manner in the two other species? the goal of this study was not to determine the molecular bases for observed differences, but rather to assess the frequency of such differences.

RESULTS
lrp is highly conserved among enterobacteriaceae and vibrionaceae
it would be extremely useful if transcriptional regulatory architecture of bacteria could be predicted from the sequence of their dna. attempts to do so generally involve extrapolation from well-studied species such as e. coli, in cases where the regulators and target genes are orthologous and a binding site is conserved in the target promoter. however, such extrapolation relies on several implicit assumptions  that have not been well tested experimentally. we used the lrp regulon as a model to carry out tests of these assumptions.

the pronounced conservation among lrp orthologs in enteric bacteria was first noted over a decade ago  <cit> , and the large number of subsequently-determined genome sequences has not altered that pattern. the lrp ortholog in p. mirabilis differs from that in e. coli by only 4/ <dig> amino acids , while lrp from v. cholerae shows 92% identity to e. coli lrp. importantly, none of the changes observed in p. mirabilis and v. cholerae occur in the helix-turn-helix motif responsible for dna sequence recognition , defined via mutation of the e. coli lrp gene and x-ray crystallography of an archaeal ortholog  <cit>  and recently of the e. coli protein itself  <cit> . similarly, the lrp orthologs of these bacteria are completely conserved for amino acids implicated in coregulator recognition .

lrp orthologs from another γ-proteobacterial family, the pasteurellaceae , are much more divergent from e. coli , with the differences specifically including the helix-turn-helix motif. it is interesting that the pasteurellaceae appear to form an outgroup with respect to lrp, as the lrp differences are far more pronounced than their overall relationship to neighboring bacterial genera would suggest . this, and the fact that in h. influenzae lrp controls only a small number of genes  <cit> , led us to exclude the pasteurellaceae from this study.

differences in growth phenotypes of lrp null strains
the first test of functional conservation is that if lrp is having similar broad effects on gene expression in e. coli, p. mirabilis, and v. cholerae, then one would expect to see similar effects of a lrp null mutation on their growth. fig. 2a shows the results of growth experiments for wild-type  and lrp strains of these three species grown in mops glucose minimally supplemented medium  or mops glucose defined rich medium  . the plot shows the wt specific growth rate on the x-axis, and the rate for the lrp strain on the y-axis; thus where lrp mutation has no effect on growth rate the points fall on the diagonal line. in mops rich medium , lrp mutation had little effect on growth of any of the three species. however in mops glucose medium, p. mirabilis stands out as having a substantial growth rate decrease when lrp is mutated . this might represent a lrp-dependent partial auxotrophy, in addition to the lrp-dependent requirements for pantothenate and thiamine that were satisfied by the medium. however that may be, it is clear that the lrp mutation has differential effects in these three species.

we cloned the lrp genes from p. mirabilis and v. cholerae downstream of placuv <dig> in the low-copy vector pcc <dig> ; a consensus e. coli shine-dalgarno sequence  <cit>  was introduced as well. we also cloned the lrp gene from e. coli o157:h <dig> . thus the three lrp alleles had identical expression sequences. the effect of the lrp allele on p. mirabilis growth in minimal medium was fully complemented by supplying the cloned p. mirabilis lrp gene on a plasmid, and was mostly but incompletely complemented by the lrp genes from e. coli and v. cholerae .

effects of orthologous lrp alleles on swarming behavior in proteus
we next tested the ability of lrp orthologs to complement a complex phenotype other than growth. p. mirabilis undergoes differentiation to form hyperflagellated swarmer cells >20-fold longer than nonswarmer cells, and yields concentric rings of growth on agar  <cit> ; fig. 3a). like growth rate, swarming is sensitive to a variety of factors and thus also provides a sensitive indication of the cell's physiological status  <cit> . it has been shown by others  <cit>  that a lrp mutation abolishes swarming in p. mirabilis . we show here that the lrp orthologs from both e. coli and v. cholerae complement a p. mirabilis lrp mutant, and restore the complex swarming behavior . the p. mirabilis lrp gene does not regenerate the exact wt swarming pattern when supplied in trans ; this difference may reflect replacement of the native lrp expression sequences with placuv <dig> on the plasmid. however, despite the fact that the three plasmid-borne lrp alleles had identical expression sequences, they gave consistent differences in the p. mirabilis swarming patterns as reflected in growth ring measurements from triplicate experiments . in this experiment, only the regulator  was varied; the p. mirabilis target genes and promoters/binding sites are identical between strains. thus the significant differences in swarming  indicate functional differences in the lrp proteins, some of which may be amplified by indirect effects.

regulation of e. coli target genes by lrp proteins from p. mirabilis and v. cholerae
if closely-related lrp orthologs are fully functionally conserved, as would be necessary for regulatory extrapolation, then the orthologous wt lrp alleles should cross complement to generate the same pattern of target gene regulation. we therefore tested the ability of heterologous lrp proteins to properly regulate three lrp-responsive genes in a lrp null mutant of e. coli. the lrp-bearing plasmids described above, which produce lrp independently of the normal growth-dependent control associated with the native lrp gene  <cit> , were used to transform e. coli strains containing reporter fusions to known lrp target genes. western blot analysis of a constant amount of total protein, probed with a polyclonal anti-lrp antiserum  <cit> , revealed comparable accumulation of the various lrp orthologs . the strain carrying the v. cholerae lrp gene appeared to accumulate ~75% as much lrp protein as the e. coli control , though this is a minimal estimate because the antiserum was generated against e. coli lrp . it is interesting that the vibrio lrp migrated slightly faster than the other lrp proteins. its calculated mass  is slightly smaller than that of the other two proteins , and its calculated pi is less basic ; other factors can also affect migration of individual polypeptides in sds acrylamide gels  <cit> .

to begin testing the functional equivalency of the different lrp orthologs, we co-transformed strain be <dig>   with a vector containing an e. coli plrp-lacz fusion and the various lrp-bearing plasmids . lrp directly represses its own promoter in e. coli, and this occurs whether or not leucine is present  <cit> . strains were grown in mops glucose, and the specific activity of β-galactosidase was determined and plotted against culture density to more quantitatively assess its level and to assure that the cultures were in balanced growth. compared to the vector control, v. cholerae lrp repressed plrp-lacz to the same extent as e. coli lrp , while p. mirabilis lrp  repressed about twice that much .

transcriptional activation is generally a more demanding process than repression, in the sense that the activator has not only to bind the dna correctly but also  to make productive contacts with rna polymerase  <cit> . strain be <dig> contains a chromosomal operon fusion to the gene for glutamate synthase  in the e. coli be <dig> background   <cit> . lrp directly and strongly activates gltbd transcription in e. coli  <cit> , in a process that also requires the global regulator ihf  <cit>  and is antagonized by crp and argr  <cit> . we found that, relative to the vector control, activation of gltb transcription by p. mirabilis or v. cholerae lrp was essentially indistinguishable from that of the e. coli lrp positive control .

leucine responsiveness of heterologous lrp proteins
conserved function among regulators depends not only on dna-binding  properties, but in some cases also on responses to small molecule coregulators. this provides the basis for a third test of assumptions in regulatory extrapolation. lrp transduces metabolic signals in the form of amino acid pool levels, in particular the amino acids l-leucine and l-alanine  <cit> . the livkhgmf operon is one of two high-affinity branched chain amino acid transport systems in e. coli  <cit> . the livk gene is repressed by lrp when exogenous leucine is present  <cit> , and activated when leucine is not in the medium  <cit> . thus livk is a particularly sensitive indicator of the responses of lrp orthologs to leucine. the amino acid residues previously demonstrated to be involved in leucine binding in e. coli lrp  <cit>  are completely conserved in the p. mirabilis and v. cholerae orthologs .

we prepared a plivk-lacz operon fusion , and co-transformed it into e. coli be <dig>   together with plasmids bearing the heterologous lrp alleles under the control of placuv <dig> . these strains were grown in mops glucose media containing isoleucine  and valine , with or without leucine . leu was not used alone as it can lead to starvation for ile, via feedback inhibition of l-threonine deaminase  <cit> . β-galactosidase activity was determined as described above.

in general the lrp proteins from p. mirabilis and v. cholerae yielded livk regulatory patterns similar to that of the e. coli control, showing activation in the absence of leucine and repression in its presence . however both p. mirabilis and v. cholerae lrp gave threefold greater repression than e. coli lrp . we also looked at the effects of adding ilv on the regulation of e. coli plrp and pgltb. addition of ilv interfered to a moderate extent with the repression of plrp by all three lrp orthologs , but the differences observed in the mops glucose cultures were maintained, with substantially greater repression by p. mirabilis lrp. also as expected from previous studies  <cit> , activation of pgltb by e. coli lrp was moderately reduced in the presence of ilv; the two heterologous lrp orthologs gave patterns essentially indistinguishable from that of e. coli lrp .

microarray analysis of gene regulation by heterologous lrp proteins – effects on regulon membership
the functional conservation of lrp orthologs was more broadly assessed by using microarrays to analyze gene regulation, when lrp alleles from e. coli, p. mirabilis, or v. cholerae  were used to complement the lrp null mutation in e. coli k- <dig>  in these experiments, the only variable is the lrp itself – the target genes and promoter binding sites are identical. the data for all significantly-affected genes are available .

only 16% of the genes differentially regulated by one or more of the three lrp orthologs were regulated in common by all three of them , but this group included recognized lrp-controlled genes such as gltbd, ilvg <dig>  lysu, and osmc  <cit>  . roughly half of the genes regulated by e. coli lrp under these conditions, directly or indirectly, were regulated by either of the other two orthologs . similar proportions were seen when activated and repressed genes were considered separately . 

a potential concern with these experiments is that some apparent differences between the gene sets responsive to the three lrp orthologs might be artifactual. for example, if the typical significantly-affected gene varies twofold, but this change is only counted as being significant in half of the genes that truly change twofold, then 1/ <dig> of genes would appear to be unaffected by a lrp ortholog, even if there were no real functional differences between the lrp proteins. we addressed this concern in two ways.

first, the null hypothesis for observed overlaps under our experimental design is that two different lrp proteins should produce identical  sets of differentially-expressed genes. we are not aware of any distribution test statistic that can be used to evaluate this hypothesis . instead we performed a bootstrap procedure to enumerate all possible outcomes of overlaps, given the data. if our actual null hypothesis were true, two complementation comparisons  would be indistinguishable. to test this, we generated a null distribution of overlaps by randomly exchanging columns of ratio values between two sets.

each set contains three ratio values , as a result of the experiments having been carried out in triplicate. for each set we determined differentially-expressed genes at α =  <dig>  using a t-test, and then determined the size of the intersection. next, we "permuted" the sets as shown in fig. 6a. there are  <dig> combinations in which three ratios can be selected out of six. thus c36xc <dig> pairs of sets were t-tested, "differentially-expressed" genes were identified, and the number of such genes in the intersection was determined. the number of times the size of the overlap is greater than that observed in the real comparison, divided by  <dig>  indicates the significance of the observed overlap – effectively a simulated p-value. table  <dig> shows the results of such simulations. the overlap between eco and pmi is significantly smaller than chance, and the small size of the overlap between eco and vch is very close to being statistically significant. overall, this analysis indicates that the sizes of the intersections are substantially smaller than what would be expected by chance, and that the different lrps are having significantly different effects on expression of the e. coli genome.

second, we used intra-set comparisons to qualitatively evaluate the observed overlaps. we compared the fractions of genes, differentially expressed by both lrps in a pairwise comparison, at different ratio cut-offs. we also compared lrp vs. wt , and lrp vs. lrp. this allowed us to compare the overlaps between lrpk <dig> on two plasmids and between a plasmid and the wt chromosomal gene. the overlap fraction was calculated as the number of regulated genes in both of two sets, divided by the total number of unique genes in both sets. fig. 6b illustrates that, as expected, the overlaps are consistently greater between identical complementation sets than between heterologous sets. thus the microarray results reveal statistically significant functional differences between the lrp orthologs.

microarray analysis of gene regulation by heterologous lrp proteins – effects on magnitude of regulation
predictions of regulatory connections between a regulator and a target gene are useful in themselves, but substantial understanding of a cell's gene regulation also requires knowing the sign and strength of the regulation. accordingly, we next examined whether the subset of genes that was regulated by both e. coli lrp and one of the other orthologs showed a similar magnitude of regulation by each ortholog . the effects of e. coli lrp  on gene expression are shown on the x-axis in every panel. column a shows the set of genes for which transcript levels gave statistically significant decreases when the lrp mutation was complemented. column a thus represents genes that are repressed  by e. coli lrp. column b includes gene showing direct or indirect activation by e. coli lrp. column c shows the set of  <dig> genes recognized in regulondb  <cit>  as being directly controlled by lrp, whether the control is positive or negative. this set includes genes that are only controlled by lrp under growth conditions that differ from those used by us  <cit> , so the cluster of genes showing little or no effect of lrp is not surprising.

we used the slope of a least-squares fit between two ratios as a measure of overall regulatory concordance . one ratio is the expression level of genes in the e. coli Δlrp mutant over the level in that strain complemented by a plasmid carrying the e. coli lrp gene . the second ratio  is the expression in e. coli Δlrp over that in the same strain complemented by a test plasmid . full complementation relative to that by pecolrp would yield a slope of  <dig>  for the linear fit. for each column, the top row indicates the effects of "complementing" the Δlrp allele with the vector alone . not surprisingly, the negative control of "complementing" the lrp mutation with the vector gives slopes of < <dig>  for all three gene sets. as a positive control, we carried out a similar analysis comparing on the one hand the e. coli lrp mutant to the mutant complemented with plasmid-borne e. coli lrp , and on the other hand the mutant to the wt lrp+ strain . the resulting slope between these datasets was within error of  <dig>  , indicating that native lrp – even with the heterologous promoter and translation initiator – fully complements the effect of the chromosomal lrp mutation under the growth conditions used.

supplying the lrp allele from p. mirabilis  gave substantial, though not full, complementation of the gene expression pattern, with slopes ranging from  <dig>  to  <dig> . the lrp allele from v. cholerae , which is more divergent from that of e. coli than is that of p. mirabilis , yielded lower overall regulatory complementation – the slopes range from  <dig>  to  <dig> . thus small changes in the lrp sequence, outside of the fully-conserved helix-turn-helix motif, have substantial effects on the magnitude of lrp-dependent effects on gene expression.

we find that, if anything, this analysis underestimates the differences between effects of the different lrp orthologs. since the power of inference cannot be adequately estimated in microarray experiments, we fixed the false discovery rate  at 5% without setting a minimum limit on fold change. however when we added a fold-change limit to the fixed fdr the differences between regression slopes were increased . in these experiments, genes were assigned to columns a or b  based on having significant responses  to e. coli lrp. the measurements on which this selection was based include noise, so even without a real difference in lrp function the data might regress back towards no change in the complementation experiments. however, since the correlations used only genes that were significantly affected in the same direction in both sets in each pair, no systematic degradation of the signal is expected.

we evaluated the significance of differences between the slopes in fig.  <dig> as follows. to avoid making assumptions about the nature of the distribution under the null hypothesis, we bootstrapped the slopes and estimated 95% confidence bands for each slope. the coordinates of each point in the correlations are estimates of corresponding ratios of transcript abundances, obtained as means of ratios observed in independent biological experiments. therefore, we estimated the width of slopes of the regression lines by permuting the series, choosing n points  at random from one of the three ratios. for example, for gene  <dig> we can take the ratio from biological replicate  <dig>  for gene  <dig> from replicate  <dig>  etc. n-member series were permuted in this way  <dig> times, and the spread of 95% confidence intervals around the mean was calculated relative to the regression coefficients from fig.  <dig>  we demonstrated that 95% confidence intervals do not overlap between regression lines of interest. this supports the conclusion that differences between lrp orthologs can explain the different amounts of variance observed in the various complemented strains.

levels of lrp protein in e. coli, p. mirabilis, and v. cholerae in different media and growth phases
if orthologous regulatory proteins are to generate the same expression patterns for orthologous target genes, having the same intrinsic properties  would be neccesary but not sufficient. the orthologs would also have to share extrinsic properties, including accumulation to similar levels under various growth conditions. this provides the basis for a fourth test of implicit assumptions underlying regulatory extrapolation. potential differences in lrp levels were minimized, in the complementation experiments described above, by providing each lrp ortholog with a common promoter and translation initiation region. however e. coli growing exponentially in a minimal glucose medium accumulates three- to four-fold more lrp than in rich medium  <cit> . to determine whether this pattern of lrp accumulation is conserved, we used western blot analysis to measure the levels of lrp throughout a batch growth cycle in e. coli, p. mirabilis and v. cholerae grown in mops glucose and mops defined rich media .

our results confirm the earlier studies of e. coli, in that we saw several-fold higher lrp levels when cells were grown in mops glucose than when they were grown in mops rich medium . when grown in mops glucose, p. mirabilis  and v. cholerae  produced levels of lrp similar to that in e. coli . furthermore, all three species showed severalfold lower lrp levels in rich than in minimal medium. there was, however, one substantial difference among the cultures. in the rich medium, p. mirabilis  produced up to twice as much lrp as e. coli or v. cholerae, with levels highest in stationary phase.

these differences between e. coli and p. mirabilis, in lrp protein levels, could well have substantial regulatory significance but needed confirmation. samples were taken from parallel cultures of e. coli and p. mirabilis during early logarithmic, mid logarithmic, late logarithmic and stationary phases in defined rich medium. equal amounts of total protein were resolved side-by-side via sds page. the results of the subsequent western blot  confirm that p. mirabilis produces substantially more lrp protein throughout the growth phases, with the greatest difference  seen in stationary phase. thus lrp provides an example of related bacteria with nearly-identical regulator proteins producing significantly different amounts of those regulators.

levels of lrp mrna in e. coli, p. mirabilis, and v. cholerae in different media and growth phases
as regulator levels are often inferred from microarray measurements of mrna levels, we determined whether the level of lrp mrna also varies with the growth medium in all three organisms . at least four qrt-pcr determinations from each of two independent experiments were averaged to generate each plotted value. in e. coli, lrp mrna levels are profoundly lower in rich than in minimal medium, irrespective of growth phase, and similar to what was seen for lrp protein . also like the protein results, p. mirabilis lrp mrna rises in stationary phase , but the mrna shows this rise only in rich medium. the v. cholerae lrp mrna results resemble the protein data in that there is no significant growth phase effect, but differ in that the mrna shows no growth medium effect .

we also measured the levels of lrp mrna for all three organisms during log-phase growth, using a more highly-quantitative method, and the results are consistent with the protein data . we used a sensitive dilution-response approach that makes use of the fact that our three species-specific pairs of qrt-pcr primers for lrp amplify with the same efficiency but are completely specific for their respective template dnas . a standard amount of reference e. coli rna  was mixed with varying amounts of test rna . the various mixes were reverse transcribed and the resultant cdna was used as template for simultaneous amplification with the three primer pairs, with real-time fluorescence monitoring . where the proportion of total mrna as lrp mrna is equal to that in the reference sample, the slope should be  <dig>  . for e. coli-derived cdna, the resulting slope is about  <dig>   or  <dig>  , indicating lower lrp mrna levels in rich than in minimal medium and consistent with the medium-dependent effect on lrp protein levels shown in fig.  <dig>  v. cholerae  gave a pattern similar to that of e. coli, though with less of a medium-dependent effect. however – also consistent with the protein data – p. mirabilis had substantially more lrp cdna as a proportion of total cdna than did e. coli, with slopes of about  <dig> .

regulation of orthologous target genes in their native backgrounds
we next tested an explicit assumption of regulatory extrapolation, by determining if the expression of orthologs of e. coli lrp target genes are lrp-responsive in their native hosts. we measured the mrna levels from orthologs of two genes previously shown to be lrp responsive in e. coli  <cit> : adhe and gltb. these orthologs were chosen based on percent identity to the e. coli protein, and presence of at least one predicted lrp-binding site using prodoric  <cit>  .

wild-type and lrp strain pairs of e. coli, p. mirabilis, and v. cholerae were grown in mops glucose defined rich medium. samples were taken in early logarithmic phase , and early stationary phase . real-time rt-pcr analysis was used to determine the relative levels of adhe, gltb, and  reca mrnas. the experiment was performed in triplicate and the relative levels of mrna were determined using the standard curve method  <cit>  and by normalizing to reca. there is no effect of lrp on reca expression, at least in e. coli and v. cholerae under our conditions  <cit>  and n. dolganov, pers. commun.).

regulation of adhe
adhe is a fused acetaldehyde-coa dehydrogenase, iron-dependent alcohol dehydrogenase and pyruvate-formate lyase deactivase  <cit> . in e. coli, adhe is preferentially expressed in stationary phase  <cit> , and repressed by lrp in a leucine-independent manner during exponential growth in minimal glucose medium  <cit>  and abk, unpublished data). fig. 10d is a log-scale correlogram showing the regulatory pattern of adhe in all three organisms. if lrp had no effect on adhe mrna levels, then the points would fall on the diagonal line. the fact that all points are above the diagonal line is consistent with lrp-dependent repression in all three species. however a more detailed analysis of this data reveals that the regulatory patterns from p. mirabilis and v. cholerae are different from those in e. coli and from one another. in e. coli , there was a modest lrp-dependent decrease in adhe mrna in log phase. p. mirabilis, in contrast , showed a strong repressive effect of lrp, though no real growth-phase dependent change in expression. v. cholerae  exhibited slight lrp-associated reduction in log phase expression, but in stationary phase the adhe mrna levels were about 50-fold higher in the lrp mutant strain.

regulation of gltb
the other target gene, gltb, was described earlier. v. cholerae appears to have two tandem gltb isozyme genes, with 73% and 43% amino acid identity to e. coli gltb. the presence of all conserved domains and key residues strongly suggests that both of these genes actually specify gltb  <cit>  and m.a. vanoni, pers. commun.). we failed to detect expression of the vibrio gltb with higher identity to e. coli during growth in minimal glucose and defined rich medium , however the lower-identity isozyme  was expressed. in e. coli gltb is activated 30– <dig> fold by lrp when grown in mops glucose  <cit> , with the activation codependent on another global regulator, ihf  <cit> . we have already shown that the lrp orthologs from p. mirabilis and v. cholerae effectively replace e. coli lrp, in an e. coli background, for activation of e. coli pgltb . here we determine whether the proteus and vibrio lrp orthologs each activate their native gltb promoters in the native background. the p. mirabilis lrp strain did not grow well in the mops glucose medium used in this study, so all experiments were carried out in mops rich medium. in another rich medium , activation of gltb by lrp is reduced relative to minimal glucose, but is still about triple the level in a lrp disruptant  <cit> .

we found that in e. coli gltb is activated ~ <dig> fold by lrp during mid-log, and about half as much in early stationary phase . in p. mirabilis there was several-fold more log-phase gltb expression in the lrp+ than in the lrp strain, with little if any growth-phase-dependent change. v. cholerae gave the most divergent expression pattern: gltb mrna levels were halved by lrp in log phase, but increased about fivefold by lrp in early stationary phase. bearing in mind that this is the ortholog showing only 43% identity to e. coli gltb, it is nevertheless the case that while lrp activates gltb in log-phase e. coli and p. mirabilis, under the same conditions it slightly represses vc <dig> in v. cholerae.

lrp regulatory interactions with two promoter regions
finally we tested whether promoter regions from orthologous genes, where the e. coli gene is lrp-controlled, are regulated by lrp in heterologous hosts. this was done by preparing lacz operon fusions to a set of ortholog promoters cloned from e. coli, p. mirabilis, and v. cholerae, and then introducing each of these fusions into both the wt and lrp strains of all three species. relative lacz activity was measured using the approach shown in fig.  <dig> . these experiments are reciprocal to those shown in fig.  <dig>  where heterologous lrp alleles had been moved into an e. coli background to test for control of e. coli target genes. however the two sets of experiments share the feature that the target promoters/binding sites being assessed are identical .

regulation of plrp
one promoter set was plrp from e. coli, p. mirabilis, or v. cholerae. plrp in e. coli is autogenously repressed  <cit> , and all three lrp promoters in all three hosts  show lower expression in the presence of lrp than in its absence . however, the exception is the v. cholerae plrp in its native host, which shows tenfold higher expression in the presence of lrp, suggesting activation rather than repression. as the same plasmid, but with different lrp promoters upstream of lacz, gives a repression phenotype in the v. cholerae background, this plrp activation result is unlikely to result from copy number variations in the vector.

aside from this, there is considerable variation in the level of repression. e. coli plrp is much more strongly repressed by lrp in the heterologous hosts than in the native host. plrp of p. mirabilis, unlike that from the other two organisms, shows no evidence of autogenous repression by lrp – p. mirabilis plrp is only weakly repressed  in all three hosts. this may explain the higher levels of lrp we found in this organism , and raises interesting questions about how lrp levels are controlled in p. mirabilis. in summary, both the source of the promoter and the host background strongly affected the regulatory pattern.

regulation of pgltb
the second promoter analyzed in this way was pgltb, including the promoters from both v. cholerae putative isozymes. in e. coli, pgltb is activated by lrp  <cit> , but the results in fig.  <dig> are more varied than for plrp. e. coli pgltb was the only one to be consistently expressed and activated by lrp  in all three hosts. pgltb from p. mirabilis was barely expressed in v. cholerae irrespective of lrp, was expressed weakly in its native host  and with statistically insignificant effects of lrp, while in e. coli this promoter was expressed at a moderate level and was activated by lrp . the v. cholerae pgltb that is less similar to e. coli gltb  was strongly expressed in its native host, with no significant effect of lrp, while showing lower expression levels and activation  in e. coli, and yielding low expression but repression by lrp  in the p. mirabilis background. the other v. cholerae pgltb , more closely related to e. coli gltb of the two, had given undetectible expression in our rt-pcr assays. vc <dig> gave detectable expression in the form of a lacz fusion, though as with the rt-pcr analysis it yielded much lower expression in the native host than did vc <dig>  lrp had insignificant effects on vc <dig> in the native host and in e. coli, while in p. mirabilis there was very low expression irrespective of lrp. thus, as with plrp, the promoter behavior varied substantially between hosts with respect to lrp effects, and given hosts expressed the promoters of orthologous target genes in varied manners.

conserved regulation of plrp and pgltb would have led to greater similarity of expression patterns of the three  orthologs in the three host species. however, the differences may reflect more than just differences in lrp. in e. coli, pgltb is controlled by lrp, crp, ihf, and argr  <cit> . species or promoter binding-site differences affecting the other regulators  could contribute to the different observed behaviors – in an extreme case, lrp has no effect on pgltb in the absence of ihf binding  <cit> . a similar caveat may apply to plrp, which in addition to being autogenously repressed by lrp  <cit>  may be activated by gade in e. coli  <cit> .

discussion
robust methods for predicting gene regulation from dna sequence data would greatly increase the usefulness of the rapidly-expanding collection of bacterial genome sequences. however current methods rely on a hypothesis that has received limited testing – that a well-conserved regulator, and well-conserved target gene downstream of a putative binding site for the regulator, together imply a similar pattern of regulation . for brevity, we refer to this as the "regulatory extrapolation hypothesis," since it involves inference of a regulatory pattern based on conservation with respect to a well-studied reference organism. some possibilities regarding this hypothesis are: that it is generally true among closely-related organisms , that it is generally true for only the most-highly conserved regulators and target genes, or that it is often incorrect even among highly-related genes and organisms. we have studied regulatory extrapolation by examining a well-conserved global regulator , conserved genes that are lrp regulatory targets in e. coli, and two species of increasing but limited genetic distance from e. coli: proteus mirabilis and vibrio cholerae.

closely-related lrp proteins have significant intrinsic differences
regulatory extrapolation relies on a tacit assumption that regulatory proteins with high amino sequence identity are functionally equivalent. we took closely-related lrp orthologs  from three species, gave them identical expression sequences for transcription and translation, put them into the same very low-copy vector , and introduced them into the same e. coli k- <dig> lrp and p. mirabilis lrp backgrounds. of the  <dig> aa in all three lrp orthologs, p. mirabilis lrp differs from e. coli lrp at only four positions, while the v. cholerae and e. coli orthologs differ at 12; none of these differences affects the known dna-binding helix-turn-helix or the coregulator binding sites .

the lrps exhibited similar overall behavior, supporting extrapolation in general, particularly where the only concern is whether a regulatory link exists at all irrespective of its sign or strength. however there were significant functional distinctions between the tested lrp orthologs. in e. coli, the native plrp  was repressed equivalently by e. coli and v. cholerae lrp, but about twice as much by p. mirabilis lrp . these differences were magnified in the presence of leucine, where p. mirabilis lrp was unique in showing virtually no effect . in contrast, the three lrp orthologs gave equivalent activation of pgltb . plivk, which in e. coli is activated by lrp in the absence of leucine and repressed in its presence, was regulated equally by all three lrp orthologs with one exception: in the presence of leucine, the e. coli lrp represses less than the others .

we used microarray analysis to more globally assess the ability of orthologous lrp proteins to properly control the e. coli k- <dig> lrp regulon. our results confirmed that minor changes in the lrp amino acid sequence had substantial effects on the targets  and magnitude  of lrp effects. of the genes whose expression was significantly changed by e. coli lrp, over a third were not significantly affected by either of the other lrp orthologs. conversely, about half of the genes significantly affected by p. mirabilis lrp, and about a third of those affected by v. cholerae lrp, were also affected by e. coli lrp in the e. coli background. looking only at the subset of genes that were significantly affected by all three lrps, we found that whether we examined genes significantly repressed by lrp, activated by lrp , or directly controlled by lrp in e. coli, the results were consistent. specifically, the transcriptional effects of p. mirabilis lrp were most similar to those of e. coli lrp , followed by v. cholerae , with vector alone showing no statistically significant similarity , and the chromosomal vs. plasmid-borne e. coli lrp comparison giving 94% concordance. it is important that in these experiments, the only variable is the lrp ortholog present – the target genes and binding sites are identical between strains .

another assessment of lrp functionality involved p. mirabilis swarming over a solid surface. swarming is a complex phenomenon; for example, in salmonella about a third of all genes showed swarming-associated changes in expression  <cit> . for the purposes of the present study, swarming thus represents a sensitive indicator of lrp action. in a p. mirabilis background, we found that all three lrp orthologs restored swarming, but gave repeatable differences in the resulting swarming patterns .

we are currently exploring the molecular bases for these intrinsic differences in the three lrp orthologs. in theory, a combination of differences in dna specificity , in cooperativity, in response to coregulatory amino acids, or to interactions with rna polymerase or other regulatory proteins  <cit>  could be involved. for the purposes of this report, however, the main point is simply that such differences exist even between proteins that are 98% identical .

orthologous lrp proteins can have different extrinsic properties
we also examined the native regulation of lrp in e. coli, p. mirabilis, and v. cholerae. regulatory extrapolation relies on a second tacit assumption: that levels of the conserved regulator are similar in the organisms being compared, and change similarly in response to growth conditions. target gene regulation is, not surprisingly, affected by the level of the regulatory protein; this is specifically true for lrp  <cit> .

lrp protein levels in all three species were reduced in rich medium relative to glucose minimal medium . for two of the three species, lrp mrna levels are also lower in rich medium . however we found that, during growth in defined rich medium , p. mirabilis levels of lrp protein and lrp mrna were about double those in e. coli or v. cholerae . for the purposes of this study, the important point is that lrp levels differ significantly between the species, so that sequence analysis of the lrp open reading frame and target gene promoter is not sufficient to predict expression patterns of the target gene. this regulatory variation is not an idiosyncracy of lrp; for example, similar species-specific variation in regulation, among enterobacteriaceae, has also been reported for the global regulator fis  <cit> , though as with lrp the most basic patterns of expression are conserved  <cit> .

orthologous target genes are regulated differently by the same lrp protein
a third tacit assumption underlying regulatory extrapolation is the reciprocal of the one described immediately above: that orthologous target genes moved into a common background will be regulated in the same way by orthologous regulators. we prepared lacz fusions to both pgltb and plrp promoters from e. coli, p. mirabilis, and v. cholerae, and introduced them into the lrp and lrp+ strain pairs for all three species in all combinations.

once again the assumption is supported in general – most plrp combinations are unaffected or repressed by lrp , while all but one of the pgltb combinations are unaffected or activated by lrp . 

however the assumption is not supported by the specifics – e.g., the e. coli pgltb is well-expressed and lrp-activated in all backgrounds, while the p. mirabilis pgltb ranges from nonexpression to lrp-activated expression in the different backgrounds . it is particularly interesting that, unique to the v. cholerae plrp in the v. cholerae background, lrp activated rather than repressing the promoter. there are some intriguing and distinctive sequence characteristics of the v. cholerae plrp that may explain this behavior, and we are investigating these further. however v. cholerae plrp gave low expression in the v. cholerae background even when lrp was present, while this same promoter gave much higher  expression in the e. coli and p. mirabilis hosts. this, and the fact that the e. coli and p. mirabilis plrp fusions were both well expressed in the vibrio background, suggests that v. cholerae negatively regulates its plrp via some vibrio-specific factor, and that lrp may in this case act as an anti-repressor.

comparisons of independent microarray studies on distinct platforms are problematic  <cit> , and this report has the benefit of direct comparison using the same experimental and statistical methods. nonetheless, our results are supported by earlier analyses of the somewhat differing effects of gene disruptions in the global regulators h-ns  <cit> , ihf  <cit> , and fis  <cit>  in the closely-related genera escherichia and salmonella.

one possible interpretation of these results is that global regulators are more likely to have greater recognition plasticity than local regulators, in which case a study of lrp may represent something of a "worst case scenario" for regulatory extrapolation despite its remarkable conservation . it has been suggested that global regulators bind a large number of sites with a wide range of affinities, affecting chromosome superhelical density and providing a continuous "analog" regulation, in contrast to the more "digital" regulation by more specific regulators  <cit> . it is also true, however, that more local and sequence-specific regulators  show considerable range in their in vivo dna binding  <cit> . there are certainly local regulators that bind unique sites with extreme specificity  <cit> , though the value of predicting their regulatory roles across species is correspondingly limited.

CONCLUSIONS
our results present a mixed picture. in general terms, we found that lrp behaves in similar ways in the three tested species. however we also found significant intrinsic and extrinsic differences among the lrp orthologs, and differences in the behavior of target gene promoters having predicted lrp-binding sites, despite the fairly close genetic relatedness of the species we examined. these results suggest that regulatory extrapolation over limited genetic distances, with the goal of making fairly general predictions of regulon structures, can provide valid and useful insights. however our results also indicate that the strength and sign  of the regulation, even across limited genetic distances, is surprisingly variable.

