BACKGROUND
the phenotype of a cell results from the combined effect of environmental and genetic factors  <cit> . while the investigation of the relationship between genetic and environmental factors at the molecular level has proved difficult  <cit> , a number of recent systems biology studies have produced important insights about the nature of this complex relationship.

the relationship between genes and environment can be analysed by computational methods founded on the principle that the biochemical habitat of a cell is primarily "engraved" in its dna sequence. genes may be associated with metabolic enzymes, membrane transporters, signal transduction or regulatory control. combined with basic biochemical information currently available in several databases , it is possible to reconstruct the majority of the metabolic reaction network and also the associated exo-metabolome  <cit> . this is the currently accepted top-down, gene-to-function molecular biology paradigm.

following these principles, borenstein et al.,  <cit>  applied a graph-theoretical algorithm to determine these exogenously acquired compounds - they called it the seed set of an organism - for each of the  <dig> prokaryotic species with available metabolic networks in the kegg database  <cit> . they found that about 8-11% of the compounds in the metabolic network of an organism correspond to the seed set and that each organism possesses a characteristic seed set. moreover, comparing the seed set of the different organisms enabled them to trace the evolutionary history of both metabolic networks and growth environments across the tree of life, supporting the "reverse" ecology principle.

using comparative genomics and flux balance analysis, pal et al.  <cit>  concluded that the adaptive evolution of bacterial metabolic networks in response to changing environments proceeds essentially by horizontal gene transfer  of genes involved primarily in the transport and catalysis of external nutrients. with a similar approach, kreimer et al.  <cit>  studied the modularity of metabolic networks among  <dig> prokaryotic species with sequenced genomes. they observed that several environmental factors contributed to the variation in metabolic-network modularity across species. their observations corroborated the findings of pal et al.  <cit>  that the variability in the natural habitat of an organism promotes modularity in its metabolic network.

allen et al.  <cit>  and kell et al.  <cit>  analysed the complete set of metabolites excreted or secreted by yeast cultures using high-throughput direct injection mass spectrometry. they called the technique "metabolic footprinting". they observed that a high number of metabolites, typically between 50- <dig> metabolites, are either excreted or secreted to the medium. using statistical methods they showed that the information contained in the environment is sufficient to distinguish between different physiological states of wild type yeast strains and single-gene deletion mutants and concluded that the technique has high potential for functional analysis and metabolic engineering.

all the above studies concur with a profound, bi-directional link between environment and genes, with routes on the evolutionary principles of life. when exposed to a particular environment, a given genotype will respond and change its environment in a unique way, which can be distinguished even between single-gene deletion mutants  <cit> . supported by these observations, we explored the feasibility of a bottom-up, envirome to cellular function reconstruction approach. instead of using transcriptome data as in functional genomics, we set out to determine if it is possible to reconstruct cellular function from the analysis of envirome data sets alone. we term this reverse functional analysis approach "cell functional enviromics". in what follows, we describe the principles of the employed methodology and show how this approach can be applied to reconstruct baby hamster kidney  metabolism.

RESULTS
a systems biology approach to cell functional enviromics
in functional genomics, the goal is genome-wide cellular function reconstruction through the collection and analysis of transcriptome or proteome data over time. in functional enviromics, we attempt to bridge environmental factors and function through the collection and analysis of dynamic envirome data. the necessary elements to such an analysis are: i) setting the universe of cellular functions and envirome components, ii) collecting informative envirome data over time, and iii) systems level analysis of dynamic envirome data to find relationships between environmental variables and cellular functions.

to support such a framework, we have developed a computational algorithm called "envirome-guided projection to latent pathways ". "cellular function" has been defined in different ways, here we adopted elementary flux modes  as function descriptors  <cit>  because they enable systematic, large-scale computational analysis of biochemical networks from a functional viewpoint. mathematically, ems form the convex basis of the null space solution of a metabolic network stoichiometric matrix. biologically, they represent elementary network topologies defining all possible independent operational modes of a cell. ems have been previously used to support computational functional genomics  <cit> . here we apply the same rational to derive a functional enviromics algorithm.

a medium scale network has typically a very large number of ems in the order of ~ <dig>  <cit> . it is however unlikely that all of these cellular functions are active at the same time. in reality, despite the apparent complexity of cellular networks, only a very limited number of core network topologies are capable of robustly executing any particular biological function  <cit> . it is thus rational to assume that a given environmental stimulus activates only a moderate number of characteristic ems.

in conformity with the above enumerated principles, plp was designed to maximise the covariance between environmental state  and observed phenotypic trait  under the constraint of known genes translated into a plausible set of cellular functions . simply put, plp implements a discrimination algorithm to find a minimal set of ems based on two criteria: i) variance of measured phenotypic trait explained by each em and ii) degree of correlation of each em with the environmental state. by maximising these two criteria, the algorithm delivers a ranking of ems in increasing order of percentage of explained variance in the measured flux data, and a functional enviromics map  representing the strength of up- or down-regulation of ems by environmental factors. mathematical details of the method can be found in the methods section. in what follows we illustrate the methodology with an application to a recombinant bhk cell line expressing the fusion glycoprotein igg1-il <dig> .

envirome guided metabolic reconstruction of bhk cells
the methodology was first applied to the analysis of a data set comprising measurements of  <dig> environmental factors collected from six independent, differently operated culture experiments as described in methods and table  <dig>  the main objective was to identify the "active" set of ems by iteratively projecting the metabolism into a minimal set of core cellular functions that correlate with the envirome. the predictor  matrix included an extensive list of environmental factors including: temperature, ph, osmolality and concentrations of  <dig> measured components . the target  matrix consisted of the  <dig> exchange fluxes calculated from the profiling of extracellular concentrations. the results are shown in figure  <dig>  the explained flux variance was calculated according to eq. . it represents the variance in the flux data that is explained by a model built on the selected ems.

gln =  <dig> 
gln =  <dig> 
gln =  <dig> 
gln =  <dig> 
glu =  <dig> 
ser =  <dig> 
gln =  <dig> 
glu =  <dig> 
a high degree of correlation was observed between measured envirome components and relative weight of discriminated ems, ultimately reflected in high correlation between measured and predicted extracellular rates . within the universe of  <dig> possible ems,  <dig> of them captured up to 93% of the measured rates variance , even though the data were pooled together from several independent cultivation experiments, with inherently diverse environmental trajectories. the first selected em is one of many for biomass synthesis , describing more than 64% of total rate data variance. this concurs with the fact that most of the processed carbon is involved in biomass synthesis. the single em for product formation  is also selected, explaining part of the specific consumption rates of every amino acid. the em corresponding to anaerobic conversion of glucose into lactate was selected in third place . given the low saturation constants of glucose transporters   <cit> ), this pathway usually carries a high flux in mammalian cell cultures, leading to waste lactate formation. serine transamination into glycine was the fourth selection . indeed, the rates of serine consumption and glycine production were quite high, mainly during the initial periods of culture. this pathway may represent a strategy for ammonia detoxification, the main toxic by-product in mammalian cell culture. the sixth position  corresponds to the pathway of glutaminolysis, well known as a major carbon source for energy production in mammalian cells  <cit> . complete oxidation of glucose in the tca cycle  is also selected, reflecting the metabolic shift induced during glucose fed-batch experiments.

the minus sign indicates flux in the opposite direction for those ems whose participating reactions are all reversible. ems in bold were conserved between cultures and also selected from the full data set , showing the ability of the plp algorithm to identify essential common features in metabolism.

the stoichiometry of em macroscopic reactions considers only extracellular compounds, and is readily calculated as described in methods. some of these pathways involve only a single intracellular reaction able to operate in steady-state, whenever all the metabolites involved are also present extracellularly.

several other methods were proposed to calculate ems weighting factors from flux vectors but none of these methods use the correlation with the envirome as criterion for ems discrimination. as pointed out by wiback et al.  <cit> , the extreme pathways  weighting factors used to reconstruct a particular flux vector may not be unique. linear programming methods can be applied to calculate the minimum and maximum values of such weighting factors, thus defining a range of possible values for each pathway, called the α-spectrum  <cit> . unique solutions can also be obtained if additional assumptions about the biological system are considered. for instance, nookaew et al.  <cit>  proposed the determination of weighting factors by mixed integer linear programing to maximise the number of elementary modes that explain measured yield values. using a different strategy, schwartz and kanehisa  <cit>  proposed a quadratic program to minimize the sum of squares of weighting factors. to better illustrate our method, we compared it with the method proposed by schwartz and kanehisa  <cit> , which basically selects the elementary modes that are closest to the actual biological sate by minimising the respective weighting factors. the application of this method to the  <dig> flux vectors data points identifies consistent subsets of  <dig> and  <dig> ems with weighting factors bigger than  <dig>  and  <dig>  respectively . as expected, this method selects a much higher number of ems than plp because it does not seek redundancy minimization. the  <dig> ems with the highest contribution to flux data variance explained only 66% of variance  compared to the 93% obtained with plp . this method also took  <dig> ems to reach the 93% variance obtained with plp with only  <dig> ems. the  <dig> ems with weighting factors bigger than  <dig>  selected by the schwartz and kanehisa  <cit>  method contain the  <dig> ems selected by plp but the former method does not link the ems with the envirome.

on the whole, these results show that the most significant pathways in cultured mammalian cells could be identified from a larger, redundant set of possible routes using the correlation with the environmental state as the selection criterion. further, the weighting factors of selected pathways are highly correlated with the environmental state denoting either a causal or effector relationship between environmental state and active pathways. finally, such envirome-correlated pathways explain more than 90% of flux data variance.

assessment of pathway variability along culture time
pathways may be up- or down-regulated either as a consequence of changes in the environment or driven by changes in the internal state ultimately reflected in a particular environmental "footprint". to monitor such regulatory processes, the plp algorithm was applied to a moving time window, from the beginning to the end of each fed-batch experiment, to identify em rearrangements over time. each culture was partitioned into sequential metabolic phases, where quasi steady state is observed, according to the profiles of extracellular metabolite concentrations.

see table  <dig> for time intervals.

see table  <dig> for time intervals.

we further analyse in more detail the cases of the reversible em  <dig>  and em  <dig> , linked to amino acids metabolism, which were selected in all phases but at some point changed direction . the main factors determining these changes in directionality were the limitation in glutamine concentration  and the exhaustion of aspartate . the selection of such pathways  illustrates the ability of the method to tap on key metabolic adaptation processes.

consistency analysis of plp reconstructions
in order to assess the consistency of plp results, the discriminated sets of ems were back-transformed into reduced metabolic networks by excluding reactions not participating in any of the selected pathways. then, metabolic flux analysis  was performed to compare intracellular flux distributions of the original bhk metabolic network and plp reconstructed metabolic networks. also the consistency index  <cit>  was calculated for each stationary phase. the minimum number of ems required for obtaining consistency between experimental data and the stoichiometry of simplified networks was the criterion to stop plp reconstruction. this methodology yielded consistent networks with no more than  <dig> ems . comparing the fluxes of original and reconstructed networks, it is clear that excluded reactions have fluxes close to zero in the original bhk network, while nonzero fluxes show almost imperceptible differences .

the excluded reactions  refer to the catabolism of amino acids , which normally occurs when their concentrations exceed the amount required for proteins synthesis  <cit> . some are inactive during the majority of metabolic phases considered, namely r <dig>  r <dig> and r <dig> , corresponding to the catabolism of valine, arginine and histidine, respectively. therefore, it can be concluded that the consumption of these amino acids is largely determined by protein synthesis , being practically unaffected by their extracellular concentrations within the range present in the medium. on the contrary, the consumption of phenylalanine, lysine, leucine, cysteine and methionine,  was largely influenced by their medium concentrations, since the corresponding catabolic pathways were active during more than half of the culture phases, suggesting these amino acids should be provided in controlled, stoichiometric amounts to minimize ammonia formation. a particular scenario arises for serine, whose catabolic conversion to pyruvate  is down-regulated only during three metabolic phases . as mentioned, cells also convert serine into glycine for ammonia detoxification : although maintaining a high extracellular concentration could be beneficial, it may also lead to net ammonia formation if present in excess.

functional enviromics maps 
functional enviromics maps are intended to compile large-scale quantitative information of the interactions between environmental factors and cellular functions. a fem consists of a data matrix, fem = {ii,j}, with columns representing elementary flux modes, rows representing environmental factors, and ii,j elements the respective regression coefficients. in some cases, the magnitude of ii,j may be interpreted as the strength of up- or down-regulation of a given cellular function i by the environmental factor j . the concept of fem is illustrated in figure  <dig> for the case of bhk cells using the full envirome data set, comprising the data of the  <dig> independent culture experiments.

analysing these data, it can be observed that several envirome factors correlate positively with the flux for biomass synthesis through em  <dig>  namely the concentrations of glucose, lactate, glutamine and other  <dig> amino acids. on the other hand, extracellular ph and the concentrations of product and histidine correlate negatively. while glucose is known to be mandatory for many cell types in culture, bhk cells are capable of glutamine synthesis from glutamate  <cit> . however, it is also a major energy source for transformed mammalian cell lines, favouring growth when present in the medium. the remaining amino acids correlate positively with this em since they are more concentrated during initial exponential growth when specific biomass formation is faster. as they are taken up by cells, the cellular division rate decreases as well.

in terms of product synthesis , negatively correlated factors include the ph and glucose concentration, while osmolality and the concentrations of valine, isoleucine, leucine and lysine correlate positively with this flux. the negative correlation with glucose concentration is explained by bioreactor operation factors, as it decreases  along culture time whereas product formation rate increases, rather than by an inhibition mechanism on product synthesis. the effect of ph deserves further attention, since it also correlates negatively with biomass formation. as described in methods, the bulk ph was allowed to vary between  <dig> and  <dig> . some reports agree that maximum growth rates  <cit>  and recombinant protein productivities  <cit>  are favoured at ph =  <dig>  thus around the lower limit of the values used in this work. on the other hand, it has been shown that specific productivity in mammalian cells is higher with increased bulk osmolality  <cit> . our results support this observation, however it should be noted that the increase in osmolality resulted mainly from the feeding of a concentrated solution during the fed-batch phase. as expected, glucose concentration positively correlated with the flux of lactate formation through em  <dig>  and serine concentration is the most important factor that activates glycine production through em  <dig> 

despite using data from six independent experiments, some environmental factors  show similar variation trends, which precludes disclosure of their true contribution to cellular phenotype. it is clear that the identifiability of environment-ems relationships is conditional to sufficient "system excitation", which can only be assured by model-based design of experiments. within proper circumstances of experimental design and physiological range of physical and biochemical variables, the information of ems regression coefficients can be used to direct the phenotype to a desired state by manipulating genes, envirome or both. it should be noted that ems represent clusters of genes, thus the em regression coefficients translate the lumped effect of kinetic and genetic regulation induced by the envirome.

CONCLUSIONS
while in functional genomics the aim is to unravel gene functions from the analysis of transcriptome and proteome dynamical data  <cit> , here we propose a reverse, envirome-to-function analysis approach sourced by dynamic envirome data. this approach is founded on the assumption that the genome sets the universe of cellular functions while the envirome sets the relative contribution of each function to the observed phenotype. we have developed a systems level methodology that deconvolutes the observed phenotype  into gene dependent structures  and envirome dependent structures . then, only the envirome dependent structures are linearly regressed against envirome components to discriminate the core cellular functions that correlate with the environmental state.

when applied to a recombinant bhk cell line, environmental data finds correspondence to less than  <dig> elementary flux modes, while explaining over 90% of flux variance. most of the discriminated elementary flux modes are typical routes known to be active in cultured mammalian cells, while excluded routes are related with the catabolism of those amino acids not in excess in the medium, thus being directly used for protein synthesis. furthermore, metabolic flux distributions of reduced metabolic networks, accounting for the discriminated core cellular functions only, were shown to be consistent with metabolic flux distributions of the original, unreduced metabolic network. these results essentially show that through the life of the culture, phenotypic variability is almost completely traceable by monitoring changes in envirome data. the remaining 10% of unexplained variance corresponds mostly to experimental error, thus leaving little room for genetically induced variability that cannot be traced to envirome data. on the whole, such results support the feasibility of a function reconstruction approach guided by the collection and analysis of envirome data sets.

when applied to a sliding time window along a single culture experiment, it was observed that several discriminated ems are not active during all culture phases while others may change direction at some point. such short-term dynamic changes correspond to metabolic adaptation induced by environmental stimuli. while some metabolic adaptation effects are readily interpretable in terms of exhaustion or limitation of essential substrates, some other have nontrivial interpretation and may correspond to unknown functions of environmental factors. the analysis of em rearrangements can provide insights about the mechanisms underlying such metabolic adaptation. despite the variability in observed ems with culture time, a high degree of conservation of cellular function among the six different cultivation experiments was obtained . these observations support the results presented by ma et al.  <cit>  who used computational methods to identify network topologies that can achieve biochemical adaptation. they concluded that despite the diversity of possible biochemical networks, only a finite set of core topologies represent a robust adaptation response to a stimulus. these results support the hypothesis of a minimal set of core cellular functions activated by the envirome. the use of less informative envirome data sets  translates into lower discriminating power of cellular functions, particularly of those cellular functions producing similar environmental footprints. however, since only a small number of core cellular functions with distinctive footprints are active they are easily identified from an analysis of the envirome, thus constituting a vital support of cell functional enviromics.

while our intention was to demonstrate the principle of cell functional enviromics, its full potential can be realized when large-scale, high-throughput analysis techniques are employed for envirome-wide reconstruction of cellular functions eventually leading to high resolution functional enviromics maps. this approach has many interesting practical applications ranging from drug design to macroscopic process control. a point to be made is that finding a statistical correlation, even if linked with a metabolic structure, does not allow one to discriminate between a "cause" and an "effect". such discrimination is only possible after a systematic analysis on the basis of a sound experimental design, which might include simultaneous environmental and genetic perturbations.

fundamental issues, which remain to be clarified, include the degree of conservation of envirome functions among different species. one can anticipate that, given the role of environmental factors in the evolution of life, some degree of conservation may exist between species, as implicitly acknowledged by those who defend the reverse ecological principle  <cit> . a systematic functional enviromics study applied to different species and genotype variants could shed light on this issue.

the need for envirome-driven systems biology approaches to address human diseases has long been recognized  <cit> . others have proposed enviromics as a complement to genomic and proteomic studies of mental health  <cit> . even the notion of 'functional enviromics' has been set forth as a counterpart to functional genomics in tackling schizophrenia disorders  <cit> . our approach has been to explore this concept in cellular systems- cell functional enviromics - which we view as a natural step in both fundamental and applied molecular biology research.

