BACKGROUND
cytoscape  <cit>  is a free open source platform providing biological network analysis and two-dimensional  visualization for biologists. with more than  <dig> registered plugins contributed by the community, it is very versatile in network applications, such as network importing, network integrating, inference customization, literature mining, topological clustering, functional enrichment, network comparison, and programmatic access  <cit> . however, it lacks the capability of displaying the large-scale networks in three-dimensions  or beyond. with the exponential growth of gigantic biological data deposited in the public domain, the extra space visualization would offer more flexibility for layered representation  <cit>  and heterogeneous data visualization  <cit> . although a few applications are available for 3d network visualization, such as biolayout  <cit> , wilmascope 3d  <cit> , arena3d  <cit> , forg3d  <cit> , the lack of community support has hindered their widespread use. tulip  <cit>  features 3d display and a variety of plugins, but it is far less versatile as cytoscape in biological studies. moreover, some of them suffer performance drawbacks when displaying large networks . although there are cytoscape’s 3d plugins using processing library  <cit>  and jogl  <cit> , they are still under development. there is also an approach using rcytoscape  <cit>  and rgl to create 3d visualization for cytoscape, but it is not well developed in terms of its layout performance and ease of use. although the release of cytoscape  <dig>   <cit>  claims that through its osgi engine, it enables user to switch renderers in cytoscape. however, graph manipulation and layout algorithms are both required to be changed while switching 2d to 3d, which means excessive override of cytoscape core modules. taking into consideration of the difficulties faced in implementation, adopting a light-weighted external renderer is a better choice. moreover, c++ implementation is often superior in performance than java when it comes to layout large graph with more than ten thousands nodes. therefore we choose ubigraph  <cit> , which is a 3d visualization tool supporting up to eight posix threads and multilevel force-directed graph layout of high performance and aesthetic pleasure. we developed 3dscapecs, a cytoscape plugin providing three-dimensional, dynamic, parallel network visualization for cytoscape in client–server  architecture . despite criticism that developers favour in building 3d visualization tools rather than analyzing using such tools has arisen within the bioinformatics community  <cit> . 3dscapecs has undergone extensive testing among molecular chemistry, genomics and proteomics studies, which showcased as the following .

*approximate network size measured with minimum frames per second  which enables smooth manipulations  on an eight core intel xeon  <dig>  ghz workstation with an on-board matrox g <dig> graphics card.

implementation
visualization of three-dimensional networks
3dscapecs converts an existed cytoscape network to a 3d view as shown in figure 1a. the conversion can retain almost all settings such as the colours, sizes, and shapes of all nodes as similar as those from the existing 2d view. the users can easily manipulate the 3d view by using mouse. operations including rotation and zooming of the display have been implemented in ubigraph. we have implemented network communication between ubigraph and cytoscape as well. on double-clicking a node in ubigraph, its attributes will be shown in the node/edge attribute browser panel in cytoscape . a searching box is provided for user to search the nodes/edges by corresponding identifiers. whenever the search succeeds, the node matched will be highlighted with a label in the 3d view .

three-dimensional layout
the layout algorithms are required to generate meaningful and aesthetic drawings of biological networks. the layout algorithm built in ubigraph is force-directed based. it acts by balancing the repulsive force between nodes and attractive force from the edge. after several rounds of movement and annealing, it generates aesthetically pleasing graph layouts with all edges of nearly equal length. the force-directed layout algorithm implemented in cytoscape has a complexity of o and low-quality local drawing  <cit> , it is only suitable for networks containing up to several hundred nodes. other global force-directed algorithms such as fruchterman-reingold  <cit>  experience the same bottleneck. therefore local force-directed algorithms such as fast multipole multilevel method   <cit>  and multilevel layout algorithm  <cit>  have been developed. hereby we adopted the multilevel layout algorithm in ubigraph for larger networks. in this approach, the network is partitioned into sub-networks. only forces within the scope of sub-networks are calculated, so that the final graph layout can be obtained in o runtime. therefore it will greatly reduce the duration required to complete three-dimensional layout, which is significantly helpful in visualization of large-scale networks .

time-course data animation
cytoscape supports the mapping of gene expression data to node color, label, and border thickness. with vistaclara  <cit>  or spotxplore  <cit>  plugin installed, the user can distinguish expression intensities from a heat map themed node colour scheme. vistaclara even creates an animated view of the network for displaying the changes over time in a series of experiments. in our implementation, users are able to explore expression data using vistaclara’s heat map scheme or user-defined color scheme . moreover, time-course data can be attributed to node sizes or edge thickness, making it possible for visualizing various data types, such as data from metabolic flux analysis, with thicker edge representing larger flux, and vice versa . we also implemented motion network in 3dscapecs, made it possible to study the changes over time or different conditions, such as mass spectral molecular networks .

parallel visualization
3dscapecs provides an approach for visualizing one network from multiple aspects by adopting parallel visualization. the cytoscape network view can be simultaneously rendered in ubigraph on multiple computer clients through network communication. different clients can be set to visualize different aspects of the graph, either a reversal of perspective, or another time-point from a time-course animation. unlike cytoscaperpc  <cit> , which use xml-rpc to modify networks in cytoscape from clients, ubigraph clients serve as xml-rpc servers in 3dscapecs architecture. therefore any changes made to the network view in cytoscape, either change the size/colour of a node, or add/delete a node, can be reflected on all clients by synchronizing the network data between ubigraph clients and cytoscape.

RESULTS
genome sequences scaffolding visualization
next-generation sequencing  and third-generation sequencing technologies such as pacbio smrt greatly facilitated whole genome sequencing. however, complex genomic structures that cause sequence bias even with high genomic coverage and repeated sequences that may cause gaps in assembly still hamper gap closure. determining the relationships between contigs or scaffolds is therefore very important. showing straightforward graph-based relationships of contigs in cytoscape rather than tables is more intuitive, and will help planning for further pcr validation. contigscape  <cit>  is a cytoscape plugin for helping visualizing genome scaffolds. however, complex contig relationships in highly repetitive regions are hard to resolve since they have many intersections. by converting such network into three-dimensional graph, the relationships between contigs become easier to be identified. in the project of ralstonia sp. genome scaffolding  <cit> , three repetitive contigs have several connections which are hard to be distinguished, while nodes are well dispersed and their relationships with other contigs are much clearer in corresponding 3d view .

dynamic visualization of metabolic flux data
flux balance analysis  is a powerful tool in simulating metabolism in genome scale reconstructions of metabolic networks  <cit> . dynamic exploration of flux data will give user an intuitive guidance on metabolic changes. in 3dscapecs, metabolic flux data visualization can either be reflected in node size , or edge thickness . here we use e. coli’s energy metabolism model  <cit> . to reduce network complexity, we only show relationship with flux distribution greater than zero. node sizes are rendered according to their flux distribution, so that reactions with greater flux can be easily identified . we compare the reaction network between the initial state  and the simulated state . the reactions with changed rate are easier to be identified in the 3d view due to the nodes in the centre of the network are dispersed in the 3d space, while the nodes in the 2d view are overlaid with each other. the evaluations with substrate-product network were carried out between 3dscapecs and fluxmap  <cit> , which is a vanted  <cit>  add-on for the visual exploration of metabolic flux . although it features time-point simulation or conditions iteration in flux visualization, it lacks the “auto-play” functionality as 3dscapecs does. simulation of flux knockout example of glycolysis pathway in fluxmap example package shows that 3dscapecs is useful in showing metabolic flux changes between different genotypes .

mass spectrometry  molecular network visualization
molecular network has been used for the analysis of ms/ms data and provide a new perspective to study microbial natural products  <cit> . however, an efficient approach needs attention to interpret the similarities or differences between several conditions in biological experiments. nguyen d. et al. has applied cytoscape to visualize ms network generated from several ms experiments  <cit> . here we present an example of the application 3dscapecs in monitoring the changes of metabolomics of the human pathogen c. albicans after the treatments using different doses of avermetin, a potent antifungal natural product . in this experiment, we treated c. albicans with  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig>  , and  <dig>   μg/ml of avermectin, respectively. meanwhile, the pathogen treated with dmso was used as negative control . the monitoring of the metabolites would help in identifying the pathway affected by avermectin and subsequently interprets the medicinal mechanism of avermectin. a motion graph varies in topology enables dynamic exploration of molecule changes at different conditions. this example is included in a saved cytoscape session named ms.cys . user needs to export the session into sif-format network and the filenames in node attributes into cytoscape node attributes file. then use separate.pl to divide the sif-format network into several sub-networks according to their filename attributes provided. the generated sif -format networks from a to f are at different dose treatments. using “order networks”, user makes them a motion network . the topological changes are useful in distinguishing different molecules produced at different dose treatments . the parallel visualization on multiple monitors and animation iterating all the networks also facilitate more comprehensive comparison. as a result, the avermectin treated cells produced more molecules compared with negative control , and the molecules were gradually reduced along with the dose decreased, indicating that avermectin affected some pathways of c. albicans to produce or accumulate different molecules. further identification of the different molecules from the node can help us to find the targeted pathway of avermectin.

detecting bubbles in de bruijn graph
de bruijn graphs  <cit>  are very common among next-generation sequencing tools such as velvet  <cit> , allpaths  <cit> , abyss  <cit> , ray  <cit>  and soapdenovo  <cit> . assembly programs indexes reads in short words . each node represents a series of overlapped k-mers in de bruijn graph, while arc represents their connection. paths traversing the graph are joined into contigs. due to the existence of biological variable and erroneous k-mers, de bruijn graph often forms bubbles, which is defined as several similar paths sharing the same start node and end node  <cit> . bubbles are hard to resolve by de novo assemblers, and therefore extension often ends up with an early termination in paths containing bubbles. in order to distinguish such termination from sequencing gaps, it is important in assessing the de bruijn structure and detecting the bubbles. here we evaluated a de novo assembly graph of streptomyces avermitilis , which was assembled using velvet v <dig> . we converted the lastgraph produced by velvet into sif-format network with  <dig>  nodes and  <dig>  edges using a perl script debruijn.pl . while the two-dimensional network visualization failed to show the bubbles between nodes after force-directed layout in cytoscape, the three-dimensional visualization indicates there are three bubbles in the highlighted regions .

discussion
three-dimensional visualization provides novel insights for cytoscape. with time-course, colour, size, shape customization, 3dscapecs can support up to seven dimensional data visualization, making it useful in presenting large-scale complex data. although external renderers such as ubigraph can add 3d functionalities to cytoscape, the operations of network are limited in ubigraph. for example, user can neither drag vertices or edges in the graph to set locations, nor set the parameters of the multilevel layout algorithm, which make it less effective in heterogeneous 3d data visualization. therefore, in the future, a more powerful renderer featured with more layouts and subcellular localization networks, such as neuronal networks, should be implemented. moreover, mobile devices such as ipad or android pad, which can be manipulated using fingers and gestures, are more suitable to manipulate 3d view. so it is also desirable to implement renderers on those platforms for wireless parallel visualization.

CONCLUSIONS
we have integrated ubigraph and cytoscape in 3dscapecs. the 3d perspective not only guarantees user a greater experience in visualization, but also offers more insight into cytoscape networks. parallel motion graph is useful in visualizing data obtained with different conditions, as well as different aspects in a single experiment. such functionalities give full play to their strength on a three-dimensional platform. therefore 3dscapecs has more advantages in large and/or complex network visualization as the study cases presented in previous paragraphs.

availability and requirements
project name: 3dscapecs

project home page: http://scape3d.sourceforge.net/

operating system: platform-independent.

programming language: java

other requirements: cytoscape v <dig> , ubigraph needs to be started as its renderer.

license: lesser general public license .

any restrictions to use by non-academics: none.

competing interests
the authors declare that they have no competing interests.

authors’ contributions
qw conceived, designed and implemented the software and the case studies, tested the software and drafted the manuscript. bt, lfs and xtl tested the software, suggested modifications, performed the case studies, and contributed in drafting the manuscript. br, ql, fx, yz and lxz contributed in drafting the manuscript. lxz also supervised this project as a whole. all authors have read, revised and approved the manuscript.

supplementary material
additional file 1
the 3dscapecs program file. put 3dscapecs.jar into cytoscape/plugins/ folder.

click here for file

 additional file 2
the 3dscapecs user manual.

click here for file

 additional file 3
the 3dscapecs case study data unpack the zip package using winzip, winrar, 7-zip or unzip command. see reame.txt inside the package on how to use the test data.

click here for file

 additional file 4
the 3dscapecs movie – basic operation and expression data visualization.

click here for file

 additional file 5
the 3dscapecs movie – reaction network motion visualization.

click here for file

 additional file 6
the 3dscapecs movie – substrate-product network motion visualization.

click here for file

 additional file 7
the 3dscapecs movie – motion network visualization of ms experiments.

click here for file

 acknowledgements
this work was supported in part by grants from the ministry of science and technology of china  and the national natural science foundation of china . lxz is an awardee for national distinguished young scholar program in china. we appreciate dr. pieter c. dorrestein for providing mass spectrometry instruments in ucsd.
