BACKGROUND
trichoderma harzianum is a soil-borne filamentous fungus that protects crop plants from attack by a range of pathogenic fungi  <cit> . species of the genus trichoderma are widely known for their biotechnological interest, however their use as biocontrol agents requires a comprehensive analysis of the biological principles of their action. their antagonistic abilities are described as a combination of several mechanisms, including nutrient competition and direct mycoparasitism, which involves the production of antifungal metabolites and cell wall-degrading enzymes  <cit> . the use of these species as biocontrol agents represents an environmentally friendly alternative to chemical fungicides, and furthermore, some of their genes have been used to improve plant resistance to pathogens and salt stress  <cit> . recently, biologically important proteins from trichoderma have been successfully produced for agricultural and industrial applications  <cit> .

the genus fusarium comprises a wide and heterogeneous group of fungi that causes economically harmful diseases in many crops, such as soybean , tobacco  and common beans , reducing both the quality and the quantity of their products  <cit> . fusarium solani occurs in practically all of the common bean-producing regions in brazil, and has been controlled through the use of chemical fungicides  <cit> . studies on the antagonistic capacity of t. harzianum have revealed that it represents an important alternative to the use of chemical fungicides  <cit> . comprehensive analysis of the molecular mechanisms used by t. harzianum during interaction with f. solani is required in order to identify the molecular determinants of its role as a biological control agent  <cit> . the identification of the trichoderma genes involved in these mechanisms and analysis of their expression profiles can provide researchers with biotechnological tools that exhibit anti-fungal activity and that could potentially be used as transgenes capable of inducing resistance to pathogens in economically valuable plants.

the aim of the present study was to provide helpful insights into the mechanism of t. harzianum in its action against f. solani. we used a suppression subtractive hybridization  approach to obtain genes that are differentially expressed during t. harzianum growth on f. solani cell wall or glucose. we analyzed the differentially-expressed genes for homology and classified them into functional categories. finally, we discuss the possible functional roles of the genes identified in the interaction between t. harzianum and f. solani by using quantitative real-time rt-pcr.

RESULTS
identification of differentially expressed genes during growth of t. harzianum in fscw or glucose
in this study, a suppression subtractive hybridization  approach, which is an efficient method for the isolation of differentially expressed genes, was used to isolate and identify genes that are differentially expressed during t. harzianum growth on fscw or glucose. samples of mrna from four incubation times  were used to construct a unique cdna library. in order to obtain a cdna library enriched for sequences representative of those genes up-regulated in the presence of fscw-library, cdna from t. harzianum grown in fscw was used as the tester and cdna from t. harzianum grown in glucose medium as the driver . the glc-library was enriched with possible genes down-regulated during t. harzianum growth on fscw, a mycoparasitism-related condition. the approach based on the construction of cdna libraries from a mixture of conditions was previously used successfully in t. harzianum <cit> .

in the fscw-library,  <dig> reads were generated, which were grouped into  <dig> unigene clusters , with an overall est redundancy of 91%. the inspection of these unigene clusters detected matches for 64% using blastx. seventy eight reads were generated from the glc-library, which represented  <dig> unigene clusters, including  <dig> contigs and  <dig> singletons, with an overall est redundancy of 64%. among these clusters, 57% presented sequence similarity with genbank entries using the blastx algorithm. the comparison between the sequences from both libraries indicated that there was no overlap between them, suggesting that the subtraction approach was successful and that the two libraries were in fact enriched for sequences from genes differentially expressed under each condition. all ests were submitted to genbank .

functional annotation of the differentially expressed genes
ests were annotated according to gene ontology  guidelines  with blast2go, a universal web-based annotation application  <cit> . genes from both libraries were allocated to the main go categories and the distribution of ests in these categories was taken as a measure of gene concurrence across the two libraries . for this purpose, the total number of unique sequences from the two libraries that possessed an assigned go term within each of the three organizing principles of go  was taken as 100%. functional annotation of the genes from the fscw-library indicated that the highest percentage of go terms was seen in the categories from biological processes: localization , cellular process , and metabolic process , as well as the categories related to molecular functions: binding , transporter activity , catalytic activity , and hydrolase activity . the go terms related to regulation: biological regulation , enzyme regulator activity , and transcription regulator activity  as well as proliferation: cell proliferation , demonstrated the lowest percentage values. genes involved in sphingolipid metabolism, n-glycan biosynthesis, glycosaminoglycan degradation, glycosphingolipid biosynthesis, other glycan degradation, oxidative phosphorylation, amino sugar and nucleotide sugar metabolism, amino acid and water transport, hydrolytic activity and energy related processes were identified during t. harzianum growth in fscw. moreover, proteins found to be associated with the response of t. harzianum to the presence of phytopathogens included: map kinases , enzymes that are essential for maintenance of the cell wall integrity, hyperosmotic stress tolerance proteins, pathogenicity factors, a serine protease and a qid  <dig> protein considered to be involved in the mycoparasitism  <cit> . annotation and kegg analysis of the identified sequences demonstrated a clear relationship with the biological processes and molecular functions required during mechanism of biocontrol  <cit> .

functional annotation of the sequences from the glc-library identified genes belonging to the following categories of biological processes: cellular process , cellular metabolic process , metabolic process , catabolic process , biosynthetic process , and also to the following categories from molecular functions: catalytic activity  and lyase activity . kegg analysis showed that the major metabolism pathways corresponded to biosynthetic pathways: glycerophospholipid metabolism, and glycolysis/gluconeogenesis. this fact is consistent with the extensive metabolic activity expected for a filamentous fungus growing on a rich medium with an easily assimilable substrate  <cit> .

expression analysis of genes from t. harzianum during growth in fscw
amongst the differentially expressed genes identified in the ssh analysis, twenty-eight genes were selected based on their predicted function or involvement in trichoderma development, metabolism and biocontrol activity . all of these genes were further analyzed by quantitative real-time rt-pcr  in order either to validate the results obtained by the ssh method or to understand the kinetics of their expression in the evaluated conditions. we then extended the studies on the expression of these genes by evaluating samples obtained at  <dig>   <dig> and 48 hours during growth of t. harzianum on fscw . the rt-qpcr results suggest that the genes identified as altered in the fscw-library and annotated as hydrolases , β- <dig> -endoglucanase , chitinase  <dig> , endochitinase  <dig> , exo-rhamnogalacturonase  and glycosyl hydrolase ) were up-regulated with the highest expression values at 24 hours with a statistically significant decrease on these values at  <dig> and 48 hours of growth. two other genes identified in the fscw-library which were annotated in the catalytic activity category  and phospholipase d ), were down-regulated in all times of growth . genes associated with binding activity such as checkpoint-like protein , serine threonine-protein kinase  and senescence-associated protein  presented the highest expression values at 24 hours and a decrease on these values at  <dig> and 48 hours of growth . the observed expression of mannose-binding lectin  increases over time .

* blastx at http://genome.jgi.doe.gov/ using trichoderma harzianum cbs  <dig>  as a reference model.

all results were compared to the respective control group  at the respective time.  represent standard deviation.

the data were analyzed by the 2-ΔΔct method.

a serine protease  transcript was also identified in the fscw-library and rt-qpcr analysis indicated that, differently from hydrolases, the highest expression value was detected after 36 hours of growth . moreover, similar to serine protease expression, three genes annotated in the transport go category , aquaporin  and a duf <dig> domain membrane protein ), showed the highest expression values after 36 hours of growth . finally, rt-qpcr expression analyses were performed with qid <dig> and cfem , genes that correspond to receptor activity on go. their highest expression values were detected at 36 hours and 24 hours of growth on fscw, respectively.

rt-qpcr expression analyses with  <dig> genes identified on the glc-library were also conducted to observe their expression profile during the growth of t. harzianum in fscw. our data showed that all genes analyzed were down-regulated  . enolase , glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase  and pyruvate decarboxylase , enzymes that are involved in glycolysis and/or glyconeogenesis pathways, showed similar expression profiles at  <dig> and 36 hours of growth . also, the genes with binding activity, hsp <dig> and a c2h <dig> , showed the lowest expression values after 24 hours of growth in fscw. moreover, the results obtained with genes corresponding to transporter activity on go  and zinc-regulated transporter ) demonstrated the same time-course expression profiles as the genes that present binding activity . rt-qpcr expression analysis of norsolorinic acid reductase , phosphatidylserine decarboxylase  and coproporphyrinogen oxidase  demonstrated that these genes are down-regulated during growth of t. harzianum in fscw . these enzymes are essential in some filamentous fungi in the biosynthetic pathways of aflatoxins, glycerophospholipid metabolism and heme groups  <cit> .

expression analysis of genes from t. harzianum during interaction with f. solani
in order to identify genes potentially involved in biocontrol, rt-qpcr was performed using total rna from dual cultures of t. harzianum and f. solani in three different interaction stages: before contact, during contact and after contact . only the genes identified in the fscw library were analyzed by rt-qpcr. as a control, a confrontation assay was conducted where t. harzianum was challenged with itself. rt-qpcr analysis showed that the genes studied were not expressed when t. harzianum was challenged with itself. we have previously reported that direct confrontation assays are a powerful tool to study the phenomenon of mycoparasitism by t. asperellum and t. harzianum <cit> .

all results were compared to the respective control group  at the respective stage.  represent standard deviation.

the data were analyzed by the 2-ΔΔct method.

during the confrontation assay most of the genes studied were down-regulated before contact, and the expression of these genes occurs only after contact with the host. however, three genes  presented high expression values before contact. previously works showed that trichoderma species are able to sense the presence of its host and specific genes are expressed already before contact  <cit> . interestingly, with the exception of serine protease  all genes are up-regulated after-contact, when the interaction has been established .

we analyzed the expression of three genes encoding cell wall degrading enzymes : β- <dig> -endoglucanase , chitinase  <dig>  and endochitinase  <dig> . in agreement with previous studies, transcripts encoding these enzymes were highly expressed mainly after contact indicating intense cell wall degradation in this stage  <cit> . the expression of the genes encoding these enzymes was induced by fscw . these enzymes could be also induced by metabolites secreted by the host, and is strongly repressed by glucose  <cit> . these genes play a major role in the mycoparasitic activity against the pathogens especially r. solani, f. oxysporum and s. sclerotiorum <cit> .

exo-rhamnogalacturonase  and glycosyl hydrolase  annotated as hydrolases were also up-regulated after contact . exo-rhamnogalacturonases belong to the group of pectin-degrading enzymes  and could be involved in cell degradation of f. solani. for instance, an endopolygalacturonase  produced by t. harzianum are known to be involved in the cell wall degradation of rhizoctonia solani and pythium <cit> . glycosyl hydrolases are a widespread group of enzymes that hydrolyse the glycosidic bond between two or more carbohydrates, or between a carbohydrate and a non-carbohydrate moiety. a classification system for glycosyl hydrolases has led to the definition of  <dig> different families, including amylases, cellulases, β-glucanases and chitinases  <cit> . thus, the characterization of the glycosyl hydrolase identified in this work needs to be made to show its role in mycoparasitism.

the expression of genes related with amino acids metabolism  was also analyzed. serine protease  was up-regulated before and during contact, but down-regulated after contact . these data show that these enzymes play an important role in the early stages of the interaction between t. harzianum and f. solani. on the other hand, the expression of amino oxidases  and a peptide transporter  are up-regulated after-contact when the expression of serine protease decreased. some proteases from trichoderma species have been identified as having biocontrol functions, including aspartyl protease, serine protease and subtilisin-like protease  <cit> . these proteases can take part in the host cell wall breakdown process or act as proteolytic inactivators of pathogen enzymes. amine oxidases  are a large group of enzymes catalyzing oxidative deamination of amines to form the corresponding aldehydes, hydrogen peroxide and ammonia. ao in filamentous fungi are involved in amino acid metabolism and are described in many fungi such as aspergillus oryzae, penicillinium chrysogenum and fusarium oxysporum <cit> . peptide transport is a universally observed physiological phenomenon in both prokaryotes and eukaryotes cells  <cit> . this process is characterized by the ability of cells to transport peptides across membranes in an energy-dependent manner. internalized peptides are rapidly hydrolyzed by peptidases and the resulting amino acids are used for protein synthesis or as alternative sources of nitrogen and carbon. vizcaíno et al., reported the cloning and characterization of thptr <dig>  di/tri-peptide transporter gene from t. harzianum related to the mycoparasitic process. this hypothesis was supported by the fact that expression of thptr <dig> was triggered when trichoderma directly interacted with b. cinerea <cit> .

the transcript asm, encoding an acid sphingomielinase , showed the lowest expression value after contact to the phytopathogen . asm are a group of hydrolases that cleave sphingolipids, a common component of plasma membranes, and their products can regulate a variety of cellular functions such as proliferation and differentiation  <cit> . this enzyme could be involved in providing nutrition for t. harzianum from f. solani cell components.

the transcripts duf , mbl <dig>  and cfem  identified in the cdna library were used in order to learn whether proteins located in membrane or outer surfaces of the cell walls are expressed during the interaction between t. harzianum and f. solani. these proteins are described as involved in recognition, attachment, adhesion and appressorium development key events mycoparasitism  <cit> . the transcript duf and cfem are down-regulated before contact and increased their expression values after-contact . however, the transcript mbl <dig>  encoding for a mannose biding lectin, is expressed in the three stages of interaction. this may be due the fact that these proteins are important in coiling and appressorium formation a key step in the mechanism of mycoparasitism.

the transcript qid <dig>  encoding the qid <dig> cell wall protein, is also up-regulated and was strongly expressed after contact. studies of qid <dig> in t. harzianum cetc  <dig> showed that this protein is involved in resistance of hyphae to lytic enzymes and the ability to adhere to hydrophobic surfaces  <cit> . high expression values of genes of cwde  were seen after contact, suggesting that qid <dig> was produced with the purpose of protecting the cell wall of t. harzianum. these proteins could be also be involved in recognition, attachment and formation of specialized structures such as appressoria.

among all studied genes only one encoding for aquaporin  was highly expressed in the three stages of interaction to f. solani . these proteins mediate rapid and selective flux of water across biological membranes and hence play important roles in the osmoregulation of cells and organisms. these proteins also facilitate transmembrane transporte of small uncharged molecules like polyols, urea, arsenite and many more, thereby playing roles in nutrient uptake  <cit> .

interestingly, we found a significant expression of the gene sag encoding for senescence-associated protein after contact between t. harzianum and f. solani . senescence is the progressive loss of growth potential of mycelium culminating in total cessation of growth when the culture is considered as dead  <cit> . some naturally occurring strains of fungi cease growing through successive subculturing  <cit> . however, this biological mechanism has to be studied in detail to offer an interpretation about the senescence in trichoderma species and its role in mycoparasitism.

finally, three genes encoding for phospholipase d , serine threonine-protein kinase  and checkpoint-like protein  involved in transduction cascades, protein modification and fungal morphogenesis were studied  <cit> . the transcript chk <dig> showed the greatest level of expression followed by sck <dig> and pld, mainly after contact . the role of these proteins in mycoparasitism must be studied in more detail, because it involves the participation of a wide range of other genes not described in this work.

CONCLUSIONS
our results provided a step toward the understanding of the mycoparasitic process of t. harzianum during its interaction with f. solani. however, future studies, aimed at the functional characterization of genes reported here, will help to better define pathways involved in t. harzianum interaction with f. solani. a better understanding of the expression profiles of these genes could improve t. harzianum performance, either by predicting the regulation of the genes involved in the mycoparasitism or by improving their use in biotechnology processes such as transgenic expression in plants.

