BACKGROUND
most antidepressants enhance serotonergic or noradrenergic neurotransmission by inhibiting monoamine oxidase or by binding to neurotransmitter transporters, thereby inhibiting neurotransmitter re-uptake. although antidepressants are widely used to treat depression, they often produce various adverse side effects such as sexual dysfunction, anxiety, blurred vision, headache, sleep disruption, constipation, nausea, sedation, and weight gain  <cit> . there are many classes of antidepressants, including monoamine oxidase inhibitors , tricyclic antidepressants , tetracyclic antidepressants , selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors , and serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors . fluoxetine has been shown to be effective for the treatment of depression in long-term controlled trials that also revealed it alleviated anxiety and improved sleep. the tricyclic antidepressant, imipramine, is a dibenzazepine that is primarily used for the treatment of clinical depression and enuresis. specifically, imipramine is a tertiary amine that inhibits the reuptake of serotonin more effectively than most secondary amine tricyclic antidepressants because it blocks reuptake of the neurotransmitters serotonin and norepinephrine almost equally. imipramine also exerts activity at the δ-opiate receptors and the dopamine receptors  <cit> . phenelzine is a non-selective monoamine oxidase inhibitor  that is used as an antidepressant. phenelzine is a derivative of hydrazine, which is a phenylethylamine-like moiety that is similar to normal substrates of mao  <cit> . when mao attempts to oxidize phenelzine, the hydrazine-moiety binds covalently to the enzyme, thereby irreversibly inactivating it. this may contribute to its anxiolytic properties and superior efficacy when treating severe anxiety  <cit> . tetracyclic antidepressants  are named after their chemical structure, which contains four rings of atoms. the representative tecas, amoxapine and maprotiline, are closely related to tricyclic antidepressants, which contain three rings of atoms. serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors  are used in the treatment of major depression and mood disorders  <cit> . snris play a role in the inhibition of serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake, which results in an increase in the concentrations of serotonin and norepinephrine and thus an increase in neurotransmission. most snris, including venlafaxine, desvenlafaxine, and duloxetine, are several fold more selective for serotonin over norepinephrine. snris are sometimes used to treat anxiety disorders, such as obsessive-compulsive disorder , attention deficit hyperactivity disorder , and chronic neuropathic pain  <cit> . nelumbinis semen  is a traditional medicine that has been used for hundreds of years in east-asia to treat insomnia, anxiety and women's post-menstrual-pause depression  <cit> . in previous studies, this herbal medicine was found to exert an antidepressant-like effect in rats when examined by the porsolt forced swim test. the results of that study also suggested that nelumbinis semen could increase local cholinergic and dopaminergic or norephinergic neurotransmission via activation of camp formation in the hippocampus and pre-frontal cortex  <cit> .

the present study was conducted to identify relevant genes that could be involved in the action of four types of antidepressants . to identify changes in the gene profile after treatment with these four drugs for various lengths of time, we conducted the microarray test for one , three and seven  days. we also investigated whether genes involved in the acute condition could be replicated in chronic condition or not. the results of this study will likely increase our understanding of the mechanisms by which drug actions occur and provide insight into the way in which cells respond to and adapt to drug exposure.

RESULTS
dna microarray analysis of rna isolated from pretreated rat hippocampus
we used a genome-wide microarray analysis to examine changes in the gene expression profile of rats after treatment with antidepressants or nelumbinis semen for one, three and seven days. of the  <dig>  genes evaluated in the present study, the expression of  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> genes decreased, whereas that of  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> genes were over-expressed in response to treatment with imipramine, fluoxetine, phenelzine and nelumbinis semen, respectively . the genes that were significantly repressed and over-expressed in response to treatment are shown in table  <dig> and  <dig> 

list of over-expressed genes affected more than  <dig> fold to their specific control by antidepressant treatments.  indicated the sacrificed day of oral administered rat with antidepressant. ns; nelumbinis semen, imip; imipramine, fluo; fluoxetine, phen; phenelzine

list of repressed genes affected less than  <dig> fold to their specific control by antidepressant treatments.  indicated the sacrificed day of oral administered rat with antidepressant. ns; nelumbinis semen, imip; imipramine, fluo; fluoxetine, phen; phenelzine

treatment with nelumbinis semen resulted in significant up-regulation of four , six , and five  genes and significant down-regulation of three , four , and one  genes after one, three and seven days of treatment, respectively. most of the genes with altered expression were found to be involved with signal transduction, inflammation and cell survival. treatment with imipramine resulted in significant up-regulation of three ,  <dig> , and five  genes and down-regulation of five , one , and two  genes after one, three and seven days of treatment, respectively. treatment with fluoxetine resulted in up-regulation of five ,  <dig>  and four  genes and downregulation of three , four  and two  genes after  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> days, respectively. finally, treatment with phenelzine resulted in up-regulation of three ,  <dig> , and five  genes and down-regulation of four , three , and two  genes after treatment for one, three and seven days, respectively . taken together, these data demonstrate that antidepressants interfere with the expression of a large array of genes involved in transcription, signaling, survival and protein metabolism .

confirmation of the expression of target genes by real time polymerase chain reaction 
to confirm the differential expression of genes identified by microarray analysis, we analyzed the amount of mrna that was isolated from the hippocampus of rats that had been treated with antidepressants by real-time rt-pcr using primers specific for selected genes of interest. all of the drugs evaluated in this study induced the up regulation of factors related to cell survival and inflammation, such as gfrα <dig>  tnfsf <dig>  neff, tgfβ <dig> and gdf <dig>  however, factors related to neurodegeneration and apoptosis were also up regulated in rats that were treated with imipramine, fluoxetine, and phenelzine. furthermore, factors related to neurodegenerative diseases, such as casp <dig>  app, and spp <dig>  were not observed in samples obtained from the nelumbinis semen treated group . statistical analysis of the data was conducted using the prism  <dig>  software . error bars represent the mean ± sem for three samples. * p <  <dig> , ** p <  <dig>  compared with control according to anova and newman-keuls analyses.

discussion
in this study, changes in gene regulation profiles in the hippocampus of rats in response to treatment with four different antidepressants, a tricyclic antidepressant , a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor , a monoamine oxidase inhibitor  and a standardized herbal medicine , were evaluated by microarray analysis.

many previous studies of antidepressants have focused on the camp cascade and alterations in the synaptic levels of monoamines  <cit> . however, major depression is accompanied by activation of the inflammatory response system, and antidepressants may have immunoregulatory activity. antidepressants have also been found to exert immunoregulatory effects on human leukocyte functions, especially cytokine production. furthermore, tricyclic antidepressants and heterocyclic antidepressants can have negative immunoregulatory effects because they inhibit stimulatory cytokines while enhancing inhibitory cytokine production  <cit> .

this neuroinflamation and apoptosis includes regulation of intracellular signal transduction pathways and gene expression. indeed, in this study, treatment with antidepressants was found to primarily be involved with alterations in the expression of several genes related to neuroinflamation and apoptosis. moreover, the antidepressants evaluated in this study lead to the over-expression of several genes implicated in signal transduction, cell structure, survival, nuclear function and metabolism. finally, we found that acute administration of antidepressants had an impact on cell cycle and survival, and that chronic treatment resulted in the regulation of factors involved in neuroinflamation and apoptosis. however, the specific gene expression patterns depending on the duration of treatment were not clearly identified in the present study.

the role of imipramine in gene expression
treatment with the tricyclic antidepressant, imipramine, resulted in the up regulation of  <dig> genes and the down regulation of  <dig> genes involved in signal transduction, metabolism, inflammation, transport, apoptosis, and biological process in general . the degs related to cell regulation included tgfβ <dig> , ngfβ , tnf <dig> , and rankl .

transforming growth factor-beta  <dig>  is a cytokine that is known to perform many cellular functions and to play a vital role in embryonic development. tgf-β <dig> is also known to suppress the effects of interleukin dependent t-cell tumors. rankl is known as a tnf-related activation-induced cytokine. overproduction of rankl is implicated in a variety of degenerative bone diseases, including rheumatism  <cit> . in addition, rankl is known to play a role in the immune system, where it is expressed by t helper cells and believed to be involved in cell maturation. furthermore, rankl has been shown to be a cell survival factor that is involved in the regulation of t cell-dependent immune response  <cit> .

the role of fluoxetine in gene expression
treatment with the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor, fluoxetine, resulted in the over-expression of  <dig> genes and the repression of  <dig> genes ; however, the genes affected by fluoxetine varied widely. the affected genes included tgfβ <dig>  jund  and adenosine a <dig> receptor, which were up-regulated, and gzma  and ifnγ , which were down-regulated.

it has been proposed that jun d proto-oncogene protects cells from p53-dependent senescence and apoptosis. the adenosine a <dig> receptor is a member of the adenosine receptor group of g protein-coupled receptors that use adenosine as an endogenous ligand. these receptors are believed to take part in the promotion of sleep by inhibiting wake promoting cholinergic neurons in the basal forebrain  <cit> . granzymes are exogenous serine proteases that are released by cytoplasmic granules within cytotoxic t cells and natural killer cells. their purpose is to induce apoptosis within virus-infected cells, thereby destroying them  <cit> .

the role of phenelzine in gene expression
treatment with the monoamine oxidase inhibitor, phenelzine, resulted in increased expression of  <dig> genes and down-regulation of  <dig> genes . the genes affected by treatment with phenelzine were involved in various process, and included tgfβ <dig>  gdf <dig> , and lepr , which were over expressed, and spp <dig> , which was down-regulated.

growth differentiation factor  <dig>  is a protein that belongs to the transforming growth factor beta superfamily and plays a role in the regulation of inflammatory and apoptotic pathways activated in response to tissue injury and during disease processes. furthermore, the expression of gdf <dig> in liver can be significantly up-regulated in response to injury of the liver, brain, kidney, heart and lung  <cit> . leptin, which is produced by adipose tissue, plays a key role in the regulation of energy intake and expenditure, including the regulation of appetite. specifically, leptin binds to the ventromedial nucleus of the hypothalamus, which sends a signal to the brain indicating that the body has had enough to eat  <cit> . secreted phosphoprotein  <dig>  is an extracellular structural protein and an organic component of bone. high levels of ssp <dig> expression are correlated with tumor invasion, progression or metastasis in multiple forms of cancer. ssp <dig> mediates the molecular mechanisms that determine metastatic spread, such as the prevention of apoptosis, extracellular matrix proteolysis, remodeling and cell migration  <cit> .

the role of nelumbinis semen in gene expression
nelumbinis semen has been widely used in traditional medicine as a remedy for insomnia, anxiety and women's depression following menopause. in previous reports, we found that this herbal medicine produced an antidepressant effect on rats under a forced swim-induced depression-like symptom  <cit> , as well as a chronic mild stress -induced depression-like symptom  <cit> . we also recently conducted a study that suggested that nelumbinis semen increases serotonin levels, which are normally decreased in depression, thereby enhancing central serotonergic transmission and possibly providing therapeutic action for the treatment of depression. this is similar to the results of other studies that have suggested that nelumbinis semen induces an antidepressant effect through the enhancement of serotonin  <cit> .

treatment with nelumbinis semen resulted in increased expression of  <dig> genes and decreased expression of  <dig> genes . the genes affected by nelumbinis semen were involved in various fields and included tgfβ <dig> and gfrα <dig> , which were up-regulated, as well as ifnγ, which was downregulated.

glial cell derived neurotrophic factor, also known as gdnf, is a small protein that promotes the survival of a wide variety of neurons  <cit> . this gene encodes a highly conserved neurotrophic factor. in addition, the recombinant form of this protein is known to promote the survival and differentiation of dopaminergic neurons in culture, and to prevent axotomy induced apoptosis in motor neurons  <cit> . ifnγ  is a dimerized soluble cytokine that is the only member of the type ii class of interferons and is secreted by t lymphocytes  <cit> . ifn-γ has antiviral, immunoregulatory, and anti-tumor properties  <cit> .

the molecular and biological mechanisms by which antidepressant action occurs are not fully understood, and various explanations of the expression profiles generated in many similar studies have been offered. in this study, we found that dna microarrays provided an efficient tool for evaluating changes in gene expression in response to treatment with antidepressants. the use of this method allowed us to isolate several mrnas from the rat hippocampus that were differentially expressed in response to treatment with antidepressants. some of these genes have been identified in previous studies and others are candidates for further study. in the present study, administration of three antidepressants and a traditional herbal medicine was found to affect a wide range of genes involved in various processes. for example, all four drugs induced the up regulation of factors related to cell survival such as tgfβ, ngfβ, gfrα <dig>  and tnf. these results suggest that antidepressants regulate the camp cascade and alterations in synaptic levels of monoamines, as well as cell survival and neuroinflamation. however, some factors associated with neurodegenerative diseases were up-regulated in response to treatment with the three antidepressants evaluated in this study  . these factors included caspase  <dig>  α-synuclein, amyloid β precursor protein and cyclin-dependent kinase. caspase  <dig> plays a central role in the execution-phase of cell apoptosis. synuclein selectively inhibits phospholipase d <dig> and is abundant in neurofibrillary lesions of patients with alzheimer's disease  <cit> . dysregulation of cyclin-dependent kinase  <dig>  has been implicated in several neurodegenerative diseases, including alzheimer's  <cit> . taken together, these results show that the three commonly used medications evaluated in this study have the potential to produce adverse effects. however, nelumbinis semen did not up-regulate any factors related to neurodegenerative diseases.

major depression is associated with an increased secretion of ifnγ. moreover, the administration of ifnγ results in behavioral effects and depression-like syndromes  <cit> . antidepressants have been found to significantly enhance the production of another inhibitory cytokine, tgfγ. this cytokine is known to inhibit several immune reactions, including autoimmune disorders  <cit> . interestingly, we found a general trend in which production of the stimulatory cytokine, ifnγ, was decreased in response to treatment with all of the antidepressants evaluated in this study, while production of the inhibitory cytokine, tgfγ, was significantly enhanced by treatment with the antidepressants evaluated here.

many previous studies have reported that antidepressant-induced alterations in mrna expression are involved in stress and survival, the cell cycle, neurotransmission, and metabolism in general  <cit> . when combined with our findings, these observations suggest that antidepressants with different molecular structures share similar targets at the molecular level.

CONCLUSIONS
our results demonstrate that antidepressants interfere with the expression of a large array of genes involved in various processes, suggesting that the therapeutic effect of these antidepressants is very complex. unlike other antidepressants, we found that the standardized herbal medicine, nelumbinis semen, is free of factors that can induce neurodegenerative diseases.

