BACKGROUND
microsatellites are composed of tandemly repeated, simple dna sequence motifs of 1– <dig> nucleotide bases in length. these loci are ubiquitously found throughout both prokaryotic and eukaryotic genomes and typically are highly polymorphic within species and populations. as such, microsatellites have become one of the most popular types of molecular markers and widely employed to study population structure of a diverse range of organisms  <cit> , reconstruction of evolutionary history  <cit> , parentage and relatedness analysis  <cit> , and natural selection  <cit> . despite the widespread application of microsatellites, their evolutionary dynamics across loci within the species and across related species are yet to be well understood. a powerful approach to study the mutational dynamics of microsatellites during the evolutionary process is to investigate their variation of mutation rates. the development of genomic technology provides an unprecedented opportunity to generate increasing microsatellite data from model organisms and their related species on a genome-wide scale. there are growing interests in using such microsatellite data, as they make it possible to take mutation rate variation into consideration by analyzing multiple loci across related species rather than a single locus from a single species.

mutation rate  per generation per locus is an important parameter in models of population genetics as it permits one to estimate the timing of evolutionary divergence between species  <cit> , and the effective population size of the species  <cit> . mutation rates of microsatellites have long been estimated in numerous animal studies. one of the most important observations was that the mutation rate largely varies in several orders of magnitude among different species, ranging from  <dig> × 10- <dig> in drosophila  <cit>  to 10- <dig> in humans  <cit> . clearly, the repeat motif length may influence microsatellite mutation rates, but the controversial has lasted many years. for example, weber and wong initially surveyed di- and tetranucleotide repeat microsatellites and estimated higher mutation rates for tetranucleotide repeats  <cit> . however, chakraborty and his colleagues employed a method based on population variation to estimate relative differences in mutation rate and claimed that di- nucleotide repeats mutate at a rate  <dig> – <dig>  times higher than that of tri- or tetranucleotide repeats  <cit> . the finding has been confirmed by the latter studies  <cit> . these preliminary results showed that mutational dynamics at microsatellite loci could be more complicated than previously observed and assumed, at least at the interspecific level. therefore, a picture of evolutionary dynamics of mutation rates among microsatellite loci of different repeat types at the genome-wide level is required for further understanding evolutionary factors which govern microsatellite variability and thus contributing to overall levels of genomic diversity across species. in this regard, knowledge of mutation dynamics is particularly necessary in plants, which have been insufficiently explored. mutation rates at microsatellites in plants seem to be higher than in animals based on different levels of genetic diversity  <cit>  as well as obviously limited experimental estimates  <cit> .

the proper estimation of mutation rate at each locus is required to examine the variation of mutation rate among loci. mutation rate of a microsatellite locus can be estimated from the direct genotype data  <cit> . direct observation of such mutational events is preferable if possible, but involves much more time-consuming genotyping. it is quite costly in practice because mutation rates at most microsatellite loci are not large enough to be accurately estimated with a reasonable sample size. these assayed loci may not have sufficient representation of the genome-wide coverage of all microsatellites. because of the above-mentioned limitations, it is impractical to study the mutation rate variation at the genome level using such a direct approach. alternatively, the scaled mutation rate can be estimated using population genetic methods that utilize allelic frequency at large microsatellite loci in population samples. in such an analysis, it is commonly assumed that the population has reached a mutation-drift equilibrium so that the allele frequency distribution can be expressed in terms of the composite population parameter θ = 4nμ, where n is the effective population size and μ is the mutation rate per locus per generation. using this approach, for example, xu and fu recently developed an estimator of θ based on the genetic variation data at the microsatellite loci  <cit> . their estimator is unbiased under the single-step stepwise mutation model and is robust against other forms of stepwise mutation models. it also has the advantage of being simple to compute and performs better than several existing estimators, including the maximum-likelihood-based estimator  <cit> . taking advantage of this novel development, they further carried out an analysis of population mutation rate variation at di- nucleotide microsatellite loci in the human genome and demonstrated that their estimator is a reasonable assumption for the analysis of large genomic data  <cit> .

as an important model crop, asian cultivated rice  has two fully sequenced genomes  <cit> . with increasing population genetic data derived from genome-wide microsatellite loci  <cit> , rice affords unique opportunities to use the above-mentioned population genetic method  <cit>  to study their patterns of mutation rate. the increasing evidence  <cit>  suggested that the majority of rice cultivars can be classified as two primary subspecies, indica and japonica, which were separated from their common wild progenitor o. rufipogon griff. about  <dig>  mya   <cit>  . genetic structure of this domesticated crop is so heterogenous that isozyme loci even distinguished additional population structure consisting of the six variety groups of indica, japonica, aus, aromatic, rayada, and ashina  <cit> . more recently, using  <dig> nuclear microsatellites and two chloroplast loci, five distinct groups were further confirmed within o. sativa, corresponding to indica, aus, aromatic, temperate japonica, and tropical japonica rices  <cit> . with regard to the subject of this work, there has been little comparative study on genome-wide patterns of mutation rate variation at microsatellites among closely related plant species and/or subspecies. therefore, a variety of rice subspecies and their differently diverged relatives could be used as a valuable study model to gain genome-wide insights into patterns of mutation rates at microsatellite loci.

variation in substitution rates has long been observed for the nucleotide sequence data. some substitution models which have been proposed to fit the distribution of substitution rates  <cit> . of them, gammar-distribution rates  <cit>  are the most adopted ones. recently, genome-wide analyses suggested that the gammar-distribution fits the population mutation rate distribution for the microsatellite loci in human  <cit> . it is of great interest to examine whether the mutation models will also fit the population mutation rate distribution for the microsatellite loci in rice and other related plant genomes.

in this study, we carried out an analysis of the population mutation rate in rice subspecies and related species at di-, tri-, and tetra-nucleotide microsatellite loci using three data sources. we collected and reported the first dataset of  <dig> microsatellite loci by genotyping chinese representative samples which also included two related wild species, o. rufipogon and o. officinalis wall. ex watt., in addition to two chinese subspecies  of o. sativa. the second dataset we investigated is from a much more comprehensive dataset which were generated using a total of  <dig> microsatellites with world-wide sampling of different rice subspecies. finally, we used the third dataset that was generated from a world-wide collection of the african cultivated rice oryza glaberrima steud., which diverged from the asian cultivated rice about  <dig>  mya  <cit>  , by assaying  <dig> microsatellite loci. here, we reported the observed patterns of population mutation rate variation in microsatellite loci across rice subspecies and related species, and then attempted to provide evolutionary insights where possible.

RESULTS
the gamma distribution of population mutation rates at di-, tri-, and tetra-nucleotide microsatellite loci
the estimates of population mutation rate were computed for each locus in all rice species where genotypes are available. to examine variation in population mutation rate of microsatellites with respect to their motif sizes, we classified the analyzed loci into four types of repeats, namely di-, tri-, tetra-, and motif-complicated according to their motif sizes. then the distribution of the population mutation rate in each category was plotted using histograms of population mutation rates at di-nucleotide repeats in all the species and/or subspecies studied. we found that the histograms can be fitted for most species and/or subspecies with a gamma distribution except o. officinalis . in the case of o. officinalis, we could not fit a gamma distribution probably due to missing data. however, the distributions of population mutation rates at microsatellites with tri-nucleotide repeats can also be approximated well with gamma distributions for all the species and/or subspecies without any exception . because only data set ii has sufficient microsatellites with tetra-nucleotide repeats for o. sativa , the histograms of population mutation rate can be fitted to the gamma distributions for the cultivated rice as well as all the included subspecies, respectively . a resampling based procedure was then performed to compare the estimates of population mutation rate at loci with different motifs from the same species and/or subspecies. results show that the means of the population mutation rates at the loci with different motifs do not significantly differ at the 95% level in the studied rice species.

dynamics of population mutation rates across related rice species
our results show that population mutation rates largely vary among the four studied species . of them, o. rufipogon, the wild progenitor of o. sativa, possesses the largest mean population mutation rate, while o. officinalis exhibits the lowest value. in comparison, two cultivated rice apparently differ in population mutation rates. african cultivated rice o. glaberrima has at least fourfold lower value than asian cultivated rice o. sativa. the interspecific comparisons at all the microsatellites further suggest that the two estimated parameters  of a gamma distribution are the largest for o. rufipogon among all the three rice species , which fit gamma distributions . interestingly, african cultivated rice o. glaberrima exhibited a slightly larger shape parameter α but a rather smaller scale parameter β than asian cultivated rice o. sativa from both data set i and ii.

* n/a: cannot be fitted with a gamma distribution because of the failure of inter-specific amplification of microsatellites and thus extensively missing data

patterns of population mutation rate variation were further investigated for the di-, tri-, and tetra-nucleotide motifs of the analyzed microsatellite loci, respectively . a similar pattern was observed in the three species, o. sativa, o. rufipogon and o. glaberrima, at microsatellites with di-nucleotide repeats . although the estimator β exhibited a similar pattern in the above-mentioned species, at microsatellites with tri-nucleotide repeats as shown in table  <dig>  they somewhat had a reverse pattern for the parameter α; that is, o. sativa possessed a larger estimated value α than o. rufipogon. it is noticeable that one more species, o. officinalis, fits a gamma distribution at microsatellites with tri-nucleotide repeats. in comparison with the other three species, it had a small estimated α . it is clear, however, that o. officinalis had a larger β value than two cultivated rice o. sativa and o. glaberrima, although it still appears smaller than o. rufipogon.

* n/a: see table 2

difference of population mutation rates among subspecies of asian cultivated rice
in this study, population mutation rate variation of o. sativa was estimated by using two data sources. the data set i was collected by using microsatellites and samples both fewer than data set ii  <cit> . comparisons of parameters  of the fitted gamma distributions show consistent estimates of population mutation rate variation from these two data sets . similar results could also be observed at microsatellites with di- and tri- nucleotide repeats from data set i and ii .

to explore whether there was any intra-specific difference in the population mutation rates of microsatellites at the genomic level, estimates of α and β of the gamma distribution were compared among the studied subspecies of o. sativa . analyses of the data sets show that subsp. indica possessed larger α estimate than subsp. japonica. results from data set ii further indicates that the α estimate is the highest for subsp. aus while that for subsp. japonica is the lowest. nevertheless, estimates for the shape parameter α do not differ significantly from each other, indicating that actual variation in mutation rates among the subspecies of o. sativa may not be apparent . it is clear that the scale parameter β has a very large variance among the estimates relative to the mean value α for the studied subspecies. interestingly, tropical japonica had a larger β value than temperate japonica despite their very close genetic proximity.

to further confirm the potential difference of mutation rates among subspecies described above, we estimated and compared mutation rates for the analyzed microsatellites in two major subspecies, indica and japonica, through coalescent simulations for data set i . as shown in figure  <dig>  we again found no obvious difference of mutation rates between them, suggesting that indeed these two subspecies may not have obtained obvious intra-specific difference of mutation rates at microsatellite loci since their domestication.

discussion
using the genetic variation data at microsatellties throughout the genome, we estimated the population mutation rate θ at these loci in a total of four oryza species. the estimator of θ was developed with the assumption of mutation-drift equilibrium and no assortative mating in the studied population  <cit> . while the samples of two cultivated rice in this study may reach mutation-drift equilibrium, it was estimated that, for example, the outcrossing rate is only 0– <dig> % in asian cultivated rice o. sativa  <cit> . however, we would argue that the estimator of θ is still applicable to our data sets due to the following reasons. first, it may be true that the selfing rate is high for a particular population  of cultivated rice. in our study, only one individual is taken from each accession and the estimation can be performed after adjustment for population size; and second, the estimator is based on sample homozygosity, which is computed from allele frequency as given in equation  <dig>  the main effect of selfing is on the frequencies of genotypes rather than the allele frequencies. therefore, the low outcrossing rate in selfing species such as o. sativa and o. glaberrima could have minimal effects on the estimator.

it is well recognized that the cultivated plants always had a complicated history of evolution and domestication. as a result, in this case of cultivated rice, there was an obvious population size expansion. however, since it is generally believed that on average the effective population size is constant for all the loci in a specific sample, our comparisons of population mutation rate within samples/species should be valid. but the comparison across species would be problematic. therefore, we can only compare the α estimates based on the property of gamma distribution when making comparisons among different species.

it should be noted that the approach we take in our study does have limitations. because we are estimating the population mutation rate θ, the variation in this parameter reflects both the variation of the underlying mutation rate and the variation of coalescent time at each locus, which could be very large. only on average does the estimates of θ reflect the average mutation rate. therefore, even though our approach does not allow the direct comparison of the exact distribution of the mutation rate, it allows us to make comparisons of the average mutation rate between the microsatellites with different repeat motifs, which is the main purpose of our study.

it is noticeable that data set ii was collected by using the world-wide samples of o. sativa which included almost all genetic or ecological subspecies  <cit> . a total of  <dig> microsatellites were sampled from the whole rice genome. in comparison, data set i only used the representative samples from china by assaying relatively fewer microsatellites of the genome. however, comparisons of parameters  of a gamma distribution show relatively consistent estimates of population mutation rate variation in o. sativa using all the loci and the microsatellites with di-nucleotide repeats from these two data sets. this suggests that the sample size and number of microsatellties from data set i may be sufficient to capture the mutation rate variation of the major class of microsatellites at the genomic level. however, since most of the microsatellites used in our study are di-nucleotide repeats and we have much fewer tri-nucleotide repeat loci , it is not surprising to observe that the parameter estimates at the tri-nucleotide repeats in o. sativa from the two data sets are inconsistent. noticeably, the ascertainment bias should be taken into consideration for each dataset under investigation when making comparisons among species and/or datasets. as the microsatellite loci were mainly chosen for a purpose of the detection of polymorphisms, the microsatellites used for genotyping were most likely not random, leading to an important bias about the distribution of theta values. for example, loci with low underlying theta values are very likely to be discarded earlier, because they were considered monomorphic. therefore, it may be necessary to analyze microsatellite data based on the randomly selected loci and retest the patterns observed in this study.

as a main purpose of this work, it is of great interest to examine whether there is any variation of mutation rates across microsatellites of different repeat types at a genome-wide level among different subspecies of the same species, o. sativa, and among these closely related oryza species. in contrast to the findings from humans  <cit> , our observations indicate that the mean population mutation rate of microsatellites with different motifs does not make significant differences among subspecies of o. sativa or within this species. the same is true for african cultivated rice o. glaberrima, and the other two wild rice species, o. rufipogon and o. officinalis. the effective population size for the sample from the same species or subspecies is generally assumed to be same across the microsatellite loci. therefore, our results suggest that the mean population mutation rates of microsatellites with different motifs do not make significant differences within the studied oryza species or each subspecies of cultivated rice.

our results suggest that the variation of population mutation rate at microsatellites within species can be approximated with a gamma distribution for the most studied species. in such a study to first investigate evolutionary dynamics of population mutation rates at microsatellites in asian cultivated rice and its relatives, the gamma distribution was applied. in addition, the results show that the subspecies of o. sativa have similar α values. since α is generally interpreted as the shape parameter of a gamma distribution, our results reveal that the shapes of the distributions of population mutation rate at microsatellites in the subspecies of o. sativa are similar. this conclusion has further been demonstrated through another separate coalescent simulation for data set i. an easy interpretation is that these subspecies of o. sativa have not been separated long enough to cause any differences in the mutation rate at microsatellites. however, a very large variance of the scale parameter β was found among the studied subspecies. such a difference in the distributions mainly comes from the different effective population sizes of these subspecies. from the viewpoint of the domestication and history of cultivation of this cultivated rice  <cit> , it is possible that these genetic or ecological subspecies have different effective population size. such a difference has contributed to the variability in the scale parameter β observed.

in contrast to consistent variation of population mutation rates at microsatellites among different subspecies within o. sativa, we observed apparent variation among the studied rice species. both estimated parameters α and β of a gamma distribution are larger for the wild progenitor o. rufipogon than those for the derived cultivated rice o. sativa. theoretically, it is a well-known fact that the wild progenitor always has a large effective population size. therefore, this observation strongly suggests that the population mutation rates of microsatellites in cultivated rice have become small after its origin and domestication. the other african cultivated rice species, o. glaberrima, which was originated and is merely grown in africa  <cit> , exhibited a larger shape parameter α but a smaller scale parameter β than asian cultivated rice o. sativa. this indicates that african cultivated rice may have a relatively high mutation rate of microsatellites. the result may also be indicative of small effective population size in o. glaberrima, which seems consistent to the origin and very narrow geographical range of this cultivar in africa  <cit> . the most distantly related species o. officinalis fits a gamma distribution only at microsatellites with tri-nucleotide repeats, which showed a smaller α value even than o. sativa. in comparison, it had a smaller estimated α than any other species.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study, genome-wide microsatellite data were analyzed for four oryza species. it suggests that the population mutation rates at the assayed loci could be approximately fitted with a gamma distribution in most of the studied species. in addition, we obtained the shape parameters of their distributions. the results demonstrate that population mutation rate  is able to efficiently estimate the genome-wide variation of mutation rates at microsatellite loci in plants. the results may help to guide the modeling of genome-wide genetic variability at microsatellite loci with different repeat motifs.

our comparative analysis shows that the mean population mutation rate of microsatellites with different motifs does not make significant differences within the studied oryza species or each subspecies of cultivated rice o. sativa. this finding is not consistent to previous results reported in other organisms , although the inconsistence may come from the dramatically different sample sizes in these studies. more data from other plant taxa may help to further clarify our obtained result. meanwhile, precise estimates of mutation rates of microsatellites with different motifs may be needed through collecting direct genotype data in closely related rice species.

our data showed that population mutation rates largely vary across the rice species in this study. such observations are indicative of the dynamics of mutation rates among them. it is also likely that they may possess different effective population size after the divergence from the common ancestor. different evolutionary histories along these lineages may be used to explain the variation of mutation rates. to better elucidate patterns of mutation rate and affected factors, it is of great interest to further study and compare extensive taxonomic groups of the genus with different population genetic histories.

we found that different subspecies of o. sativa have similar shape parameters of the gamma distribution. the coalescent simulation also indicates that the variation of mutation rates among these subspecies of o. sativa is not apparent due to their short duration of divergence. however, both estimated parameters α and β of a gamma distribution are larger for the wild progenitor o. rufipogon than those for the derived subspecies of cultivated rice o. sativa. in addition to a decreased effective population size during the process of domestication of cultivated rice, it is likely that mutation rates of microsatellites in rice may have become small in comparison to wild progenitor. accurate estimate of mutation rates in these subspecies of asian cultivated rice as well as the wild progenitor in experimental populations may help to better investigate the dynamics of their effective population size. with such an effort, we will be able to deeply obtain evolutionary insights into mutation and evolution of microsatellite loci in cultivated rice species and wild relatives.

