BACKGROUND
microarray experiments provide a rapid method for directly profiling the expression pattern of an entire gene repertoire in a genome. this experimental approach has become routine for the en masse identification of genes associated with different biological processes. we have developed a multifunctional, user-friendly, web-interactive microarray analysis tool, array2bio, that identifies and functionally characterizes co-expressed genes. in addition, it integrates other genomic, transcriptional and gene regulatory tools  to allow scientists to explore mechanisms of gene co-regulation specific to co-functional groups of genes. array2bio permits users to functionally characterize clusters of co-expressed genes, identify putative biological activities, study interaction networks, as well as predict modules of transcription factors regulating eukaryotic gene expression in different tissues and under different conditions.

implementation
microarray data analysis
background correction
array2bio follows the original affymetrix procedure of background correction. an array of probes is separated into  <dig> zones . raw intensities for each zone are ranked and the background level is defined as the 2% lowest intensity for each zone. the distance from each probe to the zone center is used to estimate the background level at each probe location, which is then subtracted from the raw probe intensity.

filtering out non-specific hybridization
each probe intensity is measured in duplicates – a perfect match  intensity and mismatch  intensity, where the mm intensity estimates the cross-reactivity with other genes. array2bio excludes all probes with a pm intensity less than  <dig> *mm. it also calculates the ratio of probes with specific hybridization that pass through this filtering. mm intensity is subtracted from the pm intensity for the remaining probes, such that the raw intensity is measured as the relative  intensity.

normalization and log <dig> transformation
median  array intensity i˜
 mathtype@mtef@5@5@+=feaafiart1ev1aaatcvaufkttlearuwrp9mdh5mbpbiqv92aaexatlxbi9gbaebbnrfifhhdyfgasaach8aky=wiffydh8gipec8eeeu0xxdbba9frfj0=oqffea0dxdd9vqai=hguq8kuc9pgc9s8qqaq=dirpe0xb9q8qilsfr0=vr0=vr0dc8meaabaqaciaacagaaeqabaqabegadaaakeaacuwgjbqsgaacaaaa@2dd6@ is calculated for the remaining probes after the filtering step. individual  probe intensities ii undergo normalization and a base  <dig> logarithmic transformation:

epi = logs.

probe to tag mapping
affymetrix .cdf files are used to map individual probe intensities epi onto affymetrix gene tags gpj. usually each tag accumulates ~  <dig> good probes that span the corresponding gene transcript.

averaging experiment replicas
several experimental replicas can be averaged in comparative analysis to reliably estimate signal and background gene expression levels.

filtering out the outliers
it is common to observe that the expression level of several gene probes differs significantly from the median level of transcript expression g˜
 mathtype@mtef@5@5@+=feaafiart1ev1aaatcvaufkttlearuwrp9mdh5mbpbiqv92aaexatlxbi9gbaebbnrfifhhdyfgasaach8aky=wiffydh8gipec8eeeu0xxdbba9frfj0=oqffea0dxdd9vqai=hguq8kuc9pgc9s8qqaq=dirpe0xb9q8qilsfr0=vr0=vr0dc8meaabaqaciaacagaaeqabaqabegadaaakeaacuwghbwrgaacaaaa@2dd2@pj . to filter out the outliers, array2bio excludes transcript probes with expression values that differ from g˜
 mathtype@mtef@5@5@+=feaafiart1ev1aaatcvaufkttlearuwrp9mdh5mbpbiqv92aaexatlxbi9gbaebbnrfifhhdyfgasaach8aky=wiffydh8gipec8eeeu0xxdbba9frfj0=oqffea0dxdd9vqai=hguq8kuc9pgc9s8qqaq=dirpe0xb9q8qilsfr0=vr0=vr0dc8meaabaqaciaacagaaeqabaqabegadaaakeaacuwghbwrgaacaaaa@2dd2@pj by an x number of standard deviations σj . a strict filtering  and a medium stringency filtering  are set as defaults for the comparative and clustering analyses, correspondingly.

statistical methods 
handling low-expressors
the significance of fold-difference in intensity values  varies dramatically for low- vs. high-expressor genes. this occurs because dividing a small number by another small number  can result in a large fold-difference simply by chance. array2bio utilizes local mean normalization and local variance correction across intensities to differentially handle low- and high-expressors and to define separate fold-difference thresholds for different intensity levels. array2bio employs an approach highly similar to the previously described snomad method  and represents a 'pooled local variance' approach with  <dig> bins of gene tags. first, fold-expression levels of affymetrix tags are ordered by their average expression level across signal and control data. then gene tags are binned into  <dig> groups by the average expression level and local variation of fold-expressions is calculated for each group. this allows one to compute the local standard deviation  and subsequently local z-score  of fold-difference for each individual gene tag in each i-th group that j-th gene tag belongs to:

zj=xj−xi¯σi
 mathtype@mtef@5@5@+=feaafiart1ev1aaatcvaufkttlearuwrp9mdh5mbpbiqv92aaexatlxbi9gbaebbnrfifhhdyfgasaach8aky=wiffydh8gipec8eeeu0xxdbba9frfj0=oqffea0dxdd9vqai=hguq8kuc9pgc9s8qqaq=dirpe0xb9q8qilsfr0=vr0=vr0dc8meaabaqaciaacagaaeqabaqabegadaaakeaacqwg6bgedawgaawcbagaemoaaogabeaakiabg2da9maalaaabagaemiwag1aasbaasqaaiabdqgaqbqabagccqghsisldaqdaaqaaiabdifaynaacaaaleqabagaemyaakgaaaaaaoqaaggaciab=n8aznaacaaaleqabaacbigae4xaakgaaaaaaaa@3abf@, where xi¯
 mathtype@mtef@5@5@+=feaafiart1ev1aaatcvaufkttlearuwrp9mdh5mbpbiqv92aaexatlxbi9gbaebbnrfifhhdyfgasaach8aky=wiffydh8gipec8eeeu0xxdbba9frfj0=oqffea0dxdd9vqai=hguq8kuc9pgc9s8qqaq=dirpe0xb9q8qilsfr0=vr0=vr0dc8meaabaqaciaacagaaeqabaqabegadaaakeaadaqdaaqaaiabdifaynaacaaaleqabagaemyaakgaaaaaaaa@2f7e@ is the average fold-difference in expression of the i-th group. differentially expressed tags identified by z-score greater than  <dig>  are selected for further analysis .

welch's t-test of differential expression significance
signal and control tags that survive the balance analysis of low- and high-expressors are next subjected to statistical testing using the welch's t-test method. statistical testing is performed on the average signal and control tag expression using standard deviations of their probe expression distribution. a p-value is assigned to every differentially expressed tag and tags with p-values less than  <dig>  are selected for multiple testing correction analyses.

mapping affymetrix tags onto ucsc known genes
array2bio first identifies a set of unique  genes in a genome matching the original.cel file by using the 'known genes' annotation provided by the ucsc genome browser database . next, affymetrix tags are mapped onto  ucsc 'known genes'. accession numbers for the corresponding mrna sequences and their genomic locations are retrieved for each gene during the mapping process. this information is next used to dynamically link genes to the ncbi database and to the ecr browser.

gene ontology  and kegg analyses of biological functions and gene interactions
array2bio utilizes a locally installed version of the gene ontology   and kegg  databases to contrast the distribution of differentially expressed functional categories of genes to the average distribution in the corresponding genome. observed and expected category population values are compared and the statistical 'enrichment'  of a category is quantified by using hypergeometric distribution statistics. functional categories with p-values smaller than  <dig>  are selected for subsequent multiple testing correction analyses. the go database provides biological classification of gene function through membership to functional categories that relate to certain biological processes, molecular functions, or to cellular components. the kegg database combines information on gene interactions that are grouped into  metabolism,  genetic information processing,  environmental information processing,  cellular processes, and  human diseases categories.

correction for multiple testing
array2bio performs correction for multiple testing to exclude false positive predictions associated with the statistical testing of differential tag expression or enrichment/depletion in go and kegg categories that is performed multiple times. array2bio provides two statistical methods to correct for multiple testing and also allows omitting multiple testing if the user does not want to apply this function. the default method used by array2bio is the medium stringency benjamini-hochberg correction . benjamini-hochberg correction is based on controlling the false discovery rate  – the expected proportion of false discoveries amongst the rejected hypothesis. in general it provides a good balance between discovery of statistically significant differences and limitation of false positive occurrences. alternatively, the bonferroni correction method can be applied. the latter is one of the most stringent multiple testing correction methods and can be used to select for the most outstanding overexpressor genes or enriched/depleted functional categories.

clustering analysis
microarray data clustering
array2bio utilizes the unix version of the cluster tool . cluster's hierarchical analysis is implemented into array2bio, which allows clustering of genes and/or conditions; provides  <dig> distance measures and  <dig> methods. due to cluster limitations, array2bio restricts the maximum number of clustered transcripts to less than  <dig> genes. genes are ranked by their standard deviation in expression across different conditions. genes with the largest variation from their average expression across all conditions are selected for clustering.

interactive tree visualization
array2bio provides an interactive web utility for visualizing clustering results, which is similar in graphical display and operation to java treeview . clustered gene expression across multiple conditions is visualized in a matrix format. the tree of clustering relationships is given to the left of the gene expression image . a mouse click on a tree branch generates a 'zoom in' image of that branch and gives a detailed description of related genes  .

interconnection with external tools
ecr browser – evolutionary conservation analysis
the ecr browser  is a dynamic whole-genome navigation tool for visualizing and studying evolutionary relationships among genomes. evolutionary conserved regions  are extracted from genome alignments, mapped to genomes, and graphically visualized in relation to the genes that have been annotated in the reference genome.

creme  <dig>  – identification of clusters of transcription factor binding sites in promoters
crème  <dig>   relies on a database of putative transcription factor binding sites that have been carefully annotated across the human genome using evolutionary conservation with the mouse and rat genomes. an efficient search algorithm is applied to this data set to identify combinations of transcription factors whose binding sites tend to co-occur in close proximity to the start site of the input gene set. these combinations are statistically evaluated, and significant combinations are reported and visualized.

ncbi – detailed sequence information
detailed mrna transcript information including: nucleotide and protein sequences, related publications, gene annotation, etc. are provided through the dynamic interconnection to the ncbi database.

RESULTS
two complementary methods of microarray data analysis are incorporated into the array2bio software: 1) comparative and 2) clustering analyses. comparative analysis identifies genes that are differentially regulated in reference to a control sample . clustering analysis identifies groups of genes that are co-expressed under different experimental conditions .

the automated functional classification of co-expressed genes is based on the gene ontology  database and allows the identification of 'enriched' or 'depleted' categories in assigned biological processes, molecular functions, and cellular components. integrated kegg  classification of gene interactions identifies major biochemical processes that underlie observed differences in gene expression and groups genes into five main categories –  metabolism,  genetic information processing,  environmental information processing,  cellular processes, and  human diseases.

every group of differentially expressed genes identified using array2bio is dynamically linked to the evolutionary conserved region  browser  and to the cis-regulatory module explorer tool , as well as to the ncbi database. the ecr browser provides multi-species evolutionary conservation information for individual genes, and the ncbi database provides detailed information about mrna sequences and related proteins. the crème  <dig>  tool allows the user to perform an additional step to functionally annotate groups of human genes through the analysis of their promoter elements. in this process the tool will identify shared clusters of evolutionary conserved transcription factor binding sites within promoters of co-expressed genes. combined, these tools provide a wealth of information regarding the gene in question, its conservation, its transcripts, as well as candidate regulatory mechanisms underlying the observed transcriptional response from the microarray data.

application to the analysis of host-pathogen interactions
to illustrate the different levels of information that can be obtained from array2bio analysis we have processed microarray expression data generated in a time-course experiment of human cells infected with yersinia pestis. the plague  is an infectious disease that has devastated much of the known world in the 14th century, and killed more than  <dig> million people during three major pandemics. it is primarily a disease in rodents caused by an infection with the bacterium yersinia pestis, but can be transmitted to humans through the bite of infected fleas.

to address host-pathogen interactions and elucidate the molecular mechanisms underlying the virulence of this pathogen during human infection, human dendritic cells were exposed to y. pestis infection, and rna samples were collected at different time points and gene expression was analyzed by microarrays. using array2bio we compared hg-u133a microarray expression data of human dendritic cells at  <dig> hours after exposureto y. pestis to mock-exposed cells. we observed significant increases and decreases in expression  for  <dig> and  <dig> human genes, respectively. gene ontology  analysis identified  <dig> 'enriched' biological processes and  <dig> molecular functions corresponding to up-regulated genes; while none were found for down-regulated genes. as expected, the majority of these categories were related to the human immune response, including the "response to pest, pathogen or parasite" . the chemokine  category was ~ 20-fold 'enriched' when compared to the expected values due to chance alone. eighteen percent of all human chemokines  are activated in response to y. pestis invasion. kegg analysis of the corresponding gene interactions identified a family of up-regulated cxc cytokines acting upstream of the il8rb receptor, and several other receptor genes . these pathways are likely to reflect the core response of human dendritic cells to this infection. kegg analysis of enriched cellular processes highlighted two related subcategories:  apoptosis  and  cell growth and death . six genes are shared between these two subcategories and may be key players in the etiology of this infectious disease.

we performed crème  <dig>  analysis on  <dig> genes identified in this study that are related to the "response to pest, pathogen or parasite" go category. crème  <dig>  predicted transcription factors that potentially act as key regulators of these genes and are likely to up-regulate their expression during y. pestis infection. several transcription factors binding sites conserved between human and rodents were significantly enriched in the promoters of these genes, including several members of the stat and nfkb families, as well as tata transcription factors. while the tata transcription factor plays a basal role in the tata-box recognition, the two other identified transcription factor families are known to be involved in regulating the immune system. stat and nfkb proteins respond to cytokines, are associated with inflammatory disease and can lead to inappropriate immune cell development. .

CONCLUSIONS
array2bio is an addition to the dcode.org collection of tools  that permits the efficient and unique integration of comparative and transcriptional regulatory genomic utilities with a multi-functional framework for analyzing gene expression data. most importantly, array2bio represents a web-based tool/utility for integrative analysis of microarray expression data that permits experimental biologists with limited background in statistics to perform detailed, highly informative analysis comparable to sophisticated software packages catered to the expert statistician. a "single-click" implementation of the variety of biological characterizations into a single tool permits the standardized, prompt identification of co-expressed genes, their functional annotation, the identification of related interaction pathways, and prediction of key transcription factors underlying observed gene expression responses. currently our server provides  <dig> mb of disk space per account. all the input cel files are compressed allowing users to store over one hundred cel files per account. we anticipate additional disk space to be made available per account, with each new release of the tool.

availability and requirements
project name: array2bio;

project home page: ;

operating system: web-based, platform independent;

programming language: php;

license: there are no access restrictions and no need for a license for both academic and private entities to use this research tool.

authors' contributions
ggl participated in designing the scheme of the tool and writing the manuscript. psgc, sm, ar, and eg carried out experimental studies. io coordinated the developments, created the tool and drafted the manuscript.

