BACKGROUND
genomes are dynamic in nature and are known to undergo various types of changes in their evolution. gene duplications result in paralogs, whereas gene deletions may induce loss of functionality. recombination causes genome rearrangements, horizontal transfer introduces genetic materials into bacterial chromosomes, enabling the organism to recruit novel metabolic enzymes and consequently to survive in a different environment  <cit> .

early comparison methods to evaluate genome differences such as needleman-wunsch global alignment  <cit>  and smith-waterman local alignment  <cit>  were designed to identify sequence differences on a small scale. the methods use dynamic programming algorithms and have been proven to be sensitive to find an optimal alignment between sequences.

the increasing number of organisms whose genomes have been completely sequenced demands sensitive and precise methods for aligning long dna sequences. local alignments have been generally used to anchor global alignments. a variety of approaches such as mummer, waba, avid, mauve and act  <cit>  have been developed for genome visualization. several other programs have been developed for specialized purposes, for instance, sim <dig> uses a greedy algorithm to investigate highly similar input sequences and works well even for long sequences  <cit> . the lagan series and multipipmaker  are designed for dealing with genome rearrangements during the alignment process  <cit> .

here we describe a novel platform-independent genome comparison viewer, ingeno, which is user-friendly and modular. it recognizes and illustrates the functional relationships between orthologous genes and strain-specific genome islands. it accepts all major standard sequence input formats . it parses alignment reports , performs a dotplot analysis, filters out the strain-specific genes of interest using a user-specified similarity threshold and plots a comparison map with an interactive interface . the modules for information retrieval aid the user: annotation keywords, logical combinations and concatenations of these, genome similarities and differences are identified from plain-text annotations and summarized and sorted by occurrences and functional categories .

implementation
strategy
two genomes are aligned to each other and the resulting individual gene comparison outputs are parsed. this allows to establish a dotplot and correlation analysis, a linear regression on the orthologs and locus collinear block  locations in the genome. furthermore, an interactive user interface for information retrieval enables to inspect detailed comparison results.

details
the program is completely implemented in java and biojava  <cit> . a java runtime environment  <dig>  is required to obtain platform-independency. a standard version of the program is available, based on an hsql database  and a set of standalone tools written in java. a further version integrates and requires a mysql database engine previously installed on the system. this server-based version can be set up and handle a database suitable for long-term research purposes.

sequence comparison data on individual genes are parsed using biojava , by which the contig data, such as location, annotation and translated protein sequence information can be extracted efficiently from rich-format input files. a ncbi-blast interface and a smith-waterman-blast interface have both been implemented and are run for the user to prepare the data for the further analyses listed below.

ingeno interactively identifies and indicates the function and description of orthologous and strain-specific gene islands. moreover, a keyword filter for annotation information aids the users  to investigate the genomes and  writes different comparison reports .

- a dot-analysis algorithm is implemented to visualize the collinear ortholog relationships. based on the coordinates, the program performs a linear regression and plots the regression line . strain-specific genes and orthologous genes are determined according to a user-defined threshold. a combined threshold can be defined using multiple conditions, such as 75% alignment coverage and 30% sequence identity in parallel .

- the log distances between the coordinates of each ortholog and the resulting regression line are then calculated and sorted. they are used in the next step for the heuristic determination of locus collinear blocks . eventually the program provides an interactive graphical user interface , in which various operations are visualized. for example, each genome is represented as a horizontal, solid line. this can be shifted horizontally and vertically, zoomed in or out by sliders in the control panel. genes of the same color linked by a line denote their orthology. these lines characterize the genome lcbs and indicate their distances . their numbers and lengths can be re-defined by a slider in the control panel. by this, genome rearrangements can be viewed distinctly, including transpositions occurring in close or long distances.

- a text mining subroutine identifies functions of collinear genes parsing blast input and sequence input annotation: tiny rectangles are plotted closely above the upper genome and below the lower genome. these are filled in different colors according to the parsed annotation files in order to differentiate the category of potential functions, e.g., blue denotes metabolism and enzymes, cyan denotes transcription/regulation factors and green denotes transporters/pts systems . this strategy improves operon recognition as well as the study of protein interactions. another text-mining routine is implemented for the statistical analysis of strain-specific gene annotations. all the keywords are parsed, sorted by frequencies and subsequently filtered out to rapidly review the critical information related to different biological functions. furthermore, there is the option to concatenate different keywords by logical operators  and in this way create more specific lists from the complete genome annotation. in addition, an editor is integrated in ingeno to correct annotation files and safe new annotation information.

- the program is implemented in java for platform independency and in object-oriented programming  design. different biojava modules have been integrated. the whole structure is optimized to allow easy insertion of new modules and functional expansion if desired by the user.

RESULTS
required input data involve only the two annotation files and two sequence comparison reports , the ingeno software then compares the two sequence comparison reports to each other . the user can select the alignment coverage  and the percentage of identity  that similar proteins from the two genomes compared have to share to be shown as orthologs by the genome viewer. only the best pair  meeting these thresholds is shown by ingeno, a back-tracking procedure eliminates all paralogs meeting the threshold but having a lesser e-value.

using this genome viewer, we have investigated a variety of genome sequences, such as comparisons between species within a genus . the resulting alignment map is plotted and provides clues for new studies. comparisons between organisms of larger phylogenetic distance  produces in general an alignment lacking conserved collinear relationships. however, interesting strain-specific islands and their specific functionalities, such as new recruited metabolic reactions or regulatory proteins and transcription factors are still easily detected by using our software.

the two annotation files supply the genome viewer with annotation information. to correct and prune wrong annotation, these files can be re-edited by the user within the program checking for pseudo-genes or bad annotations. the visualization of the genome including its annotation allows the user to go over the whole genome, correct important annotation mistakes, save all corrections made and then run ingeno again to see the result of the two corrected genome comparison. furthermore, a genometoproteome routine  compiles from a dna sequence which at least contains the start and end points of the reading frames all proteins in multi-fasta format and prepares them for systematic genome comparison with blast or smith-waterman-search program. the output files created after the search can again be directly parsed by ingeno  and so a comparatively raw dna file can also be visualized with its annotation by ingeno, provided the blast runs are done by the user. however, ingeno focuses on displaying reading frames and features of the genomes  but there is no direct visualization of dna features, for this task other genome viewers, e.g. the artemis comparison tool  <cit> , should be used.

we stress that pseudo-genes have to be marked in the annotation as such if they are to be accurately visualized. however, the back-tracking procedure from ingeno automatically ensures that pseudo-genes that are less similar to the other genome than the best available intact gene copy are not shown as wrong orthologs.

ingeno allows a precise visualization of the alignment of the proteins and further annotated features between the two genomes. in related genomes collinear relationships are highlighted . all routines are sensitive and based on the information extracted from orthologous and strain-specific genes.

the user has a number of options to visualize and identify similarities and differences between both genomes . orthologous proteins between both genomes are shown according to user specified thresholds regarding the percent identity and the length of similarity in both sequence alignment comparison files  required to be operationally declared as an orthologue. a test routine ensures that only the best orthologous pair found to pass these thresholds is shown. orthologous proteins in both genomes are indicated as ellipsoids in the same randomly chosen color. strain specific genes stand out and are marked in red. after establishing the best regression line to compare both genomes, locus collinear blocks  identify gene regions which cluster together but are rearranged in the two genomes. rainbow coloring of linkage lines between the two genomes indicates close synteny regions  up to major rearrangements between both genomes . the coloring is either according to the distance to the regression line  or according to the absolute gene to gene distance for the two genomes are compared . sliders position the genomes horizontally and vertically in the display, radio buttons switch colors, the number of linkage lines displayed and set user-specified thresholds. a "legend" option explains the different colors used in the display.

ingeno allows the user to search for string matches, e.g. keywords such as "kinase" from the annotation file. the user can select a region of interest from a genome  and ingeno sorts the annotation keywords within the selection area according to their frequency. in this way the user gets an overview for key functions encoded in this area of the genome . as an important help in detailed comparisons of the annotation files several keywords can be searched for at the same time and also be concatenated by logical operators . in this way also very complex queries and reports for strain specific features or for common features can be generated .

new information compiled for the user from the genome viewer by ingeno thus includes gene visualization, sorting and grouping as well as including importance of different keywords, string-matching and logical concatenation of terms used in the annotation text-mining routine, a graphical display of genome similarities, orthologous regions and strain-specific differences including strain specific islands and the creation of function specific annotation reports and lists.

a number of genome analysis and visualization tools are currently available and several of the specific advantages and limitations are discussed below.

the latest version of mummer  <cit>  easily handles comparisons of large eukaryotic genomes at varying evolutionary distances. two new graphical viewing tools provide alternative ways to analyze genome alignments. the new system is the first version of mummer to be released as open-source software .

mugen  <cit>  explores multiple genomes and computer analysis results. it is capable of retrieving annotated sequences in several formats, stored in local files, or available in databases over the network. from these, it then generates an interactive display, or an image file, in most common formats suitable for printing, further editing or integrating in web pages. genome maps may be mixed with computer analysis results loaded from xml files.

mauve  <cit>  focuses on multiple alignments of a conserved genomic sequence with rearrangements. it has been applied to align nine enterobacterial genomes and to determine global rearrangement structure and evolution in three mammalian genomes.

furthermore, the artemis comparison tool  allows for an interactive visualization of comparisons between complete genome sequences and associated annotations. the comparison data can be generated with several different programs  or orthologue tables generated by reciprocal fasta comparison between protein sets. act uses artemis components to display the sequences and so inherits powerful searching and analysis tools. it is written in java and platform independent.

finally, in parallel to this work, recently a java-based genome viewer appeared  as an integrated part of the argo genome browser which also provides single-genome browsing and editing capabilities and a dot-plot and genome annotation viewer.

all these tools have their pros and cons and reveal partly different information from the genome. some of the differences and advantages of ingeno as a genome viewer are analyzed and summarized below.

ingeno shows several advantages which some of the existing software also has, e.g. open source, java code  and platform independence  as well as interactive visualization of genome data . ingeno is not intended for simultaneous comparison of multiple genomes . however, specific advantages are its modular construction using biojava modules  and its rich user interface . only limited input is required: two original sequence annotation files and two ordinary blast reports on the two complete genomes compared are sufficient.

to get a solid genome alignment the program starts with a dotplot  but then ingeno identifies locus collinear blocks  and includes as an ingeno-specific advantage a back-tracking procedure to clean up the alignment and show only true positives as orthologous proteins. furthermore, ingeno allows for user specified thresholds  in the visualization of potential orthologs from both genomes .

in addition, ingeno has an improved visualization compared to the available tools by user-specified coloring  such as linkage lines. we prevent cluttering of the view  and allow a range of visualization options as well as detection of genome rearrangements  by the sensitive lcb method.

furthermore, the protein annotation in the genomes is not only visualized for both genomes compared  but actively processed so that reports for complex regular expression ) can be compiled and visualized for both genomes. this is important to interpret for example the highlighted strain-specific islands which is not available in this form in the above other viewers. we thus think that the optimized, user-friendly view provided by ingeno is at least a good alternative for a two-genome comparison, notwithstanding the qualities of the alternative above-mentioned genome viewers.

in summary, our software allows rapid genome comparisons and gene visualization, gene sorting and grouping. furthermore, the user is alerted on the importance of different keywords and string-matching from the text-mining routine, a graphical display of genome similarities, orthologous regions and strain-specific differences including highlighted strain specific islands as well as the creation of function specific annotation reports and annotation listings for complex queries

application examples
fig.  <dig> illustrates ingeno performance in a genome comparison between two closely related strains, i.e., e. coli k- <dig> strains mg <dig>  and w <dig>  which immediately indicates that these two are extremely similar. most genes are highly conserved, but there is a large inversion for w <dig> in the region shown in figure  <dig> close to the 3' prime terminus of replication. in accordance with recent studies  <cit> , ingeno shows a number of is element copies. ingeno further detects a couple of strain-specific genes, such as dcuc , gata , rcsc  and tnab . they are present in mg <dig> but pseudogenes in w <dig>  <cit> . each of these displayed variations may influence cell metabolism, for instance carbon utilization of tryptophan, galactitol or succinate.

analysis of pathogenicity features is demonstrated in figure  <dig>  these are ingeno results comparing e. coli strain o157:h <dig>  and e. coli strain mg <dig>  the e. coli strain o157:h <dig> is a major pathogen that causes diarrhea, hemorrhagic colitis and hemolytic uremic syndrome  <cit> . e. coli k <dig> strain mg <dig> is chosen as an apathogenic control strain. ingeno reveals the strain-specific pathogenicity islands present in o157:h <dig>  e.g. an island , is predicted to be involved in bacterial pathogenicity and lipoprotein metabolism. ingeno reports that it encodes a hemagglutinin/hemolysin-like protein  and a hemolysin activator-related protein . besides these cytotoxins, one next neighboring strain-specific island  is rapidly identified applying ingeno. it contains genes that are known to produce shiga-toxin <dig>   <cit> . they are involved in pathogenesis and have therapeutic implications as causes for the hemolytic uremic syndrome  <cit> . lipid metabolism genes are identified by ingeno as well in this strain-specific island, i.e., a holo acyl-carrier protein , an oxoacyl- reductase , a hydroxydecanoyl- dehydratase , an acyl-carrier protein , an aminomethyl transferase  and an oxoacyl- synthase  are involved. they potentially enable e. coli o157:h <dig> to produce fatty-acid-containing molecules. furthermore, several neighboring genes are highlighted. these encode urease components . they extend the urea cycle and catalyze urea to be transformed into ammonia and carbon dioxide. a number of detoxification proteins  are readily visualized in this island by ingeno and the detailed information provided by ingeno is listed in table  <dig> 

genes involved in the strain-specific island . this table is an excerpt from an ingeno report. all genes belong to a selected strain-specific island of the e. coli o157:h <dig> genome . the annotations marked "unknown", "hypothetic protein" are also included in the ingeno report but not shown for this table to save space. similarly, there are a number of "transposases" detected by ingeno, they are excluded from the table for the same reason.

CONCLUSIONS
ingeno is a user-friendly, platform independent application. it identifies orthologs, visualizes and inspects genome comparison results in good quality. ingeno can be applied for genome comparisons between various strains, closer and less related species. its graphical output reveals evolutionary changes, bacterial pathogenicity island and differences in metabolism. furthermore, annotation search capabilities including logical concatenation of keywords, automatic comparison reports and lists offer further information to the user.

availability and requirements
• project name: ingeno

• for users we include  the linux and windows version of ingeno as well as  the required input files sample_snapshot for the figures visualized in the paper.

• project homepage: 

• operating systems: windows, linux, general unix, macintosh

• programming language: java

• other requirements: java runtime environment  <dig>  or higher

• license: gnu gpl

authors' contributions
cl: programming and testing of the genome editor/examples, writing of the ms.

td: advice, organisation and guidance of the study, writing of the ms.

both authors read and approved the final ms.

supplementary material
additional file 1
supplementary information. tutorials, screen shots and detailed further information on ingeno

click here for file

 additional file 2
sampledata.rar. sample file to directly start ingeno

click here for file

 additional file 3
ingeno_small.rar. software.

click here for file

 acknowledgements
we thank dfg  and bmbf for support . we thank all biologists, bioinformaticians and computer scientists who contribute to the open-source biojava effort.
