BACKGROUND
cattle are vital resources for african economy and society. approximately  <dig> breeds of indigenous cattle have been found in sub-saharan africa  <cit> . indigenous african cattle which have inhabited geographically isolated region for a long time have been subjected to the environmental pressure. this imposed strong adaptive constraints to african cattle, and thus led to selection of the fitter individuals to the harsh conditions  <cit> . in particular, some breeds  have acquired tolerance to local diseases that is known to significantly decrease the survival and productivity of african livestock  <cit> . in addition to the environmental factors, artificial selection has resulted in characteristic phenotypes in a few breeds , which enhanced the production of dairy products and beef  <cit> .

rapid development of large-scale genetic variant inventories has brought attention to the identification of the genes or loci controlling phenotypic traits  <cit> . this triggered extensive studies on genome-wide analysis which is expected to ultimately improve our understanding in the role of unique genetic signatures for adapting environmental conditions. recently, several genome analyses were performed to study the genetic backgrounds as well as the diversity in multiple breeds of african cattle . for instance, a genome-wide snp analysis for the small east african zebu revealed the candidate loci to improve sustainable livestock productivity in the tropics  <cit> . discovery of such regions in the genome enables us to detect distinct genetic variants that are related to phenotypic traits of a certain breed and facilitate functional annotation of the genome.

african trypanosomiasis is a matter of great concern that can lead to serious economic losses and health crisis in africa. trypanosomes are infectious agents that are transmitted by tsetse fly. it can cause lethal diseases in mammals including human and livestock. in particular, t. congolense, t. vivax and t. brucei groups are the main african pathogenic trypanosomes for cattle  <cit> . most cattle including non-african and some african breeds  are highly susceptible to trypanosome infection. several studies have demonstrated that each breed of cattle showed an innately different degree of tolerance to trypanosomiasis when exposed to natural infection by wild-type tsetse flies from the field  <cit> . to be specific, n’dama breeds are naturally less susceptible to trypanosomiasis than other cattle, and hence they can survive better and maintain high productivity in trypanosomiasis-endemic areas  <cit> . moreover, trypanotolerant breeds including n’dama are also less susceptible to other critical infectious diseases such as helminthiasis  <cit> , ticks and tick-borne-diseases  <cit> , and streptothricosis  <cit>  in africa. hence, a recent study looked into trypanotolerance, one of the interesting physiological traits of indigenous african cattle. bayesian-based method was applied to the genome data of african cattle to detect the genetic divergence that may be associated with trypanosomiasis  <cit> . moreover, a systematic approach using an experimental cross between n’dama and boran revealed several qtls and candidate genes controlling tolerance to trypanosomiasis in cattle .

many studies on the tolerance to cattle trypanosomiasis-susceptibility have mainly focused on comparing n’dama and boran breeds. however, not many studies have carried out comparative research between n’dama and other trypano-susceptible breeds. herein, we concentrate on the analysis of the genetic variations between n’dama and ogaden cattle in order to discover n’dama-specific genetic signatures. ogaden cattle are one of the representative breeds that play a role as a valuable economic resource including the production of beef and dairy products, but they are known to be susceptible to trypanosomiasis  <cit> .

in this study, a comparative genome-wide analysis of diverse cattle breeds was carried out to identify genetic distinctiveness of n’dama breed. we investigated the genome of five indigenous african breeds and four commercial breeds using the combined methods based on information-theoretic and statistical approaches. this study identified new genetic patterns from cattle genome, and also detected selective pressures which cause an increase in genetic differentiation among populations. the proposed approaches on the analysis of the selected snps confirmed the differences of genomic patterns between n’dama and other cattle breeds. moreover, the identified associations between genes with n’dama-specific genetic variations are related to the regulation of ossification, neurological system, and immune system development which might be involved in the evolution of n’dama-specific phenotypes including the tolerance to african trypanosomiasis. this study reveals insights into detecting the breed-specific genetic signatures from the genome.

RESULTS
we performed a comparative genome-wide analysis of diverse cattle breeds to discover genetic signatures of n’dama cattle using the combined methods based on information-theoretic and statistical approaches .fig.  <dig> schematic overview of systemic analysis on cattle genome for identifying genetic signatures of subspeciation in trypanotolerant n’dama




summary of sequencing, assembly and snp detection
 <dig>  billion reads or ~ <dig> gbp of sequences with ~ <dig> x genome coverage in total were generated from individual genomes of five indigenous african cattle  and four commercial cattle breeds . the reads were aligned to the reference genome sequence umd  <dig>  with an average alignment rate of  <dig> % that covered  <dig> % of the reference genome . a total of ~ <dig> million snps were obtained after filtering the potential pcr duplicates and correcting misalignments . moreover, we observed  <dig> % overall genotype concordance between the bovinesnp <dig> genotyping beadchip and the re-sequencing results across the samples. it helps to offer confidence on the accuracy of snp calling .

identification of discriminative snps based on mutual information
the candidate snps to distinguish n’dama and other cattle breeds were extracted using an information-theoretic method, mutual information  which estimates the association strength between the snp positions and breeds. thus, our analysis was designed to detect the discriminative snps with a high dependence between the haplotypes of two adjacent loci and breeds. approximately  <dig>  hundred thousand snps were identified by averaging the results between n’dama and other five breeds along with  <dig>  common genes . the extracted snps showed high mi values  and significant p-values . to overcome any bias caused by the small sample size, a lower p-value threshold was selected for estimating statistical significance  compared to those in other studies  <cit> . overall, these results showed that the haplotype patterns in n’dama were clearly different from those in other cattle. moreover, the regions containing the extracted snps can serve as a potential marker to distinguish n’dama breeds.

difference in distribution of the snps identified by mi among boran, ogaden and n’dama breeds
the paired datasets of the three different cattle breeds including boran, ogaden, and n’dama were generated as n’dama-boran, n’dama-ogaden, and boran-ogaden in order to identify the difference in the distribution of the identified snps. we computed mi values between each snp position variable and the breed variable from the paired datasets. the total  <dig> , <dig> snp positions were annotated with  <dig>  genes for analysing the difference of the mi distributions between n’dama and other breeds. for the analysis,  the maximum,  the mean, and  the sum of mi values of all the snps in a gene were calculated in addition to  the number of snps counted for each gene. figure 2a shows the distributions of the mean and the maximum values of the mi of snps in each gene for all three pair datasets, i, i, and i. also shown in fig. 2a, i values were lower compared to those of i and i. this signifies that n’dama breed had the snp patterns which are distinguishable from boran and ogaden breeds. such differences were likely to be associated with the unique property of n’dama breed such as african trypanosomiasis tolerance. the differences of n’dama from other two breeds were also clearly shown in fig. 2b which compares the distributions of ratios for the mi values of i, i, and i. while the distributions of i and i were similar, those of i clearly showed a different pattern. considering the differential distribution of snps which led to the larger mi values, we suggest that n’dama has distinctive snp patterns which may be related to their breed-specific traits including trypanotolerance. finally, fig. 2c presents the kullback-liebler -divergence values of the mi distribution between the paired datasets of three breeds. kl-divergence is a widely used non-symmetric measure of the difference between two distributions. larger values of kl-divergence mean larger differences between two distributions. thus, this result also indicated that n’dama is different from boran and ogaden breeds with respect to the snp patterns which may influence n’dama-specific traits.fig.  <dig> the difference in the distribution of mutual information  of snp-annotating genes between the breed pairs including boran, n’dama and ogaden breed. a distribution of mean and maximum values of mis between three breed pairs on each gene is presented. all the snps are annotated by  <dig> genes. x-axis denotes the number of snps annotated by a gene, and mi score is shown in y axis. mean mi is calculated by averaging mi scores of all the snps annotated by a gene. max mi is the maximum value among mi scores of all the snps annotated by a genes. i, i and i indicate mi between n’dama and boran, n’dama and ogaden, and boran and ogaden breed. b the distributions of mi ratios between boran, n’dama and ogaden breed pairs. top and bottom graphs are the ratio distribution of the mean and the max mi ratio distributions between three breed pairs, respectively. c the difference in distributions between boran, n’dama and ogaden breed pairs is calculated by kl divergence




detection of genetic signatures in n’dama
we performed the analysis with the weighted mutual information  in order to scan the genome for breed-specific snps. for a given gene, wmi is defined as the summation of two factors: the normalized number of snps assigned to the gene and the mean mi value of snps of the gene. the proposed wmi is considered as the degree of the genetic variation in the gene and as the discriminative information between the breeds. figure  <dig> shows the distribution of the significant snps identified by wmi across all  <dig> chromosomes as well as the intersection of mi and xp-clr, and mi and xp-ehh on each chromosome, and the degree of enrichment in each chromosome with fisher’s exact test. fisher’s exact test was performed with a 2× <dig> contingency table, composed of two factors: whether the snp is included in a specific chromosome, and whether the snp is identified by each measure. we also presented the distribution of the genes including significant snps identified by the same three measures for each chromosome . although snps were found in all chromosomes, the number of the snps were not even across the chromosomes. especially, when the intersection of mi and xp-clr, and mi and xp-ehh were applied, relatively large number of snps were detected in chromosome  <dig>  these distributions of the snps on each chromosome provided the information on genomic locations that are likely to have received selection pressure and possess the ability to distinguish n’dama and ogaden breeds.fig.  <dig> distribution of the numbers and the log ratios of snps distinguishing between n’dama and ogaden in each chromosome. black, grey and patterned light grey bars indicate the numbers of snps identified by weighted mi, the intersection of mi and xp-clr, and mi and xp-ehh with a significant p-value . blue values denote the enriched chromosomes with a p-value less than  <dig> e- <dig> in fisher’s exact test. line graphs are the ratios of the identified snps to total snps for each chromosome. the ratios are in negative log scale, thus a lower value indicates a high proportion of the snps distinguishing between n’dama and ogaden breeds. for all graphs, left y-axis represents the number of snps and right y-axis indicates the ratio value




n’dama-specific snps identified by wmi
thirty genes containing the distinctive snps between n’dama and ogaden were identified by wmi analysis . we constructed correlation networks with the identified genes. the networks were generated based on the correlation coefficients of the gene variation degrees which are obtained by calculating the variations of snps annotated by each gene. the snp variation is the difference between alleles of the same snp position for cattle samples. it indicates the degree of homozygosity or heterozygosity of snps which is defined as the ratio of homozygous or heterozygous alleles for all samples of a breed. for instance, when the allele pair of snp_ <dig> of most samples of breed_ <dig> is “aa”, the homozygosity of snp_ <dig> for breed_ <dig> is large. the heterozygosity of snp_ <dig> for breed_ <dig> is high when snp_ <dig> allele pair of most breed_ <dig> samples is “at”.

the constructed network showed that accn <dig>  ctnna <dig>  fhit and ush2a function as main hubs of the network . the heterozygosity or homozygosity of snps in many genes of the network was strongly associated with that in these four genes. accn <dig> encodes a sodium channel protein which is expressed in both the central and peripheral nervous system. it regulates neuronal activity in a ph-dependent manner. the diverse physiological roles of accn <dig> in neuronal systems include synaptic plasticity, learning, fear, pain sensation, mechanosensation, and neurodegenerative diseases  <cit> . ctnna <dig> is known as a linker between cadherin receptors and the cytoskeleton to regulate cell-cell adhesion and differentiation in the nervous system, and is implicated in several neurological functions including the control of startle modulation  <cit> . fhit protein is a member of the histidine triad gene family of nucleotide hydrolases involved in purine metabolism. this gene contributes to the regulation of gene expression essential for cell proliferation and survival and tumor suppressor  <cit> . ush2a is found in the basement membrane of the cochlea and the retina, and is believed to take part in adhesion of pre- and post-synaptic membranes and in nerve fiber guidance. mutations in the ush2a gene are also responsible for a subtype of usher syndrome which is the most frequent cause of combined deaf-blindness in man  <cit> .fig.  <dig> genes identified based on the wmi for n’dama breed. a the correlation network of  <dig> genes selected using the wmi of snp types between n’dama and ogaden breeds. circles denote genes including snps identified by the wmi and dark grey octagons represent the genes annotated in the result of go analysis. dark red edges indicate strong positive correlations and dark green edges show strong negative correlations . b go analysis on the extracted genes by adjusting thresholds from the constructed correlation network. a vertical line indicates an fdr-adjusted p-value . c the genotype profiles of the identified genes including accn <dig>  ctnna <dig>  fhit, and ush2a are shown. the snp positions of each gene reveal clearly different patterns between n’dama and ogaden breeds. each logo indicates a , t , g , c , l , d , e , f , h , and i . upper table shows the types of snp alleles for each breed. values in the parentheses represent the numbers of samples with each allele for four genes




in addition, we performed go analysis with the genes extracted by the threshold of correlation coefficient  in the constructed network. enriched terms were related to cognitive functions , perceptual systems  and neurological systems   . this result strongly indicated that n’dama may be distinguished from the other breeds of african cattle by a neurological system related to startling response which requires sensory perception, learning or memory as well as neuromuscular system. furthermore, fig. 4c displayed genotype profiles for each snp position on the above-mentioned four genes. interestingly, the genotypes of the identified snps revealed different patterns between n’dama and ogaden breeds. genotypes of n’dama were biased for homozygosity and were found to be more homogeneous within the population than those in ogaden.

n’dama-specific snps identified by mi and xp-clr
in the next step, we identified genes displaying genetic signatures which may have contributed to the development of n’dama-specific phenotypes. two gene lists were created one of which containing  <dig>  genes obtained from mi analysis and the other containing  <dig> genes from xp-clr. the  <dig> genes found in common between these two lists represented a set of functional genes that facilitated adaptation of n’dama to the local environment . a correlation network based on the identified genes demonstrated that the genotype of snps in many genes were negatively associated with a single hub gene known as general transcription factor or gtf2ird <dig> . gtf2rd <dig> has been intensely studied in brain and embryo due to its involvement in a rare neurodevelopmental disorder, williams-beuren syndrome  <cit> . chimge et al.  <cit>  observed overexpression of gtf2rd <dig> in mouse embryonic fibroblast cells, and reported that gtf2ird <dig> regulates many genes that are involved in a variety of biological processes such as immune response, cell cycle, cell signaling and transcriptional regulation. the expression levels of atoh <dig>  il1rl <dig>  oasl and oprd <dig> changed after gtf2rd <dig> overexpression  <cit> . when a snp type is defined based on the degree of the heterozygosity or homozygosity of snps for all samples, the associations of snp types between gtf2ird <dig> and those mentioned target genes were also observed in our correlation network using the combined measure of the mi and the xp-clr. these results may reflect modified biological interactions of gtf2ird <dig> with target genes in n’dama as opposed to other african cattle and commercial breeds. in addition, the genotype profiles of this gene showed differences between n’dama and ogaden breeds .fig.  <dig> genes identified based on the mi and xp-clr for n’dama breed. a the correlation network of  <dig> genes selected using the mi and xp-clr of snp types between n’dama and ogaden breeds is presented. circles denote genes identified by the intersection of mi and xp-clr and dark grey octagons represent the genes annotated in the result of go analysis. dark red edges indicate strong positive correlations and dark green edges are strong negative correlations . b go analysis on the extracted genes by adjusting thresholds from the constructed correlation network is shown in this figure. a vertical line is an fdr-adjusted p-value . c the genotype profiles of the identified genes, calcr, fgf <dig> and cdk <dig>  for  <dig> representative snp positions of each gene clearly show different patterns between n’dama and ogaden breeds. upper table reveals the types of snp alleles for each breed. values in the parentheses denote for the numbers of samples with each allele for the three genes




we also carried out go analysis with the genes selected by the threshold of correlation coefficient  in the constructed network. the significantly enriched terms included ‘regulation of hormone secretion’ and ‘regulation of ossification’  . the terms that were related to appearance of the ossification enriched by genes including calcr, fgf <dig>  and cdk <dig> suggest pathways that may provide deeper insights into understanding some aspects of the n’dama-specific features. in particular, calcr is a high affinity receptor for the peptide hormone calcitonin. this receptor is known to be associated with maintaining calcium homeostasis enhancing calcium excretion by the kidneys and it also takes part in regulating osteoclast-mediated bone resorption  <cit> . fgf <dig> is a regulator of phosphate homeostasis and vitamin-d metabolism. this protein is reported to negatively regulate osteoblast differentiation and matrix mineralization  <cit> . finally, cdk <dig> which is a member of a protein kinase is an important regulator of cell cycle progression. it also prevents myeloid differentiation by interfering with runx <dig>  a transcription factor that regulates the differentiation of hematopoietic stem cells into mature blood cells  <cit> . furthermore, we identified il1rl <dig> and il1rl <dig> in the constructed network in concordance with the observation that the initial response of the host immune system to trypanosomes infection contains the activation of macrophages secreting pro-inflammatory molecules such as il- <dig>  <cit> . in particular, it has been previously reported that t. brucei infections lead to the increase of il- <dig> secretion  <cit> . apart from the go analysis, we showed that n’dama and ogaden possess distinct patterns of homozygosity and heterozygosity for the snp alleles of calcr, fgf <dig>  and cdk <dig> . taken together, these results indicated that genetic diversification has occurred between n’dama and ogaden, in the genes related to the regulation of ossification.

n’dama-specific snps identified by mi and xp-ehh
the  <dig> common genes were identified in the lists of  <dig>  genes from mi and  <dig> genes from xp-ehh . the correlation network analysis performed on those genes showed that the genotypes of snps in many of these genes were negatively related to a hub gene, rasal <dig> . rasal <dig> is a member of ras gtpase-activating protein families and recently reported to be a tumor suppressor gene in several types of cancer  <cit> . the snp alleles of rasal <dig> in n’dama also represented homozygous types unlike ogaden breeds .fig.  <dig> genes identified based on the mi and xp-ehh for n’dama breed. a correlation network of  <dig> genes selected using the mi and xp-ehh of snp types between n’dama and ogaden breeds is demonstrated. circles denote genes identified by the intersection of mi and xp-ehh and dark grey octagons represent the genes annotated in the result of go analysis. dark red edges indicate strong positive correlations and dark green edges are strong negative correlations . b go analysis on the selected genes by adjusting thresholds from the constructed correlation network is presented . a vertical line represents an fdr-adjusted p-value . c the genotype profiles of the identified genes, sp <dig>  sp <dig> and card <dig>  for each snp position clearly reveal different patterns between n’dama and ogaden breeds. table shows the types of snp allele for each breed. values in the parentheses represent the numbers of samples with each allele for three genes




go analysis of the genes extracted by the threshold of correlation coefficient  in the constructed network showed significantly enriched terms, ‘immune system development’  . card <dig>  foxp <dig> and sp <dig> were significantly over represented in ‘immune system development’. in particular, card <dig> is critical for signaling in t- and b-lymphocytes in both the innate and adaptive immune system, and it transmits signals from antigen receptors to the transcription factor nf-kb  <cit> . foxp <dig> belongs to subfamily p of the forkhead box  transcription factor family which plays important roles in the regulation of tissue- and cell type-specific gene transcription during embryo development and adulthood. more specific function of foxp <dig> includes the regulation of cardiomyocyte proliferation  <cit> , motor neuron development  <cit> , and b-cell development  <cit> . in addition, similar to the result from the analysis of mi and xp-clr, ossification-related terms were enriched with significant p-values  due to genes including sp <dig> and sp <dig> . sp <dig> is a zinc finger transcription factor involved in many cellular processes including cell differentiation, apoptosis, immune responses, and osteogenic differentiation of dental stem cells  <cit> . on the other hand, sp <dig> is a bone-specific transcription factor that is required for the activation of a range of genes during osteoblast differentiation and bone formation  <cit> . also, it was reported by other studies that some of sp7-expressing osteoblast precursors travel through the cartilage template and form stromal cells in the bone marrow space in which hematopoiesis occurs  <cit> . fig. 6c presents the snp profiles for sp <dig> and sp <dig> genes between n’dama and ogaden breeds. two genes showed the opposite zygosity snp pattern in n’dama and ogaden respectively. these results imply that snp variants may be involved in the gene regulation between n’dama and ogaden breeds.

furthermore, we also observed that majority of snps found in eight mirnas  showed homogeneity in snp variation . notably, these mirnas are located in close proximity to one another in chromosome  <dig> between  <dig> , <dig> and  <dig> , <dig> and five of which including bta-mir- <dig>  - <dig>  -409b, - <dig> and - <dig> are the members of mir- <dig> family. homologs of mir- <dig> family found in human are originally known to be overexpressed in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis  <cit> . in addition, recent evidence suggests the association of the function of this mirna family with the bone development. li et al.  <cit>  reported that expression of mir- <dig> and mir- <dig> are decreased in tension-treated adipose-derived mesenchymal stem cells , and that mir- <dig> inhibits osteogenic differentiation of adscs through the wnt/pcp pathway by directly regulating wnt  <dig>  this result indicated that the snp variants may cause differential expression of mirna which in turn influence expression of their target genes between n’dama and ogaden breeds.

identification of n’dama-specific missense and nonsense mutations
finally, we looked into variations on a protein level by focusing onto non-synonymous snps and investigated whether such variations caused any physiological change in n’dama cattle. n’dama-specific missense or nonsense variants with their annotated genomic locations and coding effects for the identified genes were observed after performing the three measures . all missense or nonsense mutations observed were summarized in table 1:  <dig> missense mutations in  <dig> protein coding genes, and a nonsense mutation with one variants in ranbp <dig>  many of the annotated genes are associated with immune , nervous  and cellular metabolic  systems. the gene description and the related function for each gene are shown in additional file 1: table s <dig> table  <dig> list of the identified genes including n’dama-specific missense and nonsense mutations. aa, amino acid

mi
∩
mi
∩



also, the  <dig> mutations out of  <dig> missense mutations resulted in alteration of chemical properties. eleven mutations were located in functional domains, while the rest nine were in inter-domain region . amz <dig>  c1rl and pik3c2g exhibited multiple protein mutations. even though these mutations were not found within the functional domains, amino acid properties were changed. notably, c1rl displayed four mutations, all of which resulted in altered properties of amino acids. two mutations including cub and trypsin-like serine protease domain were located in the functional domains. several proteins containing cub and trypsin-like serine protease domains are associated with complement activation, tissue remodeling and cellular migration. it has been suggested that c1rl is involved in complement pathways during inflammation although its physiological role is not well-understood  <cit> . we also found one nonsense variant  with a significant p-value . this snp was located in ranbp <dig> which is a member of the importin-β super family of nuclear transport receptors. in human, ranbp <dig> is the loci of recurrent chromosomal  <dig> breakpoints detected in t-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia, and the transcriptional activation of this gene occurs during hematopoietic process with enhancer elements of the tcr delta gene  <cit> .

furthermore, we compared the amino acids encoded by the  <dig> missense and one nonsense mutations in n’dama with the corresponding amino acids in reference cow , human and mouse . interestingly, the amino acids substitution in the variant positions were detected only in n’dama which clearly distinguished n’dama from other cattle breeds and species. it implies that the mutated alleles affected coding changes leading to alterations in the function of the identified genes.fig.  <dig> amino acid substitution resulted from the missense and nonsense mutations of the genes identified by wmi, the intersection of mi/xp-clr and mi/xp-ehh. the  <dig> missense and one nonsense variants of the identified genes show distinguishing amino acid substitution in n’dama compared to that of reference cow , human and mouse




discussion
the development of large-scale genetic variant inventories has triggered a number of studies on the identification of distinct genome patterns which give rise to breed-specific traits. for instance, several researches attempted to detect genetic divergences that are associated with trypanosomiasis in african cattle from genome data  <cit> . in this study, a genome-wide comparative analysis was performed with snp data from various cattle breeds, including african indigenous cattle and commercial breeds, in order to identify the genetic signatures of n’dama.

comparison of n’dama genome with other indigenous african cattle and commercial breeds resulted in the identification of n’dama specific snps. mi analysis for the detection of breed-specific snps successfully distinguished genotypic profiles among boran, n’dama and ogaden. in addition, the combination of either mi and xp-clr or mi and xp-ehh allowed us to screen positively selected snps in n’dama genome that are presumed to have occurred during natural and artificial selection. genetic regions uncovered by xp-ehh and xp-clr often represent biologically meaningful variations that may explain adaptive traits. moreover, it is possible to produce larger lists of likely selective sweeps, and as a result, this may allow us to better understand how selection has affected the variation of a specific-breed  <cit> . some of the positively selected snps located in genic region were unique in n’dama when compared to commercial breed and other mammals. furthermore, some variants in n’dama were homogeneous, and these n’dama-specific variants were also detected in the pool of ogaden genotypes. ogaden possessed not only more heterogeneous but also bigger genetic pools than n’dama. numbers of detected snps were significantly high in some of the chromosomes , indicating greater selection pressures to these chromosomes during the evolutionary history of n’dama.

the correlation network is constructed based on the similarity of genotype between genes. if a snp variation value at gene level is close to  <dig>  this means that the gene possesses similar genotypes to the reference. on the other hand, if the snp variation at gene level is higher, the gene is likely to possess relatively more heterozygous or alternative homozygous genotypes. the interaction between genes in the correlation networks shows similarity in their genotypes. if calculated trends of genotypes for two genes are homo-homo or hetero-hetero, their correlation will be high  and the edge will be red as shown in the fig. 4a, 5a and 6a. whereas, if the collective genotype is homo for one gene and hetero for the other gene, then the correlation will be low  and the edge will be in green. in the correlation network, hub genes connected by negative correlation edges can be differently interpreted from hub genes with positive edges. since a hub node is usually important in many networks, highly connected hub genes are expected to play a significant role in biological networks  <cit> . thus, the hub genes we found are expected to have potentials for distinguishing between n’dama and ogaden. in particular, two negative hub genes including gtf2ird <dig> and rasal <dig> can be considered as genes with the opposite zygosity against most of the node genes. we speculate that the homo- or hetero- zygosity of two genes is likely to play a distinct role from other genes. it can be expected to provide an opportunity to formulate potential hypotheses for investigating biological processes.

comparison of genomes among different cattle breeds using wmi identified statistically significant snps and the genes where these snps are located. from the analysis based on wmi approach, many genes of the constructed network and the majority of enriched go terms indicated that n’dama may have a distinguished sensory and neurological system related to startle response . notably, the investigation of the acoustic startle response in terms of brain and genetic mechanisms revealed the involvement of genetic factor  <cit> . for example, there are a wide range of responses across the inbred strains in rodents . it is plausible that indigenous african cattle may possess various levels of startling and fear responses. the mammalian startle response is related to defence system and plays a critical role in survival of the species throughout evolution  <cit> . in addition, fear has greatly affected the process of animal domestication, especially when animals become frightened of the people who handle them  <cit> . this imply that unique neuronal circuitries of startle response and cognition might play a critical role in specification, adaptation, and domestication of n’dama cattle. unfortunately, not many studies on neurology of normal or trypanosomiasis infected n’dama cattle exist. hence, the functional consequences and pathogenic relevance of the neurological features regarding trypanotolerance remain to be elucidated. although we could not directly associate n’dama-specific neurological features with trypanotolerance, these results may be considered as genetic signatures distinguishing n’dama from the other cattle breeds due to their statistical significance.

while wmi methods extracted statistically significant snps by comparing genomes of different breeds, xp-ehh and xp-clr detected snps that were influenced by positive selection. both the combined mi and xp-clr, and mi and xp-ehh analysis identified genes involved in ossification. this may reflect the differences in feed efficiency and growth traits between n’dama and ogaden which may result in smaller skeletal size of n’dama. additionally, n’dama has developed superior ability to survive under unfavourable environment while ogaden has been selected for better dairy and beef production. in many genome-wide association study  and genomic predictions for feed efficiency and growth traits in commercial beef and dairy cattle, the positive or negative regulation of ossification and bone mineralization is commonly observed in relation to traits like average daily gain, or mid-test metabolic weight  <cit> .

enrichment in the term “ossification” may also indicate physiological difference between n’dama and ogaden. ossification has several functions: for instance, skeletal growth, mineral storage, blood cell production, and energy storage. the genes associated with ossification were implicated in biological process such as calcium homeostasis , phosphate homeostasis and vitamin-d metabolism , cell cycle progression , and the regulation of transcription  involved in multiple functions .

according to previous studies on trypanosomiasis, responses to trypanosoma infection in cattle include immunosuppression, inflammatory response and anaemia  <cit> . card <dig> over-represented in ‘immune system development’ plays important roles in innate and adaptive immune system, and contributes to nf-kb activation in various signalling cascades  <cit> . the activation of nf-kb is known as a determinant of the intracellular survival and tissue tropism of t. cruzi that causes human sleeping sickness  <cit> . this may suggest that card <dig> affecting nf-kb activation is possible to change in functions to effectively control the infection of t. brucei. in addition, haematopoietic stem cells  in bone marrow give rise to the different types of mature blood cells and immune cells. our results imply that n’dama may possess specific genetic factors that confer immunity to supress activities of trypanosomes more effectively. a previous genome-wide study performed with west african cattle revealed that genes involved in immune response were under strong balancing selection in trypanotolerant n’dama breeds  <cit>  which also supports the implication suggested by our result. furthermore, bone marrow function and blood cells have been suggested to take parts in the development of trypanosomiasis .

through examining exonic snps that results in missense or nonsense mutation , we identified three main biological processes associated with the immune system . all of the mutations were specific in n’dama cattle compared to other cattle, mouse and human . although these mutations are required to be validated for functional and physiological consequences in the future studies, we suggest that the biological processes related to immunity may be a part of the strong candidate systems that give rise to trypanotolerance.

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, our results illustrate that trypanotolerant n’dama displays clear genetic differences compared to other african cattle and commercial breeds. the adaptation of n’dama to the environment may implicate unique bone formation related to growth traits, immuno-genetic mechanisms that allow them to tolerate regional diseases including trypanosomiasis, and neurological processes which involved in the development of favorable behaviors for survival. our analysis provides advanced knowledge in genetic selection of n’dama and its adaptation to the local environment.

