BACKGROUND
vocal communication is a complex behavioral pattern that occurs in most vertebrates. in most mammals, vocal output is produced by coordinated activity of several cranial, respiratory, and laryngeal muscles  <cit> . most of these muscles are also involved in several other motor functions, such as swallowing, chewing, and respiration  <cit> . hereby, the major challenge that has to be tackled by the vocal motor system is the coordination of vocal output with normal respiration  <cit> .

one way to coordinate vocal utterances with respiration is to embed vocalizations into the expiratory phase of the normal respiratory cycle. this suggests that respiratory cycles are not, or are only slightly, modulated during vocal output, with the actual output recruiting an additional group of vocalization-related muscles in the lateral abdominal wall and the larynx  <cit> . therefore, in this scheme, vocal behavior is characterized by a constant distance between call onsets of consecutive calls, so-called call intervals . moreover, ci is independent of the call duration  within the expiratory phase, because ci is largely determined by the respiratory cycle. additionally, in this scheme, cd is inversely proportional to the distance between the end of a call and the onset of the consecutive call , again because call onset is synchronized to respiration. these predictions are illustrated schematically in figure 1a , in which we show a model of how vocalization characteristics would appear if vocal behavior was embedded into the respiratory cycle.

a vocalization mechanism embedded into the respiratory cycle can be found in a variety of animals, especially those producing vocal utterances with rapid succession. for example, bat species from the family rhinolophidae  <cit> , producing vocal sounds more than 25% of the time, usually produce one echolocation pulse per respiratory cycle at rest. these bats’ vocal onsets are highly correlated with expiratory onset  <cit> , consistent with the abovementioned scheme of figure 1a.

another way to coordinate vocal output with respiration is to modulate the normal respiratory cycle by the vocal motor system. for example, vocalizations can be associated with phase shifts in respiratory rhythms or phase lags that are created by postponed inspirations  <cit> . in this case, cd has a significant effect on ci, because the latter is now largely determined by the vocalization itself instead of by an independent respiratory rhythm. moreover, cd in this scheme would be only weakly correlated, if at all, with ici. for example, in figure 1a , a model of vocal behaviour that is independent of respiratory cycles is shown. as can be seen, in contrast to the model with vocalization embedded into the respiratory rhythm, this model shows very different patterns of predictions on the relationships between cd and ci or between cd and ici.

species that produce multi-syllabic vocal sequences, such as several primate species and humans, possess mechanisms to modulate respiration by vocalization, as in the scheme of figure 1a . in these species, vocalizations are thought to be produced by vocal pattern generators within the brainstem  <cit> . however, these mechanisms are not fully understood, and this is even more so for inter-species differences. for example, while interactions between vocal and respiratory processes have been well studied in bats and primates, it is virtually unknown how these processes take place in other mammals, such as rodents. mice produce genetically predetermined whistle-like ultrasonic vocalizations during several inter-individual encounters  <cit>  . in this case, they produce their vocal utterances in very rapid succession  <cit> , in a manner that is comparable to those of echolocation pulses in several bat species from the family rhinolophidae  <cit> . this leads to the question of whether vocal utterances of mice are produced similarly to echolocation pulses in bats. in other words, are mouse vocal utterances embedded in the regular respiratory cycle with no or just minor adjustments of the respiration rate  <cit> , or are they rather generated by a more complex mechanism possibly involving a vocal pattern generator that takes control over respiratory muscles  <cit> ?

studying vocal behaviour in mice is not only important for clarifying vocalization mechanisms in different species, but it can also have direct practical implications. specifically, several mouse models have recently been established for understanding a broad spectrum of human disease conditions, including autism, speech disorders, and neurodegenerative diseases. interestingly, vocal behavior is severely altered in these model animals and is therefore suggested to be a useful indicator for these impairments  <cit> . before using mouse vocalizations as such indicators, however, we first have to investigate whether their production mechanisms, such as vocal pattern generation, are comparable to those in primates, including man, or not.

in the current study, we compared the mechanisms of ultrasound production in two different animal species, bats and mice, that both emit ultrasonic vocalizations in rapid succession, and in a comparable frequency range. therefore, we analyzed the relationships between several call parameters such as cd, ci and ici of mice and bats. our data indicate that vocal production mechanisms of mice are different from those in bats and support the idea that they might be similar to those in primates.

RESULTS
we recorded  <dig>  vocalizations from  <dig> house mice  per mouse). median cd calculated over all  <dig> mice was 33 ms . ici and ci occurred with highest probability between  <dig> to 100 ms and  <dig> to 140 ms, respectively, in all mice . figure 3a shows the relationship between call parameters collected from a single representative mouse. as can be seen from the figure, cd was significantly correlated with ci , and the data showed a steep slope of the regression line of  <dig> . in contrast, cd was not correlated with ici , and the data showed a flat slope of the regression line of  <dig> . we performed similar analyses for each mouse individually and found that cd was significantly correlated with ci for every single animal . in contrast, cd was significantly correlated with ici in only  <dig> mice, and in those animals, the overall correlation coefficients were low . in fact, the regression lines showed flat or weakly decreasing  in all mice . finally, we tested whether cd shows a stronger correlation to ci or ici and found that slopes of regression lines were significantly steeper when correlating cd with ci than cd with ici . thus, mouse vocalizations showed a pattern of results consistent with the scheme of figure 1a .

data in boldface: p <  <dig> .

the mouse results above were categorically different from those obtained with bats. specifically, to obtain control data for the characteristics of mouse vocal utterances obtain above, we measured such utterances from a model animal in which vocalization is known to be synchronized with the respiratory cycle. we characterized cd, ci, and ici from  <dig>  echolocation pulses of two horseshoe bats . both animals showed no correlation between ci and cd  with flat slopes of the regression line of − <dig>  and − <dig> , respectively. ici were significantly negatively correlated with cd  and showed steep slopes of the regression line of − <dig>  and − <dig> , respectively. thus, the echolocation patterns from bats, with known synchronization to respiratory rhythms, were qualitatively different from those of mice, supporting the hypothesis that the latter possess different vocalization mechanisms.

discussion
we analyzed the distribution of cd, ci, and ici in mouse vocalizations and compared them to the echolocation calls of bats. our results suggest that – in contrast to echolocation calls in bats – mouse vocalizations might be produced by similar pattern generating mechanisms to those found in primates.

in echolocation calls of both bats, cd was independent of ci but negatively correlated with ici. as explained in figure 1a , this indicates that vocal production mechanisms in echolocating horseshoe bats are highly correlated with the respiratory cycle. these results are in accordance with previous studies on echolocation calls in horseshoe bats  <cit>  indicating that these two bats in our study were representative of the larger bat population. our findings, therefore, confirm the hypothesis that echolocation pulses are embedded within the respiratory cycle as has been supposed for animals producing vocal output with rapid succession  <cit> . in contrast, we observed a direct correlation between ci and cd in house mice; cd, however, was not, or only slightly, correlated with ici. these findings indicate that vocal production in mice is largely independent from the respiratory cycle, and our results therefore point to a vocal production mechanism that modulates the normal respiratory cycle. such modulation of the respiratory cycle has been observed during vocal behavior in primates including man  <cit> . here, distinct vocal utterances are produced by pattern generating networks in the brainstem that control several vocalization-related cranial and abdominal muscles  <cit> . these, in turn, modulate the normal respiratory cycle, either by shifting the phase of respiratory rhythms or by generating phase lags that are created by postponed inspirations  <cit> . here, it is important to mention that horseshoe bats possess a rich repertoire of non-echolocation social calls in addition to their echolocation calls  <cit> . further studies will have to investigate whether or not the non-echolocation social calls of bats might have a vocal pattern generating mechanism more similar to mice than their echolocation calls.

despite the fact that mice produce their ultrasonic vocal utterances with rapid succession, our results suggest that vocal production mechanisms in mice are rather independent from the normal respiratory cycle, similarly to those found in primates. this is of particular interest, since mouse vocalizations are increasingly being used as indicators for the degree of progression of several disease patterns in mouse models for neurodegenerative and neurodevelopmental disorders of humans . in these models, it seems that mouse vocalizations are altered similarly as human speech in the corresponding neurodegenerative and neurodevelopmental disorders. at first glance, these findings may seem very surprising in light of the different production mechanisms for human speech and vocal utterances of non-human primates and mice. learned vocal patterns, such as human speech are produced primarily by a complex network of cortical areas. in contrast, genetically pre-programmed vocalizations of non-human primates are generated by a complex neuronal network in the brainstem  <cit> . however, recent work is revealing that such differences are not as dichotomous as one might think. for example, several studies indicate a two-stage model for the evolution of human speech, a model that is based on the integration of primate-general brainstem mechanisms of acoustic communication with human-specific motor capacities to produce articulate speech . therefore, due to similar mechanisms at least at the level of the primate-general brainstem mechanisms, our findings support the idea of using mouse vocalizations as an animal model for vocal motor control mechanisms.

CONCLUSIONS
during vocal behavior in mice, ci and cd are directly correlated, while cd is not, or is only slightly, correlated with ici. these findings are in contrast to echolocation call pattern distributions in bats and indicate that vocalizations in mice are likely produced by a call-pattern generating mechanism that is capable of modulating respiration in these animals. thus, these results suggest a similar call pattern generating mechanism in mice and in primates, including man, and support the idea of using vocal behavior in mice as a potential marker for the degree of progression of several disease patterns in mouse models for neurodegenerative and neurodevelopmental disorders in humans.

