BACKGROUND
interphase nuclei are structurally highly organized with chromosomes restricted to defined territories <cit> . the movement of large complexes or nuclear bodies such as cajal bodies or pml bodies in the nucleus has been described by various groups  <cit> . this type of organization of interphase chromosomes indicates that the resulting interchromatin compartment provides a so-called interchromosomal domain  space that differs significantly from that occupied by chromatin  <cit> . it was shown that nuclear bodies as well as specific rna are excluded from the chromosome territories but reside in an interchromatin compartment  <cit> . investigation of the diffusional accessibility of the nucleus for microinjected dna and dextrans of varying molecular weight by fluorescent recovery after photobleaching  methods revealed significant differences in mobility according to size. fitc-dextrans of molecular sizes up to  <dig> kda were demonstrated to be fully mobile, whereas dna fragments were nearly immobile  <cit> . furthermore, a size- and electrical charge-dependent exclusion for macromolecules is encountered for chromatin regions  <cit> . in contrast, poly rna has been shown to move freely throughout the interchromatin space of the nucleus with properties characteristic of diffusion  <cit> . moreover, the large ribosomal subunits seem to exhibit a random movement in a gaussian manner without evidence for any direct path on their way from the nucleolus to the nuclear pores  <cit> . recently, microinjection of fluorescent nanospheres has been used to track the movement of such particles under distinct experimental conditions  <cit> . the authors employed a silicon – intensifier target camera coupled to an epifluorescence microscope in combination with a 2-d particle – nanotracking routine implemented in the metamorph / metaview image processing system  <cit> . in particular, tracking of nanospheres within the nucleus revealed that the particles diffused freely in restricted "cages", eventually translocating into another "cage". these studies, however, did not reveal any information on the 3-d movement of particles in comparison with local chromatin density. such a study requires recording of simultaneous time-lapse recording of three-dimensional image stacks of particles and chromatin using a confocal laser scanning microscope as described in the present study.

kinetic analysis of nuclear bodies requires spatio-temporal microscopic imaging of live cells generating a huge amount of data that is only difficult or impossible to analyze in a standardized way without computational support. the present developments of an open microscopy environment  aims at providing a standardized informatics solution for the storage, management and analysis of light microscopic image data  <cit> . for quantitative analysis of complex data from live cell experiments a variety of systems have been developed . an integrated image analysis solution should include tools for all steps in the image processing chain, i.e. image preprocessing and segmentation of objects, registration of moving and deforming cells, tracking of objects over time, and multi-dimensional visualization and kinetic analyzes of dynamic objects. only with the availability of quantitative kinetic data it is possible to obtain insight into the underlying mechanisms of biological processes such as those involved in the functional and spatial organization of the cell nucleus.

in the present study we describe a combined computational and experimental approach to study the dynamic behaviour of nuclear body-like particles formed by gfp-nls-vimentin  <cit>  in response to different cellular inhibitors and, most importantly, in relation to the chromatin structure of the nucleus. this has been compared with the motion of polystyrene particles of similar size. since both kinds of "bodies" display identical movement, the vimentin bodies can be regarded and hence employed as entities supposedly "biologically inert" for the nucleus. using our novel image processing platform tikal we show that the kinetics of nuclear particles are influenced by various cellular inhibitors. furthermore we show that the kinetics of nuclear bodies is directly influenced by local restructuring of chromatin domains.

RESULTS
an experimental system for probing particle kinetics in the cell
we used fast 3-d time-lapse confocal laser scanning microscopy to analyze the mobility of xenopus laevis gfp-nls-vimentin and synthetic particles  within the nucleoplasm. gfp-nls-vimentin is deposited at 37°c within the nucleus of stably transfected sw <dig> cells in multiple discrete bodies . on average the cells contain bodies that are nearly  <dig> μm in diameter as observed in the light microscope . this corresponds to a particle diameter of about  <dig> –  <dig> nm in fixed cells as prepared for conventional electron microscopy . from correlative light and electron microscopy studies we know that nuclear vimentin particles are excluded from dense chromatin regions . in contrast, transfection of human vimentin-free sw <dig> cells with an expression plasmid encoding gfp-vimentin without the engineered nls sequence leads to the formation of many cytoplasmic particles  of very similar size .

to study the nucleoplasmic mobility of particles of a defined size we microinjected unloaded polystyrene beads into the nucleus of living cells. we used orange fluorescent  <dig> nm-beads that resemble in size authentic nuclear bodies such as pml- or cajal bodies  <cit>  on the light microscopic level. thereby we attempted to find out how the mobility of the ectopically expressed nuclear vimentin particles related to polystyrene particles  <cit> .

in the course of these studies we found that a system based on an ectopically expressed protein has several clear advantages compared to the microinjection of beads. first, the expression efficiency of the gfp-vimentin construct is very high. more than 50% of the cell nuclei show formation of nuclear vimentin bodies. since the cells are stably transfected they reflect a normal physiological state. in contrast, for microinjection only approximately 10% – 20% of injected the cells survived over night culture . additionally, the artificial microspheres have to undergo tedious processing steps such as sonification and centrifugation prior to injection to avoid the formation of aggregates.

a computational system for tracking nuclear particles on the background of moving cells
for the analysis of complex data derived from spatio-temporal imaging of trafficking particles we developed a proprietary image processing platform, tikal . the platform allows to directly and easily handle complex microscopic data and to dynamically interact with the data set throughout the whole quantitative data analysis steps. the image processing pipeline is initiated by image pre-processing steps including noise reduction followed by object segmentation .

in many cases, cells move and also change their morphology during the observation period. global movements include translocation and rotation, whereas morphological changes are either caused by global changes in size  or by local deformations. since any of these transformations overlay the actual movement of nuclear particles within the cell, we corrected for them by rigid transformations , affine transformations  and by thin-plate spline models . these transformations allow a direct measurement of nuclear particle movements without any bias induced by external forces and cellular movements.

for quantitative evaluation of kinetics of moving particles we extended our single particle tracking approach formerly developed for two-dimensional time series  <cit>  to automatically track objects in 3-d time series. the automatically computed 4-d tracks are visualized together with a surface rendered 3-d reconstruction of segmented nuclear particles in a multi-dimensional scene viewer . by interacting with the automatically computed trajectories the user is able to interactively control and correct for possible artefacts during the tracking procedure, e.g. deriving from noisy images. applying tikal, we rapidly reconstructed, visualized and analyzed the trajectories of  <dig> particles in more than  <dig> cells.

in vivo observation of microspheres
we imaged the microinjected microspheres and the gfp-nls-vimentin particles in sw <dig> cells over a time interval of  <dig> min . after image processing a qualitative analysis of the trajectories of  <dig> microspheres visualized in  <dig> cells suggested the same kind of mobility for both the  <dig> nm-beads and the gfp-nls-vimentin bodies . for a more rigorous quantitative comparison the mean square displacement  was calculated for each individual particle as well as its anomalous diffusion coefficient α. based on α, the analyzed particles were classified into four arbitrary groups of mobility using the theoretical framework from previous studies  <cit> :  confined diffusion ,  obstructed diffusion ,  simple diffusion  and  directed motion  . the comparison of the calculated anomalous diffusion coefficients of the gfp-nls-vimentin bodies with those of the  <dig> nm-microspheres revealed no significant changes in the distribution .

next, we were interested in the differences of the kinetic behaviour of the xenopus gfp-vimentin particles in the nucleoplasm as compared to that in the cytoplasm. transfected sw <dig> cells lack endogenous vimentin and therefore do not have intermediate filaments. instead, only small spherical aggregates of the temperature-sensitive amphibian protein were deposited throughout the cytoplasm . when directly comparing the particle trajectories of the nucleoplasmic vimentin bodies to the cytoplasmic vimentin bodies striking differences were found. nuclear-targeted vimentin particles displayed a spatially restricted movement within distinct corrals. however, on occasion they were able to move spontaneously to an adjacent corral . the maximum distance that a nls-vimentin particle moved was  <dig> μm within the observation time of  <dig> min. this corresponds on average to a speed of  <dig>  μm / min. most strikingly, we never encountered crossing nuclear trajectories. in contrast, cytoplasmic vimentin particles moved along more extended trajectories and did hardly ever exhibit corralling events . moreover, the cytoplasmic bodies moved three times as fast, i.e. up to  <dig> μm in distance within  <dig> minutes.

a comparison of the overall kinetic characteristics of nuclear vimentin bodies versus sepharose beads revealed that in the nucleus obstructed diffusion is the major type of movement whereas in the cytoplasm directed motion is observed to a similar extent, both accounting for approximately  <dig> %. notably, confined diffusion is very rarely found in the cytoplasm whereas in the nucleus  <dig>  % of the movement can be accounted for it .

chromatin remodelling directly effects mobility of nuclear particles
in the next step we analyzed the influence of chromatin density on mobility of nuclear particles. upon inspection of corralled versus highly mobile nuclear particles  we frequently observed a correlation between chromatin density in the neighbourhood of particles and their degree of motility. for a more rigorous quantitative analysis the mean grey value in a neighbourhood of  <dig> ×  <dig> pixels was measured for each particle over an observation time of  <dig> min with a time-lapse of Δt =  <dig> seconds . evidently, there is a strong correlation between chromatin density and particle velocity. particles with high velocities were exclusively formed in areas of very low chromatin density. an increase in chromatin density directly led to a decrease of particle velocity . a similar reverse effect was detected in cases where particles had very low velocities. after release of a body from a dense chromatin cluster a sudden increase of its mobility could be observed. in this case a high chromatin density was measured during the resting phase of the body, whereas a decrease of chromatin density was detected before the particle started to increase its velocity . this phenomenon was prominently encountered with particles showing a high frequency of changes in corralled and more directed movement . for particles with minimal changes in distance and velocities, a constant chromatin density with low fluctuation in measured grey values was observed .

influence of inhibitors on the mobility of nuclear vimentin bodies
in order to investigate the contribution of structural elements of the cytoplasm to nuclear body mobility in living cells, inhibitors of cellular energy as well as drugs that lead to the depolymerization of cytoskeletal systems were employed. in particular, we inhibited cellular atp production and incubated cells with agents that depolymerize microtubules or microfilaments, both of which are tracks for molecular motors in the cytoplasm. cells were imaged prior to addition of the inhibiting substance for  <dig> minutes with image stacks acquired every Δt =  <dig> seconds.

in a first step, the dependency of nuclear vimentin particles on energy-dependent mechanisms as investigated by depletion of atp through incubation with  <dig> mm azide and  <dig> mm deoxyglucose followed by live cell imaging over a time interval of another  <dig> minutes. for more than  <dig> bodies in eight cells the diffusion coefficients were calculated. compared to the control group  an absolute increase of  <dig>  % for confined diffusion, an absolute increase of  <dig>  % for obstructed diffusion, an absolute decrease of  <dig>  % for simple diffusion and an absolute decrease of  <dig>  % for directed motion were observed . interestingly, after addition of azide / deoxyglucose a rapid condensation of chromatin was observed. chromatin condensation was reversed after removal of the inhibitor as also reported recently  <cit> ,  <cit> .

secondly, the impact of the presence of a functional actin cytoskeleton on vimentin body movement was tested using the actin polymerization inhibitor cytochalasin d at  <dig> μg/ml . five cells were imaged after addition of cytochalasin d every Δt =  <dig> seconds for  <dig> minutes. a quantitative analysis of  <dig> bodies revealed an absolute increase of  <dig>  % and  <dig>  % for confined and obstructed diffusion, respectively, and an absolute decrease of  <dig>  % for simple diffusion and a decrease of  <dig>  % for directed motion compared to the control group.

to study the role for microtubule structures on particle mobility we used the microtubule polymerization inhibitor nocodazole . the effect of nocodazole treatment  was also imaged in  <dig> cells with image stacks every Δt =  <dig> seconds for  <dig> minutes. by analysing  <dig> bodies, an absolute increase of  <dig>  % and  <dig>  % was detected for confined and obstructed diffusion while an absolute decrease of  <dig>  % and  <dig>  % compared to the control groups was observed for simple diffusion and directed motion, respectively.

particle movement in dehydrated cells
finally the dependency of the gfp-nls-vimentin mobility on availability of water in the nucleus was tested by treating the cells with sorbitol   <cit>  . in contrast to the previous inhibitors, we observed a dramatic change in particle mobility. calculation of diffusion coefficients for  <dig> particles in five cells revealed the total loss of simple diffusion and directed motion activities. accordingly,  <dig>  % of all particles were found in the confined diffusion and  <dig>  % in the obstructed diffusion group.

in summary kinetic changes were most prominent for the directed motion mode. atp depletion decreased directed motion about  <dig> % relative to the control group. treatments with cytochalasin d and nocodazole even showed a  <dig> % decrease in directed motion relative to the control group. the most striking effect was encountered by treating the cells with sorbitol. simple diffusion and directed motion were totally abolished whereas the number of particles exhibiting confined diffusion increased by a factor of  <dig> relative to the control group.

discussion
in this study we developed comprehensive bioinformatics tools to analyze the kinetic behaviour of small particles in the cell nucleus. for this purpose, fast time-lapse confocal laser scanning microscopy was used to record fluorescent particles in their chromatin environment. automated image processing algorithms such as image registration and single particle tracking were instrumental to analyze the resulting complex data sets in a most efficient way. usually, sophisticated image processing methods are widely not accessible for cell biology laboratories working with multi-dimensional data sets. a qualitative, interactive analysis of complex processes in living cells can yield interesting results. however, a quantitative insight into the underlying mechanisms can only be achieved by a rigorous computational analysis. while computational systems have been provided for estimating diffusion and binding constants based on photobleaching experiments of populations of small proteins  <cit> , integrated software packages for single particle tracking of nuclear bodies on the background of moving and shape changing objects have not been provided yet to the community. here, our system tikal closes an important gap. for an automated analysis of even larger sets of spatio-temporal data as in this study any software system needs to be adapted to data storage systems that are devoted for handling such huge data sets  <cit> . at the same time image analysis workflows have to be deployed onto computing clusters or the grid . both developments are underway in our laboratory.

we visualized the different kinetic behaviours of nucleus-injected  <dig> nm polystyrene microspheres. furthermore, a stably transfected cell line expressing gfp-nls-vimentin, which forms nuclear particles in the same size range as microspheres, was used. the majority of nuclear particles moved with obstructed diffusion within distinct corralled regions. this kind of movement was essentially found also for microinjected polystyrene beads. the obstructed diffusion behaviour supports the notion that these particles can diffuse within corrals restricted by dense chromatin regions. upon chromatin remodelling distinct less dense chromatin regions are formed and enable the particle to move to an adjacent corralled region. we were able to quantitatively assess this phenomenon by measuring the chromatin intensity around an individual particle. our data show that chromatin intensity decreases prior to a global velocity increase of the particle. therefore we conclude that the particles do not actively push their way through the chromatin. moreover, the chromatin itself is able to support or induce the movement of individual particles. the ability of the particle to move from one corral to the next is restricted and regulated by the surrounding chromatin remodelling activities. however, whether local chromatin regions can actively influence the destination of small nuclear particle movement has to be resolved in future investigations. with the present assay we cannot discern whether changes in the velocity of a body simply correlate with the entry of a body into a domain or whether the changes are caused by interaction between a body and the surrounding chromatin domain surfaces.

the addition of cellular inhibitors caused significant changes in the diffusional behaviour of nuclear particles. in all treatments a reduction of active transport processes were observed. this suggests that the coordination of nuclear processes such as chromatin remodelling is not solely dependent on single factors such as atp, i.e. atp consuming enzymes. moreover, chromatin regions in interphase nuclei apparently move in a diffusional way  <cit> , while other factors such as cytoplasmic microtubules and actin filaments attached to the nuclear periphery possibly account for large-scale spatial chromatin rearrangements  <cit> .

the phenomenon of energy dependent nuclear body movement has been also described in other studies where an anomalous diffusion behaviour and an atp- and transcription-dependent association of cajal bodies with chromatin was reported  <cit> . further, upon atp depletion in bhk cells rapid and large-scale movement of pml bodies stopped, whereas small localized movements of pml bodies were still observed  <cit> . a recent examination of the dynamic behaviour of pml nuclear bodies showed their fission to microstructures after different physiological stresses, and their fusion upon recovery  <cit> . moreover it has been shown that movements of pml and other nuclear bodies can be described by diffusion of the individual body within a chromatin corral and its translocation resulting from chromatin diffusion  <cit> . however, future systematic studies will help to reveal the influence of drug treatments and cellular inhibitors on the dynamic behaviour of those and other nuclear bodies.

a further interesting observation was the reversible formation of chromatin dense regions upon energy depletion. the general effect of this reorganization seems to influence the mobility distribution pattern of the particles only slightly. however, we could observe a significant decrease in directed motion of up to  <dig> % upon inhibition of energy-depended processes.

furthermore, in order to evaluate the degree of nuclear particle movement with respect to cytoplasmic dynamics, we used the vimentin system to analyze cytoplasmic particle mobility. mostly active transport processes were observed. two possible explanations for this phenomenon are suitable. vimentin, which belongs to the group of intermediate filaments, forms crossbridges to other cellular structures. since the sw <dig> cells lack endogenous expression of intermediate filament proteins such as cytokeratins and vimentin, possible interactions with these cytoplasmic intermediate filaments can be omitted. specific interactions with dynein have been described  <cit> . hence, newly synthesized vimentin is subjected to active transport processes and "guided" to cellular locations for the establishment of vimentin networks. another explanation could assume that the filaments do not bind any cytoplasmic structure. in this less likely scenario the active transport of vimentin particles would result from the densely packed cytoplasm and the resulting pushing and pulling of adjacent actively transported molecules.

from our data we conclude that the nls-vimentin system is very suitable for further studies of nuclear architecture. though we obtained the same results with microinjection assays, the gfp-nls-vimentin system has significant advantages such as the higher expression efficiency and the fact that the experiments can be performed in a cell system with normal proliferation characteristics.

CONCLUSIONS
we presented a novel image analysis platform tikal that for the first time allows the 4-d tracking of nuclear particles on the background of moving and shape changing objects. tikal is complementary to other software systems designed for diffusion studies based on photobleaching experiments. applying tikal we were able to analyze the dynamics of nuclear bodies under various different conditions and thus demonstrated that local chromatin remodelling accounts to a large extent for changes in the dynamics of individual nuclear bodies.

