BACKGROUND
bacterial metabolic activity in the large intestine is influenced by the composition of the microbiota, the colonic transit time of the chyme, and the intraluminal ph  <cit> . it is also closely related to the optimal absorptive functioning of the colon. in vitro and in vivo studies have shown that the final products of bacterial fermentation mostly depend on the chemical composition of the chyme that reaches the large intestine  <cit> . for instance, if there is a lack of carbohydrates  in the diet, the microorganisms ferment amino acids into short-chain fatty acids  and ammonia to obtain energy  <cit> . a sufficient throughput of carbohydrate leads to a decrease in luminal nitrogenous compounds and an increase in faecal bacterial mass  <cit> . the chemical composition of the digesta/chyme, the amounts of substrates, and the physical form of the food affect the microbial fermentation  <cit> . the physical form of the diet depends on the manufacturing process of the diet. therefore, the latter also affects the characteristics of the microbial fermentation. evidence for this was provided by a study, on food processing  <cit> . that study showed that when dogs were fed canned food with poultry and/or beef as the protein source, they had lower total faecal vfas, but higher levels of faecal valeric, propionic, and branched-chain fatty acids  than dogs that were fed commercial dry food with poultry as the protein source  <cit> .

various studies have shown that diets can impact upon intestinal health and lead to an increased faecal water content and/or high faecal ammonia concentrations. such changes are mainly due to the protein source  <cit>  and protein concentration  <cit> , followed by the carbohydrate concentration of the diet  <cit> . the induction of mucosal inflammation is an important pathogenic negative outcome of an impact that diets can have upon intestinal health. methods for assessing colonic inflammation in humans include the histological evaluation of colonic biopsies and the measurement of faecal biomarkers such as calprotectin, lactoferrin, or polymorphonuclear neutrophil elastase  <cit> . a lack of species-specific faecal biomarkers in dogs has prompted the use of endoscopic sampling of the intestinal mucosa under general anaesthesia for the collection of colonic biopsies  <cit> . faecal calprotectin is a ca2+- and zn2+- binding protein that is a sensitive but nonspecific biomarker of intestinal inflammation  <cit> . it is also a protein that has bacteriostatic and fungistatic properties  <cit> , which protects the intestinal epithelia against infection and contributes to the innate immunity of the host. bacteriostatic effects of calprotectin were found against listeria monocytogenes, salmonella enterica spp. enterica serovar typhimurium  <cit> . calprotectin is expressed mostly by neutrophils, monocytes  <cit>  and activated macrophages  <cit> , but small amounts were also found to be expressed by keratinocytes  <cit> . furthermore, calprotectin levels are increased in serum and other body fluids of patients that suffer from rheumatoid arthritis or from cystic fibrosis, which can be considered to be supporting evidence for its usefulness as a marker of inflammation  <cit>  and also for the contribution it makes to the host’s defence mechanism  <cit> . recently, a radioimmunoassay for the quantification of canine calprotectin in serum and faeces was developed and analytically validated  <cit> .

to the best of our knowledge, experimental studies in dogs that assess canine faecal characteristics, vfas and their associations with intestinal inflammatory markers are lacking. the current study is the hitherto unreported part of a previously published study  <cit> , in which we investigated the effects of the above mentioned diets on canine faecal microbiota. in that study, we found that faecal samples from the greaves-meal diet fed, dogs favoured growth of species of fusobacteriales. it is important to note that fusobacteriales are potential pathogens for humans  <cit> . additionally, we reported coriobacteriales in dog faeces: a finding that was reported in only one other recent study  <cit> . the hypothesis for the current study was that the high protein greaves-meal diet influences the measured faecal parameters, as it was found to remarkably increase the faecal populations belonging to the order fusobacteriales <cit> . therefore, our aim was to study whether the effect of dietary greaves-meal and maize starch on faecal microbiota can be associated with altered faecal characteristics, vfas, and canine faecal calprotectin.

RESULTS
the hpgm diet increased the faecal consistency score  and it led to diarrhoea in all the dogs. faecal ph was higher for the hpgm and the hcs diets than for the dc diet . faecal ammonia concentrations were  lower for the hcs diet than for either the hpgm or the dc diet feeding periods .

1dc: dry commercial diet.

2hpgm: high-protein greaves-meal diet.

3hcs: high-carbohydrate starch based diet.

values are expressed as medians and ranges . for each variable, diets not sharing a common superscript  are significantly different at p <  <dig>  and are marked in bold.

the total vfa concentrations were lowest  for the hpgm diet. this reduction could be partly explained by the lower concentrations of acetic acid  and of propionic acid , which both accounted for the largest proportion of the vfas measured. although butyric acid was somewhat lower for the hpgm diet compared to the dc diet there was no difference between those diets . valeric acid and the bcfa concentrations measured were higher for the hpgm diet  compared with the dc and hcs diets. the faecal canine calprotectin concentrations remained within the established reference interval  <cit> , but were higher for the hpgm diet  than either the hcs or the dc diet, and they correlated positively with valeric acid .

discussion
this study investigated the influence of feeding diets with either high dietary protein  or high carbohydrate  on food intake, body weight, faecal consistency scores, faecal dry matter, ph, ammonia, vfas, and levels of faecal canine calprotectin.

none of the three diets used in this study affected food intake or body weight of the dogs differently.

the source and concentration of the dietary carbohydrate and/or protein reaching the colon can alter conditions in the colon, by changing the fermentation characteristics and the faecal microbiota  <cit> . maize and greaves-meal were respectively used in the current study as a source of carbohydrate and protein. it is known from previous studies that maize and greaves-meal are highly digested in the small intestine  <cit> . to our knowledge diets with such high maize starch or greaves-meal concentrations have not been used previously in studies.

in our study, the hcs diet did not affect the faecal parameters any differently from the dc diet, except for faecal ph and ammonia. faecal ph was higher for dogs fed the hpgm diet than when they were fed either the hcs or the dc diets . this finding is consistent with those of previous studies, in which protein-rich diets led to increases in faecal ph  <cit> . faecal ammonia was lowest when the dogs were fed the hcs diet as expected. the ammonia fluctuations could be explained by two mechanisms that require further investigation. first, a sufficient carbohydrate supply to the large intestine in dogs fed the hcs diet, led to a decrease in luminal nitrogenous compounds as reported earlier  <cit> . second, when the dogs were fed the hcs diet decreased amounts of protein that reached the hindgut for subsequent fermentation. however, the forenamed mechanisms are hypothetical as the amount of carbohydrates and protein reached to the hindgut was not measured in this study.

there was no dietary effect on faecal dry matter. nevertheless, the high concentration of dietary protein of the hpgm diet used in our study led to diarrhoea in all the dogs . the reason for not reaching statistical significance could be due to the large variation between faecal samples within the same dietary sampling period. this in turn, could be due to the small number of dogs  allocated to the study. further, substantial variations in faecal dry matter between dogs that received the same dietary treatment and a lack of correlation between faecal moisture and faecal consistency score has also been reported in earlier studies  <cit> .

our finding on the undesirable effects of dietary animal proteins on faecal consistency agrees with the results of previous studies  <cit> . furthermore, the only previous study used bacterial culture methods for the assessment of dietary effects on the faecal microbiota, and it showed an increased number of clostridium perfringens in dogs fed animal  protein  <cit> . this is consistent with an increased number of c. perfringens colonies and decreased counts of bifidobacterium organisms reported in dogs that were fed a low-quality protein diet  <cit> . in our previous study, the faecal samples obtained from dogs fed the high protein-greaves-meal treatment contained bacterial species that belonged to the orders clostridiales, coriobacteriales, and especially members of the order fusobacteriales <cit> . fusobacteriales have been implicated to play a role in many different inflammatory processes, including colonic inflammation  <cit> . therefore, it could be hypothesised that the diarrhoea observed in all dogs fed the hpgm diet was probably associated with the amount and/or quality of protein, which might change the intestinal microbiota and their metabolic activity  <cit> . alternatively, it could be due to the lower levels of carbohydrates that enter the large intestine, which lead to the abundance of bacteria belonging to the order of fusobacteriales <cit> .

in the present study, the high levels of greaves-meal  led to a decrease in total vfas that were mainly attributable to decreases in acetic and propionic acids . in contrast, the concentration of faecal valeric acid increased for the hpgm diet. it has been shown in previous studies that there are differences between protein sources in terms of fermentation end products  <cit> , which result in higher proportions of valeric and acetic acids in the canine colon arising from the fermentation of undigested proteins  <cit> . acetic acid is produced and excreted by the fermentation activities of acetic acid producing bacteria   <cit> . it could be hypothesized that the decrease in faecal acetic acid found in our study for the hpgm diet could be associated with: a) a lower amount of acetic acid bacteria present in the hindgut due to reduced levels of carbohydrate entering the large intestine/colon; or b) it could be due to the high amounts of greaves-meal entering the large intestine. it could also be a combination of both a) and b).

*the anova p-value was calculated for this variable due to lack of measurement points.

1dc: dry commercial diet.

2hpgm: high-protein greaves-meal diet.

3hcs: high-carbohydrate starch based diet.

values are expressed as medians and ranges . for each variable, diets not sharing a common superscript  are significantly different at p <  <dig>  and are marked in bold.

we also recorded an increase in faecal bcfas  in dogs fed the hpgm diet. it is generally known that bcfas are formed by the metabolism of branched-chain amino acids such as valine, leucine, and isoleucine following the breakdown of polypeptides  <cit> . consequently, the increase in faecal bcfas measured for the hpgm diet might be simply due to the large amounts of protein entering the hindgut. an increase in the concentration of bcfas in stools has also been reported in humans who were fed a diet containing supplemental dietary protein based on whey, casein, and lactalbumin  <cit> .

calprotectin was increased in the faeces of dogs fed the hpgm diet  and it was also positively correlated with the concentration of faecal valeric acid. in human medical studies, calprotectin is reported to be a sensitive but nonspecific biomarker of intestinal inflammation  <cit>  as the calprotectin parameter is not sensitive enough for the definitive differentiation between underlying intestinal diseases  <cit> . calprotectin also has bacteriostatic and fungistatic properties  <cit>  that have been suggested to protect the intestinal epithelium against infection, thus contributing to the innate immunity of the host. increased concentrations of faecal calprotectin were detected in patients with crohn’s disease  <cit> , ulcerative colitis  <cit> , and colorectal cancer  <cit> . recently, the development and analytical validation of a species-specific laboratory method for the measurement of canine calprotectin in faeces for faecal calprotectin has been published  <cit> . in our study, increases in faecal canine calprotectin concentrations, occurred only when dogs were fed the hpgm diet. this increase also correlated positively with faecal valeric acid levels. interestingly, the faecal samples from dogs fed the greaves-meal diet had a high preponderance of fusobacteriales bacteria  <cit> : an order of bacteria that has been suspected to play a pathogenic role in human intestinal inflammation  <cit> . therefore, one could hypothesize that fusobacteria could produce branched vfas and valeric acid from protein break-down products  <cit> . moreover, some fusobacteria could act as pathogens, which may cause intestinal inflammation that would result in increased faecal calprotectin levels. therefore, valerate and calprotectin would be expected to be correlated. however, further investigation is needed to assess the possible role of fusobacteriales spp., and increased quantities of bacterially-derived faecal valeric acid and faecal calprotectin in cases of canine intestinal inflammation.

CONCLUSIONS
feeding a high protein diet with a high content of greaves-meal to dogs led to diarrhoea in all the dogs of our study. intestinal metabolic  and inflammatory  parameters for the hpgm diet differed from those of the hcs or the dc diet. we conclude that the hpgm could have mediated the following alternative scenarios: hpgm caused high concentrations of protein to enter the hindgut, hpgm caused lower quantities of maize starch to enter the hindgut, or a combination of both of these. any of these alternative mechanisms could lead to diarrhoea mediated by changes in the intestinal microbiota and their metabolic activity. such changes could possibly lead to intestinal mucosal inflammation.

