BACKGROUND
protein alignment tools are key in many protein science applications. for very closely related proteins the alignment problem can easily be solved as a fuzzy string search in the sequences. however, with growing evolutionary distance more sophisticated techniques have to be applied to detect similarities. at about 25% sequence identity, when the alignment problem enters the so-called 'twilight zone'  <cit> , related and unrelated proteins cannot be distinguished reliably by sequence based measures. a commonly applied strategy for this regime consists in exploiting not only the sequences that are to be aligned, but also evolutionary background information extracted from large sequence databases. this is achieved through analysis of multiple alignments from which one can obtain a suitable statistical description of the corresponding protein family. especially for very distantly related sequences, the site-specific amino acid profiles or position-specific scoring matrices  obtained in this way increase the reliability of alignments by taking into account their evolutionary context.

since protein structure evolves much more slowly than sequence, protein structure alignments are usually much more accurate for distantly related proteins and, hence, preferable if structural data is available. however, for the majority of cases only sequence information is available. a possible strategy for such cases would be to predict the unknown structures from their sequences and to perform a structure alignment using these predictions. unfortunately, the accurate prediction of 3d coordinates is in general not possible yet and results are limited in quality  <cit> . nevertheless, coarser descriptions of the protein structure than the one based on coordinates give sufficient information for many applications, and a number of algorithms exists that allow predicting structural characteristics of proteins such as secondary structure, residue-wise contact order, or solvent accessibility, to name but a few. here we consider a reduced description of protein structures based on the contact vector , whose i-th component represents the number of sites with which site i is in contact. the cv is strongly correlated with more complex descriptions such as solvent accessibility and effective connectivity of the contact matrix. we showed in previous work  <cit> , that the cv, despite giving a very simplified description of a protein structure, is sufficient for obtaining state-of-the-art protein structure alignments.

RESULTS
we previously developed the sabertooth algorithm for performing protein structure alignments by aligning profiles that represent the protein structure  <cit> . in this work, we apply this algorithm to aligning structural profiles predicted from the protein sequence alone, thereby obtaining protein sequence alignments.

we adopted a structural profile based on the contact vector  described above, which produces structural alignments of high quality and is simple to predict. contact vector prediction is an active field of research: bastolla et al.  <cit>  described a very simple prediction method that defines typical hydrophobicity values per amino acid residue type assuming independent sites. the resulting hydrophobicities can be shown to correlate with typical cv components per residue type. a more elaborate approach is discussed by vullo et al.  <cit>  who employ an artificial neural network  to include correlations between amino acid sites along the sequence. an alternative approach to consider these correlations is described by kinjo and nishikawa  <cit>  who run psi-blast to compute position-specific scoring matrices  that are then input into a so-called critical random network . the prediction scheme used here follows an idea introduced by jones  <cit>  to predict secondary structure propensities using an ann with protein family information encoded in pssms. we modify this approach to predict the contact vector from protein sequence .

the alignments produced by our algorithm following the strategy described above and detailed in the methods section were then compared with some of the most commonly used sequence alignments programs, which we classified in three main classes:  programs that take as only input the two sequences to be aligned;  programs that take an additional input in form of a large database of known protein sequences and extract from it two families of proteins evolutionarily related with the query proteins;  programs that, in addition to taking a sequence database as input, build a probabilistic description of the protein families as a hidden markov model . as reference tools of the first class we chose the programs clustal w  <cit> , muscle  <cit> , and t-coffee  <cit> . these tools are commonly used to compute multiple sequence alignments. in the present work, we assess their performances in building pairwise alignments, since we compare them with our new pairwise algorithm. the construction of all-vs-all pairwise alignments is always the first step in building multiple alignments, and the accuracy of this first step strongly influences the final result. we expect that the quality achieved in the pairwise step will also benefit multiple alignments based on it. in addition, the construction of the multiple alignment depends on the choice of the set of sequences to be aligned. influences of this set of sequences have to be ruled out in order to compare to the pairwise sabertooth alignments. psi-blast  <cit>  was selected as a representative of the second class of programs, which make use of sequence databases to collect a large set of evolutionarily related proteins for each of the query sequences. sabertooth and psi-blast use the same input data, since sabertooth uses pssms derived by psi-blast as alignment parameters as well as for predicting the structural profiles, permitting a fair comparison between the two programs. as a representative of the third class of programs we considered the algorithm hhpred  <cit> , which also uses as input the set of evolutionarily related proteins obtained through psi-blast search and obtains from them a powerful probabilistic description of the protein family in terms of a hidden markov model.

to compare the quality of sequence alignments, we adopted a new method that scores the structure similarity derived from alignments of proteins with known structure. in fact, measures of sequence similarity are not meaningful for distantly related proteins, and their use in the assessment could lead to circular results, since many sequence alignment algorithms are based on the optimization of sequence similarity. moreover, for many practical applications, such as homology modelling and function prediction, sequence alignments are used to infer a structure alignment, which is the real aim. these arguments have motivated the practice to assess the quality of sequence alignments by using structure alignments as a 'gold standard', either computed by a structure alignment tool or taken from databases like balibase  <cit>  or homstrad  <cit> . however, the problem to find the optimal structure alignment for a pair of proteins has no unique solution  <cit> . existing algorithms differ in how they address this problem and have different biases that would inevitably influence the assessment based upon them. therefore, the only way to obtain an unbiased assessment of alignment accuracy is to renounce using any supposed gold standard. however, this does not mean that we also have to renounce applying powerful structure similarity scores. here we directly compute structure similarity scores from the sequence alignment. for instance, the optimal spatial superimposition corresponding to a given alignment can be obtained through the maxsub algorithm  <cit> , and the contact overlap can be directly computed from the alignment, without having to optimally superimpose the structures. in this way, we can objectively quantify the alignment quality without the need of a gold standard. as we show below, the qualitative results of a large scale comparison are quite clear, and they do not change when we use different structure similarity scores.

as an objective measure of structural similarity we adopt the contact overlap. we find this measure preferable to others because of three reasons:  it does not require to compute a structure superimposition, avoiding the influence of the choices necessary for defining an optimal rotation matrix;  it effectively weights more the sites that belong to the protein core due to the larger number of contacts found here;  in the important cases of conformation changes in which one subdomain of the protein moves with respect to the other one, for which superimposition-based measures underestimate the structural relatedness, the contact overlap only penalizes a small number of inter-subdomains contacts that do not match in the two structures, while superimposition-based scores also penalize intra-subdomain contacts. we also consider as additional similarity measure the tm-score  <cit> , a well-known structural similarity measure based on structure superimposition. it is reassuring that the tm-score supports the results of the contact overlap. for comparative purposes, we also consider the sequence similarity measure. the definitions of these measures are given in the methods section.

in fig.  <dig>  we report the structural quality of over  <dig> thousand alignments assessed through the similarity measures described above. as a reference set we use a representative set of pairs of related proteins from the astral <dig> database of structural domains  <cit> . these are challenging alignments below the threshold of 40% sequence identity, ranging from the family level of strong evolutionary and probable functional relationships, through the superfamily level of more elusive evolutionary relationships, to the fold level of proteins structurally but not necessarily evolutionarily related. curves in the plot depict the similarity measures of the alignments obtained through sabertooth  and through the reference tools. for each pair of proteins, we select the alignment with largest contact overlap produced by all reference tools  and use the corresponding contact overlap to rank the alignments from difficult to easy ones. therefore, the left part of the plots corresponds to distantly related pairs of proteins and the right part corresponds to closely related pairs. loosely speaking, we call the left, middle and right part of the plots the "fold", "superfamily" and "family" range of similarity, respectively. nevertheless, not all of the alignments included in each range belong to the corresponding scop level. for purposes of comparison, we also represent the best similarity measure produced by all reference tools  and the one produced through sabertooth structure alignment by making direct use of structural information. the ranking of the alignment algorithms is consistent over the three ranges of similarity, with important differences discussed below, and using both structure similarity measures, as one can see comparing the top and middle plot of fig.  <dig>  in particular, psi-blast produces the least accurate alignments except in the family region, where it is comparable or slightly better than the three references clustal w, t-coffee, and muscle. the decrease of contact overlap and tm-score for psi-blast is partly an artifact of the reduced percentage of aligned residues that result from the fact that psi-blast outputs only the aligned segments that it considers relevant. the use of different substitution matrices with psi-blast does not change this picture, in fact, we found only very slightly different results for blosum <dig>  blosum <dig>  and blosum <dig>  so that in the plots we only show results based on blosum <dig>  the three references clustal w, t-coffee, and muscle are very similar in quality over the whole range of structural similarity, and their placing in the ranking is just above psi-blast. then we find sabertooth, whose sequence similarity scores are better than those of the above mentioned tools except for very high similarity, where basically all tools achieve a similar quality. hhpred is unambiguously identified as the tool producing the best quality alignments over the whole relatedness range, and it even approaches the accuracy of structure alignment algorithms. one sees that the best reference almost exactly coincides with the hhpred results. nevertheless, for very distantly related alignments sabertooth reaches a quality even higher than that of hhpred. the mean values of the structural quality measures for alignments in the family, superfamily and fold range are reported in table  <dig> for all programs. the lists of the alignments used for quality assessments at scop family, superfamily and fold level are reported in the additional file  <dig> 

the table shows the length weighted mean values of contact overlap, tm-score, and sequence similarity  corresponding to fig.  <dig> separated for the three test sets on the major scop similarity levels family, superfamily, and fold. the table is sorted by contact overlap on family level. sabertooth structure alignment is added for illustrative purposes, but it is not included in the comparison.

in the bottom plot in fig.  <dig> we show results of sequence similarity, maintaining the same colouring scheme of the tools and the same ordering of the alignments as in the plots above. the sequence similarity values agree with the contact overlap and the tm-score, in the sense that, for each tool, alignments endowed with larger structure similarity also display higher sequence similarity, as expected. however, the ranking of the tools is now completely different. the structure alignment provides the lowest sequence similarity, and the two algorithms that yield the highest structure similarity, namely hhpred and sabertooth, output the lowest sequence similarity measures, together with t-coffee. the three tools that show nearly identical performances in matters of contact overlap display very different sequence similarities. muscle finds unrealistically high sequence similarity values still for very distantly related pairs deep in the fold level region. also clustal w and psi-blast assign positive values in this region, in contradiction to scop's definition of the fold level. surprisingly, hhpred's sequence similarity values slightly increase again for very low similarities which might reveal a tendency to over-optimisation of spurious sequence similarities in this area.

comparing the results in matters of sequence similarity to those found with sabertooth structure alignment  <cit>  we can see that sabertooth, hhpred and t-coffee assign more realistic sequence similarity values than the other tools that cross zero sequence similarity in the early superfamily area. this analysis points out that all tools tend to overestimate sequence similarity with respect to structure alignment, whose quality is unambiguously better as measured in terms of contact overlap or tm-score and systematically lower when measured in terms of sequence similarity. this behaviour reveals an inherent bias of sequence alignment tools in this respect. this tendency is even more pronounced considering that the structure alignment of sabertooth yields higher sequence similarities than other well known alignment tools  <cit> .

as a second test, we evaluate the ability of the alignment programs to detect relevant relationships between the aligned proteins based on the significance measures they output. this is an important application, since sequence alignments are often used to predict whether two proteins share a similar function, have a close evolutionary relationship, or a similar structure, so that e.g. one can be used as a template for the other. as a test set of relevant relationships, we again consider the scop classification at family, superfamily and fold level. although the scop classification is not fully consistent with quantitative measures of structural similarity, it provides a large number of mostly valid relationships that constitute a suitable benchmark.

the results of this analysis mostly agree with the first test, as shown in the roc plots in fig.  <dig>  the larger the area under the curve of the roc plot, the better the ability of the corresponding significance score to identify relationships at the given level. the structure alignments have the best performance at all levels, with their advantage with respect to sequence alignment growing from the family level to the fold level. however, not even structure similarity is perfect at detecting scop relationships, which is due to the fact that scop is an expert classification not entirely consistent with structure similarity measures. of the sequence aligners, the best performances are once again obtained by hhpred at superfamily level, with sabertooth's significance score consistently performing second-best and psi-blast being the third best, despite its structure similarity measure being lower than that of clustal w, muscle and t-coffee. however, sabertooth gets almost equal to hhpred at family level, and performs slightly better than it at detecting relationships at fold level, consistent with sabertooth's improved structure similarity in this range. this is consistent with the insight that alignment quality as assessed from structure and on evolutionary relationships are intimately related. the output sequence similarity, in contrast to that, is unrelated with the ability to detect significant evolutionary relationships. we also show in fig.  <dig>  right panels, the roc plots in log-linear scale in order to focus on the region of very low false positive rate. it can be seen that, surprisingly, for the family and the superfamily level the significance scores derived from structure alignments have a lower true positive rate at very low false positive rate than those derived from sequence alignments. numerical values for the area under curve in the roc plots can be found in table  <dig>  the list of the  <dig>  alignments used for significance score assessment is reported in additional file  <dig> 

the table shows the area under curve  in percentage for all programs and scop levels shown in fig.  <dig>  sorted by the first column. for 'sabertooth ' significance is measured using the less accurate seqsim instead of the pssm score, data is added for illustration. sabertooth structure alignment is added for illustrative purposes, but it is not included in the comparison.

finally, we assessed the accuracy of the prediction of the structural profile that sabertooth uses for sequence alignment. the predicted profile was compared with the profile measured over a test set of  <dig> protein domains, disjoint from the training set used. for each domain, we measured the correlation between the predicted and the measured contact vector, finding a length weighted correlation coefficient of r =  <dig> . this comparison is in part affected by the fact that single chains and single domains are considered in the test set, so that the observed number of contacts does not include inter-chain and inter-domain contacts, thus underestimating the observed number of contacts with respect to the case in which the whole multi-chain protein is considered. we also measured the variance of the predicted contact vector for each domain, and compared it with the observed variance. the predicted variance is systematically underestimated and not very well predicted, as indicated by the weak correlation coefficient r =  <dig> . this suggests that it is still possible to improve the performance of sabertooth by improving the prediction of the contact vector. the quantity relevant for the alignment algorithm is the penalty that has to be paid for aligning the observed and predicted contact vector,  . we measured this quantity for each domain in the test set, and plotted it versus chain length in fig.  <dig>  each point in the plot represents a protein domain from the test set. one can see that the penalties are low and that they are almost uncorrelated with chain length.

CONCLUSIONS
the sabertooth algorithm can align vectorial representations of protein structures. this was first applied to cases in which the protein structures are known, so that the algorithm produces a structure alignment. in the present paper, we apply the same algorithm to aligning vectorial representations predicted based on sequence alone, obtaining high quality sequence alignments. this new approach to sequence alignment is made possible because we adopt a very simple structural representation, the contact vector, which can be predicted relatively easily based on sequence, and it presents three main advantages: first, the predicted contact vectors are expected to capture structural features that are more conserved in evolution than the sequence itself, which leads to an increased sensitivity when comparing remotely related proteins. second, we perform sequence alignment by aligning the same structural profiles that we adopt for structure alignment, which enables us to treat structure and sequence alignment with the same formalism and the same algorithm. third, sequence alignment quality is expected to further improve through improvements in the profile prediction scheme and adding other types of structure description such as secondary structure. as a caveat, we warn that the application of sabertooth should be limited to proteins predicted to be globular, since the strategy that we apply is not suitable for the alignment of disordered proteins.

our results show that the approach to combine structural profile prediction from sequence with our generic alignment program sabertooth leads to sequence alignment quality better than those of most widely used algorithms we compare with, with the exception of hhpred, which shows the best performance but is also computationally more expensive than sabertooth. it is interesting to notice that sabertooth shows slightly better quality than hhpred for aligning very distantly related pairs, a difficult and important task for the field of homology modelling. therefore, the use of sabertooth is anticipated to be advantageous at least for these difficult alignments, whereas for less distant alignments users should balance the better quality of hhpred with its heavier computational burden. these improved performances for distantly related alignments can exploit the fact that protein structure is more conserved in evolution than protein sequence, and that the alignment algorithm and parameters used were designed and trained to align contact vectors derived from coordinates. this reduces the bias to overemphasize sequence similarity, which tends to become insignificant at large evolutionary distance, and which is overestimated by most other sequence alignment algorithms. in fact, comparing the quality of the structural similarity measure and the sequence similarity measure for various sequence aligners, we see that the alignment algorithms that output the highest sequence similarity in the region of distantly related proteins also tend to produce the worst results in terms of structure similarity. this tendency is particularly clear when structural aligners are included in the comparison. moreover, three reference methods output alignments that are of very similar quality as assessed through their structural similarity score, but their sequence similarity scores yield very different values. this implies that absolute sequence similarity values depend strongly on the algorithm used and are therefore not very informative for quantifying the relatedness of distantly related proteins. consistently, the performances of these algorithms for recognising distant evolutionary or structural relationships are comparable or even worse than random, as the roc analysis shows. this suggests that sequence similarity values output by sequence alignment programs are not very meaningful for distantly related proteins, and they are not comparable between different programs.

the improved alignment accuracy has a cost in computational complexity. the runtime of our alignment routine cannot compete with highly optimized tools even when we pre-compute the profile predictions. while the runtime of the neural network for the prediction of the profiles can be neglected, the computation of the pssm by psi-blast is quite lengthy, heavily depending on the number of amino acids in the query sequence, psi-blast parameters, and the sequence database used. the runtime of the alignment routine with pre-computed profiles takes approximately as long as the fastest structure alignment tools existing today. including the computation of the profiles, sabertooth and psi-blast are comparable in computation time, while hhpred is about three times slower due to the larger number of iterations used to compute the psi-blast pssms that also underly hhpred's alignments. taking accuracy and computation time into account, we envisage the application of sabertooth to studies in which a large number of sequence alignments have to be performed, so that hhpred and similar methods would be too costly, but high accuracy is nevertheless required, and to studies that deal with the comparison of very distantly related proteins. furthermore, there is still room for improving sabertooth in two directions. first, it is possible to improve the quality of the contact vector predictions. if these were perfect, the quality of the produced alignments would be comparable to those obtained with hhpred. second, it is possible to consider structural information such as predicted secondary structure. finally, sabertooth facilitates analyses that make use of different types of alignments, since the same program can be used not only for sequence alignment but also for structure alignment  <cit>  and sequence-to-structure alignment without changes. the latter application will be treated in a later publication.

