BACKGROUND
recent advances in biomedical technologies such as high-throughput molecular profiling provide the ability to identify large numbers of molecules of interest simultaneously. an accessible and straightforward solution to elucidating why a set of genes might be associated with a given phenomenon is manual inspection of the scientific literature and examination of web-based resources. pubmed  <cit>  is the most widely-used method for accessing the medline corpus of abstracts and full text articles. gene-centered corpora such as locuslink  <cit> , entrez gene  <cit> , sgd  <cit> , wormbase  <cit> , and flybase  <cit>  are non-redundant, comprehensive, text-based catalogs of information designed to support research on genes and gene families , variation, gene expression, genome annotation, and so on. a "document" in such a corpus corresponds to a genetic locus and includes annotations obtained by automated computational methods and/or manual data curation. despite the ready availability of multiple biomedical corpora, the task of collating and synthesizing information relevant to a collection of genes remains both a challenging and time-consuming endeavor. consequently, increasing attention is being paid to developing techniques and tools able to transform data interpretation into a more systematic and automated process .

a variety of approaches have been proposed to address the problem of determining the common functionspecified by a group of genes. the free-text of pubmed abstracts known to be associated with specific genes have been analyzed using concepts from statistical natural language processing  . frequently, entries in gene-centered corpora contain annotations for proteins in the form of controlled vocabulary terms from the gene ontology  molecular function, cellular component and biological process aspects  <cit> . given the go annotations associated with a list of genes, methods for finding significant shared go terms and for visualizing the collection include gominer  <cit> , gotermfinder  <cit> , funspec  <cit> , gostat  <cit> , and funcassociate  <cit> . however, such approaches do not exploit other types of annotations that may be assigned to loci. for example, a locuslink entry can indicate which domains in the conserved domain database  have been identified in the protein.

this work describes ensemble attribute profile clustering, a novel text-based strategy that employs ideas from statistical information retrieval  and annotation data from gene-centered corpora to discover and characterize groups of genes in a list with shared properties. whereas nlp focuses on the syntax and semantics of text, statistical ir emphasizes vector space models and probabilistic models for document representation, retrieval and analysis  <cit> . a gene attribute profile is a vector space representation of a genetic locus in which an element of the vector specifies a functional, structural or other property of the locus . a profile is created from descriptors that can be ascribed to loci such as the molecular weight of an encoded rna or protein, the hydrophobic content of a protein, whether a transcription factor regulates a gene, a term from a controlled vocabulary, and so on. this study exploits ongoing large-scale annotation efforts and the extensive body of knowledge present in existing resources to facilitate and simplify the task of constructing gene attribute profiles. here, the profiles consider only the protein product of a locus. in particular, the choice of attributes is restricted to terms in the go and cdd vocabularies and the terms associated with specific genes are derived from the corresponding locuslink entries.

the task of ascertaining genes in a list with shared biological properties is posed as one of clustering gene attribute profiles, i.e., determining homogeneous groups of profiles such that profiles in the same cluster are more similar to each other than they are to ones in other clusters. the problem of discovering groups of genes with similar patterns of attributes can be addressed using methods and principles that have been employed to find groups of transcript profiles with related patterns of expression. simple probabilistic graphical models, finite mixture models in particular, have been utilized to cluster vector space representations of transcript abundances   <cit>  and text documents  <cit> . multiple runs of a single clustering algorithm or runs of different algorithms on the same data set can yield distinct partitionings so efforts to ameliorate this disparity seek to determine subsets of objects  whose behavior is consistent across the partitionings. methods proposed for gene expression profiles include re-sampling the data over the algorithm  <cit>  and combining the output from correlation-based clustering techniques  <cit> . gene expression profiles can be clustered using distance-based methods because every feature is of the same type . the advantage of clustering gene attribute profiles using a model-based approach is that in a finite mixture model, the variable corresponding to a feature has its own probability model meaning that different types of attributes  can be combined and considered within the same framework.

to illustrate the practical utility of ensemble attribute profile clustering, the method was employed in a retrospective study of data extracted from a published transcript profiling study of normal human breast tissue. this prior investigation identified two non-overlapping sets of genes, one list specified markers for luminal epithelial cells and the other markers for myoepithelial cells  <cit> . for each list of genes, a set of gene attribute profiles was built using the go and cdd terms assigned to genetic loci by locuslink. the profiling data were used to estimate four independent finite mixture models and the four partitionings of the profiles produced using these probabilistic models were combined via a unanimous voting scheme. genes that co-occurred in all four partitionings were identified and attributes that characterized each resultant consensus cluster were determined. examination of these automatically generated results in conjunction with external knowledge indicated that the two lists contained groups of genes with common biological functions  and unique functions . thus, although the two collections of genes designated as markers for luminal and myoepithelial breast cells are disjoint sets  <cit> , the encoded proteins specify a limited number of broad functional categories, some of which are shared by both normal human breast tissue cell types. the palette of functions and protein domains highlighted by this study can guide the design of experiments aimed at improving understanding of breast biology. despite limitations in go- and cdd-based gene attribute profiles and the approach itself, the results described here demonstrate that ensemble attribute profile clustering can assist in elucidating relationships within and between user-defined sets of genes and/or proteins.

RESULTS
gene attribute profiles for normal human breast tissue-related genes
ensemble attribute profiling was used to analyze two lists of genes extracted from an extant study of normal human breast tissues and defined by the investigators as markers for luminal epithelial cells and myoepithelial cells  <cit> . the vector space representation of a gene devised here focused on the structural and functional properties of encoded proteins. in particular, the gene attribute profiles associated with a list of genes were derived from the go and cdd terms assigned to the loci by the gene-centered corpus locuslink. each resultant profile was a vector of binary random variables, i.e., the value of a feature was "1" if the corresponding attribute was associated with the gene and "0" otherwise. the data set constructed from the published list of luminal epithelial cell markers consisted of  <dig> genes represented as 43-dimensional vectors . the data set for the myoepithelial cell markers consisted of  <dig> 96-dimensional vectors . for each data set, four independent finite mixture models were estimated and a unanimous voting scheme was employed to combine the four partitionings of the profiles produced by these models. in both cases, every gene could be assigned to a consensus cluster. the influential attributes for the consensus clusters were determined and the results integrated with external knowledge.

properties common and unique to proteins encoded by genes in the luminal and myoepithelial collections
two sets of results reports were generated and examined to gain insights into the differences and similarities between the luminal and myoepithelial collections. these reports are provided as additional files and contain full descriptions of the consensus clusters, gene-specific go/cdd terms, and annotations present in locuslink entries but not used as attributes to construct gene attribute profiles. inspection of these reports showed that in contrast to go and cdd terms, very few of the genes considered in this study were annotated with kegg pathways by locuslink. however, every gene was annotated with a cytoband position . tables  <dig> and  <dig> summarize the information on consensus clusters and their influential attributes found in the results reports.

in order to delineate broad functional categories associated with the  <dig> genes in the luminal collection, the influential and most frequent attributes for each consensus cluster were determined and summarized. these genes were partitioned into four groups, with each group representing a broad functional category . the prominent features of the proteins encoded by the genes in the four consensus clusters were as follows:  <dig> , membrane proteins with receptor and/or signal transduction activity;  <dig> , metabolic activity;  <dig> , nucleic acid binding and transcription; and  <dig> , oxidoreductase and ion transport activity. the  <dig> genes in the myoepithelial collection were partitioned into four groups, three of which represented broad functional categories . the prominent features of the proteins encoded by the genes in the four consensus clusters were as follows:  <dig> , intracellular proteins;  <dig> , membrane proteins with receptor and/or signal transduction activity;  <dig> , protein hydrolase activity; and  <dig> , nucleic acid binding and transcription.

the properties common to proteins encoded by genes in the luminal and myoepithelial collections were integral membrane proteins that are receptors and/or involved in signal transduction, and proteins involved in nucleic acid binding and transcription. the luminal genes were distinguished by a subset of proteins with metabolic and oxidoreductase activity, whereas protein hydrolase activity was a distinctive feature of a subset of the myoepithelial genes. although the  <dig> luminal genes and  <dig> myoepithelial genes were mutually exclusive, the resulting functional clusters specified a limited number of high-level functions. furthermore, some of these functions were associated with both gene lists, and hence both cell types.

the absence of influential cdd attributes in summary tables  <dig> and  <dig> can be explained by the relative paucity of cdd terms compared to go terms in a locuslink entry, and different aspects of the process used to create and cluster gene attribute profiles. for the luminal collection, no cdd term was assigned to three or more genes, so feature selection resulted in profiles composed exclusively of go term attributes . although the myoepithelial collection profiles contained go and cdd term attributes , no cdd term was assigned to half the genes in a consensus cluster so no cdd term was designated an influential attribute .

examination of the cdd term attributes in the profiles used for clustering showed that four protein domains were each associated with three myoepithelial genes but no luminal gene. these myoepithelial unique domains were as follows,  "helix-loop-helix domain, found in specific dna-binding proteins that act as transcription factors"  was associated with id <dig> , id <dig> , and myc ;  "calcium-binding egf-like domain, present in a large number of membrane-bound and extracellular  proteins. many of these proteins require calcium for their biological function and calcium-binding sites have been found to be located at the n-terminus of particular egf-like domains"  was associated with sele , fat <dig> , and jag <dig> ;  "cadherin egf lag seven-pass g-type receptor "  was associated with sele, pcdhga <dig> , and cdh <dig> ; and  "cadherin repeat domain"  was associated with fat <dig>  pcdhga <dig>  and cdh <dig>  each of these protein domains represents a superfamily of diverse functions, so further studies using a variety of sequence analysis tools will be required to produce fine-grained information about the specific domain subfamily represented in the myoepithelial gene list.

the output produced by ensemble attribute profile clustering should be viewed as a useful synthesis of the annotations assigned by gene-centered corpora with the results warranting additional examination. for example, of the genes discussed above, cdh <dig>  fat <dig>  jag <dig>  pcdhga <dig> and sele are present in myoepithelial consensus cluster  <dig> so a simple interpretation of the functional biology linking them is a connection to membrane biology . indeed, all are assigned the go term "integral to membrane" . however, closer inspection of all go terms indicates that, for example, cdh <dig> is an adhesion molecule  whereas jag <dig> is a ligand for the receptor notch .

although the pathways in which a protein is involved are important properties of a gene, their exclusion from the vector space model formulated here appears to have had minimal impact on the results described above. inspection of the kegg pathways assigned to genes in a consensus cluster largely reinforced the observations made by examination of influential go and cdd attributes. in luminal consensus cluster  <dig>  for example, the go molecular function term "oxidoreductase activity" was an influential attribute and three of the four genes were assigned the kegg pathway "oxidative phosphorylation". for other gene lists, it may be necessary to include kegg pathway attributes in the gene attribute profiles used as input for consensus clustering. in general, the issue is not only a matter of whether certain properties should be included as attributes in the vector space representation of a gene, but also whether the relevant information is present in and hence can be extracted from text-based, gene-centered corpora.

discussion
ensemble attribute profile clustering-based analysis of two disjoint lists of breast tissue-related genes demonstrates the utility of this general purpose strategy for discovering and characterizing groups of genes with similar patterns of features. the approach separates the tasks of computing clusters of profiles and determining attributes important in defining each cluster. thus, one enhancement would be to replace the finite mixture model used to perform one-way probabilistic clustering with a two-way clustering algorithm that estimates groups of genes and groups of attributes simultaneously . an alternative approach might be model-based subspace clustering in which clusters of objects are identified based on subsets of attributes  <cit> . ensemble attribute profile clustering bears some resemblance to txtgate, an existing framework for analyzing a group of genes that is based on clustering and vector space representations  <cit> . the two methods are distinguished by their choice of features in the vector space models, the algorithm used for clustering , and the absence of cluster combination in txtgate. irrespective of the algorithm used for clustering, the major determinants of the biological insights that can be deduced from examination of  clusters and  attributes are the choice of attributes used to construct gene attribute profiles, the ability to encode functionally important properties as features, and the independence of attributes in the vector space model representation of a gene.

since a particular choice of attributes embodies prior knowledge about the properties of genes deemed to be most important, vector space models can be tailored to emphasize different desired aspects. the advantages of employing go and cdd terms to build profiles is their capacity to capture a broad range of concepts in structural, molecular and cellular biology, the widespread adoption of terms in these controlled vocabularies to annotate genes, and the ability to extract these descriptors for an arbitrary collection of genes from gene-centered corpora. for the luminal and myoepithelial collections, the go and cdd terms appear sufficient to encapsulate the knowledge that would have been added by incorporation of kegg pathway-based attributes. however, the go and cdd vocabularies are unable in general to capture information such as normal versus aberrant phenotypes and aspects related to evolutionary biology. to ameliorate the former limitation, genes could be characterized using terms that were binary random variables indicating association with disease classes such as "immune", "metabolic", "cancer", "cardiovascular", "aging", "development", "infection", "neurodegeneration" and so on. however, the consensus clusters could differ because genes would be grouped on the basis of similar patterns of phenotypic properties rather than the protein structural and functional properties examined in this work.

although go and cdd terms could be augmented with attributes related to phenotypes, the ensuing profiles would remain partial descriptions of genes. to highlight and illustrate this issue, the inability of go- and cdd-based profiles to capture knowledge about genomic context was investigated. this topic was selected because of increasing interest in the relationship between co-ordinated gene expression and gene clustering in eukaryotes . the chromosomal positions of genes in the luminal and myoepithelial collections are given in additional file  <dig>  although most luminal and myoepithelial genes are separated by large physical distances and/or many interlopers, some are separated by four or fewer genes. luminal genes meeting this criterion are: rarres <dig> –  -hrasls <dig> . myoepithelial genes meeting this criterion are fat <dig> –  <cit>  – sparc ; mt <dig> –  <cit>  – mt1k –  <cit>  – mt1b –  <cit>  – mt1f –  <cit>  – mt1g –  <cit>  – mt1x ; s100a <dig> –  <cit>  – s100a <dig> ; and nlgn <dig> –  <cit>  – polr2a –  <cit>  – eif4a <dig> . further analysis and studies of the genomic regions containing these blocks of genes could reveal critical regulatory elements, a hypothesis that could not have been formulated from inspection of clusters of go- and cdd-based gene attribute profiles.

attributes related to genomic context could be generated by creating a series of binary variables defining the window within which a gene could occur, for example, cytogenetic location such as "iq", "1", "2q", and "3p.l3", fixed physical distance such as  <dig> kbp, and region coinciding with a bac clone. however, the optimal window size is an open question since too small a bin would result in a large increase in the number of attributes to be added to the vector, too large a bin might be uninformative, and different regions of the genome might require different sizes depending on local factors such as gene density.

in both the "bag-of-words" representation of documents used commonly in ir and the "bag-of-attributes" representation of genes considered here, the features in a vector are assumed to be unrelated to each other and the order in which they occur is not significant . however, dependencies amongst and between go and cdd terms means that this assumption of attribute independence is violated in go- and cdd-based profiles. the directed acyclic graph underpinning the go vocabulary defines semantic relationships amongst go terms so that, for example, the term intracellular is a parent of nucleus. the co-occurrence of protein domains is likely to be non-random because, for example, a nucleic acid binding domain is more likely to occur in conjunction with a nuclease domain than with some other domain. finally, the go molecular function terms assigned to a gene are related to the presence of specific protein domains in the encoded protein, for example, dna binding is associated with zinc finger domains.

CONCLUSIONS
despite the limitations in ensemble attribute profile clustering discussed above, analysis of genes associated with two normal human breast tissue cell types using go- and cdd-based gene attribute profiles demonstrates that the strategy provides a simple but useful method for synthesizing prior biological knowledge and facilitating the extraction of new insights. no specific gene is present in both the list of epithelial cell markers and the list of myoepithelial cell markers  <cit> . however, examination of the consensus clusters discovered and characterized for the luminal and myoepithelial collections indicates that both collections contain genes encoding membrane proteins , and proteins involved in nucleic acid binding and transcription. in addition to these common properties are biological functions that appear to be unique. four of the  <dig> luminal genes encode proteins with metabolic and oxidoreductase activity; fifteen of the  <dig> myoepithelial genes are associated with protein hydrolase activity.

improved understanding of the biology of the breast requires integrating data and information from multiple sources as well as studies of both normal and aberrant breast tissue. the two gene lists analyzed here were the outcome of a cdna microarray study of luminal and myoepithelial cells isolated from primary cultures of reduction mammoplasty specimens  <cit> . elsewhere, sage technology was used to identify markers for the same two cell types isolated from freshly dissected normal breast reduction tissue  <cit> . finally, a comparative genomic hybridization  analysis of  <dig> grade iii invasive ductal breast carcinomas positive for basal cytokeratin  <dig>  and  <dig> grade- and age-matched ck14-negative controls found significant differences in cgh profiles between these two groups in terms of mean number of changes and types of chromosomal alterations  <cit> . table  <dig> lists genes common to the two transcript profiling studies and of these, those located in regions found to be altered in the cgh study. these genes, notably ones marked with †, encode proteins associated with membrane biology, transcription, and  metabolism. thus, they represent good candidates for experiments aimed at predicting disease outcome and elucidating the molecules and pathways involved in normal breast function.

