BACKGROUND
sex differences in muscle morphology, function and plasticity have previously been documented. in general, men are stronger and have a larger muscle fiber cross-sectional area, especially for type ii fibers  <cit> . in contrast, women generally have a higher proportion of oxidative type i muscle fibers and muscle capillary density  <cit> , and are more resistant to muscle fatigue  <cit> . no influence of sex on strength loss and recovery pattern following damaging eccentric contractions has been reported  <cit> . sex differences in skeletal muscle response and adaptation to physiological stimuli, such as training and detraining, have also been reported. men generally experience a greater hypertrophic response after resistance training in both young  <cit>  and older adults  <cit>  and also appear to have a higher degree of muscle loss with detraining  <cit> . despite the obvious influence of sex on muscle morphology and muscle plasticity, less is known about the molecular events driving the manifestation of sexual dimorphism observed in muscle phenotypes.

skeletal muscle plasticity in response to exercise is controlled by several levels of regulation, including transcriptional, post-transcriptional and translational events. it has been suggested that the transient changes in transcription during recovery from acute bouts of exercise may accumulate and translate into cellular training adaptations if the exercise is performed for a prolonged period of time  <cit> . because exercise is a complex stimuli involving mechanical loading, metabolic disturbances, neuronal activation and hormonal alterations  <cit> , microarrays can be a useful high-throughput means to examine global transcriptional profiles and transcriptional changes in skeletal muscle under various experimental conditions. microarray studies have previously characterized gene expression profiles in human skeletal muscle in relation to sex, age, endurance and resistance training  <cit> . however, no study has examined the global alteration in gene expression profiles following acute resistance exercise  in humans; nor is there much known regarding how men and women differ in re-induced transcriptional regulation in skeletal muscle.

in this study, we used microarrays to analyze the muscle transcriptome at rest and following acute re at two time points among young male and female participants. this study was an ancillary study conducted on a subset of participants participating in a larger scale multi-center study, the functional snps associated with human muscle size and strength  study. the famuss study was designed to uncover novel genetic polymorphisms associated with human muscle phenotypes and training adaptation  <cit> . in famuss, a  <dig> week unilateral arm re training program was utilized, and the last re session was repeated 48~ <dig> h after completion of the training as the acute stimuli among  <dig> volunteers for the present investigation. the aims of the study were 1) to define acute transcriptional regulatory events induced by re in trained muscle for each sex which potentially mediate skeletal muscle training adaptation; and 2) to identify the sexual differences in the skeletal muscle transcriptome in both the resting untrained state and following re, as they might contribute to a sexual dimorphism in muscle phenotypes.

our data analysis focused on identifying significantly regulated biological processes and molecular pathways  instead of testing the differential expression of individual genes. gene functional analysis has the potential to reduce false positive discoveries typically associated with gene-gene comparison studies  <cit> . a study conducted by the texicogenomics research consortium  <cit>  clearly demonstrated that in microarray studies the use of gene functional analysis can result in higher reproducibility than gene-gene comparison methods. moreover, gene-based analysis does not perform as well as gene functional analysis in capturing the minor but concordant changes across multiple genes in a particular pathway, which biologically might be more important than a large fold change in any single gene  <cit> . various analytical approaches have been developed and utilized for performing gene functional analysis in microarray studies. among these is a novel logistic regression-based method , which we used in this investigation. lrpath has several documented advantages over many other methods  <cit> . in particular, it takes into account the distribution of significance levels of all genes profiled and overcomes the limitations associated with the use of arbitrary significance cut-off values  <cit> . as has been documented, different threshold choices can lead to different results from enrichment analysis, and thus different biological conclusions  <cit> .

RESULTS
physical characteristics of subjects
the subjects' physical characteristics are presented in table  <dig>  compared with females, males were heavier, taller and had higher arm flexion strength. the 12-week unilateral arm re training program induced significant improvements in both muscle mass and strength in the trained arm of the participants. females, as compared with males, exhibited greater improvements in muscle dynamic strength, measured as one-repetition maximum . due to the small number of subjects in the present analysis, the sex difference in training-induced improvements in isometric strength  and muscle volume  did not reach significance. however, males tended to have greater improvements in muscle cross-sectional area  than females . nevertheless, we previously reported significantly greater increases in muscle strength in women than in men and a significantly greater increase in muscle csa in men than in women among  <dig> male and  <dig> female participants of the famuss study  <cit> .

note: anthropometric and muscle phenotypic measurements are presented as mean ± sem and sex differences were tested by t-test.

Δ relative to control, relative improvement induced by re training, calculated as /control; the numbers are median  and sex differences were tested by wilcoxon rank sum test.

1rm:  <dig> repetition maximum; iso: isometric muscle strength; csa: arm whole muscle cross-sectional area measured by mri; vol: arm whole muscle volume.

differential gene expression in resting skeletal muscle between men and women
we first examined the gene expression profiles of the untrained biceps muscle of male  and female  participants. gene functional analysis based on gene ontology  terms  <cit>  and kyoto encyclopaedia of genes and genomes  pathways  <cit>  were conducted by using a logistic regression-based method . six go terms  were significantly enriched for male-associated high expression genes , and  <dig> go terms and five kegg pathways for female-associated high expression genes  . after removing highly redundant terms , three go terms were defined as being associated with higher gene expression in male muscle including spermatogenesis , peptidase activity, acting on l-amino acid peptides  and protein modification by small protein removal ; four go terms and five kegg pathways were defined as being associated with higher gene expression in female muscle. these nine functional groups and pathways consistently presented two main biological themes, which were gene transcription and translation and fatty acid oxidation . the complete results of the functional enrichment analysis can be found in supplementary materials .

gene transcriptional regulation in skeletal muscle induced by acute resistance exercise
men  <dig> h post . lrpath analysis following an intensity-based bayesian moderated t-statistic  using a paired sample-design indicated that  <dig> go terms  and five kegg pathways were significantly enriched with up-regulated genes; 21go terms  and three kegg pathways were significantly enriched with down-regulated genes  . the re up-regulated go terms and kegg pathways concentrated on several biological themes including extracellular matrix  and cytoskeleton based processes, muscle hypertrophy, angiogenesis, signal transduction and stress response; whereas down-regulated go terms and kegg pathways were mainly concerned with gene transcription and translation, mitochondrial structure and oxidative phosphorylation activity and protein metabolism .

male  <dig> h post . in a separate group of males, we discovered in the exercised vs. rested muscle, that  <dig> go terms  and eight kegg pathways were significantly enriched with up-regulated genes and that  <dig> go terms  and four kegg pathways were significantly enriched with down-regulated genes  . similar to male  <dig> h post, the biological themes reflected by up-regulated go terms and kegg pathways included ecm and cytoskeleton based processes, angiogenesis, signal transduction, muscle hypertrophy and stress response; biological themes reflected by down-regulated go terms and kegg pathways concentrated on fatty acid oxidation, carbohydrate and amino acid metabolism, gene transcription and translation, and mitochondrial structure and oxidative phosphorylation activities .

female  <dig> h post . in exercised vs. rested muscle, up-regulated genes over-represented  <dig> kegg pathways and  <dig> go terms  and down-regulated genes over-represented  <dig> go terms  and  <dig> kegg pathways . the significantly enriched go terms and kegg pathways for up-regulated genes can be categorized into several biological functional groups including ecm and cytoskeleton based processes, signal transduction, stress response, tissue regeneration and remodelling, muscle hypertrophy, as well as angiogenesis; whereas down-regulated genes significantly enriched a list of go terms and kegg pathways relevant to mitochondrial structure and oxidative phosphorylation activity, proteolysis, and transcription and translation .

female  <dig> h post . in a separate group of females, we observed in the exercised vs. rested muscle, that seven go terms  and three kegg pathways were significantly enriched with up-regulated genes and that  <dig> go terms and one kegg pathways with down-regulated genes . most consistently, the significantly enriched biological go terms and kegg pathways for up-regulated genes were related to gene translation and protein biosynthesis .

validation of subset of genes by quantitative real time pcr 
ten genes were selected for validation by qrt-pcr. these genes represented seven significantly regulated biological processes by re, as identified by microarray analysis, including up-regulated growth factor activity , angiogenesis , stress response , exercise response , down-regulated muscle protein catabolic metabolism , lipid metabolism , and carbohydrate metabolism . these genes were selected based on their known effect in exercise physiology and reported exercise responsiveness. correlation analysis using spearman's rank order correlation indicated a strong concordance between fold changes of gene expression tested by microarrays and qrt-pcr in our study . because muscle tissue available for qrt-pcr analysis was limited, sample size was not adequate for testing gene expression changes following re for each of the four sex  and time  specific conditions . as such, we compared mrna levels of the selected genes in male and female muscles in the resting state . consistent with microarray analysis, no significant sex differences were indicated for these genes with the exception of aldh <dig>  in both the microarray and qrt-pcr, aldh <dig> showed higher expression levels in females than in males . the mean fold changes of the expression of these genes in exercised vs. rested muscle for each sex and time specific condition are presented in supplementary materials .

discussion
in the present study, we used a novel analytic design to identify sex differences in the human muscle transcriptome in both the resting state and during recovery from acute resistance exercise . in the resting state, female muscle had a greater transcript abundance of genes involved in fatty acid oxidation and gene transcription/translation processes. after strenuous re at the same relative intensity, transcriptional modulation follows a different time course in male and female muscles . males experienced prolonged changes while females exhibited a rapid recovery. moreover, the present study identified novel sex specific areas that exist in the fine regulatory system of the muscle response to re at the transcriptional level which merit further exploration. the depression of negative regulators of the mtor signaling pathway in male muscle and activation of notch signaling and tgf-beta signaling in females suggests that sex differences in skeletal muscle transcriptional regulation might implicate a mechanism behind disproportional muscle growth in males as compared with female counterparts after re training at the same relative intensity. overall, our data suggest that re is a powerful modulator of muscle transcriptional regulation that is also tailored by sex.

there are several strengths to the study design used in this investigation. first, we chose to study two time points, i.e  <dig> h and  <dig> h post exercise, to address the dynamic and transient nature of gene transcriptional regulation. this choice was based on previous work on the time course of transcriptional changes following exercise  <cit> , and represents early and late recovery to acute re respectively. secondly, we used separate groups of subjects for each time point. this design has dual advantages: 1) it avoids a second incision to subjects and thus minimizes any possible influence from previous sampling trauma; and 2) using separate groups of subjects increases the generalizability of the findings and thus improves the validity of our data. third, to reduce potential confounders, we chose to study biceps brachii instead of the more commonly used quadriceps because 1) sex differences in muscle phenotypes is greater for upper as compared to lower limb musculature <cit> ; 2) lifestyle influences on upper body are relatively small since lower body musculature plays a dominant role in mobility; 3) compared with vastus lateralis muscle, biceps brachii has a more uniform fiber type distribution between sexes  <cit> . given these considerations, studying biceps brachii offers us more power to decipher the sex influence on the muscle transcriptome. however, caution needs to be taken when trying to generalize the present study findings based on biceps brachii to other muscle groups of different fiber type composition. as indicated by a previous study  <cit> , tissue heterogeneity can be a major source of variation in expression profiling experiments even when using relatively homogeneous muscle tissue. finally, our study design provided the opportunity to maximize analytic power by minimizing the inter-individual biological variability typically observed in human studies. specifically, subjects were carefully selected: they were of similar age, bmi, and ethnicity, and moreover they were trained under the same exercise protocol. more importantly, we employed a unilateral exercise model with bilateral muscle biopsy procedure, which allowed us to perform a paired comparison within the same individual thus effectively reducing inter-individual variation by controlling all systemic effects on gene expression such as the influence of different genetic backgrounds, neurohormonal states, and other physiological and environmental factors that may exist among individuals.

furthermore, we studied acute transcriptional regulation of resistance exercise in trained muscle rather than untrained muscle. this approach may have limited our ability to distinguish chronic training effects from acute responses. however this is unlikely to impair the ability of the study to reveal exercise-induced transcriptional regulation relevant to muscle adaptation and, in particular, to affect the detection of sex differences in this regard. relevant to re, tang et al.  <cit>  observed that after eight weeks of unilateral resistance exercise, a shortened, but augmented increase in mixed muscle protein synthesis was shown in the trained leg as compared with untrained control leg in the fed state in young men. wilkinson et al.  <cit>  compared muscle protein synthetic responses to re and endurance exercise  before and after ten weeks of training. after training, muscle protein synthetic response became more specific to the training phenotypic adaptation. resistance exercise increased both mitochondrial and myofibrillar protein synthesis in the untrained state whereas only myofibrillar protein synthesis increased in the trained state  <cit> . therefore the design in the present study might provide a better opportunity to observe the mrna changes more specific to typical resistance exercise training adaptations.

sex difference in muscle transcriptome in the untrained resting state
it is plausible to speculate that sex-related gene transcriptional regulation contributes to the sexual dimorphism observed in the skeletal muscle phenotypes  <cit> . the existence of sex differences in the human skeletal muscle transcriptome has been identified before using genome-wide expression profiling  <cit> . consistent with a recent report  <cit> , females in the present study had higher expression levels of genes involved in lipid metabolism, including lipoprotein lipase , cd <dig> molecule , fatty acid binding protein  <dig> , hydroxyacyl-coenzyme a dehydrogenase, beta subunit  and acyl-coenzyme a dehydrogenase, long chain . this finding supports the notion that female muscles rely more on fatty acids as an energy source in the resting state and possibly during submaximal endurance exercise, as demonstrated elsewhere  <cit> . kiens et al.  <cit>  observed significantly higher mrna levels of several key lipid-binding proteins and lpl in untrained female vastus lateralis muscle than in male muscle, although a similar trend was not observed for corresponding protein levels. a possible contributor to the sex difference in substrate utilization for energy production in skeletal muscle is estrogen. in a recent study, fu et al. elegantly demonstrates that female subjects had higher mrna levels of genes involved in lipid metabolism than male  <cit>  subjects both before and immediately after  <dig> minutes of cycling  and that 17β-estradiol  supplementation among male participants was able to increase the transcript abundance of those lipid metabolism related genes.

considering that males have larger muscle fibers, we expected to see higher mrna levels of genes involved in muscle protein biosynthesis in the male and/or higher expression levels of genes involved in protein catabolic processes in the female. instead, our investigation revealed that the genes involved in transcription and post-transcriptional rna processing, ribosome construction and mrna translation were consistently expressed at higher levels in female biceps. this observation suggests that females, at least at the transcriptional level, have a greater potential for protein biosynthesis due to a higher efficiency of gene transcription and translation machinery. indeed, a recent study  <cit>  reported that women had higher rates of whole-body protein turnover and skeletal muscle protein synthesis than men at both young and old age. the higher protein turnover rates may underlie the need for increased levels of translational machinery.

in comparison to females, males in the rested state demonstrated higher expression levels of genes which enriched go terms relevant to protein modification by small protein removal. the key genes driving the enrichment of these terms included several ubiquitin specific peptidases. since ubiquitin conjugation for targeted protein degradation via the proteasome system plays a crucial role in muscle protein proteolysis  <cit> , it is reasonable to postulate that ubiquitin removal  might outweigh ubiquitination in male muscle thus aiding in muscle protein preservation. however, it should be pointed out that the enrichment of deubiquitination relevant go terms and kegg pathways in male muscle may be simply a result of including the y chromosome in the analysis considering the most significant gene, ubiquitin specific peptidase  <dig> , is y-linked. since the biological function of usp9y in skeletal muscle is still unclear, we can only speculate that interference of deubiquitination factors in the protein catabolic process might play a role in protein accumulation in males.

sex alters the time course of gene transcriptional regulation after re
in the present study, we observed that re induced an extensive alteration in skeletal muscle transcriptome throughout the  <dig> h recovery period in both male and female muscles. when examining the go terms and kegg pathways enriched with differentially expressed genes across the four conditions , we recognized a striking difference between the sexes in the time course of re-induced transcriptome alteration. male muscles responded to the exercise stimuli with prolonged alterations in transcript contents, where most of the go terms and kegg pathways that were significantly enriched at  <dig> h post exercise also remained significant at  <dig> h post exercise. in contrast, female muscle experienced a quick restoration to the baseline state, where nearly all of the significantly enriched go terms and kegg pathways were only seen at  <dig> h post exercise. additionally, up-regulation of biological processes related to mitochondria ribosome and gene translation were observed only at  <dig> h post exercise in females. this may suggest that  <dig> h post re represents another phase of transcriptional response after recovery from acute exercise in female skeletal muscle. the sex differences in the time course of muscle transcriptional alteration as a result of re were also confirmed by checking a subset of genes with well established function in re, i.e., myogenin , insulin-like growth factor  <dig> , nuclear receptor subfamily  <dig>  group a, member , ankyrin repeat domain  <dig>  , vascular endothelial growth factor a , and eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4e binding protein  <dig>   <cit> . in males, nearly all of these genes showed significant up-regulation at both  <dig> h and  <dig> h post exercise, but in females these genes only appeared significantly up-regulated at  <dig> h post exercise . furthermore, when we examined the number of differentially expressed genes as a result of re based on a stringent significance level of fdr≤ <dig> , we found that no gene appeared significantly altered for males at  <dig> h post-exercise or for females at  <dig> h post-exercise. however for females at  <dig> h post-exercise and males at  <dig> h post-exercise,  <dig> probes  and  <dig> probes  were significant, respectively. these results indicate that transcriptional changes in response to acute re in male muscle were delayed and they peaked at a later time point, as compared with female muscle.

there is limited information regarding the time course of skeletal muscle transcriptional modification as a result of re, particularly considering sex. several studies have used multiple  time points to investigate the expression of selected genes during recovery following acute resistance exercise, using combined sex groups  <cit>  or men only groups  <cit> , thus they provided no insight regarding a sex specific time course of expression changes. the novel finding from this study strongly indicates that sex has a fundamental role in determining the time course of gene transcriptional response to re. it should also be noted that the relative resistance load was identical in both sexes such that differences cannot be explained by the amount of mechanical work performed. overall, in the present study, females appeared to possess a higher capacity to restore cellular homeostasis after re stimuli at the transcriptional level. this finding is consistent with the well-documented phenomenon in which, when compared with males, females have a higher capability to maintain cellular homeostasis  <cit> . it is also plausible to propose that the prolonged gene expression response experienced by males might contribute to the more pronounced hypertrophy seen in male muscle after training.

common biological processes transcriptionally regulated by re
most of the enriched biological go terms and kegg pathways for both up- and down-regulated genes observed in our study were shared in males and females. a complete discussion on the common biological processes can be found in the supplemental material . briefly, we observed the up-regulation of extracellular matrix  and actin cytoskeleton, tissue remodelling, angiogenesis, signal transduction, stress response and immune activation in both males and females. down-regulated biological processes included mitochondrial structure and oxidative phosphorylation, muscle protein proteolysis and biosynthesis. it is important to point out that involvement of these pathways in muscle in response to re has been previously reported in studies using various methods including protein assays  <cit> , custom dna microarrays  <cit> , rt-pcr  <cit> , and northern blotting  <cit>  . the consistency of our results with these previous reports provides additional confirmation of the reliability of our results. overall, our data supports the notion that the skeletal muscle response to re is orchestrated by a series of gene regulatory events  <cit> . it involves not only muscle fibers, but additional supporting structures and cell types comprising the muscle tissue are also influenced, such as the ecm and actin cytoskeleton, blood vessels and neurons. our expression data also provides supporting evidence for the inhibitory effect of re on muscle mitochondria functional activity. regarding muscle hypertrophy, our data suggested that re-induced muscle protein accretion may occur at the transcriptional level through a decline of protein degradation and stabilization of mrna at an early time point, and augmented translation at a later time point.

sex-specific gene transcriptional regulation in skeletal muscle induced by acute resistance exercise
although a majority of the biological processes transcriptionally regulated following re were shared between men and women, some biological processes appeared to be sex specific. in females, we detected up-regulation of genes involved in: blood coagulation; insulin receptor binding; transforming growth factor beta  signaling; smad binding; janus kinase /signal transducers and activators of transcription  signaling; and notch signaling. in males only, we detected an up-regulation of genes involved in: ion transport; apoptosis/cell death; and p <dig> signaling pathway. additionally, several down-regulated go terms and kegg pathways were only observed in males including: triglyceride biosynthetic process; vitamin d receptor binding; and water transporter activity at  <dig> h post exercise.

some of these sex specific features might be a reflection of sex differences in the time course, such that genes whose peak and trough times are out of phase with our sampling time points for one sex but not the other such that they would be detected as specific features for only one sex. also the imbalance in sample size may skew differential gene expression between sexes, although lrpath has been shown to perform well for small sample sizes  <cit> . nevertheless, we cannot exclude the possibility that some of the sex- specific biological processes regulated by re, defined by this study, have a biological basis. specifically, coordinated up-regulation of genes related to smad binding, tgf-beta signaling and notch signaling may suggest a mechanism for a hampered hypertrophic effect of re in females . these genes included smad family member  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> , transforming growth factor, beta receptor ii , v-fos fbj murine osteosarcoma viral oncogene homolog , interleukin  <dig> receptor , hairy/enhancer-of-split related with yrpw motif  <dig>   <dig> and motif-like , hairy and enhancer of split  <dig> and  <dig> , inhibitor of dna binding  <dig> . smad  <dig> and smad <dig> are the transcription factors downstream of myostatin/tgf-beta and are able to induce atrophy programming  <cit> . activation of notch signaling was able to inhibit myogenesis via transcriptional repressors of hey and hes family members  <cit> . this finding suggests that, in response to re, along with activation of hypertrophy signaling events, a concomitant activation of atrophic factors may work against a muscle hypertrophic effect in the female muscle.

furthermore, although muscle hypertrophy was found to be a significantly up-regulated biological theme in both males  and females , it is noteworthy that sex differences might exist in the fine regulatory system of gene transcription leading to muscle hypertrophy. specifically, the expression patterns of the mammalian target of rapamycin  signaling-associated factors identified in male muscle  indicate that there was a coordinated repression of negative regulators of mtor signaling, which were not observed in females. the mtor signaling pathway plays a crucial role in mediating muscle hypertrophy  <cit> . the regulatory mechanisms controlling the activation and inactivation of mtor signaling in muscle contractile activity are just starting to be elucidated. several negative regulators have been identified including dna-damage-inducible transcript  <dig> , dna-damage-inducible transcript 4-like , akt <dig> substrate  <dig>  , and tuberous sclerosis  <dig> and  <dig>   <cit> . in a previous study, drummond et al.  <cit>  reported decreased mrna expression of ddit <dig>  ddit4l, tsc <dig>  and tsc <dig> in skeletal muscle of young and/or old men after an acute stimulation of protein synthesis via re and essential amino acid ingestion. consistent with their reports, our microarray data indicated a significant down-regulation of mtor inhibitors in male muscle: ddit <dig>  ddit4l, akt1s <dig> were significantly down-regulated  and tsc <dig> showed a trend towards a down-regulation in male muscle . however this coordinated negative regulation was not observed in female muscle  . this finding may implicate a mechanism behind disproportional muscle growth in males as compared with females working at the same relative intensity. further research using larger sample sizes and measurements of protein content along this pathway is needed to confirm these preliminary findings. sex differences in these specific features have not been reported elsewhere. further research is needed to clarify their contribution to sexual dimorphism in muscle phenotypes.

limitations of the study
undoubtedly the sample size in the present study was limited. however, given the fact that human tissue is notoriously hard to obtain in exercise  studies, major efforts were utilized to maximize the power of the study by minimizing the potential for experimental error. the technical error inherent in high-density oligonucleotide technology such as the affymetrix platform is fairly low  <cit> . however, the biological variability is large and has been identified as a major source of experimental error leading to a need for large sample sizes in conducting microarray studies  <cit> . this is especially true in studies involving human tissue because there is substantial polymorphic noise due to the outbred nature of the human population  <cit> . nevertheless, it has been demonstrated that reducing biological variability is an efficient and viable solution for achieving reliable results with a limited number of samples  <cit> . in the present study, much effort has been paid to reduce the potential influence of inter-individual variability on gene expression, as mentioned at the beginning of the discussion section.

furthermore, the analytic methods we used, i.e. lrpath combined with an intensity-based bayesian moderated t-statistic , can maximize the detection power while accurately estimating the false discovery rate, and have also demonstrated superior performance with small sample sizes  <cit> . consequently, by using a stringent study design and powerful analytical tools, we estimate that we were able to detect a  <dig> -fold change at the  <dig>  alpha level for 90% of the probes with at least 91% power. for the mid to high expressed genes, the power was even greater due to their lower variance. as such, we believe that the findings from the present study are valid and reliable for three principal reasons: 1) our results are generally consistent with those reported previously; 2) we studied different individuals at two time points and the major re-altered biological processes and molecular pathways independently identified were similar across both time points in males; 3) although we focused on the sex-based differences in gene regulation in this study, it is noteworthy that many of the main biological themes reflected by female and male muscles were similar as expected. the consistent findings within the present study provide additional evidence that our results are reliable.

we also recognize that the changes in protein levels do not always follow transcriptional regulations. post-transcriptional modification and protein interactions need to be considered in order to fully understand the contribution of these transcriptional findings in future studies.

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, our novel data indicate that sex plays an important role in the time course of skeletal muscle transcriptional regulation in response to resistance exercise. the findings from the present study provide insight into our understanding of the mechanisms underlying sex differences in muscle morphology and plasticity. in addition, the plethora of information generated regarding the transcriptionally regulated biological processes aid in understanding the mechanisms underpinning the adaptation of muscle to re. ultimately, following final clarification and additional clinical confirmation, these data will provide a knowledge base for refining the exercise prescription guidelines implemented by clinical and fitness professionals in order to optimize targeted fitness and therapeutic goals associated with exercise intervention.

