BACKGROUND
cryptic species are closely related species which are morphologically similar, but differ genetically  <cit> . the recent development in molecular taxonomy and systematics has uncovered a rich diversity of cryptic species, in particular for nocturnal mammals  <cit> .

a fundamental problem for sympatrically living, cryptic mammalian species is the coordination of reproduction between conspecifics in time and space, especially when individuals of a species forage solitarily. under these circumstances mating partners do not only have to detect, localise and find each other, they also have to discriminate between conspecifics and remarkably similar heterospecifics. current evolutionary theory  <cit>  suggests that species cohesiveness in sympatry requires signalling and recognition systems acting as premating isolation mechanisms in order to avoid costly hybridisation. sexual selection may cause a faster evolution of behavioural than of morphological traits  <cit> . while this theory has been supported by studies on the perception of the advertisement calls of crickets  <cit>  and frogs  <cit> , the songs of birds  <cit>  and the social calls of bats  <cit> , empirical data on other mammalian groups such as primates are still missing.

the malagasy mouse lemurs, small nocturnal primates which inhabit the fine branch niche of forests provide an excellent model to explore the significance of vocal communication for species recognition and discrimination. mouse lemurs have large mobile ears, exhibit a high auditory sensitivity  <cit> , are highly vocal and show a rich repertoire of social calls  <cit>  extending to the ultrasonic range, which is comparable to communication calls of microchiropteran bats, cetaceans, some rodents  <cit>  and some frogs  <cit> . the call types of social calls in mouse lemurs are used in contexts of, for example, social cohesion , attention and alarm  or agonistic situations .

at present  <dig> cryptic species are known which are difficult to distinguish in body characteristics  <cit> . in several areas two species occur sympatrically. mouse lemurs live in a dispersed social system  <cit> . during the mating period, vocal activity in mates is enhanced  <cit> , males actively search for oestrous females during the night and female choice may prevail  <cit> .

we studied the structure of male advertisement calls of the grey, the golden brown and the goodman's mouse lemur, formerly belonging to the rufous mouse lemur  and their perception by the grey mouse lemur. these three species are genetically distinct from each other but share a large number of morphological features  <cit> . the first two species live sympatrically in dry deciduous forest of north-western madagascar. the goodman's mouse lemur, on the other hand, inhabits rainforest areas in eastern madagascar, that is, it occurs allopatrically to the other studied species.

male advertisement calls used in the reproductive context exhibited significant differences in call structure of allopatric mouse lemur species  whereas alarm calls do not  <cit> . until now, however, it is not known whether there are differences in vocal communication between sympatric species or whether mouse lemurs discriminate between social calls across species.

the present study gives the first account of the relevance of communication calls for species recognition and discrimination in cryptic primates in an area of sympatry combining a call structure analysis and playback experiments. three questions were addressed:

 <dig>  to what extent do advertisement calls of sympatric cryptic mouse lemurs differ in structure?

 <dig>  do mouse lemurs discriminate between advertisement calls of different species and do they show stronger discrimination between conspecific and sympatric than between conspecific and allopatric calls?

 <dig>  do mouse lemurs discriminate between call types of different species which are irrelevant for species recognition in the reproductive context?

to answer these questions we recorded male advertisement calls of grey and golden brown mouse lemurs and measured several time and frequency parameters for an interspecific statistical comparison of the sympatrically living species. per individual, we analysed  <dig> to  <dig>  calls and calculated individual median values for each acoustic parameter. on the basis of these values we conducted a kruskal-wallis analysis of variance  to test for species-specificity.

in addition we conducted playback experiments with  <dig> grey mouse lemurs from the field. six categories of playback stimuli were presented during a single experimental session: conspecific male advertisement calls , heterospecific male advertisement calls of the golden brown mouse lemur , heterospecific male advertisement calls of the goodman's mouse lemur  and male whistle alarm calls  <cit>  of all three species .

the behavioural responses of the tested individuals were classified into two different response categories:  no orientation, not involving any orientation response including no reaction, ear movement, interruption of activity or startle without turning towards the speaker and  orientation, including turning towards the speaker and approaching the speaker, sometimes accompanied by antiphonal vocalisation.

for statistical comparison of call categories, an individual-based analysis was conducted comparing individual response indices for all call categories of advertisement calls and short whistles, respectively. the individual response index towards a call category was defined by the number of orientation responses divided by all responses of an individual towards stimuli of the respective call category, that is

 individual response index = / 

friedman-anova and wilcoxon tests with a serial bonferroni correction procedure  <cit>  were performed for each call type.

RESULTS
interspecific comparison of advertisement calls
the frequency contour of the harmonically structured advertisement calls from the three species was remarkably different . the grey mouse lemur produced an acoustically complex, frequency modulated advertisement call with an upward frequency modulated sweep followed by a tail containing several sinusoidal modulations ). the advertisement calls of the golden brown mouse lemur consisted of two to six generally upward frequency modulated components. occasionally, a component contained a nearly constant frequency part and/or ended with a downward frequency modulated hook ). the goodman's mouse lemur emitted a two-component call of relatively stereotypic structure with an upward followed by a downward modulated element separated by a short inter-element interval ).

no measured frequency parameter showed any species specificity , that is the absolute frequency ranges and the bandwidths of the advertisement calls of the three species were comparable. call duration, however, differed significantly between the three species . the calls of the grey mouse lemurs were the longest, those of the goodman's mouse lemur the shortest and those of the golden brown mouse lemur took an intermediate position.

n, number of individuals; n, number of calls; sfm, sinusoidally frequency modulated call; ufm, upward frequency modulated with plateau call; ius, inverse u-shaped call; for abbreviations of the acoustic parameters see recordings and analysis of advertisement calls in methods.

behavioural responses to advertisement and short whistle stimuli
in the  <dig> analysed responses the animals showed an orientation response in  <dig> cases, including turning towards the speaker on  <dig> occasions and approaching the speaker  <dig> times. in one of the latter cases a male additionally uttered an advertisement call after the presentation of a conspecific advertisement call. in the remaining  <dig> cases the animals showed no reaction to the stimuli in  <dig> cases, ear movement in  <dig>  interruption of activity in  <dig> and startle without turning towards the speaker in  <dig> cases. an overview of the distribution of all analysed no orientation and orientation responses within the six call categories of all tested individuals is given in figure  <dig> 

neither the sound pressure level nor the signal-to-noise ratio of stimuli had a significant effect on the stimulus response indices . in addition, response strength was independent of the presentation number of stimuli . this shows that inter-stimulus intervals were sufficient to avoid any habituation effects owing to the consecutive stimulus presentation design.

individual response indices revealed remarkable differences for conspecific, sympatric and allopatric stimuli . thus, individuals reacted significantly more frequently with orientation responses towards conspecific than towards both sympatric and allopatric advertisement stimuli. this suggests a high interest of grey mouse lemurs for conspecifics advertisement stimuli compared with heterospecific advertisement stimuli. furthermore, they responded significantly more frequently with orientation responses towards allopatric than towards sympatric advertisement stimuli .

in contrast, the individual-based analysis showed no significant differences in response strength towards all short whistle categories . these findings suggest that the grey mouse lemurs had no preference for any category of the short whistles.

discussion
the interspecific comparison of male advertisement calls of three mouse lemur species revealed structural differences as well as differences in response behaviour to playbacks. both indicate a species-specific function of these calls. conspecific calls evoked the strongest responses. playback experiments furthermore suggest a different relevance of heterospecific advertisement calls with regard to sympatry or allopatry as sympatric calls evoked lower responses than allopatric calls. in contrast, no preference for any whistle call category was found.

species-specific structure in advertisement calls
the evolution of species-specific signals is driven by a trade-off between sensory system characteristics, predation, environment and mate choice criteria  <cit> . in the present study, all species used broadband, frequency modulated advertisement calls in the same frequency range. broadband, frequency modulated signals provide advantages for sound localisation  <cit> . uniformity in frequency range may be explained by similar morphological constraints  <cit>  and similar predation pressure  <cit>  for the three species studied.

on the other hand, we found species-specific frequency contours in the advertisement calls which play an important role in courtship and mating of mouse lemurs  <cit> . this divergence may reflect the high sexual selection pressure existing for advertisement calls  <cit> . moreover, this divergence constitutes first evidence in primates for a behavioural trait evolving faster than morphological traits. the species-specific differences of advertisement calls could have evolved as an adaptation to transmission over long distances in different microhabitats as suggested for a number of different vertebrate taxa  <cit> . according to this habitat adaptation hypothesis  <cit> , longer calls with short, rapidly repeated elements are favoured in more open habitats and shorter, slower modulated elements in denser vegetation structure  <cit> .

in fact, the grey mouse lemur lives in dry deciduous forests and produces the longest call consisting of partially connected, rapidly repeated short elements. in contrast, the goodman's mouse lemur, which occurs in rainforest areas characterised by dense vegetation emits the shortest call consisting of two longer elements only. accordingly, shorter calls with separate more slowly modulated elements might have been the primary adaptation to the rainforest habitat. the call of the golden brown mouse lemur, which lives sympatrically with the grey mouse lemur, but is genetically closer related to the goodman's mouse lemur  <cit> , takes an intermediary position. the migration of the golden brown mouse lemur from rainforests into more open habitats  <cit>  may have driven selection towards longer calls with more rapidly modulated elements. thus, our results support the habitat adaptation hypothesis for this call type.

species-specific call recognition
structural differences in advertisement calls of the three species do not necessarily represent evidence for the use of these calls in conspecific recognition. we showed in this study that grey mouse lemurs responded similarly towards the structurally similar whistle calls of the three species. this is not surprising as they occur in alarm situations  <cit>  for which calls of a similar structure is used by a broad range of species and yield the same anti-predator responses  <cit> . as these calls are not counter-selected by sexual selection this trait remains stable.

in contrast, species-specific recognition of advertisement calls plays an important role for reproduction in cryptic and dispersed living species where females and males have to find each other for courtship and mating  <cit> . thus, a positive response behaviour towards heterospecific calls would have a negative impact on the fitness of individuals as they would risk costly hybridisation. our playback experiment confirms the above hypothesis for the first time in dispersed living primates: conspecific calls caused stronger interest than heterospecific calls. this response behaviour was not due to differences in stimulus quality. therefore, an influence of sound quality on the response behaviour does not account for the differential responses to the different stimulus classes.

we found more pronounced differences in the perception of conspecific versus sympatric than versus allopatric calls. comparable differences in perception have been reported from a wide range of species  <cit> . character displacement  <cit>  describes a pattern of greater divergence of an isolating trait in areas of sympatry between closely related taxa than in areas of allopatry  <cit> . as a result of selection against hybrids this mechanism may cause species-specificity in recognition systems . this explanation may also account for our data . alternatively, the observed differences in the perception of sympatric and allopatric advertisement calls could be a result of different exposure of the grey mouse lemurs to these calls. the grey mouse lemurs in our experiments would have been habituated to the sympatric calls over a long time and the increased attention towards the allopatric calls compared to the sympatric calls may represent a novelty effect  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
this study provides the first evidence in primates for specific acoustic divergence in the communication of cryptic species living in sympatry. advertisement calls of sympatric species essential in the reproductive context differed distinctly in their structure whereas whistle calls irrelevant for reproduction did not. on the perception side mouse lemurs discriminated between the species-specific advertisement calls and preferred conspecific to sympatric calls. thus, our data support the evolutionary hypothesis that species cohesiveness in sympatry has led to specific divergence in signalling and recognition systems in order to avoid costly hybridisation.

