BACKGROUND
the mediterranean corn borer  is the main maize pest in the mediterranean area  <cit> . in spain, the first generation of mcb larvae attack maize plants at an early stage of development and feed on leaves, and the second and further generations mainly feed on the pith  <cit> . several studies have focused on identifying constitutive chemical compounds in maize that are involved in resistance to mcb, and the best candidates are benzoxazinoids and hydroxycinnamates  <cit> .

benzoxazinoids are the most extensively studied cereal phytoalexins because they play a major role in the defense of cereals against insects, fungi, bacteria, and adventitious plant species  <cit> . in young maize plants, benzoxazinoids, especially dimboa , are considered to be the most important chemical factors in resistance to leaf-feeding insects, including corn borers such as the european corn borer, ostrinia nubilalis hübner, and mcb  <cit> . benzoxazinoids are predominantly stored as glucosides in the cell vacuole. tissue maceration by chewing herbivores results in the release of active aglycones by the action of endogenous β-glucosidases. hydroxycinnamates, derived from the phenylpropanoid pathway, comprise another array of compounds that have been extensively studied in relation to their function in constitutive resistance to herbivores . grasses contain relatively high concentrations of ferulates  and p-coumarates  linked to hemicellulose and lignin polymers. the fas are attached by ester bonds to arabinose side chains of arabinoxylans and can be coupled by oxidative reactions to form dehydrodimers  that crosslink hemicellulose, or bind lignin monomers via ether bonds that cross-link hemicellulose with lignin. in cereals, pcas are incorporated into cell walls where they are ester-linked to lignin monolignols, and are thought to function in transferring radicals during the polymerization of lignin  <cit> . the constitutive contents of pcas and fas in cell walls and the degree of hemicellulose cross-linking by dfa bridges has been suggested to be a structural defense mechanism against insect damage. several studies reported that differences in cell wall-bound hydroxycinnamate contents in grains, leaves, or stem tissues between resistant and susceptible genotypes of maize, wheat, and tall fescue were associated with contrasting levels of resistance to folivores and stem borers and with reduced insect performance .

in addition to constitutive resistance, maize shows other responses induced by insect feeding. khajuria et al.  <cit>  described the up-regulation of various enzymes in the phenylpropanoid metabolic pathway in wheat after infestation by hessian fly  that led to increased abundance of the phenolics 4-hydroxy-cinnamate and vanillin. several studies have focused on the induction of benzoxazinoid accumulation in leaves by insect attack. in maize leaves, the transcript levels of bx <dig>  the first gene in the benzoxazinoid biosynthesis pathway, were shown to increase after caterpillar attack  <cit> . in parallel, the benzoxazinoid content in maize leaves changed after infestation by specialist and generalist caterpillars; insect feeding led to significant increases in dimboa and hdmboa-glc  and decreased levels of dimboa-glc, and the younger leaves were more prone to benzoxazinoid induction than older ones . in relation to mcb attack, rodriguez et al.  <cit>  showed that maize stalks near the flowering stage responded to mcb attack by activating general plant defense mechanisms, including genes encoding jasmonic acid biosynthetic enzymes, proteinase inhibitors, defense-related transcription factors, and proteins involved in cell-wall reorganization. concomitantly, after mcb attack, all genotypes showed no significant decreases in dimboa content, while some showed significant changes in the levels of specific hydroxycinnamate compounds that were probably involved in cell-wall stiffness. however, the induced response to mcb at earlier stages of maize development, when maize leaves are damaged by first-generation larvae, has not been studied, and there is no information about the induction of resistance-related metabolites at this stage of development.

furthermore, little is known about insect and plant metabolites involved in eliciting the response to mcb attack and in perceiving and signaling damage caused by this lepidopteran species. plants likely use two strategies to optimize their response to herbivore feeding: damaged-self recognition, and herbivore-associated molecular patterns -based specific responses. however, hamps-triggered immunity can be partially suppressed by herbivore-associated effector molecules  <cit> . hamps have been found in oral secretions such as regurgitant and those of salivary glands. these secretions have been shown to modulate specific defense responses to herbivores, either amplifying or suppressing direct and indirect defenses elicited by wounding . hamps identified in the regurgitant or saliva of insect species include amino acid-fatty acid conjugates , enzymes such as β-glucosidase and glucose oxidase, fragments of ingested plant proteins, sulfated fatty acids, and cell wall fragments  <cit> . in maize, the regurgitants of lepidoptera species such as spodoptera littoralis  and spodoptera exigua hübner were shown to induce plants to release volatile compounds and trigger direct responses . so far, no studies have determined presence of hamps in mcb regurgitant. identification of such hamps is the first step to determine whether mcb regurgitant can promote maize defense responses and increase resistance. similarly, although jasmonic acid has been proposed as an important molecule in mediating the maize response to herbivore attack, little is known about its role as a signaling molecule in the induced response to mcb  <cit> . recently, methyl jasmonate  was suggested to play an important role in maize defense signaling against asian corn borer  attack  <cit> .

the overall aim of this study was to expand our knowledge about the factors involved in triggering and signaling the maize response to first-generation mcb attack, to determine if constitutive resistance metabolites respond to first-generation mcb attack, and to assess whether the induced response increases leaf resistance to mcb. the specific objectives were as follows: 1) to determine whether the response to leaf feeding by mcb larvae increases leaf antibiosis against mcb in two maize genotypes with contrasting levels of resistance against mcb; 2) to determine if mcb regurgitant has a role in eliciting that response; 3) to ascertain if meja functions in mediating the maize response; and 4) to evaluate the effect of several treatments  on metabolites that are known to be involved in constitutive resistance to mcb attack.

RESULTS
non-choice feeding bioassays
to evaluate if feeding by mcb increases the antibiosis of leaves in young plants, mcb larvae were reared for 13 days on excised leaves from maize plants previously infested with mcb larvae , and larval weight and survival were monitored. the growth and survival on leaves from plants in other treatments  and untreated plants  were monitored at the same time. the regression curves of larval weights with time  showed that larvae grew better on leaves from untreated plants than on those from treated plants regardless of the maize genotype . however, the differences among treatments varied between the two maize genotypes. the antibiosis levels of the leaves from ep <dig> and ep <dig> plants pre-infested with mcb larvae were similar at the early stage of the bioassay   . leaves of ep <dig> had a stronger antibiotic effect on larval weight than those of ep <dig> at 15 days after wounding, but the opposite effect was observed when leaves were treated with meja. the responses to treatments differed slightly between the two maize genotypes; differences among treatments in ep <dig> became significant at  <dig> dat, while differences in ep <dig> became significant at  <dig> dat. the effect of meja treatment was similar to that of infestation treatment in ep <dig> at  <dig> dat, while the effect of meja treatment was similar to those of the wounding treatment and the regurgitant treatment in ep <dig>  the wounding treatment and the regurgitant treatment negatively affected larval development on both maize genotypes at  <dig> dat .fig.  <dig> mediterranean cron borer  larval growth in non-choice feeding bioassays. regression curves of weight of the mcb larvae fed on leaves of ep <dig> and ep <dig> maize plants pre-infested with mcb larvae, wounded, treated with mcb regurgitant upon wounding, exposed to methyl jasmonate  or untreated  over time. bioassays were initiated at 2 days after treatment 


least square  mean values of larval weight  of mcb larvae fed on leaves from maize plants pre-infested with mcb larvae, wounded, treated with mcb regurgitant upon wounding, exposed to methyl jasmonate  or untreated . bioassays were initiated 2 days after treatment 


awithin each column, different letters indicate significant differences 




the larval survival curves differed significantly among treatments when larvae were fed with leaves from ep <dig> , but not when they were fed with leaves from ep <dig>  . wounding was the only treatment that significantly reduced the survival of larvae fed with ep <dig> leaves, compared with control plants  .table  <dig> mediterranean corn borer larval survival in non-choice feeding bioassays

values of log-rank statistic for testing homogeneity of survival distribution of mcb when larvae were reared on previously infested, wounded, treated with regurgitant upon wounding, treated with methyl jasmonate  and untreated  plants. positive values of log-rank statistic indicate that number of dead larvae is greater than that expected under the null hypothesis of equivalent survival distributions


alog-rank statistics followed by the same letter in the same row indicate that survival curves were homogeneous 




cell wall bound hydroxycinnamates and dimboa concentrations in maize leaves
next, we determined whether leaf feeding by mcb larvae, wounding, wounding + mcb regurgitant, or exposure to meja affected cell wall-bound hydroxycinnamates and dimboa concentrations in the leaves. the concentrations of pca, fas, total dfas , and dimboa in the leaves of treated and control plants were compared at  <dig> and  <dig> dat. leaf feeding by mcb larvae resulted in significantly increased contents of cell wall-bound fas and dfat in the leaves of ep <dig> and ep <dig> at  <dig> dat  , while the increase in pcas was only significant in ep <dig> leaves . at  <dig> dat, the dfat concentration in leaves infested by mcb was higher than that in leaves of untreated plants, but the difference was only significant for ep <dig> . interestingly, application of mcb regurgitant to wounded leaves produced short-term increases  in the level of cell wall-bound hydroxycinnamates, similar to those reported after leaf feeding by mcb larvae. in ep <dig>  regurgitant application resulted in higher pcas, fas, and dfat contents in leaves than did wounding alone, although this difference was only significant for dfat contents  . in the long term, wounding and the application of regurgitant had similar effects on hydroxycinnamates content, and those effects were the opposite of those induced by larval feeding . exposure to meja produced slight increases  in cell wall-bound hydroxycinnamates contents in the leaves over time .fig.  <dig> cell wall-bound hydroxycinnamate and  <dig> -dihydroxy-7-methoxy- <dig> -benzoxazin-3-one  concentrations in maize leaves. mean concentration of cell wall bound hydroxycinnamates and dimboa  in the leaves of maize inbreds ep <dig> and ep <dig> at  <dig>  and  <dig>  days after  infestation with mediterranean corn borer  larvae , wounding , wounding + mcb regurgitant application , methyl jasmonate exposure , and no treatment . pca, p-coumarate; fa, ferulate; dfat, total diferulates




we detected dimboa in treated and control leaves at  <dig> dat, and only the meja treatment increased the dimboa concentration to a level higher than that in the control. the wounding, wounding + regurgitant, and infestation treatments resulted in decreased dimboa contents . this opposite changes in dimboa contents between infested/wounded plants and meja-treated plants resulted in significantly different concentrations of dimboa in ep <dig> plants  . no dimboa was detected in the treated leaves at  <dig> dat, and the dimboa content in leaves of untreated plants was 3-fold higher in ep <dig>  than in ep <dig>   .

discussion
insect attack induces defense mechanisms in plants that can reduce the fitness of the herbivorous insect. in maize, negative effects on the growth of larvae fed on leaves previously exposed to insect feeding or insect elicitors has been reported for noctuid species such as s. littoralis and spodoptera frugiperda  <cit> , and for the crambid o. nubilalis  <cit> . in this study, the effect of leaf feeding by mcb on the suitability of leaves for mcb growth was assessed for 13 days  in two maize genotypes. we found that mcb larvae grow slower on leaves from previously infested plants, regardless of the maize genotype. the antibiotic effect triggered in leaves by insect feeding was only relevant in the long term, because differences in larval weights between those reared on untreated and previously infested plants became significant only after 8 days of feeding. these results highlight the relevance of performing long-term bioassays, because the antibiosis effect could be exponential rather than linear, and/or plant responses to short and long-term infestation could differ due to continuous cross-talk between the plant and the larvae. the plant response triggered by the first contact with the insect may differ from that induced later, so that the metabolic arsenal of the larvae may be modified as a counter-response to plant induction. the ep <dig> response to infestation seemed to contribute earlier than that of ep <dig> to leaf antibiosis. however, at the end of bioassay, the antibiosis levels of ep <dig> and ep <dig> leaves from infested plants were similar. studies on other chewing herbivores have shown that leaf feeding can increase plant resistance, which can be measured as reduced larval growth. however, this effect depends on the insect species, plant genotype, and the interval between priming and evaluating antibiosis  <cit> . we conclude that leaf feeding increased resistance to mcb in two different maize genotypes, but the response to mcb attack was not immediate.

the application of mcb regurgitant upon wounding did not significantly increase the antibiosis of maize leaves more than mechanical wounding alone, because the plant responses elicited by mcb regurgitant + wounding and wounding alone retarded larval growth to the same extent. therefore, mcb regurgitant does not appear to play an important role in eliciting direct defenses. alternatively, the procedure used to apply the regurgitant may need improvement, because the regurgitant was applied once, rather than multiple times over time, which would more closely mimic possible regurgitant secretion during feeding. also, because the response of maize plants to insect regurgitant depends on plant age, time of exposure, and maize genotype  <cit> , we cannot rule out that regurgitant from mcb larvae could play a crucial role in inducing maize defense mechanisms at other plant stages and/or in maize genotypes different from those studied here. regurgitant from pests such as s. exigua, s. littoralis, and mythimna separata  was shown to induce defense-related genes and jasmonic acid accumulation , but regurgitant from other corn borers present in europe, such as the european corn borer , did not elicit direct defenses in maize leaves  <cit> . in this last case, it was the saliva from o. nubilalis, and not the regurgitant, that was the critical component for inducing direct plant defenses in maize  <cit> .

the results of the bioassay indicated that hamps were not present in mcb regurgitant, but suggested that herbivore-associated effector molecules could be present in some other mcb secretions because the wounding and mcb regurgitant + wounding treatments resulted in lower larvae growth than did actual herbivory. this could indicate that mcb larvae partially counteract plants’ responses to mechanical damage, making the infested leaves less harmful for consumption than mechanically wounded leaves. salivary and frass effectors in other lepidoptera species that disrupt plant defense signaling are currently being studied . in addition, we speculate that the possible effectors present in mcb frass or saliva could suppress some of the maize defenses against mcb attack mediated by jasmonic acid, as reported for the maize–s. frugiperda interaction  <cit> . however, this partial suppression of defenses would depend on the maize genotype, because meja and infestation treatments had similar effects on the antibiosis of ep <dig> leaves, but meja and wounding treatments had similar effects on the antibiosis of ep <dig> leaves. in ep <dig>  the combination of meja + wounding reduced larval growth more than did the infestation treatment.

after investigating the effects of plant treatments  on mcb growth and survival, we determined whether these treatments induced the accumulation of resistance-related compounds  in leaves. at  <dig> dat, maize plants in all treatments and both genotypes had dimboa levels ranging from  <dig> to 932 μg/g dry weight. however, at  <dig> dat, no dimboa was detected in treated plants; while the concentration in untreated ep <dig> and ep <dig> plants was  <dig> and 304 μg/g dry weight, respectively. several studies have reported that hdmboa-glc was strongly induced in maize soon  after herbivory or jasmonic acid elicitation, while dimboa-glc levels decreased  <cit> . we propose that longer term  tissue disruption and exposure to meja could result in total conversion of dimboa-glc to hdmboa-glc to better deter herbivory by specialist insects, because hdmboa, unlike dimboa, cannot be detoxified by insects via glycosylation  <cit> . at this stage of development and using the current methodology, the only peak at quantifiable concentrations was that corresponding to dimboa. further in-depth research using precise analytical procedures needs to be carried out to identify and quantify the presence of derivates at lower concentrations.

we also investigated whether induced cell wall fortification mediated by hydroxycinnamates occurs in maize leaves after mcb attack, and tested whether mcb regurgitant and jasmonic acid play roles in elicitation and signaling. maize plants infested with mcb larvae showed increased cell wall fas and dfat contents in leaves at all sampling times, suggesting that leaf feeding by mcb larvae modified the leaf cell wall structure by increasing feruloylation of arabinoxylan chains and favoring hemicellulose cross-linking. changes in hydroxycinnamate contents in maize stalk after mcb attack have been reported previously  <cit> . in the short term, the effects of mcb regurgitant + wounding on fas and dfat contents were similar to the effect of larval feeding, but a significant effect of mcb regurgitant + wounding on fa and dfat contents was detected at  <dig> dat. therefore, the continuous contact of the maize plant with regurgitant elicitors during larval feeding may have a role in maintaining higher rates of fas and dfat synthesis in infested vs. control plants. unlike regurgitant + wounding and infestation treatments, meja and wounding treatments did not cause a significant difference in dfat compared with that in the control at  <dig> dat. this result suggested that the response mediated by jasmonic acid signaling or mechanical damage cannot solely explain the changes in fas and dfat contents in the infested plants. cell wall pcas were induced after infestation but, unlike fas and dfat, the pcas levels were similar in infested and control plants at  <dig> dat. therefore, although cell wall pcas are related to lignin deposition and their abundance is positively correlated with lignin content in several plant species  <cit> , they did not seem to participate in long-term leaf cell wall fortification in maize induced by mcb attack.

increased feruloylation and polymer cross-linking by insect feeding could reinforce the leaf cell wall. this reinforcement is expected to hinder the activity of cell wall-degrading enzymes and affect the accessibility and digestibility of plant tissues, and hence, larval performance  <cit> . nevertheless, after infestation, the significant difference in hydroxycinnamate contents between genotypes  at  <dig> dat was not associated with a significant difference in antibiosis against mcb. therefore, other mechanisms induced by insect attack, besides hydroxycinnamate induction and dimboa metabolism, could be involved in reducing insect performance on leaves of ep <dig> 

CONCLUSIONS
in both maize genotypes, the leaf responses to mcb infestation retarded the growth of mcb larvae but barely affected larval survival. in maize, mcb regurgitant could play a role in inducing dfat accumulation, but herbivore-associated effector molecules that suppress some responses triggered by wounding could also be involved in the maize–mcb interaction. in the ep <dig> maize line, the plants strengthened their leaf cell walls through incorporating hydroxycinnamates and increasing hemicellulose cross-linking in response to mcb attack, while the induced defenses in the ep <dig> line appeared to reflect a wider array of resistance mechanisms.

