BACKGROUND
gcn5-containing histone acetyltransferase  complexes play roles in different molecular processes by affecting nucleosome structure via histone modifications. the saga  complex harbors the gcn5/kat <dig>  catalytic subunit and the ada <dig>  adaptor protein  <cit> , among several other constituents. ada <dig> itself has no catalytic activity. it physically interacts with gcn <dig> and regulates its hat activity  <cit> . in metazoa there are two ada2-type adaptors: ada2b is a subunit of saga, while ada2a is a subunit of the atac  acetyltransferase complex  <cit> . the interacting regions between the human  hgcn <dig> and hada2b proteins have been mapped to the sant domain-containing central region of hada2b, but single amino acid changes in the c-terminal region of hada2b were also found to interfere with hgcn <dig> activity  <cit> . following the identification of the drosophila melanogaster dada2b gene, its ability to direct the synthesis of two dada2b isoforms was recognized  <cit> . we refer to these proteins of  <dig> and  <dig> amino acid residues as dada2bl and dada2bs, respectively. the existence of two dada2b isoforms might add to the functional complexity of dsaga. studies of dada2b mutants reported so far were carried out using dada2b alleles which affected the production of both dada2b isoforms  <cit> . these reports demonstrated the essential function of dada2b in drosophila melanogaster development and histone h3k <dig> and h3k <dig> acetylation, but provided no information on whether the two gene products are functionally equivalent or whether they have distinct roles regarding these and/or other functions. we sought an answer to this question by generating genetic constructs which permit the study of the function of an individual dada2b isoform in vivo. here we show that the two isoforms of dada2b are expressed at different levels during drosophila development, and present data on the in vivo function of dada2bs. we show that dada2bs alone partially restores viability and histone h <dig> acetylation levels of dada2b mutants. by comparing transcriptome profiles using microarray of dada2b and dada2bs transgene-carrier dada2b larvae, we found that dada2bs expression alone altered specific mrna levels to different extents. significantly, in dada2bs transgene-carriers the genes which were either up- or down-regulated in dada2b null mutants displayed a shift in their expression level towards that of the wild type control. our data suggest the preferential involvement of dada2bs in a dsaga variant with negative regulatory function.

RESULTS
two isoforms of dada2b are expressed at different levels during drosophila development
the structure of the dada2b gene  suggests that it can give rise to two mrna forms, which share their first two exons but are different in exons  <dig> and  <dig> . consequently, the encoded two isoforms of dada2b are identical in their n-terminal parts, but differ in their c-terminal regions. the shared parts of the two proteins harbor a zinc finger-like zz and a sant domain, characteristic of all known ada <dig> proteins, and two of three so-called ada boxes   <cit> . a third ada box is present only in the longer isoform of dada2b.

using primers which permit the amplification of cdnas specific for either of the two mrna forms, we detected both mrna variants in d. melanogaster by rt-pcr . in agreement with this, using dada2b-specific antibodies raised against an n-terminal peptide of the protein we detected two isoforms of dada2b at different stages of drosophila development . in denaturing gels the two forms migrate as  <dig> kda and  <dig> kda proteins. these molecular mass values correspond well to the expected mass of the dada2bl and dada2bs isoforms, respectively. the amounts of detectable dada2b isoforms vary at different stages of drosophila development . dada2bs is detectable at highest levels in embryos, and at lowest levels in the mid-larval stage. we noticed that despite the use of protease inhibitors during sample preparations, a fast migrating protein recognized specifically by the dada2b-specific antibody was present in samples obtained from pupae . in samples obtained from dada2b null pupae  this protein was completely absent, similarly to the two dada2b isoforms . therefore we find it unlikely that this band corresponds to an immunoreactive protein unrelated to dada2b. a clarification of the relationship between this protein and dada2bs and l isoforms, however, requires further studies.

in earlier biochemical separation of dgcn5-containing complexes, dada2b proteins with different molecular masses were detected in embryonic nuclear extract fractions corresponding to  <dig> - <dig> mda complexes  <cit> . as each of these dada2b forms co-fractionated with tbp, taf <dig> and taf <dig> proteins, this observation may suggest that several dada2b isoforms are components of either the same or related multiprotein complexes. to explore this possibility we wanted to determine whether dada2b isoforms formed heterodimers and interacted with dada <dig>  another component of ada2b-containing hat complexes. since earlier we found that mutations of the dada2b gene affected dp <dig> function  <cit> , and physical interaction between dada2b and dp <dig> was demonstrated  <cit> , we were also interested to learn whether dada2b isoforms show differences in interaction with dp <dig>  to detect protein-protein interactions we expressed one of the dada2b isoforms with n-terminal flag and the other with ha epitope tag in s <dig> cells, and performed co-immunoprecipitations using epitope-specific antibodies. co-precipitation of dada2bs with dada2bl and vice versa indicated in vivo physical interaction between the two isoforms . furthermore, both dada2b isoforms co-precipitated with dada <dig>  as well as with dp <dig> . thus, the tested protein-protein interactions suggested the possibility of dimer formation between the two dada2b isoforms but did not reveal different abilities of dada2b isoforms to participate in interactions with dada <dig> or dp <dig> 

taken together, these data indicate that dada2b gives rise to at least two protein isoforms, dada2bl and dada2bs. the two isoforms are present at different levels during drosophila development. furthermore, the two isoforms interact with each other and with dada <dig>  another subunit of gcn5-containing hat complexes. these observations are in line with earlier observations indicating that in embryo extracts different dada2b forms are present in the same or similar sized complexes, most probably in dsaga.

the expression of dada2bs isoform partially rescues dada2b lethality
in order to study the function of individual dada2b isoforms we generated transgenic lines expressing dada2bl or dada2bs with egfp fused to their c-termini. the transgenes were constructed by fusion of genomic and cdna sequences in such a way that the expression of the egfp-tagged proteins could be directed either by the dada2b promoter or by a gal <dig> driver due to a uas sequence inserted in front of the promoter. the expression of the egfp-tagged dada2b isoforms is clearly detectable in extracts of transgene-carrier larvae . the immunoblots also reveal that in dada2bl-egfp transgene-carrier animals, in addition to the egfp-tagged long isoform, the shorter form of dada2b is also produced. this is due to the genomic origin of the transgene and alternative splicing of the transcript.

next we studied the potential of dada2b isoforms to complement dada2b mutation. dada2bd <dig> is a null allele resulting in lethality in pupal stages  <cit> . in contrast, 10% of pupae of homozygous dada2bd <dig> mutants carrying a single copy of dada2bs-egfp, and 85% of those carrying a single copy of dada2bl-egfp completed development and emerged as full-fledged adults . the incomplete rescue by the dada2bl-egfp transgene was surprising since carriers of this can express the short isoform as well . we reasoned that the egfp tag might interfere with the function of the protein. as the egfp tag could similarly affect dada2bs-egfp transgene function, we constructed an untagged dada2bs transgene and studied its rescue ability. ectopic expression of dada2bs without an egfp tag significantly increased the eclosion rate of transgene-carrier dada2b null animals, as 40% of larvae emerged as adults . however, despite the high level of dada2bs expression by the transgene-carriers , we never observed a complete rescue by the short isoform of dada2b alone. furthermore, we noticed that adults rescued by the dada2bs transgene had a short lifespan .

in summary, from these data we conclude that the dada2b short isoform can partially provide dada2b functions essential for the development of morphologically normal animals. the incomplete rescue by dada2bs might suggest that complexes containing this isoform only cannot perform all dsaga functions perfectly.

the involvement of dada2bs isoform in histone h <dig> acetylation
in dada2b mutants acetylation of nucleosomal histone h <dig> at k <dig> and k <dig> is severely decreased due to the functional impairment of dsaga, the dada2b-containing gcn <dig> hat complex  <cit> . we thus found it interesting to determine the activity of complexes containing only dada2bs in this respect. polytene chromosomes of dada2bl-egfp transgene-carrier dada2bd <dig> l <dig> larvae displayed similar staining intensity with antibodies specific for h3k14ac or h3k9ac as chromosomes of wild type animals . this indicated that, in accord with the observed almost complete rescue, dada2bl-egfp transgene-carrier larvae produce acetylation competent hat complexes. in contrast, chromosomes of dada2bs-egfp transgene-carriers revealed significantly weaker dsaga-specific acetylation signals . the transgene directing the expression of untagged dada2bs, which was more potent in rescue experiments, was also more effective in restoring h <dig> acetylation. immunodetection of h3k9ac in extracts of dada2b mutants and transgene-carriers also indicated that dada2bs complemented at least partially the dsaga-specific h <dig> acetylation in dada2b null mutants . thus, cells containing only the short isoform of dada2b produce acetylation-competent hat complex; however, their activity towards nucleosomal histone tails seems to be reduced. it is noteworthy that despite the reduced levels of h3k <dig> and k <dig> acetylation, a significant fraction of dada2bs transgene-carrier animals completed development and reached adult stage.

transcriptome analysis of dada2bs isoform expressing larvae
the complementation of dada2b  mutation by the dada2bs transgene indicated that this isoform can partially restore development. in order to answer the question whether the partial functional rescue was the result of an overall decrease in gene transcription or the differential expression of specific genes, we performed transcriptome analysis. we compared the mrna profiles of wild type, dada2b null mutants and the dada2bs-egfp transgene-carriers in dada2bd <dig> background. mrna samples were obtained from late l <dig> larvae synchronized to anterior spiracle eversion and hybridized to cdna microarray  containing  <dig>  <dig> target sequences. hybridizations were performed using three independent biological samples. the analysis of microarray data in respect to wild type and dada2b null comparisons has been described  <cit> ; here we analyse the effects of dada2bs expression.

we found that in dada2b larvae the levels of  <dig> mrnas were reduced by more than 50% of their levels in control samples   <cit>  . the simplest explanation for this could be that this group of genes requires the function of the dsaga hat module for transcription, and in absence of dada2b they are transcribed less effectively. surprisingly, in dada2bs samples  a higher number of mrnas  were present at less than 50% levels compared to wild type samples . the overlap between the groups of genes down-regulated in dada2b null and in dada2bs transgene-carriers is high: 77% . this suggests that for effective transcription of these genes the long isoform, or alternatively both isoforms of dada2b are required. another group of genes  was identified in which genes are down-regulated when only dada2bs is present but expressed normally in loss of both dada2b isoforms . the response of these genes suggests that dada2bs-containing complexes could act as their negative regulators. this may indicate that dada2bs may also be present in complexes affecting transcription negatively.

we demonstrated earlier that the absence of dada2b results in increased transcription of several genes  <cit>  . in fact, the number of mrnas showing increased signals in dada2b mutants exceeded the number of those which were decreased . the overlap between the genes with increased mrna levels in dada2b null mutants versus dada2bs rescued conditions is 60% . in contrast, 73% of those genes represented with a higher mrna level in animals having only dada2bs were also overexpressed in the dada2b mutant . from a different perspective: only 40%  of genes up-regulated in dada2b null mutants were restored by dada2bs close to control level . taken together, the increase of mrna levels in absence of dada2b is the result of a derepression type of mechanism. the presence of dada2bs alone prevents this in 40% of the affected genes.

genes which display altered mrna levels in dada2b mutants expressing dada2bs-egfp  were classified according to gene ontology  enrichments . similarly, we compared the go categories of those which show altered expression in the presence of dada2bs, but are not affected in the dada2b mutant . the distribution of these two groups of genes among go categories is very similar concerning both the activated and the repressed genes. among the genes which show increased expression only in the presence of dada2bs , those belonging to go groups proteolysis and cuticle formation are underrepresented . on the other hand, the representation of genes belonging to go categories defense response and transport is somewhat higher among those genes activated only in dada2bs. no difference is observable in the distribution according to go categories between those groups of genes repressed in dada2bs or in the group of genes which was affected by only dada2bs . it is noteworthy that genes related to transcription are represented in higher numbers both among those repressed in dada2bs and dada2bs only, compared to those activated in either of these.

the effect of dada2bs isoform on the transcription of selected genes
in order to explore whether alterations in the expression of individual genes can uncover specific patterns we analysed the expression of those genes which had the highest hybridization signals  from the sets of genes affected. in order to investigate the possibility that the different dada2b isoform containing dsaga complexes may have diverse functions, we included dada2bl-egfp transgene-carriers into this microarray analysis. in this respect dada2bl-egfp transgene-carriers might be considered as a phenocopy of a dada2b hypomorphic mutant. as described above, the dada2bl-egfp transgene allowed the production of the short dada2b isoform as well, but resulted in only partial phenotypic rescue, most probably due to the egfp tag .

as expected, in samples obtained from animals expressing an egfp-tagged isoform of either dada2bs or dada2bl, most of the affected genes had rna hybridization signal intensities situated between the signals of mutant and wild type samples . significantly, in carriers of either transgene only very few genes were represented by lower or higher rna signals than in the wild type or null mutant. this is a strong indication of the good quality of our hybridization data. a comparison of signal intensities observed in the four genotypes  allowed the classification of genes into groups . in the case of a group of genes down-regulated in null mutants, neither of the transgenes could restore the mrna levels . in the case of a large number of dada2b dependent genes, however, the rna levels were restored to some extent by both or one of the transgenes. the presence of the dada2bl-egfp transgene resulted in higher hybridization signals than the presence of the dada2bs-egfp for all of these genes . this is in line with the observation that the dada2bl-egfp transgene had a better rescue ability than the dada2bs-egfp. practically, for all genes which were represented with decreased mrna level in dada2b null animals, the expression of dada2bs only was less effective in restoring the wild type mrna level than the dada2bl transgene .

on about half of the genes which were up-regulated in dada2b mutants, the two transgenes had virtually identical effects: neither could restore the wild type rna levels . in the case of the other half of the genes which were up-regulated in dada2b mutants, the expression of either dada2b-egfp transgene resulted in a decrease in the mrna level, causing a shift towards the wild type level in transgene-carriers. intriguingly, for several genes  the expression of the short dada2b isoform alone resulted in mrna levels closer to the wild type than the expression of both isoforms from dada2bl-egfp .

CONCLUSIONS
drosophila saga harbors one of the two fly ada2-type adaptors, dada2b, while dada2a is present in the atac hat complex  <cit> . within the yeast saga ada <dig> and ada <dig> are believed to play a role in extending the lysine specificity of gcn <dig> hat  <cit> . in accord with this function, yada <dig> physically interacts with ygcn <dig>  <cit> . the sant domain of yada <dig> was mapped as a region critical for the interaction and the n-terminal half of this domain was found to be required for effective histone acetylation by ygcn <dig> in the context of saga  <cit> . in drosophila too, the absence of dada2b makes dsaga an incompetent nucleosomal histone h <dig> acetyltransferase  <cit> .

we present here biochemical and genetic evidences that the two isoforms of dada2b are expressed in different quantities during drosophila development. it might be surprising that despite the detection of two different forms of dada2b messages in earlier studies  <cit>  the functions of the two protein isoforms have not been studied. since dada2bs has only a short unique peptide segment distinguishing it from dada2bl, discriminating between the two isoforms might be difficult by mass spectrometric determination of dsaga constituents. the antibody we used in this study for dada2b detection is highly specific and the complete absence of both dada2b isoforms from extracts of dada2b null animals  proves that both proteins are bona fide products of dada2b.

our analysis of dada2bs transgene-carriers provides information on the in vivo function of the short dada2b isoform. the partial phenotypic rescue of dada2b null mutants by dada2bs transgenes proves that the shorter isoform alone can contribute to dsaga functions required for the completion of development. the decreased viability of adults possessing only dada2bs suggests functional deficiencies, which might be related to dsaga function in neuronal development  <cit> . the dsaga-specific histone h <dig> modification pattern of animals expressing only dada2bs indicates a reduction in the level of h3k14ac and particularly in that of h3k9ac . the high level of dada2bs expression in the transgene-carriers makes it unlikely that the amount of dsaga complexes would be limiting. rather, the hat activity of dsaga complexes containing only dada2bs seems to be generally decreased. a change in activity of a c-terminally truncated dada2b form is in accord with our recent observation that the c-terminal regions of dada <dig> proteins play important roles in targeting them to gcn5-containing complexes  <cit> .

microarray analysis of total rna profiles revealed that the mrna levels corresponding to several genes affected by dada2b mutation were partially restored in dada2bs transgene-carriers. significantly, the levels of those mrnas, which were either up- or down-regulated in dada2b null mutants, were changed towards the wild type control in dada2bs transgene-carriers . furthermore, the short dada2b isoform alone seems to be more potent to restore mrna levels of genes up-regulated in null mutants.

for a large number of genes we observed that in dada2bs expressing animals the mrna levels were close to those detected in dada2b null mutants, so dada2bs could not restore the normal expression levels of these genes. in the case of a smaller number of genes the mrna levels in dada2bs transgene-carriers were between those detected in wild type and dada2b samples. the intermediate mrna levels of these genes are indicative of a partial dsaga function. perhaps the most interesting are those few genes for which the presence of dada2bs resulted in mrna levels close to the wild type . all these genes are represented with increased rna level in null mutants, but in the presence of the short dada2b isoform their expression is kept at a lower level. the expression of dada2bs alone results in a decreased level of mrna for more genes than the expression of none of the dada2b isoforms . one explanation for these observations could be that the negative function of dada2b-containing complex is restored better if at least the short isoform is present, than if none.

the microarray data unfortunately does not provide information on which step of transcription is affected when only dada2bs is expressed. saga complexes have several structural modules, to which specific functions can be assigned  <cit> . the ada <dig> type proteins belong to the gcn5-hat module, but this does not exclude the possibility that they modify saga function through mechanisms other than histone acetylation. for example mutations affecting wda and dada2b proteins cause similar phenotypes though the former is part of the deubiquitinating module  <cit> . furthermore, the acetyltransferase function of saga could affect gene expression by several mechanisms including promoter specific modification, global histone acetylation, factor acetylation, acting at pic formation or at elongation  <cit> . the various saga functions explain the observations that up- and down-regulated genes are detected in comparable numbers in dada2b mutants. the phenotype and histone acetylation pattern of animals expressing only dada2bs indicate that with the short dada2b isoform dsaga complexes with reduced activity are formed. whether the activity changes of these complexes affect the expression of genes selectively and differently at specific stages and/or conditions remains to be revealed. our data on the alterations of the transcriptome in the presence of dada2bs alone suggest that the use of distinct ada2b adaptor isoforms could be a way to achieve gene-selective effects.

