BACKGROUND
the microbial ecology of the human small intestine is of interest since it is the first site where intestinal microbes interact with ingested food components  <cit> . due to poor physical accessibility, there is only limited knowledge of the microbial gene functions and metabolic pathways that are operating in the small intestine microbiota. powerful high throughput sequence-driven metagenomic approaches have emerged to study the genetic potential of complex gut microbial communities  <cit> . metagenome analyses of microbial samples derived from the human small intestine have previously identified genes and corresponding pathways involved in transport and metabolism of simple carbohydrate substrates to be enriched in the small intestine microbiota, suggesting their importance for the functioning of this microbial ecosystem  <cit> . however, elucidation of the actual activity and metabolic role of individual microbial members in the small intestine is still limited.

transcript abundance as a proxy for activity may complement the dna-based analyses by identifying the metabolic activity patterns of individual microbial members and by unraveling the community responses to changing environmental conditions  <cit> . metatranscriptome analysis at a small scale using a cdna cloning and sequencing approach already demonstrated that the genes and functional categories that are enriched in the small intestine metagenome, were also among the highest expressed functions  <cit> . the application of mrna enrichment procedures in combination with next generation sequencing  technologies on pure cultures has clearly established that in depth analysis of transcriptomic landscapes are now feasible  <cit>  and was applied to microbial communities of marine  <cit> , soil  <cit> , and human gastrointestinal tract  <cit>  origins. the two most frequently used high throughput rna sequencing  technologies for metatranscriptome analysis are provided by roche- <dig> flx titanium  <cit>  and illumina  <cit> , which differ in the length and the number of sequence reads generated. current illumina protocols generate single-end sequencing reads with a shorter read length, but with a greater depth of analysis as compared to roche- <dig> technology  <cit> . notably, to extend the illumina read-length, paired-end sequencing technology can be applied to increase the information content and to enhance the identification of expressed gene functions in complex communities  <cit> .

both rna-seq technologies mentioned above provide large datasets of great complexity, which require a reliable bioinformatics pipeline to effectively convert the initial data into biologically relevant information. goncalves et al. <cit>  constructed an r-based pipeline for pre-processing, quality assessment, and expression estimation of rna sequencing datasets. analogously, a bioinformatics analysis pipeline for roche  <dig> sequencing technology derived metatranscriptome of soil and seawater samples was described by gilbert et al.  <cit> , which includes removal of low quality reads and reads originating from rrna sequences, followed by functional annotation based on the predicted open reading frames  and comparison between datasets. however, several steps were not described in detail and although this methodology appears to be appropriate for processing and interpreting of  <dig> datasets, it may not be suitable for the massive amounts of short-read length reads that are present in illumina generated datasets.

here we present a reliable pipeline that can process illumina-rna-seq metatranscriptome data by linking the sequence reads to reference gene databases, their assigned functions, and predicted phylogenetic origin. the information retrieved from the processed data can be employed to obtain comprehensive biological insights in the ecosystem’s activity patterns. we employed this pipeline for the primary interpretation of the activity patterns of the human small intestine microbiome using effluent samples obtained from individuals with an ileostoma.

RESULTS
two rna samples designated a and b were extracted from effluent samples of two healthy ileostomy subjects with an overall yield of  <dig> and  <dig> μg of total rna per ml of effluent, respectively. the difference in yield correlated with a more than 10-fold higher total bacterial community density per ml in sample a relative to sample b, which was determined by qpcr targeting the 16s rrna gene . the rna samples had reasonable rna-quality scores  of  <dig>  and  <dig>  for samples a and b, respectively . although sample b was estimated to contain lower quality rna compared to sample a, the rna size-profile of sample b still lacked the intense degradation rna peaks that are typical for poor-quality rna , and thereby meet the criteria set for rna quality  <cit> . from the total rna, mrna was enriched using a bead-based selective capture procedure, which was previously shown to have a limited impact on the mrna composition  <cit> . however, as this procedure is based on 16s and 23s rrna specific capture probes, rrna removal efficiency varies between bacterial species. the mrna enrichment procedure resulted in approximately 70% removal of the total ribosomal rna based on the quantity of enriched mrna that was recovered .

both single- and paired-end illumina cdna libraries had an insert size ranging between 200- <dig> bp. two independent single-end cdna libraries of sample a were constructed and sequenced, yielding datasets ‘a’ that contained ~ <dig>  million reads and ‘a-rep’ that was sequenced at 3-fold lower depth and contained ~ <dig> million reads. the mrna-enriched rna of sample b was used to construct a paired-end sequencing library, of which the sequencing generated approximately  <dig>  million read-pairs. both single and paired-end sequencing reads had a read-length of 101nt. the paired-end sequencing dataset of sample b was split in two individual datasets arbitrarily designated b-left and b-right, corresponding to the forward and reverse illumina reads, respectively. the resulting four datasets  were used for the development and validation of a bioinformatics analysis pipeline , and for primary functional analyses of the resulting activity patterns of the human small intestine microbiota.

development of the rna-seq bioinformatics analysis pipeline
the overall quality score of the raw sequence reads was very high. the vast majority of the reads had average phred scores of more than  <dig> . to avoid unreliable results, most metatranscriptome studies to date only analyzed sequence reads with high average phred scores  <cit> . however, a recent analysis of rna-seq datasets obtained for bacillus subtilis str.  <dig>  <cit>  demonstrated that lower-quality rna-seq reads can still be reliably mapped to specific regions of the strain’s genome, indicating that removal of lower-quality reads may lead to loss of biologically relevant information. since the aim of our study is to assign function and phylogeny information to individual reads, rather than higher-stringency multi-read procedures like re-sequencing or assembly, we employed a minimum average phred score of  <dig> as a cut-off filter in primary data-processing steps . using this threshold, less than 5% of the total reads was removed from the rna-seq datasets used in this study.

the massive illumina rna-seq datasets may contain repeated sequence-reads that align to identical genetic loci. these reads are likely deriving from highly expressed and/or highly conserved sequence regions of strains and species in the community, such as the rrna genes  <cit> . to avoid inefficient and repetitive mapping of these repeated reads, and to reduce the dataset’s complexity, identical reads within a dataset were clustered . this compression strategy significantly reduced the complexity of the dataset, yielding approximately 12– <dig> million unique-reads for the datasets a, b-left, and b-right and  <dig> million unique-reads for the lower-depth dataset a-rep , which were subjected to further analysis. the clustering of identical reads was executed for compression purposes only, and transcript-abundance calculations employed the actual read-abundance of the clustered identical reads.

removal of rrna and trna sequences
although an mrna enrichment step was performed prior to sequencing-library construction, rrna removal efficiencies are generally incomplete. therefore, removal of reads originating from rrna and trna sequences is a compulsory procedure when dealing with rna-seq datasets from bacteria  <cit> . in addition, the illumina data may still contain a fraction of reads originating from phix spike-in control sequences and illumina adaptor sequences that should also be removed. to this end, iterative filtering steps were employed to remove 80-86% of the reads on basis of alignment to rrna/trna , to phix, and to the illumina adaptor sequences . to test the performance of this filtering step, the paired-end reads of dataset b were filtered separately, revealing a virtually identical  removal efficiency from the read pairs of the b-left and b-right datasets.

because the oligonucleotides employed in the mrna enrichment procedure applied here are targeting the 5’- and 3’-terminal ends of the 16s and 23s rrna molecules, the efficacy of the procedure largely depends on the fraction of intact total rrna in the sample. therefore, the relatively high amount of rrna derived reads that remained in the rna-seq datasets suggested the presence of  degraded rrna fragments in the original total rna samples that were not captured by the rrna probes  <cit> . the reads coding for rrna and trna sequences were analyzed for their overall taxonomic composition. the results indicated that more than 99% of these reads originated from prokaryotes and less than 1% could be assigned to a eukaryotic origin . based on the low number of eukarya derived sequences in the rna-seq datasets, further analysis was focussed on assigning the reads of prokaryotic  origin.

read-assignment to the reference genome database
the rna-seq reads that passed the rrna/trna filter are assumed to represent mrna transcripts of bacterial origin  that are largely expected to derive from protein encoding genes that are transcribed, but could also derive from intergenic non-coding genomic regions. phylogenetic and functional assignments were obtained by directly aligning the mrna reads to the complete ncbi prokaryote genome database that included draft genomes.

according to simulation experiments , minimum bit score thresholds of  <dig> and  <dig> can be used for phylogenetic assignments at genus- and family-level, both with > 80% confidence level. respectively 73% and 50% of the mrna reads of datasets a and b aligned with sequences in the ncbi prokaryote genome database with a bit score of  <dig> or higher. the phylogenetic distribution of these genus-assigned mrna reads revealed that 70% and 34% of the mrna reads were assigned to the genus streptococcus in the rna-seq datasets a and b, respectively. both datasets also contained mrna reads that were assigned to the genus veillonella, which appeared to be more abundant in the dataset a  as compared to dataset b . inversely, mrna reads that were assigned to the clostridium and haemophilus genera were more abundant in dataset b  compared to dataset a  . notably, turicibacter-assigned mrna reads were only encountered in the dataset b . these observations illustrate the subject specificity of the small intestinal microbiota ecosystem activity profile. a similar conclusion was also reached in previous studies that described the human small intestine microbiota composition, revealing relatively consistent high abundances of streptococcus spp. in different individuals and a more variable relative abundance of species belonging to the genera of veillonella and clostridium <cit> . highly similar phylogenetic distributions at genus-level were obtained for datasets a and a-rep, while the separate analysis of the b-left and b-right datasets generated a virtually identical phylogenetic profile .

the mrna reads with an alignment bit-score between  <dig> and  <dig> could be confidently assigned at family level and represented 11% and 15% of the reads in datasets a and b, respectively. the family-level assignments identified in dataset a were dominated by the family of the streptococcaceae that captured approximately 85% of the family-assigned reads. by contrast, 65% of the family-assigned reads identified in dataset b belonged to the clostridiaceae family, supporting the composition difference in these samples that was also apparent from the genus-assigned mrna reads. the mrna reads in datasets a and b that had alignment bit-scores below  <dig>  were grouped as unclassified reads .

the microbiota composition of the samples a and b was also determined using a 16s rrna gene and transcript targeting approach, using 16s rdna and 16s rrna pyrosequencing. of the total sequence reads obtained in this analysis, between  <dig> and 97% could be assigned to genus level using the rdp classifier with a 80% confidence threshold  <cit> . a remarkable overall similarity of the relative genus abundances was observed for the phylogenetic reconstruction of the small intestinal microbiota ecosystem on basis of the 16s  datasets and the phylogenetic assignments of the mrna reads . this observation is in clear contrast with the low correlation observed between the total and active fractions of the fecal microbiota community  <cit> , indicating that compared to the fecal microbiota, the human small intestine ecosystem displays more congruency in microbial composition and activity  patterns.

notably, the mrna derived phylogenetic ecosystem reconstruction contained a substantial amount  of reads that could not be assigned at genus level, while the 16s-based sequences could nearly all be assigned at genus level  . this illustrates the superiority of the 16s rrna gene as a phylogenetic marker for microbiota composition profiling, which is probably due to the lower coverage of the gene-sequence space within the prokaryotic genome database as compared to the 16s rrna sequence database.

all read alignments with minimum bit score of  <dig> or higher could reliably  be assigned to a cog-based function . using this minimum bit score threshold,  <dig> to 93% of the mrna reads  could be assigned to homologous loci in bacterial genomes using megablast  and blastn . this relatively high hit-frequency illustrates that the ncbi genome database provides a good representation of the functional diversity encountered in the human small intestine ecosystem. however, it should be noted that samples from other ecosystems may be less well represented in this database.

classification of aligned mrna reads to protein and non-protein encoding gene regions
bacterial genomes commonly have a relatively high coding density, but also contain non-coding or intergenic regions  <cit> . therefore, not all mrna reads in the dataset are necessarily derived from transcripts of protein-coding genes, but may also represent non-coding 5’-, or 3’-untranslated regions of gene transcripts or specific non protein-coding rna molecules. to restrict the analysis to mrna reads that contain functional gene-expression information, the reads assigned to protein-encoding genes were selected among the genome-assigned reads . this procedure captured more than 84% of the total genome assigned reads, illustrating that a relatively limited percentage of mrna reads aligned with intergenic or non-coding regions in the genome database   <cit> . although mrna reads were aligning with  <dig> to  <dig> thousand different genes per dataset, only a fraction of these assignments were considered to be significant. significant gene expression identification was determined by ranking the genes based on the number of reads that were assigned to the gene, followed by selecting the top ranking genes that captured 95% of the assigned mrna reads. application of this threshold limits the number of gene-transcript identifications to approximately  <dig> to  <dig> thousand genes per dataset , supporting that this restrictive step removed numerous spuriously identified gene-transcripts.

for genes that were predicted to originate from a specific taxonomic origin, full-length mrna read coverage strongly supports the expression of the encoded function. therefore, the coverage of each gene detected by mrna read mapping was determined, revealing that approximately 40% of all genes identified within the datasets a, b-left and b-right have more than 80% of their sequence length covered . the high coverage gene-sets are expected to represent the highly expressed functions deriving from the dominant microbial genera in the ecosystem, and encompassed translation associated functions, glycolytic enzymes, and components of carbohydrate phosphotransferase systems . due to a three-fold lower sequencing depth, gene coverage is lower for dataset a-rep . nevertheless, only 25% less genes were identified in dataset a-rep compared to dataset a , implying that the lower depth of metatranscriptome analysis performed for dataset a-rep  still generated a substantial amount of information with respect to the main microbiome activity patterns . this observation may specifically be valid for microbial ecosystems of limited phylogenetic complexity, such as the human small intestine, which harbors ‘only’ approximately 5– <dig> dominant genera, but may not hold true for ecosystems that contain much more complex microbial communities with hundreds of different genera, such as the large intestine microbiota.

analysis of unassigned mrna reads
to further increase the function assignment of the mrna reads, the more sensitive protein-sequence alignment was qualitatively evaluated using blastx  <cit> . to this end, a randomly selected fraction of 10% of the reads that were not assigned to the prokaryotic genome database by nucleotide alignment  were subjected to blastx-based alignment to the ncbi protein database. this analysis revealed that approximately  <dig> and 70% of the unassigned reads could be significantly assigned to proteins in the datasets a and b, respectively. notably, the majority  of the proteins that were detected by these alignments had a functional annotation , indicating that this salvage strategy may expand the detected protein-function repertoire. for both datasets the translated mrna reads were predominantly assigned to proteins derived from the clostridium related species . clostridium genus displays an extensive genetic diversity and the results suggest that the small intestinal members of this genus are less well represented in the prokaryote genome database. subsequently, the reads that remained unassigned after blastx-alignment to the ncbi protein database were blastx-aligned to the  <dig>  million genes of the human fecal metagenome database  <cit>  and the approximately  <dig>  genes of the human small intestinal metagenome database  <cit> . these alignments allowed the assignment of a further 10% and 16% of reads derived from datasets a and b, respectively. overall, the finally remaining unassigned fraction of mrna reads was approximately 3% of the total putative mrna-derived reads in the datasets. these reads could represent novel bacterial genes  <cit>  that are not represented in the databases used, or could represent putative mrna sequences originating from eukaryotes, that may be related to the eukaryal rrna sequences that were identified at a low frequency in these datasets during the rrna filtering step , or finally, they may also be the result of sequencing artifacts.

reproducibility and paired-end versus single-end sequence analyses
to establish reproducibility of the rna-seq approach, a technical duplicate sequencing dataset was generated for the sample obtained from subject a . comparison of the number of reads that were significantly assigned to genes for the two sequence datasets of sample a revealed a highly significant pearson correlation of  <dig>  , supporting the high reproducibility of the rna-seq approach as has also been reported in previous studies  <cit> . consistency in read assignment was also apparent for the paired-end reads, where 91% of the paired mrna reads independently aligned with sequences from the same genus . however, only 79% of the paired-end reads aligned to the same species, which is in line with results obtained from the simulated reads . due to high levels of sequence similarity within species of the same genus, the simulated read analysis  predicted that a reliable phylogenetic assignment could only be achieved at genus level. in terms of function assignment , a near-perfect congruency was observed between the mate-pairs , implying that no additional functional information can be obtained from paired-end, relative to single-end sequencing methods.

functional analysis and metabolic pathways mapping
to obtain insight in the functional properties of the human small intestinal microbiota, significantly detected genes were assigned to cogs  <cit>  for functional analysis and linked to kegg orthologs  <cit>  for pathway identification. for approximately 89% of the genes that were detected, their encoded proteins could be assigned to a specific cog, of which between 80-90% have a functional annotation , whereas approximately 69% could be assigned to a kegg-orthology  identifier. the overall fraction of the total mrna reads that were captured within those cog and/or kegg annotated genes were  <dig> to 94% and  <dig> to 81% for cog and kegg assignments, respectively.

the majority of the cog function-assigned transcripts that were detected belong to functional categories “information storage and processing”  and “metabolism”.  . these findings suggest that the microbial communities are growing and metabolically active. notably, in a metatranscriptome study that targeted the fecal microbiota  <cit> , a predominance of the same functional categories was observed.

as anticipated, similar cog identifiers  were assigned to the protein-homologues of the technical replicate datasets , which is also clearly apparent from the similar cog category distribution of both datasets derived from sample a . analogously, in the datasets obtained for sample b, only  <dig> % of the read pairs were assigned to different cog ids . remarkably, comparison of the cog ids detected in datasets a and b revealed a significant similarity between the two samples . however, no similarity was observed in the comparison of the a and b datasets with respect to the expression levels of each significantly expressed gene . these observations imply that although these datasets are derived from different microbiomes in terms of species composition and gene expression profiles, the qualitative functional activity profiles are comparable, supporting substantial functional redundancy in the community members.

annotations using the kegg database  <cit>  were performed to enable effective metabolic pathway identification using the compatible ipath pathway mapping system  <cit> , which is less well compatible with cog function assignments. metabolic pathway mapping of the transcript profiles obtained from datasets a and a-rep gave an overall similar result . nevertheless, the higher resolution of dataset a allowed for the identification of pathways involved in secondary metabolite production and lipopolysaccharide biosynthesis . as expected, identical pathway mapping results were obtained for datasets b-left and b-right of sample-b . the metabolic mapping of the metatranscriptomic profile of datasets a and b also displayed a high degree of similarity . both profiles revealed major similarity of pathways related to nucleotide, carbohydrate, amino acid, energy, and lipid metabolism, as well as cofactor and vitamin synthesis. nevertheless, detailed analysis still allowed detection of differences of pathways related to oxidative phosphorylation and propanoate metabolism which were detected at a much higher level in dataset a, while pathways related to metabolism of specific amino acids were more abundant in dataset b . these differences may reflect ecosystem adaptations to environmental differences such as variation in the dietary composition of subject a and b.

for each dataset, the cog distributions of the mrna reads that could be assigned to the two most abundant genera for each sample were analyzed to evaluate genus specific functional activity profiles within the ecosystem. these analyses were performed for the genera streptococcus, veillonella and clostridium, using two representative reference genomes of each genus from intestinal and non-intestinal isolation origins . in comparison with the cog functional category profile of the reference genomes, the cogs assigned to the genera streptococcus , veillonella  and clostridium  were enriched for the functional categories “carbohydrate transport and metabolism”, “energy production and conversion”, and “translation, ribosomal structure and biogenesis”, respectively . in addition, the streptococcus assigned cog distribution profile resembled the total cog distribution profile, which is a reflection of the abundance of streptococcus-assigned reads in these datasets . variation in genus-specific cog distributions observed in both datasets is indicative for the distinct activities that can be observed for the different genera. this finding can be used as a starting point to decipher genus specific metabolic activity as well as the deduction of syntrophic relationships between different genera in the small intestine ecosystem.

CONCLUSIONS
insight into the functional characteristics of the microbiota residing in different ecosystems can be obtained from metatranscriptome analysis. in this study, a pipeline was developed for the analysis of massive amounts of rna-seq data, which was evaluated using metatranscriptome datasets obtained from the microbial ecosystem found in the human small intestine. the pipeline enabled the effective removal of rrna derived sequences that dominated the primary sequence data, despite the implemented mrna enrichment procedure. this implies that the extend of the functional analysis still can be significantly improved by increasing the efficiency of rrna removal prior to cdna library construction. nevertheless, a substantial number of sequence reads derived from protein-encoding mrna transcripts that could be assigned to a function and/or to a phylogenetic origin at genus or family level were obtained in this study. moreover, the phylogenetic origin of specific transcripts and corresponding expressed functions was further substantiated by a global read-coverage of specific genes, such as genes that are highly expressed by dominant microbial members of the ecosystem.

although in this study, the pipeline was evaluated only for samples derived from the human small intestine, its generic set-up by using a ‘complete’ rrna database for filtering and the entire ncbi prokaryote genome database for mrna read-mapping makes it suitable for metatranscriptome analysis of datasets derived from other niches. nevertheless, the reliability of the assignment of the phylogenetic origin of expressed sequences is dependent on high sequence similarity levels in the alignment with a reference genome database.

this study establishes the reproducibility of the metatranscriptome sequencing approach to unravel the main activity profiles in the ecosystem, despite differences in sequencing depth. it also shows that functional insights and accuracy of the phylogenetic assignment are not significantly improved by the application of paired-end sequencing procedures.

for the small intestine ecosystem, a strong correlation was observed between the community composition , the overall activity of the community members , and the specific activity of community members . preliminary functional profiling of the metatranscriptomic landscapes revealed the overall  activity profiles belonging to the microbial ecosystem of the human small intestine. this implies that the method presented provides a means to monitor the impact of for example, dietary interventions on the microbiota activity. moreover, metatranscriptome analysis enabled the discrimination of functional cog expression profiles of specific genera within the ecosystem, which provides a framework for further study aiming to unravel syntrophic relationships that are operating in complex microbial ecosystems.

