BACKGROUND
since the 1990s, data sets have accumulated where large numbers of genes or proteins are associated with each other using a variety of experimental approaches  <cit> ). prominent examples of such data include physical protein interactions identified by the yeast two-hybrid  <cit>  or affinity purification mass spectrometry  <cit>  techniques, and genetic interactions where the non-multiplicative  effects of disrupting two genes are reported  <cit> . recently, a quantitative variant of the genetic interaction screen was developed, termed epistasis-mapping  <cit> , and to date several thousand interactions have been published. as well as information describing their interactions, many other types of information describing genes and proteins are available, for instance, where they are located in the cell, what types of biochemical function they carry out, and whether they are essential for viability or associated with impaired phenotype when they are disrupted  may have a corresponding importance for the cell. another property observed in biological and other networks is small-worldness, meaning that all nodes tend to be connected to each other by a small number of intermediate nodes  <cit> . methods for analysing networks constructed using both physical and genetic interactions have been reviewed  <cit> .

motifs or configurations that occur repeatedly in networks can be used to try and understand the underlying biology. over- or under-represented configurations have been observed in a wide variety of networks, including biological networks such as protein interaction maps and ecological food chains  <cit> . in a pioneering example, zhang and coworkers  <cit>  searched an integrated saccharomyces cerevisiae network, containing five data types  studies; synthetic lethal interactions; correlated mrna expression profiles; and sequence homology relationships) for 3- and 4-node motifs and found several classes of statistically enriched configuration. the frequency with which motifs are observed reflects the fact that complex systems often have a restricted number of favoured states among the vast landscape of possible states. motifs have been classified into superfamilies, where different families of motif class are associated with different types of network feature in biological and other networks   <cit> . for instance, motifs corresponding to temporal transcriptional control of metabolic enzyme expression in yeast were recently identified  <cit> . in addition, network motifs may play different roles in different contexts, for instance very similar motifs engaged in different functions have been described in single cell microbes and in nerve cells  <cit> . other aspects of the relevance of network motifs to biology have been studied, including their role in the evolution of modularity  <cit> , their relationship with network hubs  <cit> , and their use in predicting physical protein-protein interactions  <cit> .

while network motifs can be viewed as tools to facilitate understanding, they may also serve as functional units that are used again and again by nature to solve biological problems. in networks where flux information is available , differential equations can be used to analyze the network and to find stable states. however, the majority of currently available datasets describing protein and gene interactions are static, describing merely the presence or absence of an interaction between the two genes in the network. in the case of e-maps a continuous score that may be positive or negative reflects the relative effect on growth rate of disrupting two genes  <cit> . hou and coworkers recently introduced mixture modelling to generate a probabilistic e-map network to which they applied a bayesian analysis to identify network modules  <cit> , an approach that shows considerable promise. here, we first asked whether enrichment for small triplet  motifs is present in e-map networks, and secondly whether enriched motifs are correlated with biological properties. because it is likely that large-scale e-maps will soon be generated for mammalian and other model systems using rnai technologies, our ultimate goal is to map the location of motifs within gene and protein networks relative to known biochemical pathways and protein complexes, in order to improve our understanding of how cells work.

RESULTS
identifying triplet motifs in a compendium of yeast epistatic interactions
the strength of the epistatic effect between two genes in an e-map is expressed using an s-score, which quantifies deviation from the growth rate  expected if no epistatic interaction occurs between the genes  <cit> . disruption of two genes can result in a phenotype where the growth rate is slower than expected , often corresponding to a situation where the product of one gene can compensate for the loss of the other. alternatively, a phenotype where growth rate is faster than expected may arise , corresponding to a situation where the disruptive effect of loss of one gene is, in fact, reversed or relieved by loss of another  <cit> .

we aimed to identify all the small triplet motifs composed of negative and positive e-map interactions . we first assembled a compendium of epistatic interactions that included all published s.cerevisiae e-map interactions  <cit> . this dataset comprises a two-dimensional array of epistasis scores for pairwise knockouts, amounting to  <dig>  yeast genes with  <dig>  pairwise epistatic scores and  <dig> , <dig>  missing values. genes that are tested in an e-map experiment are either complete knockouts  or damp  alleles with reduced transcription  <cit> .

in order to classify epistatic interactions as either positive, negative, or neutral , we defined symmetric s-score cutoffs in the e-map data sets, with equal numbers of positive and negative interactions taken from the upper and lower x percentile. here, x was specified by comparing the total number of each triplet type in the experimental e-map compendium with a randomised version of the compendium made by switching edges . we chose the extreme 1% s-scores  for a cutoff that maximally enriches or depletes observed number of triplets compared to random graphs . while studies to date in yeast suggest that negative interactions outnumber positive ones, it is unclear whether this reflects the nature of the yeast colony growth assay , or reflects a tendency in nature for negative interactions to dominate. recent studies in cultured cells using alternative assays suggest a more even distribution  <cit> , supporting the more conservative approach taken here. in order to reduce noise and to select only for genes that could be involved in a triplet, any gene that did not achieve two or more interaction scores beyond the threshold was excluded, leaving  <dig>  genes . hence, the set of binary interactions used to generate the triplets is not identical to the set of 1% highest and lowest s-scores in the original datasets; the set is available in additional file  <dig>  when arranged into triplets, these e-map compendium genes generated  <dig>  triplet motifs .

epistatically interacting genes pairs favour assembly into triplet motifs
triplets are the simplest type of epistatic motif  and are therefore a useful unit for studying the significance of motifs in e-map networks. a triplet motif contains a mutually interacting set of genes, and therefore is less likely to arise by chance, or through experimental noise, than binary interactions, or sets of three genes arranged in a linear manner. additionally, higher order motifs have generally been found to be made up of combinations of lower order  motifs. we counted the frequency of triplet types  in the data using random expectation with standard error, finding that all types are enriched over random . this confirms that genes interacting with two or more other genes prefer closed triplet motifs to linear or branched configurations, consistent with other reports showing that physical and genetic interactions tend to cluster together and to interact reciprocally within modules  <cit> . the distribution of triplet types at first appears to imply that negative interactions are more likely to be involved in triplets . in fact, while there are slightly more negative than positive interactions in the triplets , the disproportionate count of nnn and nnp triplets reflects a tendency for a given negative edge to be involved in more triplets than a positive edge , thereby making the pool of unique negative edges produce relatively more negative-containing triplets. this arrangement also is reflected in the counts of expected numbers of triplets, since the graph randomization procedure we apply preserves the degree of each node, i.e. the number of positive and negative edges connected to the node.

the tendency to partake in triplet motifs suggests that epistatic interactions arrange themselves into structures reflecting higher levels of cellular organization, and that triplet motifs might capture some aspects of this structure that are not apparent from examining pairwise interactions in isolation. by their nature, the presence of negative interactions suggest an aligned or redundant function between two genes or their protein products , while the presence of a positive interaction suggests counterbalancing functions within a complex or pathway . interestingly, the distribution of positive and negative interactions per individual gene is often far from random. even though the percentile cutoffs result in an equal number of positive and negative interactions being considered, we noticed that many genes interact predominantly through negative interactions or predominantly through positive interactions . this type of polarity was previously noted by segre and coworkers using computed models of epistatic interactions  <cit> .

triplet members often share biological properties
if triplet motifs are biologically significant, one would expect that the members are involved in similar processes in the cell. in order to establish whether triplets are associated with previously described properties , we built a table of feature presence/absence per position in the triplet  versus the triplet type  . we counted the number of biological properties shared among the nodes and edges of our set of e-map triplet motifs. the fold change in enrichment for negative interactions  and for positive interactions  show that many motif classes are enriched  in individual network contexts. overall, it is apparent that there is a general enrichment of biological features within triplets, as has been shown extensively for binary epistatic interactions  <cit> . for example, as expected, both negative and positive epistatic pairs within any type of triplet are several-fold more likely to share a phenotype. negative interactions within triplets are enriched for shared genetic interactions, while positive interactions similarly are more likely to share a physical interaction or membership of the same protein complex. interestingly, positive pairs within triplet motifs seem more likely than non-triplet pairs to share a cellular location, in contrast to negative pairs. many pathways operate across cellular locations , while most protein complexes are present in a single location at a given time, so this observations perhaps reflects the tendency for positive pairs to be associated with protein complexes or portions of biochemical pathways operating locally in the cell.

positive and negative edges within epistatic triplet motifs have distinct profiles of biological annotations
the distribution of triplet types among the compendium of e-map interactions reveals several distinct patterns of association with specific biological roles. in order to more fully understand the functional relevance of these patterns, we examined not only enrichment for biological annotations in the triplets themselves, but also the position within the triplet for any such enrichment . in nnn and ppp triplets, the position of each epistatic pair appears equivalent, but the magnitude of epistatic effect can vary between them. similarly, for nnp and npp triplets, the association of a particular property  with one pair rather than another may be informative. by focusing our analysis on the two main paradigms of protein organization in the cell, membership of protein complexes and membership of pathways, we can ask whether the occurrence of particular triplet motifs can be associated with particular arrangements of complexes or pathways. we therefore carried out fisher exact tests on entries in a table that cross-tabulates features with triplet types . this procedure yields an odds ratio and associated p-value for enrichment of biological features .

a number of general observations can be made. a) most striking is that the pair of positively interacting genes in an nnp triplet are highly enriched for physical protein-protein interactions and membership of protein complexes. indeed collins and coworkers  <cit>  showed that genes encoding physically interacting proteins are more likely to interact positively than negatively. there is also enrichment for shared function, shared biochemical process and shared cellular location for the positive pair in an nnp triplet. b) the negative edges within nnn, nnp and npp triplets often interact genetically, as expected. c) the negative edge of npp triplets tend to share biological database annotations, location in the cell, to be members of the same biochemical pathway, and/or physically interact. they also tend to interact negatively with paralogs in the yeast genome. d) ppp triplets are enriched for physical interactions between all members of the triplet.

in order to confirm that these features are general properties of the yeast epistasis network, and not confined to a individual experimental method or laboratory, we repeated this analysis on a recently published dataset comprising over  <dig> million tested pairs  <cit> . the resulting enrichment patterns are almost identical between the two datasets , suggesting that our observations are relevant at least for yeast epistatic interactions, and that these distinguishing properties may be useful for interpreting the potential roles of triplet genes in cellular biology. we next sought to analyze each triplet type, emphasizing the 'mixed'  triplets .

nnn and ppp triplet motifs
we extracted instances of nnn triplets where each edge is in a known genetic interaction, a combination that is highly enriched for this triplet class , and plotted as a graph . the triplets organize into structured  modules, each containing genes involved in a related process. overall, this nnn network confirms many earlier reports showing that networks of negative  interactions are enriched for functionally related genes. for example, one cluster of negative interactions occurs between several dna replication and repair enzymes, including members of the rad <dig> epistasis group , the mrx complex , and the 9-1- <dig> clamp , while another includes the proteasome genes pre <dig>  rpn <dig>  and rpn <dig>  because genes interacting via negative epistatic interactions often carry out mutually supportive roles , nnn motifs may be characteristic of genes acting cooperatively in functionally coherent roles.

triplets of type ppp are strongly correlated with physical protein-protein interactions, and overlap extensively with known protein complexes . by definition, the ppp-containing complexes exhibit positive internal  interactions. these contrast with the subunits of complexes such as the proteasome , whose genes tend to interact negatively. notably bandyopadhyay and co-workers  <cit>  found that complexes containing predominantly negative epistatic interactions were more likely to contain essential genes than those with predominately positive interactions. consistent with this, only two of the eight complexes depicted in the ppp sub-network  contain essential subunits. similarly, the finding that nnn-containing triplets tend to form an extended network, while ppp-enriched modules tend to be isolated, is consistent with an observations first described by kelley and ideker  <cit> . they showed that a combined genetic and physical interaction network in yeast could be better explained using a model where genetic interactions tended to separate physically interacting components  than one characterized by genetic interactions occurring within a physical complex .

npp and nnp triplet motifs
both nnp and npp motifs are informative because they are strongly associated with configurations adjoining protein complexes and pathways. because of the association between positive interactions and physical protein interactions, it might be expected that the higher the number of positive edges in a triplet, the more likely that one or more of the gene products take part in a physical interaction. in fact, while 8% of nnn motifs and 34% of ppp motifs have one or more physical interactions, the figure for nnp motifs is 40% . in contrast, npp motifs, despite containing two positive edges, are even less likely than nnn motifs to contain physically interacting gene products, only 7% having one or more physical interactions. as well as disfavouring the presence of physical interactions, the negative edge in npp motifs typically contain gene pairs that share annotated biological properties, indicating that they take part in the same biochemical pathways . npp motifs therefore, may be common in situations where two genes play partly redundant roles in a pathway, while both interact with a third that may acts in an opposing or antagonistic role, typical of a regulator. a cartoon model showing possible scenarios for npp motifs consistent with our observations is shown in figure 4b and discussed below. by contrast, within nnp motifs, the positive edge is usually between a gene pair whose corresponding proteins co-purify in a protein complex . although the third gene in an nnp triplet  is usually not a member of the same protein complex as the other two, it is generally involved in another, different complex . further supporting this model, the components of nnp triplets show highly correlated epistatic interaction profiles within the triplet , suggesting aligned function among the genes, and especially among the positively interacting genes. nnp triplets may therefore be associated with situations where different protein complexes coordinate or modify their activities by communicating with each other, mostly likely via a direct or indirect interaction between the proteins that span the two complexes .

npp motifs often highlight an antagonistic or regulatory relationship between two components of a biochemical pathway and a third gene
the most common scenario for npp motifs is that the negatively interacting gene pair is annotated within the same biochemical pathway but their gene products have not been shown to physically interact. in npp motifs, the negatively interacting genes in turn interact through positive epistasis to a third gene, suggesting an opposing activity on the pathway. the third gene may regulate the pathway, because in its absence, over- or under-activity of the pathway increases cell growth. in order to test this model, we asked whether the third gene in npp triplets displayed properties consistent with regulatory or substrate roles. among the  <dig> genes in this category, those with annotations containing the terms 'regulator', 'activator' or 'repressor', suggestive or regulatory role, formed the majority of gene ontology terms enriched with a p-value > 10- <dig> . consistent with potential regulatory roles,  <dig> genes occupying the 'positive' node of npp triplets are transcription factors involved in the regulation of a wide variety of cellular pathways; for example bas <dig> in purine and histidine biosynthesis, hir <dig> in cell cycle regulated transcription of histone genes, oaf <dig> in peroxisome biogenesis, pho <dig> in phosphate metabolism, rpn <dig> in proteasome degradation, stb <dig> in activation of multidrug resistance genes, and ume <dig> in meiosis . many of these proteins contain structural features prominent in regulatory activity such as the sant, zinc finger, phd, myb, homeobox domains .

* indicates annotations suggesting regulatory roles

a good example of how npp triplets can indicate such relationships is the ure2-gat1-gln <dig> triplet . in this case, ure <dig> occupies the 'positive'  position, while the gata transcription activators gat <dig> and gln <dig> are separated by a negative interaction. these genes are involved in the yeast cellular response to nitrogen availability  <cit> . gat <dig> and gln <dig> activate nitrogen utilization enzymes when nitrogen is limited, while ure <dig> inhibits this activity by confining gat <dig> and gln <dig> to the cytoplasm when nitrogen sources are readily available  <cit> .

nnp motifs often highlight a supportive relationship between two protein complexes
the presence of a physical interaction between the positively interacting genes of an nnp triplet is the strongest signal in the data set. moreover, in our e-map compendium, the occurrence of nnp motifs is strongly associated with two protein complexes separated by a negative edge. this data supports a model where nnp motifs mark regions of the epistasis network where two different protein complexes coordinate their behaviour in a supportive manner  <cit> . several such functional connections support this idea for the nnp network . for instance six protein complexes involved in different aspects of chromatin biology are connected by nnp motifs . central to these interactions is the swr <dig> complex, which is responsible for incorporation of the variant histone h2az  <cit> . the individual swr1-c subunits are separated by positive edges, while interactions between swr <dig> and the other complexes are negative. all these complexes play roles in gene expression regulation by catalyzing steps in the modification of chromatin. for example, the set <dig> complex  methylates histone  <dig>  <cit>  while the nua <dig> complex acetylates histone  <dig>  <cit> . both these modifications are associated with active transcription, consistent with the idea that, since the intercomplex interactions are negative, the complexes may provide supportive or redundant roles during gene expression. interestingly, two recent studies linking the function of the nua <dig> complex to other chromatin modification complexes, including swr1-c, highlight a coordinating role for eaf <dig>  <cit> . the bub1p spindle checkpoint protein provides another example of nnp triplets spanning protein complexes with aligned roles . bub1p associates physically with the kinetochore via skp1p, and it is proposed that this interaction is responsible for communicating a signal to the spindle checkpoint pathway that a kinetochore tension defect exists  <cit> . thus, the bub1-bub <dig> positive interaction, reflecting the substrate-product relationship between these two proteins, is linked via nnp motifs to other kinetochore components, such as ctf19p.

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, we find evidence for a tendency of two triplet motif classes, nnp and npp, to be associated with distinct modes of network arrangement in a large set of yeast epistatic interactions. in both cases, the motif members combine to fulfil general cellular roles in the cell, but nnp motifs favour supportive engagements between protein complexes, while npp motifs tend rather to be associated with biochemical pathways where a third protein acts in an opposing, perhaps regulatory, role. these local network features are therefore potentially helpful for interpreting the biology underlying large epistatic networks, for which limited additional orthogonal data is available. the current yeast epistatic network is somewhat fragmented due to the nature of the e-map format . with increasing overlap between studies , the use of motifs to infer biological organization is likely to become more powerful and more useful. similarly, the use of rnai technologies to carry out epistasis screens promises to extend the uses of motif analysis to higher organisms, including humans  <cit> . our observations offer an initial approach to screening very large biological networks for motifs that highlight functionally relevant articulation points. this will facilitate the prioritization of further experiments to confirm hypotheses arising from the position of the motifs, as well as offering insights into how nature arranges epistatic relationships between genes in order to best advance the interests of the cell.

