BACKGROUND
during the last decades, protein misfolding and aggregation of certain proteins were found to play a major role in a variety of diseases, commonly called proteopathies . for many of these diseases, age is a major risk factor. some of them exhibit intracellular protein deposits, like in parkinson’s disease, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis or huntington’s disease, while others are diseases of the intra- and extracellular space, like systemic amyloidoses or alzheimer’s disease  <cit> . in huntington’s disease, huntingtin , a protein with yet unattributed function, exhibits a tendency to aggregate within cells if mutated  <cit> . the age of disease onset and the aggregation propensity of huntingtin are closely related to the length of a stretch of polyglutamine  residues in its n-terminal domain  <cit> . the threshold to transform into a pathogenic protein was shown to be around 35– <dig> consecutive glutamine residues  <cit> . importantly, the phenomenon of polyq aggregation is not limited to huntington’s disease, but approximately a dozen other diseases are similarly associated with extended glutamine stretches in specific proteins .

the origin of toxicity of these aggregation-prone proteins is still under debate. one hypothesis states that the presumed toxic species ties all available chaperone activity to the aggregation process, thereby interfering with the protein quality control system. this would lead to a propagation of folding defects onto other cellular proteins . in mammalian cells more than  <dig> proteins, including several chaperones, were identified in intracellular aggregates  <cit> . experiments on model membranes also suggest that soluble oligomers of polyq proteins are able to compromise the integrity of cellular membranes  <cit> . in addition, apoptosis and a purely mechanical constriction of neuronal axonal trafficking by aggregates has been suggested to be responsible for the loss of neurons . the diversity of observations concerning the mechanism of pathogenesis highlights that potentially different cellular processes are affected in parallel.

the simplest and genetically most accessible eukaryotic model organism is saccharomyces cerevisiae, in which several systems to study polyq aggregation have been established . here diverse morphological effects have been described in response to polyq-expression, including dna-fragmentation, damage to respiratory chain complexes, apoptosis like effects, spindle formation defects, mislocalization of septin proteins and altered regulation of the prion state  . in our model system, using q56-yfp, the polyq-induced cellular arrest phenotype  is evident from small colony growth, enlarged cell size and incomplete septin assemblies during g <dig> phase prior to budding  <cit> . in contrast to other systems it is independent of the prion state of rnq <dig> but dependent on the ploidy status of the yeast cell  <cit> .

comparing q0-yfp and q56-yfp expressing cells in this study we uncover further genetic interactors and analyze the transcriptional state of pica cells. in this process, we define genes, which help to reduce the toxicity of the polyq protein and identify mitochondrial pathways, which likely are participating during establishment of toxicity.

RESULTS
q56-yfp toxicity is suppressed by a set of mitochondrial genes
in order to study polyq induced toxicity we used a yeast model system, which consists of three different constructs fusing either zero,  <dig> or  <dig> glutamine residues to yfp  <cit> . in previous work the  <dig> amino acid stretch was found to be toxic, while the two other constructs were not harmful. toxicity is evident from small colony growth after transformation with plasmids containing the constitutively expressed polyq-encoding gene. to delineate the chain of events responsible for polyq toxicity, we had performed a genome-wide screen of genomic deletion strains and identified yeast deletion mutants, which showed decreased toxicity in comparison to the wild type  strain  <cit> . using the same approach we now focused on deletion strains, which show increased toxicity. from  <dig> strains, we retrieved fourteen knock-out strains, some of which had entirely lost the capability to form small colonies even after 15 days of incubation at 30 °c . the presence of these non-essential genes thus is required for the residual growth after pq <dig> transformation.fig.  <dig> selection of deletion strains unable to grow upon q56-yfp expression. by <dig> and five deletion strains after transformation of either q30-yfp  or q56-yfp . the respective deletion is indicated on the top. cells were grown on sd plates containing 2 % glucose. growth was monitored after 4 days of incubation at 30 °c. representative images are shown for selected strains . the scale bar represents 10 mm















genes, whose knock-out leads to an enhanced phenotype. the intensity of the phenotype is indicated on a semi-quantitative scale. --- : very strong toxicity, no residual growth, --: residual growth detectable, but stronger toxicity than in the wt background. gene functions are annotated according to the yeast genome database



most of the identified toxicity-suppressors participate in metabolic processes. four of the  <dig> genes  are directly localized in mitochondria, one of the suppressors of toxicity  is required for anaerobic growth and at least  <dig> others are part of metabolic pathways shared between the cytosol and mitochondria . thus, these deleted genes optimize essential systems, which are functional under normal growth conditions but become dysfunctional at conditions like polyq intoxication. the increased proportion of mitochondrial genes indicates that in particular the mitochondrial system may be challenged in q56-yfp producing yeast.

toxic and non-toxic polyq stretches disturb the phosphate balance of the cells
to obtain more information on the condition of the pica yeast cells, we investigated the transcriptomic status of q56-yfp intoxicated yeasts. we determined gene expression differences between intoxicated pq <dig> and normally growing pq <dig> transformed cells. we used four data sets to approach this question – q0_3d , q0_2d, q56_3d and q56_4d – and obtained average relative expression changes for each gene . we identified  <dig> genes, whose expression is reduced in pq <dig> transformed cells to less than 33 % of the pq <dig> transformed yeasts .

to define and visualize transcriptional clusters down-regulated in q56-yfp expressing yeasts, we clustered our hits based on co-regulation patterns from co-expression databases  <cit> . in this way, most of the  <dig> genes down-regulated in the microarray experiments can be assembled into an interconnected network , as they apparently originate from two to three interconnected expression clusters. beyond the initial hits we looked at further genes, which usually are part of these clusters: using the spell database we automatically determined several co-regulated candidates with the highest connectivity and included them in the network of down-regulated genes . this also helped to integrate further hits into the clusters of the network. beyond that, these predicted candidates can be used to assess the predictive power of our network. of the  <dig> candidates added to the network by the algorithm described in the methods section,  <dig> were in fact down-regulated to less than 60 %  >  <dig> ), while only  <dig> were up-regulated to the same extent , providing a sound statistical basis for the clusters formed in the network. it is evident from this network that transcripts related to phosphate metabolism and transport  are down-regulated in q56-yfp producing cells. this cluster had been observed before in a microarray study of yeasts expressing non-toxic polyq proteins in liquid cultures  <cit> . the clear overlap to this study highlights that specific parts of the response to polyq proteins are remarkably robust even if entirely different toxicity levels and growth conditions are examined. beyond that, another large cluster of genes, which is usually up-regulated during diauxic shift, is lower expressed in q56-yfp intoxicated cells when compared to q0-yfp . this suggests that the normally growing pq <dig> transformed cells in our study are undergoing diauxic shift whereas the pq <dig> transformed cells do not, which might coincide with the smaller colonies formed or other metabolic abnormalities.fig.  <dig> reduced expression between q56-yfp and q0-yfp yeast cells. a network of genes down-regulated in q56-yfp cells compared to q0-yfp cells. genes are colored in accordance to their log differences . hits with a p-value smaller than  <dig>  were indicated by a greater font size . pink frames highlight predicted co-regulated genes listed in additional file  <dig>  the smaller font size was additionally used for the predicted coregulators. for a detailed description of the data analysis see the methods section. red boxes highlight clusters according to cellular pathways. b analysis of predicted co-regulators within fig. 2a. the line shows the number of genes within the respective category, while the vertical bar chart indicates the percentage of the genes predicted by the spell-correlations. if bars for all expression categories have the same height no significant enrichment in the predicted genes would be reported, which would indicate a non-significant clustering analysis



to see whether these expression differences coincide with toxicity, we determined differentially expressed clusters in response to the non-toxic q30-yfp sample . noteworthy, yeast cells synthesizing q30-yfp, show no phenotype and are comparable to q0-yfp expressing cells in terms of growth rate and colony size. due to generally smaller differences in expression levels, we utilized a lower threshold –  <dig>  log <dig> scales in both directions – to retrieve a reasonable number of hits for the analysis, while compromising on the p-value of the hits . correlations between the hits again were obtained from the co-regulation patterns in the spell database . again further co-regulated candidates were derived from the spell database and incorporated into the network to evaluate the predictive power of the initial hit set . genes down-regulated in response to q30-yfp form mostly one connected cluster. this cluster contains genes of phosphate metabolism and phosphate transport . the consistent presence of this phosphate-cluster in all our experiments and in the previous study  <cit>  is remarkable  and suggests that the presence of polyq stretches results in alterations to phosphate regulation. our data imply that this reaction may be a very sensitive marker in the reaction chain leading to the formation of the pica phenotype, but it is barely dependent on the toxicity level.

polyphosphate levels are elevated in q56-yfp expressing yeasts
we aimed at determining the metabolic impact of polyq stretches to understand the cause for the differences in gene expression patterns. we thus analyzed whether dysregulation of the phosphate metabolism was evident in pica cells. to this end, we prepared suspensions of live q0-yfp, q30-yfp or q56-yfp producing yeast cells and recorded 31p nmr spectra of these samples. notably, distinct phosphate nmr signals could be detected in the cell suspensions . specifically, peak  <dig> at 2 ppm was tentatively assigned to free phosphate, peak  <dig> and  <dig> at − <dig>  ppm and −24 ppm were tentatively assigned to polyphosphate , a storage form of phosphate, usually maintained by yeast cells in the vacuole and cytosol. the 31p nmr spectra of q0-yfp and q30-yfp producing yeast were virtually identical, whereas q56-yfp expressing cells were different . interestingly, the signal intensities for the inorganic phosphate were similar in all samples, implying that free phosphate levels are mostly comparable, whereas the signals originating from polyphosphate were increased by an approximate factor of  <dig> in pq <dig> transformed yeast. this suggests that the phosphate balance is still maintained in q30-yfp expressing yeasts despite the differences in induction of pho-genes. in q56-yfp expressing cells instead the phosphate homeostasis is misbalanced.fig.  <dig> effect of different polyq stretches in yeast cells on phosphate metabolism. a
31p-nmr spectra of yeast cells expressing q0-yfp , q30-yfp  or q56-yfp . yeasts were resuspended to an od595 =  <dig> in phosphate free buffer. chemical shift positions are listed in additional file  <dig>  1: inorganic phosphate, 2: polyphosphate , 3: polyphosphate . b exophosphatase activity was monitored upon transferring yeasts to phosphate free media. q0-yfp is depicted in black, q30-yfp in blue and q56-yfp in red. results were obtained from three independent experiments. values were normalized for better comparability. mean and sem are depicted. statistical significance is indicated with a star 



we aimed at determining the level of extracellular phosphatase activity by established assays in q56-yfp, q30-yfp and q0-yfp yeast cells to see, whether the down-regulation of the extracellular phosphatases pho <dig>  pho <dig> and pho <dig> is observable on the protein level . indeed q56-yfp expressing yeast show reduced dephosphorylation activity compared to the two control strains, implying that the intoxicated yeast strains contain reduced amounts of phosphatases.

on this basis, it is tempting to speculate that the down-regulation of genes responsible for phosphate uptake and phosphate distribution in the cell could be related to the elevated polyphosphate levels in q56-yfp synthesizing cells. apparently in q30-yfp the down-regulation of these genes enables the yeast cells to stabilize phosphate levels, while in q56-yfp expressing yeasts the dysregulation manifests. given that the transcriptional response already is observable in q30-yfp producing yeasts, it is to be assumed that this part of the response is not related to toxicity.

expression changes in toxic q56-yfp show a specific upregulated response
we then looked at the genes upregulated in the response to toxic q56-yfp. here we obtained  <dig> genes, whose expression is more than  <dig>  fold higher in pq56- compared to pq0-transformed cells in different biological samples , many of which show p-values with high significance . for these genes we likewise determined a network of expression clusters utilizing the strategy outlined before . this network includes a cluster of sulfur-regulated genes, many of which are part of sulfur uptake and early steps of methionine metabolism . furthermore, a cluster of iron-regulated genes is up-regulated. this includes three of the four iron-transporters encoded in the genome, enb <dig>  sit <dig> and arn <dig> and genes related to iron-starvation . the sulfur and iron clusters are interconnected via several genes co-regulated with both clusters . we again determined co-regulated genes from the spell-database. here, the connected and co-regulated candidate genes obtained from the spell database  are indeed mostly up-regulated . for many of them, the change in expression level was just below the  <dig>  fold threshold for our initial hit list showing that many of the added genes are among the most strongly up-regulated genes within the data set . thus, from this microarray set we obtain upregulated expression networks with remarkable predictive power pointing to iron and methionine starvation in q56-yfp producing yeast cells. importantly, other stress responses, like the heat shock response, are not upregulated . also nutrient supply appears sufficiently high despite the intoxication as evident from the down-regulation of clusters related to starvation . interestingly, the up-regulated genes do not overlap with earlier microarray studies on non-toxic polyq  <cit> . they thus may indicate a potential correlation to toxicity.fig.  <dig> enhanced expression between q56-yfp and q0-yfp yeast cells. a network of genes up-regulated in q56-yfp expressing cells compared to q0-yfp expressing cells using the same color code as fig. 2a. hits with a p-value smaller than  <dig>  were indicated by a greater font size . blue frames highlight predicted co-regulated genes listed in additional file  <dig>  the smaller font size was additionally used for the predicted coregulators. red boxes highlight clusters according to cellular pathways. b analysis of predicted co-regulators within fig. 4a. the line shows the number of genes within the respective category, while the vertical bar chart indicates the percentage of the genes predicted by the spell-correlations. if bars for all expression categories have the same height no significant enrichment in the predicted genes would be reported, which would indicate a non-significant clustering analysis



we again looked at the q30-yfp control cells to analyze, whether a similar response can be observed here. in these cells, though, only very few genes are up-regulated significantly . nevertheless we attempted to construct a connected network, but only few of the genes could be connected and only very few further genes could be uncovered from the spell database due to a general lack of connectivity. the predictive power of clusters in this q30-yfp/q0-yfp data set is much less pronounced . genes involved in iron and sulfur regulation are not retrieved, if q30-yfp is used to stress the cell. this suggests that the alteration of iron and sulfur homeostasis is specific for pica cells exhibiting the growth phenotype .

we tested the up-regulation of some genes from the iron- and sulfur-clusters by investigating genomic gfp-fusions of the respective proteins in the q56-mcherry intoxicated and q0-mcherry control background. indeed for several of them, like met10p, met13p, met22p, met28p and tmt1p we find a marked up-regulation observable by fluorescence microscopy of the gfp-fused proteins , implying that the up-regulation is also evident at the level of protein concentrations within the cell.fig.  <dig> up-regulation of met10p, met13p, met22p, met28p,and tmt1p fused to gfp monitored on protein level. exposure time is not changed between q56-mcherry and q0-mcherry cells if not stated otherwise. dic and gfp pictures are shown. quantification was performed with imagej. for a detailed description see methods section. gfp strains used in this work are listed in additional file  <dig>  scale bar represents 10 μm



iron-homeostasis is affected in q56-yfp producing yeasts
having observed a strong up-regulation of iron and sulfur associated expression clusters in pica yeast we tested, whether a lack of iron ions causes this response. we determined the total intracellular free iron concentration in intact cells by electron paramagnetic resonance,  . membrane-permeable desferroxiamine  was used to complex free fe3+ and oxidize intracellular fe2+  <cit> . surprisingly, q56-yfp cells contain two-fold higher levels of intracellular iron compared to the control cells. cells producing q30-yfp instead show no alteration of the free iron level . the strong increase of intracellular iron levels in pq <dig> transformed pica cells reflects a clearly disturbed intracellular iron balance. the higher levels of free iron though seem to contradict the observed up-regulation of iron-transporters. however, iron-regulation and its metabolism are both very complex and closely tied to the synthesis of fe-s cluster proteins. in fact, up-regulation of iron-regulated genes as observed in q56-yfp yeast is usually induced via the transcription factor aft <dig>  if fe-s clusters are not produced to sufficient extent in mitochondria  <cit> .fig.  <dig> iron concentration and aconitase activity in q56-yfp and q0-yfp yeasts. a relative concentration of intracellular free iron in yeast cells expressing q0-yfp, q30-yfp or q56-yfp determined by epr spectroscopy. yeasts were treated with detapac and dfo to complex iron and resuspended to an od595 =  <dig> in hepes buffer. results are expressed as mean ± sem . b aconitase activity of yeast cells expressing q0-yfp, q30-yfp or q56-yfp was determined colorimetrically. results are expressed as mean ± sem . statistical significance is indicated by three stars 



to evaluate, whether pica yeasts show deficiencies in the generation of fe-s cluster proteins in general, we tested the activity level of the prominent fe-s cluster protein aconitase. while q0-yfp and q30-yfp producing yeast cells show very similar aconitase activities, we observed a strong reduction in aconitase activity in q56-yfp yeasts . hence, the higher level of free iron in the cell is apparently not sufficient to ensure the production of the fe-s cluster containing enzyme aconitase. the reduced production of fe-s cluster proteins in the mitochondria of pica yeast might thus cause the up-regulation of the iron-regulatory expression cluster observed.

q56-yfp reduces mitochondrial carbon source utilization
we had found several indications that the mitochondrial system in pica cells is compromised and related to toxicity. to get direct information on the ability to perform non-fermentative metabolism, transformed yeast samples were placed on sd media containing 2 % sorbitol or 3 % glycerol instead of 2 % glucose  <cit> . both alternative carbon sources make yeasts more dependent on respiration compared to glucose and require functional mitochondria. as a control, we used galactose, which can be metabolized in a similar manner as glucose. when transformants of control plasmids pq <dig> or pq <dig> were plated on 3 % glycerol medium, growth was generally slower compared to glucose plates, but the colony patterns after four additional days of incubation resembled those of yeasts grown on glucose . q56-yfp cells instead behaved differently. while few of the large colonies grew, which are resistant to the pica phenotype due to polyploidization or shortened polyq stretches  <cit> , the vast amount of small colonies is absent. also, on 2 % sorbitol the growth suppression by q56-yfp expression was stronger leading to the absence of small colonies . usage of galactose as carbon source instead did not lead to absence of pica colonies, implying that the residual growth of these cells can be maintained, as long as carbon sources are used that allow sufficient energy production under fermentative conditions. to further study the importance of respiratory activity for growth of pica yeast we inhibited the respiratory chain by cultivating them on oligomycin. indeed, we observed a loss in growth of pq <dig> transformed yeasts whereas the pq <dig> cells were still viable at the same oligomycin concentration .fig.  <dig> alteration in carbon metabolism upon polyq intoxication. a growth of transformed yeasts was monitored after 8 days of incubation. the pica phenotype of q56-yfp is enhanced when by <dig> cells are grown on sd media containing 2 % sorbitol or 2 % glycerol. the pica phenotype is unchanged if cells are grown on 2 % galactose as a carbon source compared to glucose. upon respiratory chain inhibition by adding oligomycin no growth is observable after pq <dig> transformation. the scale bar represents 10 mm. b yeast were resuspended to an od595 =  <dig> and -glucose was added at time point  <dig>  spectra were recorded for 3 h by nmr. the kinetics of glucose consumption are based on the peak at  <dig>  ppm and ethanol production based on the peak at  <dig>  ppm in pq0-  and pq56-  transformed yeasts. the kinetics of pyruvate accumulation are based on the peaks at  <dig>  ppm and carbonate production quantified based on the peak at  <dig>  ppm in pq0-  and pq56-  transformed yeasts. the chemical shift positions are assigned in additional file  <dig> and additional file 14f and g. c atp-level of q0-yfp, q30-yfp and q56-yfp yeasts was determined using a luciferase coupled assay. means and sem are depicted. six biological replicates were analyzed. the detected differences are not significant. d nadh-level of q0-yfp, q30-yfp and q56-yfp yeasts. the detected differences are not significant. e) mitotracker staining in q56-yfp and q0-yfp expressing cells. expression time is not changed between samples. scale bar represents 5 μm for mitotracker. expression pattern of cox4p and om45p fused to gfp. exposure time is not changed between q56-mcherry and q0-mcherry producing cells. scale bar represents 10 μm for cox4-gfp and om45-gfp. quantification was carried out as described in the methods section. mean fluorescence per pixel is plotted with sd



to determine whether also differences in mitochondrial activity can be observed on the metabolic level, we tested the capability of pica yeasts to metabolize glucose. to this end we added  glucose to yeast suspensions of q0-yfp or q56-yfp cells and analyzed the samples by 13c-nmr spectroscopy at different time points after addition of the substrate . within two hours control yeast produce metabolites of different kinds including ethanol, whereas the signal sets for glucose are diminished . the same signal patterns are observed with suspensions of pq <dig> transformed yeast cells demonstrating that the conversion of glucose in the fermentative pathway in general is not affected by the presence of extended polyq stretches . looking into the weaker signals it becomes obvious that throughout the time course of the measurement small peak sets, which based on the chemical shifts and the j-couplings can be attributed to pyruvate, are observable only in pq <dig> transformed suspensions . further, a slight reduction in the carbonate peak at  <dig>  ppm is evident in pq <dig> transformed yeasts . this difference confirms an impaired respiratory activity of mitochondria as apparently the respiratory conversion of pyruvate to co <dig> is reduced in the pica cells.

q56-yfp intoxication results in decreased cox4p levels
we aimed at determining, whether the altered metabolic pathways induce the growth arrest by energy shortage, or whether other mitochondrial functions, like generation of fe-s cluster proteins, are more relevant for the pica phenotype. to this end, we investigated atp-levels of q56-yfp cells and normal growing q0-yfp cells. despite the reduced metabolic activity, atp-levels themselves seem not to be altered in pica yeasts compared to control yeasts . we further investigated nadh levels, as these also could be misbalanced due to their relationship to mitochondrial metabolism. the detected differences in nadh level between pica and control yeasts are minor and not significant . even though these values relate to full cell lysate and not isolated mitochondria, they imply that energy metabolism is still working in these yeasts. we finally aimed at testing by fluorescence microscopy whether proteins within the mitochondria are affected by the polyglutamine intoxication, which could also explain the deficiency in aconitase and the up-regulation of iron-regulated genes. based on staining with the dye mitotracker the mitochondrial system seems to be intact and the tubular network is formed . two mitochondrial proteins were analyzed then by fluorescence microscopy, om <dig> and cox <dig>  both are slightly lower expressed in q56-yfp yeasts based on our microarray analysis . the mitochondrial membrane protein om <dig> does not detectably change its cellular localization or its protein levels . looking at cox4p, a component of the respiratory chain, instead, the protein levels are strongly diminished in q56-yfp expressing yeasts, implying that at the level of distinct proteins alterations to the mitochondrial system become observable . these data suggest that, while mitochondria generally appear functional in respect to energy metabolism, alterations within the mitochondria of pica cells become observable in connection to toxicity.

discussion
elongated polyq stretches have been reported as genetic cause for several neurodegenerative diseases, including huntington’s disease  <cit> . the reasons for this toxicity and the cellular pathways relevant for this process are under debate and many alterations have been reported, including dna-fragmentation, apoptosis, spindle disorganization and involvement of the chaperone system or diverse prion proteins  <cit> . here we used a toxic polyq system composed of zero,  <dig> or  <dig> glutamine residues to reveal affected cellular pathways based on an un-biased approach starting from a genome-wide screen of the euroscarf deletion strain library and a genome-wide assessment of expression changes upon intoxication.

fourteen genomic deletion strains were uncovered that act synergistically with the polyq induced phenotype. the knock-out of these genes prevents the residual growth, which in the wild type background is evident from many small colonies on agar plates. interestingly, the majority of these genes are associated with mitochondrial functions, including the mitochondrial fusion mediator ugo1p, the subunit of the f1f0-atpase atp15p and the protein nfu1p, which is involved in fe-s cluster synthesis. several of these genes, including ugo <dig> and atp <dig>  have before been associated with the petite-phenotype, a small-colony formation phenotype, which can be intensified by cultivation on non-fermentative growth media. given the similar appearance of polyq-intoxicated pica yeasts, a related cause for these phenotypes could be speculated on, in particular as pica responds to the growth on non-fermentative carbon sources likewise with a general inability to form any colonies  <cit> . our screening approach had excluded strains with significant growth defects due to their genomic deletion, in particular when residual growth of small colonies could be observed after pq56-transformation. we thus omitted some strains, which show the petite-phenotype, even though they were retained in the first round of screening. two of these strains have deletions in mgm <dig> and fzo <dig>  given that ugo <dig>  mgm <dig> and fzo <dig> are functionally related in mitochondrial fusion we reanalyzed their behavior in response to pq56-transformation . indeed the differences in colony pattern between q0-yfp expression and q56-yfp expression suggest growth defects that are stronger than the additive effects of mutation and q56-yfp toxicity.

the transcriptional profiling reported here additionally uncovers pathways with mitochondrial association and suggests the iron- and sulfur-metabolism as a potential target. both pathways converge in the mitochondria during fe-s cluster synthesis  <cit> . we observe here the up-regulation of a transcriptional cluster, which is usually under the control of the transcription factor aft <dig>  this cluster includes the iron importers in the plasma membrane and several other proteins, which regulate the distribution and metabolism of iron ions in the cell. generally this transcriptional cluster is induced by the lack of or shortage of fe-s cluster proteins via the fe-s containing sensor complex grx  <cit> . this reduction becomes obvious in our system by the reduced activity of aconitase, a very prominent fe-s cluster protein in the cytosol. this shortage is not due to down-regulation of aconitase as evident from our genome-wide expression data, which show only slightly up-regulated aco <dig> and slightly down-regulated aco <dig> expression, but is apparently due to reduced levels of active protein . the increased levels of iron in the cell do not necessarily have to imply that fe2+ is sufficiently present in the mitochondria for generation of fe-s clusters. fe3+ could also be present in the cytosol or even in complex with polyphosphate in the vacuole, all of which could lead to a shortage of mitochondrial iron in the presence of excessive fe3+  <cit> . likewise the accumulation of polyphosphate could be caused by the accumulation of iron in the cells given that these two are found in complex with each other on multiple occasions. it is interesting to note that cox4p, a subunit of the cytochrome c oxidase complex  in the mitochondria and highly sensitive to polyq intoxication, is part of a protein complex, which complexes iron ions  <cit> . thus proteome-wide data may indeed be necessary to establish, whether in particular iron-containing proteins are affected by the presence of polyq containing aggregates. it is very interesting to further see, that the highly responsive heat shock and stress response network of chaperones does not react in polyq intoxicated cells. this could indeed indicate that this part of the proteostasis network is not directly involved or at least that shortage of chaperones is not causative to the toxicity experienced in our yeast model system.

several genome-wide studies had been performed in the past on similar aggregation systems in higher eukaryotes . these uncovered a broad range of genetic and physical interactors. as such an rnai screens in c. elegans uncovered metabolic influences, but in connection with the ascorbate and aldarate system  <cit> . additionally the protein homeostasis system was shown to suppress polyglutamine aggregation  <cit> . transcriptional changes in huntingtin mice and huntington's patients point to genes in signal transduction  <cit> , likewise do studies in mammalian cell culture based on rna interference  <cit> . also studies in drosophila melanogaster, employing huntingtin and ataxin as model systems find genes in signal transduction and cellular proteostasis  <cit> .

beyond that, the damage to the mitochondrial system has been observed in other aggregation model systems repeatedly  <cit> . also in subsets of patients suffering from neurodegenerative diseases the involvement of mitochondrial damage or the involvement of iron-metabolism has been encountered  <cit> . in several cases the reduction in aconitase and the reduction in respiratory chain complexes have been observed  <cit> . another striking example linking the iron-metabolism to neurodegenerative disease is the protein frataxin, which itself is the iron-importer into mitochondria. this protein, if its polyq stretch is expanded, tends to aggregate and result in neurodegenerative ataxias  <cit> . while it is speculative to assume a common mechanism in generation of neurodegenerative defects in polyq diseases, it emerges that alterations and damages to the mitochondrial system are highly relevant for the toxicity observable upon expression of polyq proteins also in yeast.

CONCLUSIONS
protein aggregation of elongated polyglutamine stretches induces cellular defects and death. analyzing the transcriptional response in yeast we found two clusters connected to the iron and sulfur metabolism to be up-regulated in presence of extended toxic polyglutamine stretches. we report an accumulation of iron in vivo and a reduction in the activity of the prominent fe-s cluster containing enzyme aconitase. in a genome wide approach, genes related to mitochondrial proteins were found to be crucial for cellular survival. our data suggest an intricate connection between polyglutamine-induced toxicity, mitochondrial functionality and iron homeostasis in this model system.

