BACKGROUND
the key disciplinary goal of genetics the last  <dig> years has been to understand the relationship between genetic variation and phenotypic variation. a series of concepts have been conceived to describe various aspects of the genotype-phenotype map. many of them reflect the fact that the phenotypic signatures of alleles and genes depend on other alleles and genes . however, these concepts have to be regarded as descriptory rather than explanatory. an explanatory theory capable of linking genetic variation with phenotypic variation in even simple mechanistic terms has yet to emerge  <cit> . however, there exist a few well studied model systems such as the lambda switch  <cit>  where this link has been described very well.

an empirically sound starting point for such a theory development will be the mrna phenotype. the genotype-phenotype gap is in this case narrow compared to higher level phenotypes and relatively simple dynamic models can be used to describe much of the systemic behaviour  <cit> . also, numerous studies have established that a significant fraction of observed inter-individual variability in gene expression is due to cis-linked and trans-linked genetic polymorphisms . how biological systems translate genetic variation into phenotypic variation has recently received some attention  <cit> , but there is still an almost completely unrevealed relationship between regulatory polymorphisms, network design principles, and descriptory concepts like cis/trans- linkage, dominance, epistasis and penetrance even at the expression level.

gjuvsland et al.  <cit>  showed that gene regulatory networks generate significant amounts of statistical epistasis which depends on the type of feedback regulation involved. here we address how single gene descriptors and their dependence on  regulatory design features contribute to the functional epistasis characteristics of mathematical genotype-phenotype maps. functional epistasis is here used as a common term for describing situations where the phenotypic effect of a genetic substitution  depends on the genetic background, i.e. on the state of other loci in the genotype  <cit> .

the basic strategy underlying our analysis was to  position a fixed number of genes on a genetic map;  introduce dynamic network models for the expression of these genes;  define alleles by a set of model parameters and the equilibrium concentrations of the gene products  as these genes' expression phenotype;  introduce genetic variation in the model parameters;  make mapping populations of individuals having their expression phenotypes determined by the dynamic network models; and  analyse the populations with the machinery of statistical genetics. this approach opens for a systematic investigation of the phenotypic manifestations of genetic variation as a function of gene network design.

as the steady state abundance of mrna is dependent on the balance between synthesis and decay, our models include one term for synthesis and one for decay of mrna.

a polymorphism that has an effect on expression level of a given gene x must transmit this effect through the production and/or degradation term describing the time rate of change of expression of x. this low-resolution modelling approach catches the most important aggregate features of more detailed first-principle models of transcription based on statistical mechanics  <cit>  moreover, the current resolution of empirical data on the existence of non-coding polymorphisms affecting maximal production rates  <cit>  and decay rates  <cit>  does not invite to make use of more detailed models of the processes underlying these observations. thus, by letting the parameters defining production rate and decay rate mediate genetic variation in our genotype-phenotype models we account for a whole range of different, and possibly still unrevealed, mechanistic processes responsible for this variation.

more specifically, we constructed six different three-gene regulatory models  based on the transcriptional regulatory motifs that have been characterized in e. coli  <cit>  and s. cerevisiae  <cit> : a negative feedback loop with all three genes, a negative feedback loop with two genes and downstream activation, a regulatory chain of three genes, a coherent feedforward loop, a double input module with an and gate, and a double input module with an or gate . for each model we generated genetic variation by sampling maximal production rates, decay rates and regulation thresholds from uniform distributions and assigning them to alleles. in dynamic models of specific biological systems the relevant phenotypes are normally given by some aspect of the solution of the model in a quite straight-forward way. welch et al  <cit>  introduce a phenotype functional, which transform a dynamic solution in form of a function or time series into a real-valued phenotype, they exemplify such functionals for plant phenotypes; grainfill is represented by cumulative effects, while budding is modelled by threshold triggers. another example is a model of the lambda switch  <cit>  where the two stable steady states of the system correspond to lytic and lysogenic growth phenotypes respectively. however, in a study like the present one where one searches for common characteristics over a whole range of various models, it is not so obvious how to define a common phenotype as different regulatory systems have different properties. a simple property shared by many networks is the stable steady state, and this property is closely associated with homeostatic regulation, which is an ubiquitous property of biological systems  <cit> . for simplicity, we have thus restricted ourselves to systems and parameter values that give a unique stable equilibrium. the stable concentrations of all three gene products for a given set of parameter values  were taken as the genotypic values for the three expression phenotypes .

we particularly investigated whether or not different gene network structures create different cis- and trans- linkage patterns, and how the manifestation of phenotypic effects is influenced by the actual form of the cis-regulatory input function  <cit> . this function  describes the relationship between the production rates of a given gene product and the concentrations of the regulatory agents controlling these rates. our motivation for focusing on this function is thus that it is both a basic regulatory design common to all network structure and the prime mediator of trans-acting effects, in both downstream and feedback regulatory relationships  <cit> . we chose to work with two distinct functional shapes , one describing ordinary hyperbolic saturation kinetics , and one describing moderately nonlinear  saturation kinetics . there is solid empirical  <cit>  as well as theoretical  <cit>  support for frequent presence of both modes in eukaryotes, and experimental studies have shown that it is relatively easy in mutational terms to move between a hyperbolic mode and a sigmoidal one  <cit> . we found that the shape of the cis-regulatory input function has a dramatic influence on the genotype-phenotype map concerning the phenotypic expression of distant compared to local polymorphisms under otherwise equal conditions.

RESULTS
in all six models the transition from a hyperbolic to a sigmoidal cis-regulatory input function causes a dramatic increase in the frequency of detected trans-acting determinants . this applied to genes having their gene products explicitly incorporated in the regulatory function of a down-stream gene that is measured as well as those that mediate their regulatory effect through another gene. further, in five of six models  the number of cis-linked polymorphisms increases also substantially for at least one of the three mapping instances, but the change is not as dramatic as in the trans case. these two patterns are thus quite generic. despite that polymorphisms in a double input module with an and gate seem much less prone to be detected than those with an or gate, the results suggest that even very different gene network structures do not in general cause markedly different cis- and trans-linkage patterns. generally, results from multiple trait mappings were very similar to those from the single trait analysis except that fewer false positives were detected .

how can these observations be interpreted in biological terms? linkage analysis estimates so-called additive  and dominance  genotypic values . for a single locus with two alleles a measures half the distance between the genotypic values of the two homozygots. in other words, this parameter describes the mean difference between the two homozygote genotypes in phenotypic units. the dominance genotypic value is the difference between the heterozygot genotyic value and the midpoint of the two homozygots. the gene action of the locus is described by these two parameters; if d =  <dig> the locus is said to be additive, if d < | a | it shows partial dominance, complete dominance if d < | a | and overdominance if d < | a |. together, a and d constitute the basic gene action model upon which the predictive machinery of quantitative genetics, which includes variance components, heritabilities and breeding values, is built . these two values thus constitute the link between the mathematical genotype-phenotype models and the linkage analysis results. when we compare the distributions of additive and dominance values in the hyperbolic and sigmoidal case for all the models, the general pattern is that the additive and dominance absolute values become more fanned out for local as well as for distant variation when the steepness of the cis-regulatory input function increases . this means that steepening the cis-regulatory input function causes in general a given set of regulatory polymorphisms to have more distinct phenotypic signatures. in accordance with the linkage analysis results , the steepening modulates the allelic variation such that the phenotypic expression effect of distant polymorphisms increases relative to the local polymorphisms. we also see that in the hyperbolic case, dominance effects are scarcely present, while in the sigmoidal case they contribute substantially. as the change of shape of the cis-regulatory input function can be interpreted as a change of genetic background, the observed shifts in the cis-/trans-linkage and dominance patterns are manifestations of functional epistasis in the actual genotype-phenotype map.

the linkage analysis results  can thus be explained by how allelic effects on a and d values are systemically modulated. however, this elucidation does not reveal the actual relationships between genetic variation in production rates, decay rates and regulation thresholds and the phenotypic a and d values. intuitively one would expect that polymorphisms affecting maximal production rates or decay rates would appear as eqtls. for instance, schadt et al  <cit>  highlights polymorphisms affecting the decay rate of c <dig>  and a double copy number variation of alad, which will increase the production capacity, as candidate polymorphisms for cis-acting eqtls in mice. the relationship between polymorphisms affecting the shape of the cis-regulatory input function is less intuitive. with mathematical models of gene regulatory networks we can explore these relationships in detail. some very interesting features emerge from a systematic investigation of how allelic differences in these three parameters for a given gene are correlated with its own expression as well as the expression of all other genes in the network in terms of a and d . the correlation between additive genotypic values and parental line difference  in the ratio between maximal production rate and relative decay rate  and the threshold value changes dramatically with the steepness of the cis-regulatory input function. this is true for additive genotypic values underlying both cis- and trans-linkage. furthermore, the effect of going from the hyperbolic case to the sigmoidal case is that differences in μ becomes more weakly correlated with a, while the differences in θ become stronger correlated to a. in molecular terms this suggests that mutations affecting the steepness of the cis-regulatory input function will alter the phenotypic effect of other polymorphisms, simultaneously releasing variation associated with one type of parameter and buffering variation associated with the other. other simulation studies have also shown that both maintenance and release of genetic variation are emergent properties of gene regulatory networks with sigmoidal dose-response relationships  <cit> , and our findings identify the steepness as an important modulator of genetic variation. another aspect is that if trans- and cis-linked polymorphisms are both selected for in a given network this implicitly leads to more pronounced dependency patterns compared to when only cis-linked polymorphisms are selected for. the frequency of trans-linked polymorphisms identified by linkage analysis  <cit>  strongly suggest that selection for such polymorphisms is a frequent phenomenon.
 mathtype@mtef@5@5@+=feaafiart1ev1aqatcvaufkttlearuwrp9mdh5mbpbiqv92aaexatlxbi9gbaebbnrfifhhdyfgasaach8aky=wiffydh8gipec8eeeu0xxdbba9frfj0=oqffea0dxdd9vqai=hguq8kuc9pgc9s8qqaq=dirpe0xb9q8qilsfr0=vr0=vr0dc8meaabaqaciaacagaaeqabaqabegadaaakeaacqghuoariigacqwf8oqbdawgaawcbagaemyaakgabeaakiabg2da9iab=x7atnaabaaaleaacqwgpbqacqaixaqmaeqaaogaeyoei0iae8hvd02aasbaasqaaiabdmgapjabikdayaqabagccqgh9aqpdawcaaqaaiab=f7ahnaabaaaleaacqwgpbqacqaixaqmaeqaaagcbagae83sdc2aasbaasqaaiabdmgapjabigdaxaqabaaaaogaeyoei0yaasaaaeaacqwfxoqydawgaawcbagaemyaakmaegomaidabeaaaoqaaiab=n7annaabaaaleaacqwgpbqacqaiyagmaeqaaaaaaaa@4e44@ and threshold value Δθi = θi <dig> - θi <dig> .

with regard to dominance values, all models contain cases where these are correlated with μ or θ or both . however, the relationship between model parameters and dominance values is dramatically weaker than for additive values. this implies that cis-regulatory variation at a given locus does not relate in a straightforward manner to dominance values associated with its own gene product or on gene products of down-stream loci. predictors of the dominance variation can be constructed in deterministic models like the ones made use of here, but these predictors will have to include much more extensive information about the system. the variation in dominance effects is thus a more pronounced systemic feature than the variation in additive effects, which in turn implies that the classical definition of dominance as an intralocus interaction  <cit>  should be used with care.

although cis-regulatory variation is more difficult to detect and understand  <cit> , we have focused on the phenotypic signatures of cis-regulatory variation in transcriptional networks and not taken into account the effect of coding polymorphisms. the rationale for this is that genetical genomics studies in yeast  <cit>  and mice  <cit>  strongly suggest that this cis-variation is a very important cause for self-linkage.

our results apply to a much wider range of regulatory settings than what appears from a superficial inspection of the differential equations . this is because a regulatory relationship can be mediated by numerous other gene products influencing a variety of intra- and intercellular processes, a simple example being a transcriptional cascade  <cit> . as long as all these gene products simply transfer the signal between genes a and b in the form of a well-defined dose-response functional relationship, the complexity of this transduction does not influence our predictions. sigmoidal gene regulation functions are widely used in models of gene networks. here we employ the frequently  <cit>  used hill function . properties of the transcriptional machinery such as multiple transcription factor binding sites, synergy and cooperativity  <cit> , and fractal kinetics  <cit>  will contribute to sigmoidal gene regulation functions. mathematical description of transcription regulation by use of statistical mechanics methodology  <cit>  as well as experimental data  <cit>  also suggest that the hill function is very well suited for describing a whole range of mechanistic processes causing nonlinear transcription responses.

simulations with genotype-phenotype maps defined by genotypic values is a widely used tool in quantitative genetics, and the main purposes are demonstrating and testing methods for mapping of qtls  <cit> . such simulations are very useful for showing differences between various mapping methods, and for identifying weaknesses of current methodologies. the main difference to the approach presented here is that we start out from a dynamic system of genes rather than statistical effects. the genotypic values, which are explicitly defined in the genetic model approach, instead become emergent properties of a biologically interpretable dynamic system. this opens up for a much deeper understanding of functional epistasis aspects  <cit>  of the genotype-phenotype map in terms of biological processes and mechanisms. this is illustrated by our identification of the cis-regulatory input function as an important provider of functional epistasis to the genotype-phenotype map, which is clearly beyond reach for the standard genetic model approach.

in the case of sigmoidal gene regulation functions, our results  indicate that polymorphisms affecting μ  will not be directly translated into a qtl effect on the steady state. this opens a new opportunity window for genetical genomics studies. although frequently considered to be the phenotype level closest to dna sequence variation  <cit> , transcript abundance does actually reflect the balance between production and decay rates. these two rates are thus more directly tied up with dna sequence variation than transcript abundance. genome-wide studies of decay rates have already been performed in yeast  <cit>  and human cells  <cit> , and in principle such data could be used to map rateqtls in the same way as they are used for expressionqtls. as our results illustrate how variation can be visible at one phenotypic level and hidden at the next level for systemic reasons, comparing qtls for rates and expression levels can thus probably be exploited to reveal to which degree systemic silencing of mutations in transcriptional networks is a generic feature or not.

CONCLUSIONS
when mathematical models capable of bridging the genotype-phenotype gap are embedded in a framework accounting for the number of individuals, mating structures, allele frequencies, genome-wide variations in recombination frequencies and linkage disequilibrium structures, we possess a tool to understand how various polymorphisms affect phenotypic variation in a population. with our simple models we have here only sketched the potential of this approach, but the methodis likely to be applicable also in more complex settings. although we in this paper focus on expression networks, there is in principle no limit to how many systemic levels one can include, and how sophisticated the mathematical phenotypes can be  <cit> . our approach thus opens up for a systematic investigation of the systemic conditions under which different types of functional genetic variation make detectable contributions to the phenotypic variation of traits of interest to biomedicine, production biology and evolutionary biology. the main constraint will be our capacity to make biologically realistic mathematical descriptions of complex phenotypes over a broad range, not the structural complexities of the genetic variation involved.

