BACKGROUND
professionals in the biomedical domain are confronted with increasing masses of data,
which require efficient and user-friendly solutions and the development of methods to
assist them in knowledge discovery to identify, extract, visualize and understand useful
information from these large amounts of data  <cit> . the trend towards personalized medicine has resulted in a mass of clinical,
laboratory and genome-scale

data and moreover, most data models are characterized by complexity, which makes manual
analysis very time-consuming and frequently practically impossible  <cit> . the major challenge is: how can an expert find knowledge in these terabytes
of complex data? for example, to successfully search for novel hypotheses in large
datasets, we must look for unexpected patterns and interpret evidence in ways that frame
new questions and suggest further explorations <cit> . consequently, methods from knowledge discovery and visual analytics methods
may help us to

• overview large data sets as the human visual sense is optimized for parallel
processing

• connect the global view with detail information

• provide different contextual views 

• deal with inhomogeneous data sets and broad range of data quality.

as one solution to these goals, we developed a set of validated glyphs for interactive
exploration of biomedical data sets. with the ability to work with different level of
details, to arrange and order the glyphs in space and to synchronise different
visualizations through coordinated multiple views   <cit> , an expert can in the truest sense of the word, travel through his data
space.

jacques bertin's book sémiologie graphique, published in  <dig> , provides the foundation for the analysis of visual elements to display
qualitative or quantitative data  <cit> . bertin's practical experience as a cartographer led him to the question how
to find rules to build proper graphics. his study of signs together with their
"grammatical" rules is based on a clear and logical symbol scheme in which symbols can
be varied referring to visual variables. visual variables include size of elements,
their shape, orientation, brightness color, texture and position. bertin called these
attributes also retinal variables, because they describe the quality characteristics of
the human perception, in contrast to a technical description of a graphical element.
actually, this leads to semiotics - and we view informatics as semiotics engineering  <cit> , because it is interesting to observe that the three main goals of
informatics  turn out to be nicely related to the three semiotic dimensions  <cit> : 1) correctness is a matter of syntax to be answered by considering formal
aspects only  <cit> ; 2) efficiency is a matter of semantics related to the object world  <cit> ; and 3) usability, taking interest and motivation of the end user into
account  <cit> ; being our basic assumptions for the following details:

a visual variable is characterized according to bertin by the kind of scale
 and the length of the visual variable. the length of a variable is the
number of distinguishable values that can be perceived by a viewer  choosing different visual
variables for representing the same data variable greatly influence the perception and
understanding of the glyph. it is therefore important to know and appropriately map data
variables to visual variables in the design of a glyph.

our approach will make use of visual variables to describe the perceptual properties of
a glyph. ropinski & preim  and ropinski, oeltze & preim   <cit> ,  <cit>  describe glyph-based visualization techniques in medical visualizations and
give a glyph taxonomy together with guidelines for the usage of glyphs. ward   <cit>  describes a taxonomy of glyph placement strategies, were he distinguishes
between data-driven and structure-driven approaches. he also describes strategies to
avoid overlapping problems and proposes a spacefilling layout for structured data.

a very specific type of glyphs was introduced by chernoff : the so-called chernoff
faces  <cit> . chernoff faces are 2d glyphs, which employ human's ability to recognize
faces and small changes in facial characteristics. however the effectiveness of this
form of visualization is still being debated in the scientific community  <cit> ,  <cit> .

kraus & ertl  <cit>  present in a more technical approach a system for glyph generation  which has been used in a visualization tool in the automotive
industry.

an overview about the state of the art in the visualization of multi-variate data is
given by peng & laramee   <cit>  as well as bürger & hauser , where they discuss how different
techniques take effect at specific stages of the visualization pipeline and how they
apply to multi- variate data sets being composed of scalars, vectors, and tensors.
moreover they provide a categorization of these techniques in the aim for a better
overview of related approaches

 <cit> , with an update published  <dig>  <cit> . visual data exploration methods on large data sets were described by several
authors, and particularly keim   <cit> , hege et al.   <cit> , fayyad, wierse & grinstein ,  <cit> , fekete & plaisant   <cit> , and santos & brodlie   <cit>  provide a good introduction to this topic. a recent state-of-the-art report
on glyph based visualization and a good overview on theoretic frameworks, e.g. on the
semiotic system of bertin, was given by borgo et. al.   <cit> .

an interesting application of glyphs for a visual analytics approach for understanding
biclustering results from microarray data has been presented by santamaria, theron &
quintales ,  <cit>  and another one by gehlenborg & brazma ,  <cit>  and helt et al ,  <cit>  and a recent work by konwar et al ,  <cit> .

the closest work to use glyphs with an adaptive layout is the work of legg et al.   <cit>  in the application domain of sport analysis. here the data space is event
based, and the adaptive layout strategy is focused on overlapping events with so called
"macro glyphs", which combine several glyphs into one. in the "macro glyph" approach
only scaling and no level of detail  suitable for different screen spaces are
applied. in the evaluation phase expert interviews at the work environment level. based
on methods described by tory & möller   <cit>  and plaisant   <cit>  were done.

methods
data glyphs
data glyphs are composed by  a mapping of data variables to visual primitives,
e.g. lines, shapes, fonts. each of the visual primitives is described by its visual
capabilities according to bertin's visual variables  combination of the visual
primitives into compound shapes,  organization of he compound shaped into level
of details  and  spatial positioning and rendering algorithms, see figure
 <dig> 
multilevel data glyphs.

our previous work  <cit>  in biomedical visualization resulted in an upper bound of  <dig> attributes
for the highest level of detail. this number is given be the attribute set in a
pathological finding, which is composed of patient information , the pathological
finding  and surgery attributes . in order to unveil hidden relations by the recognition of
unexpected patterns, as many variables as possible should be integrated within the
rendering of one glyph. 2d glyph designs are usually limited to up to  <dig> data
variables, therefore we chose the approach to model data glyphs as 3d objects. this
results on the one hand a high information density but on other hand we face the
problems of occlusion, perspective distortion and complex navigation and orientation
in 3d space. usability tests with very first prototypes have indicated that glyphs
placement in 3d space using a perspective projection and the possibility to freely
move within this space was overly burdensome for almost all users, especially for
medical experts. to avoid the problems described above, we restricted the 3d space to
 <dig> d or to a ¾ perspective view by applying dimetric  projection
grid, well known from technical illustrations and from some very successful
simulation games of the 1990s  in a diametric projection grid data
glyphs do not change size as they are moved, so no re-rendering of a glyph is
necessary to simulate a "¾ perspective view. with a dimetric projection grids
also specific performance optimization strategies, e.g. bitmap caching and selection
highlighting can be easily applied.

level of detail
as we want visualize several millions data elements in the smallest level of detail,
the screen size of a glyph can be as small as one pixel. therefore only the visual
variable "value"  or "color" 
can be the starting point. note: if the maximal number of elements to be visualized
is in the range of several  <dig>  elements, we can also choose the visual variable
shape as starting point. to achieve well-graduated levels of details and visually
smooth transition between leves we rely at the principle that the dominant visual
variable of level n is also the strongest visual variable in level n+ <dig> 

in previous work  <cit>  several glyph designs were developed, but not evaluated. a systematic
evaluation with medical expert  resulted in a very clear results, 
were in favour of "cubic glyphs", with the two main arguments: all graphical elements
are necessary and useful  and the transition between
level is naturally . an example cubic glyph can be seen in figure  <dig> 
the corresponding visual variables are summarized in table  <dig> 
the  <dig> levels of the cubic glyphs are: 

the pixel level, were one data attribute determines the color of the glyph
either by direct mapping, a color gradient or a custom  mapping. this
color will be the dominant color also in all higher levels. the pixel level is
applied, when the screen size of a glyph is below 2x <dig> pixels. at the pixel level a
user can interact  with several million glyphs. 
in the iconic level we add  <dig> additional visual variables. at the iconic
level a user can interact  with several thousands
elements. and finally  the detail level, were we add  <dig> geometric primitives to
the data glyph, which results in an overall number of maximal  <dig> data attributes
mapped to a single glyph. a glyph is rendered in the detail view when its screen size
is greater then 64x <dig> pixels. at the detail level a user can interact  with several thousands elements

glyph placement
according to the taxonomy given by ward  <cit>  we support:

• user driven placement, in which case the user determines the position of a
glyph through interaction tasks 

• data driven placement, in which case data values are used to specify the
location of the glyph. our placement strategy supports value discretization and
jittering strategies for the placement in an dimetric projection grid,

• structure driven placement, in which case relationship between data points
determines the location of a glyph. we support structure directly derivable from the
data values, e.g. grouping glyph representing cancer cases by year of surgery, sex
and cancer staging, and glyph placements determined by interactive ant clustering
algorithm.
in an age pyramid. all male patients are on the left side and female patients on the
right side. the vertical position of a glyph is determined by the patients age and
the horizontal position by the size of the tumor given by the t-staging of the
pathological finding  <cit> . the t-staging is also the variable used in the mapping of the primary
level.
arrangement of iconic glyphs in a age pyramid. all male thyroid cancer patients
are on the left side and female patients on the right side. the vertical
position of a glyph is determined by the patients' age and the horizontal
position by the t-staging. the t-staging is also the variable used in the
mapping of the primary level.

mapping validation
a data glyph can be configured through the mapping of data variables to the
parameters of its geometric primitives. this is on the one hand a very powerful tool,
as the user can map any data attribute to any geometric parameter, and even change
the mapping on the fly, on the other hand its also crucial, because the great
flexibility could easily lead to faulty mappings  and in succession to misinterpretations of
the visualizations results. in order to avoid those mismatches we provide an
automatic validation of the variable mapping.

in the automatic validation, we compare meta information about data variables - scale
of measurement  and
the number of distinct values - to the visual capabilities of the glyph elements. the
verification is done according to the following rules:

the shape of a geometric primitive is purely nominal and should therefore
never be mapped to ordinal data values. however we can recognize a almost infinite
variety of shapes .

the perceptual variable color  is a nominal variable, even though the
wavelength of light assigns an ordering to colors, the human perceptual system takes
no notice of it. there is some cultural ordering imposed on hue , but it is weak because not all hues are related. a non-color deficient person
can distinguish between seven and ten million different colors. however, color is a
deeply subjective attribute, and therefore not more than  <dig> to  <dig> carefully chosen
color values should be used in color mapping. a great tool for carefully designed
colormaps, which e.g. provides "colorblind safe" suggestions, can be found at
colorbrewer <dig> org <cit> 

value  and the texture  are ordered and can be mapped to an ordinal scale. value and texture
are short variables, i.e. roughly  <dig> values can be distinguished in an effective
way.

the position of a glyph can be mapped to ordinal values, and is a very fine-grained
 variable. the size of a geometric primitive, or even of the whole glyph
element can also be mapped to ordinal values, but it is "shorter" than the position
variable.

finally the orientation of a geometric primitive can be mapped to an ordinal data
value, but this is a very short viusal variable, i.e. only very few different
orientations can be perceived.

RESULTS
we use multilevel data glyphs in the disease analyser, a visual analytic
application for the interactive exploration of a database containing approximately  <dig> 
million cancer cases. each record describes a comprehensive diagnosis of a cancerous
 tumor case. the most used variables are patient age and sex, the icdn
classification, the tnm staging, grading receptor states and information about the time
under risk, disease free survival and overall survival together with surgery
information.
variables of the data glyph. in this interface we use "traffic light" indicator to show
the validity of the mapping.
variables of the data glyph. a "traffic light" visualization indicates the
validity of the mapping.

• green: all data scales fits to the scale of corresponding visuals variable the
length of all visual variables is equal/greater then the corresponding distinct data
values.

• yellow: all data scales fits to the scale of visuals variables and the length of
some visual variable is smaller then the number of corresponding distinct data
values.

• red: there is a mismatch  attribute scale and the scale of the
corresponding visual variable.
disease database. we took this high number of cases to get a proportionate sampling for
all organs. for this high number of cases glyphs are rendered in the pixel level, i.e.
the t-staging  maps to the color of the. the spatial position of the
glyphs in the starting view is just determined by the ordering of the cases within the
database.
distribution of teaching types . approx.  <dig>  randomly
selected entities from the disease database. for this number of elements we use
the pixel level for the data glyph, i.e. only the color of the glyph is given by
its primary mapping, the t-staging. the spatial position of the glyphs in the
starting view is just determined by the ordering of the cases within the database.
in the lower part of the disease analyser histograms of the variables
used in the glyph mapping are shown

in the lower part of the disease analyser histograms of the attributes of
cancer findings are shown. figure  <dig> shows the histograms for the
examination year, sex, age, disease free survival, t-staging, n-staging, m-staging and
the grading. in the next step an expert can divide cases into two subgroups, in our
example by patient age. the histogram view shows the value distribution of the selected
cases  in relation to the overall distribution of cases . the
specification of subgroups  together with
glyph highlighting and re-ordering can be done in real-time. the interface for this
filtering task is embedded into the histograms . see the supplement video
"linked histogram sliders.mov".
sex, age, disease free survival, t-staging, n-staging, m-staging and the grading.
the histogram view shows the value distribution of the selected cases 
in relation to the overall distribution of cases . see also the
additional file suppl_linked_sliders.mov

in the next example an expert compares cancer cases for different organs. figure  <dig> shows  <dig> thyroid cancer cases and  <dig> lung cases, both arranged
in an age pyramid. the relatively low number of cases result in a screen size, therefore
the rendering of the glyphs is done at the iconic level. in figure  <dig> we see the iconic glyphs in a zoomed state . the visualization shows difference in gender distribution , difference in mortality , high overall survival of a subgroup in thyroid cancer . beside of the overview and comparison of two medium size groups, outliers
can be identified easily .
subgroups   <dig> thyroid cancer cases and  <dig> lung cases, both
arranged in an age pyramid. the relatively low number of cases result in bigger
glyphs sizes, therefore the rendering of the glyphs is done at the iconic
level.
 zoom-in of the visualization of figure  <dig> 
pixel level. the glyphs are grouped by the examination year . for each
year the glyphs are arranged in an age pyramid. here a medical expert can overview a
very large number of cases and recognise in a trend analysis several aspects. for colon
cancer cases the following observations were made.  there is a strong increase of
cases,  a shift in age distribution and increase in small tumors through by early
warning programs can be clearly seen and  two outliners in the 1999/ <dig> for male
patients in the age group 75- <dig> were identified, with no explanation yet.
visualization is done at the pixel level .  <dig>  colon cancer cases,
grouped by the examination year . for each year the glyphs are
arranged in an age pyramid. a medical expert can overview a very large number of
cases and recognise in a trend analysis several aspects, e.g. the increase of
cases, shift in age distribution, increase in small tumors through by early
warning programs, two outliners in the 1999/ <dig> for male patients in the age
group 75- <dig> .
year time periods. in the iconic view we can see additional information about the mortal
state and disease free survival period of a patient. in the period  it was
clearly identified, that the number of cases with not t-staging  is much
higher for male patients as for female. there was no hypothesis to explain this
difference. further investigation explained this as wrong classification, as most of thw
cases included a secondary finding about a colon tissue, which is done in combination
with a prostate biopsy.
iconic glyphs . regrouping of the colon cancer cases to  <dig> year time
periods. in the iconic view we can see additional information about the mortal
state and disease free survival period of a patient.

a further zoom-in shows the glyphs in the detail view, see figure  <dig>  the user can now compare the n-staging, m-staging and the grading for a
small number of glyphs. the disease analyser shows the variable values of the current
selected element in the histogram view and the full text diagnosis is shown in a text
window on the right side . here the disease analyser is used
to manually select and compose subgroups for clinical studies. in our example two
subgroups of colon cancer tissues were selected, by maximum difference in grading and
disease free survival together with a preferably complete follow up diagnosis.
glyphs . further magnification shows the glyphs in the detail view.
the user can compare the n-staging, m-staging and the grading for a small number
of glyphs. the disease analyser depicts the variable values of the
current selected element in the histogram view. additionally the full text
diagnosis of the selected element is shown in a text window.

discussion
the utilization of multilevel data glyphs in the disease analyser was a valuable source
for the development of our glyph design criteria. in the design process we faced the
following challenges:

• occlusion: 3d glyphs provide on the one hand high data density, but on
the other hand face the problem of occlusion. to minimize the occlusion effect we put
the main visual variable on top of the geometry  and
limit the height of the data glyph. perspective distortions are avoided by the use a
parallel projection . we use either a
dimetric projection or a cavalier or military projection when the glyphs should be seen
from a higher point of view.

• secondary colors: multilevel glyphs consist of complex geometry, where
each geometric primitive can be colored independently. this may result in undesirable
secondary  colors. to avoid this effect a good glyph design provides a clear
gradation of visual variables, especially for color perception. such a gradation can be
achieved through well defined increments of the graphic primitives size and a restricted
color mapping for individual graphical primitives. in some special cases secondary
colors could be used intentionally, e.g. to visualize the coincidence of two values in a
large data set.

• grid patterns: when data glyphs are arranged in a dense grid unwanted
patterns can occur. to avoid this, a good glyph design is based on a symmetrical
skeletal structure. especially in the iconic view it is crucial to model borders of the
glyph, in order to provide a good visual differentiation. in the simplest case a border
can be realized through a plinth as a neutral base element.

during beta testing the disease analyser was used by  <dig> experts working in the field of
bioinformatics, computational biology and medical research. the first group had a focus
on data acquisition, automatic classification of medical records and data quality
issues. the focus of the second group was on data analysis, e.g. the development of the
health care system, and hypothesis generation. the following observations and statements
describe their experience and provide valuable input for further developments:

• the disease analyser is very well suited to find outliers and "white spaces" in
the source data.

• snapshot and bookmarking functionality is missing.

• the selection of subgroups within the histograms and the visual comparison of
the value distributions were very much appreciated.

• in research tasks, the disease analyser was used to compare two to four
subgroups.

• manual arrangement and sorting of cases was used often.

• the fast availability of the full diagnosis text for the selected data glyph is
an important feature.

• when a hypothesis is generated there should be a report module to
 compare the involved subgroups and to print out a report.

CONCLUSIONS
we developed multilevel data glyphs for the visualization of large medical data sets.
the data glyphs provide

• three levels of detail  suitable for a different screen space,
and a

• validation of the data variable mapping.

we used multilevel data glyphs in the disease analyser, a visual analytic
application for quality control and exploration of a comprehensive collection of cancer
disease records. three concrete glyph designs and design rules resulted out of the
hands-on- experience.

we plan to integrate the proposed data glyphs as a visual front end to the biobank of
the medical university graz and for quality assurance tasks of data record related to
cancer samples and to apply the visualization method for strategic planning and trend
analysis in the medical domain. in the undertaking we will use a lightweight 
version of data glyphs, which can be used as visualization components in a webpage
connected to a local datagrid or through a web service to a central medical
database.

there are a lot of studies to compare of 2d versus 3d visualization techniques for the
visualizations of spatial related data, e.g. medical renderings or geographic data.
however there is now systematic evaluation known to the authors comparing 2d glyphs to
3d and 2½d  techniques for abstract information. for abstract
information no inherent mapping of the data either to the 3d shape of a glyph nor the
spatial position is given, which would be a natural mental model for users of the
visualization results. lie et al  <cit>  have discussed design and realization aspects  of glyph based 3d-data visualization with a focus on glyph
placement. their work is a good starting point for a systematic evaluation of the
shape/placement of 2½d glyphs providing high data density versus 2d shapes, which
are less challenging for the user perception.

a second open research question is how to build and evaluate smooth transitions between
different levels of glyph abstraction. in the current work the glyph rendering method
was changed due to the glyph size in the screen space. the configuration of "switching
points" was done with a heuristic approach, and carefully  designed glyph
geometry resulted in a smooth visual transition. however a systematic study and
description of the methodology of glyph transitions  has still to be done.

competing interests
the authors declare that they have no competing interests.

authors' contributions
hm and kz conceived the idea in the analysis of the pathological finding database of the
medical university graz. hm developed the medical glyph concept and defined together
with kz and ah medical needs and usability criteria. the opengl/c++ application was
written by hm and rr. the database was administered by rr. all authors read and approved
the final manuscript.

supplementary material
additional file 1
video of linked sliders . linked histogram
sliders for the selection of subgroups

click here for file

 acknowledgements
this work was funded by the fit-it programme  and by the austrian fonds zur
förderung der wissenschaftlichen forschung . medical data were
provided in the context of the austrian genome programme gen-au and the crip project.
our thanks are due to all partners, for their contributions, critical reviews and
various discussions. the work has been approved by the ethical committee of the
medical university of graz.

declarations
publication for this article has been funded by the christian doppler laboratory for
biospecimen research and biobanking technologies.

this article has been published as part of bmc bioinformatics volume 15
supplement  <dig>  2014: knowledge discovery and interactive data mining in
bioinformatics. the full contents of the supplement are available online at
http://www.biomedcentral.com/bmcbioinformatics/supplements/15/s <dig> 
