BACKGROUND
little information exists on the mobility of  outer membrane proteins  in the bacterial om. traditionally, the bacterial outer membrane is presented as a tight, gel-like barrier, with lps packed together with cations in a crystalline matrix  <cit> . at the same time, experimental evidence suggests that integral outer membrane protein icsa is able to diffuse laterally over micron-ranges in the om  <cit> . recent developments in live-cell protein labeling and  imaging technology are starting to elucidate the nature of protein dynamics in the bacterial om.

for example, recent work on the mobility of integral omp lamb suggests that it is confined to a region of size ~50 nm  <cit> . this was based on the motion of a marker bead or quantum dot attached to a surface-exposed biotinylated loop of lamb. the authors propose that the confinement is caused by lamb’s attachment to the peptidoglycan layer  layer  <cit> . furthermore, in pioneering experiments, proteins in the cell envelope of e. coli have been labeled using a reactive fluorescent dye  <cit> . it was found that the mobility of  cell envelope proteins was restrained at the cellular poles  <cit> . also, it was found that the cell envelope contained both mobile and immobile proteins  <cit> . it should be noted that “immobile” in this context refers to the absence of long-range  diffusion, as only single-molecule techniques have sufficient spatial resolution to detect the complete absence of diffusion over short-range distances .

in  <cit>  it was speculated that one of the major om proteins of e. coli, ompa, would be one of the “immobile” proteins in the om due to its pg binding domain. the pg interaction of ompa originates from a separate c-terminal domain in the bacterial periplasm, and genetically truncated ompa- <dig> consisting of only the tm domain assembles into the outer membrane as efficiently as the full-length protein  <cit> . in this study, we have exploited these features of ompa to determine its mobility in vivo using fluorescence recovery after photobleaching , as well as to establish whether the presence of the pg binding domain has an effect on the mobility of the ompa tm domain.

frap is a relatively simple technique to measure mobility and diffusion of fluorescent proteins inside living cells. for e. coli, it has been used to measure diffusion constants for gfp in the cytoplasm and periplasm  <cit> , as well as for various gfp fusions to inner membrane proteins  <cit> .

the full-length, processed ompa protein  consists of two domains, an n-terminal transmembrane  domain of  <dig> residues, connected via a short 19-residue ala-pro rich hinge region to a c-terminal periplasmic domain of  <dig> residues  <cit> . the periplasmic domain plays a structural role by non-covalently tethering the om to the peptidoglycan cell wall layer  <cit> . for a comprehensive review on ompa structure and function see  <cit> .

we have taken advantage from the availability of a red fluorescent protein reporter  that fluoresces in the periplasm of e. coli <cit>  to create fluorescent ompa variants with and without pg binding domain. we used the by-now standard approach of elongating the bacterial cells using the antibiotic cephalexin  <cit> .

we find that full-length ompa exhibits an absence of long-range  diffusion in the om. surprisingly, removing the pg binding domain genetically does not increase protein mobility. from this we conclude that the absence of long-range diffusion of ompa is not caused by its pg binding domain.

RESULTS
functionality of the constructs
in previous work, we have shown that full-length ompa with a small c-terminal linker , as well as truncated ompa with an epitope tag  inserted in the first surface-exposed loop, expressed from plasmid in the presence of wild-type ompa, are properly assembled into the outer membrane  <cit> .

in this work, we have constructed c-terminal mcherry fusions to the constructs mentioned above, creating ompa-mcherry  and ompa-177--mcherry  . since its discovery as fluorescent periplasmic reporter in e. coli <cit> , mrfp1/mcherry  <cit>  has been used in several fusion constructs that sub-localize to the pg/om layer, without interfering with their function. for example, the om lipoprotein pal-mcherry  <cit>  localizes to mid-cell and complements a pal deletion, and puld-mcherry  <cit>  allows the formation of puld multimers in the om.

cells are grown in ez defined rich medium  <cit>  , with  <dig> % glucose as carbon source. we refer to this medium as dru  medium from now on. no adverse effects on growth rate were observed for either construct under the experimental growth and induction conditions reported here.

lmc <dig>  cells expressing either construct exhibit a red fluorescent halo along the cell’s perimeter , as expected for fluorescence originating from the periplasm  <cit> . for cells grown to steady state, the fluorescence was distributed evenly along the cell perimeter, showing no preference for the cell pole, the cylindrical part or the division site. we tested if the truncate ompa-177--mcherry fusion was properly inserted in the om using two different methods:  fluorescent imaging of live cells after staining the surface-exposed epitope tag, and  sds-page gel-shift experiments.

the cells are grown in the presence of iptg to induce expression of the construct. after staining with fluorescent streptavidin, we find that the sa- <dig> peptide is properly exposed on the cell surface , suggesting that the ompa tm domain is properly inserted in the om, with the mcherry domain present in the periplasm.

we used sds-page gel-shift experiments to check if the constructs are intact or suffer from degradation, and if so to what extent. these experiments make use of ompa’s so-called heat modifiability  <cit> : in its folded form, ompa migrates to a different position in sds-page compared to its  unfolded form  <cit> .

first, we checked for a possible heat-modifiability of mcherry, as it also has a β-barrel fold. to this end, we grew cells expressing cytoplasmic mcherry, lysed them by sonication, and after varying heat treatment, subjected the samples to sds-page followed by immunoblotting with a monoclonal antibody  that recognizes only denatured dsred variants, including mcherry . thus, we make use of the antibody’s specificity for the unfolded state of mcherry to obtain information on its folding state after varying heat treatment conditions. a band of the expected height  was present that increased in intensity upon heating , and did not exhibit heat-modifiability. the increase in intensity is explained by a gradual unfolding of mcherry due to increasing exposure to heat. if we assume that after boiling, all mcherry is unfolded, we then conclude based on band intensities that at rt i.e. without any heat treatment, ~80% of mcherry is folded and 20% is not. since mcherry unfolds partially under conditions where ompa is fully stable , we conclude that the mcherry β-barrel fold is less stable than that of the ompa tm domain . therefore, the anti-dsred can be used to determine the folding state of the ompa tm domain, because the denatured mcherry will become visible before ompa has unfolded, and any gel-shifts observed can be unequivocally attributed to the ompa tm domain, because mcherry itself becomes visible only after it has unfolded, and does not exhibit heat modifiability.

to test the heat-modifiability of the ompa-177--mcherry fusion, an immunoblot containing cell lysates heated at different temperatures was probed with anti-dsred . starting at the far right lane , two bands are visible, a low and high molecular weight band . at rt and 37°c, only a faint lmw  band at 26 kda was detected. at 50°c, folded mcherry starts to unfold, and the fusion becomes visible on blot. from literature  <cit>  and our own experiments, we know that the folded ompa tm domain does not unfold at all at 50°c. increasing the temperature further from 50°c to 99°c, the ompa tm domain unfolds and the intact fusion  shifts to its expected molecular weight of 49 kda. these results demonstrate that the ompa tm domain remains heat-modifiable and therefore is correctly assembled into the om when mcherry is fused to its c-terminus.

with increasing exposure to heat, the initially faint lmw  band also increased in intensity, and displays the exact same heat-modifiability behavior as the intact fusion between the ompa β-barrel and mcherry. because we know that mcherry does not exhibit heat-modifiability, the degradation band must consist of the ompa β-barrel with  the n-terminal part of mcherry , which appears to contain the epitope recognized by the monoclonal antibody. we conclude that cells expressing ompa-177-sa-1-mcherry contain a mixture of intact fusion assembled in the om, and ompa-177-sa- <dig> with a c-terminal part of mcherry proteolytically removed. assuming c-terminal degradation, the removed part then contains the chromophore  <cit> , and therefore this would represent a dark sub-population of ompa tm domain in the om.

for the full-length ompa-mcherry fusion , we already knew that the full-length ompa with c -terminal linker, but without mcherry , was inserted properly in the om  <cit> . therefore, we only checked that the mcherry fluorescence was associated with the pg/om layer by fluorescence microscopy of plasmolyzed cells   <cit> . this was indeed the case.

frap results on cytoplasmic mcherry
to maximize the likelihood of observing ompa mobility, we avoided the cell poles  and performed the frap experiments in the cylindrical part of elongated cells. to create elongated cells  we grew the cells in the presence of the antibiotic cephalexin which blocks cell division but allows further elongation  <cit> . the effect of cephalexin on bacterial cells is well-known: it binds with high affinity to pbp <dig>  interfering with its ability to function in cell division. in addition, it has recently been shown that pbp <dig> only interacts with pbp <dig>  during division at mid-cell  <cit> . we expect therefore that the structure of the cell wall in filaments will be highly similar to that of normal length cells.

we tested our setup by starting with cells expressing cytoplasmic mcherry, which should give a recovery rate similar to that observed for cytoplasmic gfp, for which diffusion constants of 6–9 μm2/s are reported  <cit> . the average length scale that corresponds with such a diffusion constant is 2dt = 2–3 μm when t =  <dig>  s. indeed, the half-time to recover fluorescence in our bleached region of ~ 3–4 μm is on the order of 1 s , yielding a diffusion coefficient of 4–8 μm2/s.

frap results on full-length ompa-mcherry
as we were interested in diffusion / mobility of ompa in the om, and our timescale of observation is tens of minutes, we risked mistaking ompa synthesis, om insertion and / or fluorophore maturation for fluorescence recovery caused by lateral diffusion. to minimize this risk we adopted the following procedure: first the cells were grown to steady state in dru medium in the presence of iptg to induce expression , followed by resuspension of the cells in medium without iptg to repress new synthesis . growing the cells in dru medium for an additional 2 hours in the absence of iptg allows time for export to finish and the mcherry fluorophore to mature. this way, we expected to end up with cells that contain little precursor or partially degraded protein. then we transfered the filaments to the observation chamber  and performed the frap experiment at room temperature. we made use of the perfect focus system that is part of the nikon eclipse ti microscope system to keep the filament in focus during the experiment, which takes about 15–20 min per filament .

in figure  <dig> a representative image series is shown. several observations can be noted. as is apparent, significant bleaching occurs ). furthermore, the filament is still growing in the chamber. this means that the om can move with respect to the cover slip, and the cover slip should not interfere with the mobility  of ompa. also, the poles are much brighter than the cylindrical part. this makes sense when ompa-mcherry does not exhibit long-range lateral diffusion: because synthesis is shut down during elongation / filament formation, and cell wall growth occurs randomly along the cylindrical region, the existing ompa-mcherry is diluted in the cylindrical part, but not in the poles, where no growth occurs  <cit> . even after 15 min, no significant recovery had occurred. thus, we conclude that full-length ompa-mcherry is either immobile or its mobility is limited to distances below ~100 nm . this was to be expected, since full-length ompa is thought to be anchored to the pg layer underneath the om.

frap results on truncate ompa-177-sa-1-mcherry
after genetic removal of the pg binding domain of ompa, we expected that this would allow the fusion to laterally diffuse in the om. to our surprise, the results obtained were essentially identical to those of full-length ompa. all filaments observed  did not show recovery on the timescale of 15 min. in figure  <dig> a representative image series is shown. again, we see that the poles are more fluorescent compared to the cylindrical part. because we have observed on immunoblot that all ompa- <dig> with  mcherry attached is heat-modifiable, we can conclude from these results that the ompa-177-sa1-mcherry present in the om is immobile or its mobility is limited to distances below ~100 nm.

CONCLUSIONS
to conclude, we have observed that the ompa- <dig> tm domain fused to mcherry, as well as full-length ompa fused to mcherry, exhibit an absence of long-range  diffusion in the om on a timescale of tens of minutes. such absence of long-range lateral diffusion has been observed before, and pg interaction was invoked in explaining  these observations  <cit> . our results imply that other mechanisms are needed to explain our observations.

it is well established that ompa is a monomer, in contrast to many other outer membrane proteins  <cit> . immobilization through association with the endogenous ompa proteins  can therefore not explain our observations. possibly, an interaction with immobile lps is responsible for the immobilization  <cit> . an alternative explanation could be the existence of sub-micron size domains in the om acting as barriers to diffusion. interestingly, recent in vivo single molecule fluorescence experiments performed for omp’s ompf and btub implied that ompf diffused within domains of ~100 nm in the om, and that on average, btub traversed 190 nm in  <dig>  s, the longest time-scale for which results were reported  <cit> .

it will be interesting to see whether the short-range diffusive properties of our constructs differ. this could be investigated using single-molecule techniques. finally, we believe that our experimental design forms a valuable addition to existing techniques to study om protein mobility, such as frap after chemical labeling treatments  <cit> , tracking of single molecule fluorescence  <cit>  as well as single particle tracking  <cit> .

