BACKGROUND
ancient dna has been shown to survive in fossil material for over thousands to even hundreds of thousands of years  <cit> . however, post-mortem dna damage reactions, which fragment the dna backbone into short pieces and generate hydrolytic and oxidative base derivatives, often limit the amount of dna templates preserved  <cit> . together with dna-dna crosslinks  <cit>  and by-products of the maillard reaction  <cit> , these modifications could limit the success of pcr amplification and thus the ability to incorporate ancient dna fragments into dna libraries, such as those required for sequencing on second-generation sequencing platforms  <cit> . as a result of such dna degradation, the overwhelming majority of dna within ancient dna extracts often consists of exogenous contaminant dna templates, mainly originating from environmental microbes  <cit> , with endogenous dna levels rarely greater than a few percent of the sequenceable templates  <cit> .

notable exceptions have been reported. for example, ancient keratinous materials such as hair, horn and nail, are relatively exempt from exogenous contamination  <cit> , as is the occasional bone that has been exceptionally well preserved in both permafrost  <cit>  and temperate environments  <cit> .

several different targeted re-sequencing techniques have been demonstrated to be able to preferentially access ancient dna templates over exogenous contaminants, but these have been limited to the characterization of complete mitochondrial genomes  <cit> , complete plasmids  <cit>  and complete exomes  <cit> . the exact efficiency of such methods is also unclear with reported enrichment values ranging over several orders of magnitude and subject to whether or not clonal collapse is considered in the calculation  <cit> . so far, no dna capture method has been successfully used for recovering gigabases of sequence information and complete genomes. as a result, the characterization of ancient genomes is still principally dependent on shotgun sequencing  <cit> . the introduction of methods that would improve the balance of endogenous over exogenous sequences obtained would therefore be especially beneficial in the emerging field of paleogenomics, since such methods would serve to improve sequencing depth and consequently the quality of the genome drafts generated  <cit> . additionally, since most dna extraction approaches are destructive, improving current methods would help to minimize damage to valuable samples, a point of critical importance in cases where the fossil record is limited .

recently, green and collaborators have shown that enzymatic restriction digestion can be used to successfully deplete the environmental microbe component within illumina sequencing libraries, thus enriching the fraction of sequenced material of endogenous origin   <cit> . similarly, we have recently demonstrated that true single molecule dna sequencing , as performed on the helicos heliscope platform, advantageously complemented illumina gaiix platforms when sequencing dna extracted from a pleistocene horse bone preserved in permafrost  <cit> . indeed, a simple modification to the conventional tsms dna template preparation procedure, involving a modified denaturation temperature prior to template 3’ poly-a tailing, increased the efficiency of endogenous sequence recovery, suggesting that the efficiency of tsms could be further improved for sequencing ancient dna extracts  <cit> . inspired by this observation, in this study, we further explore the potential of the tsms procedure when sequencing ancient dna extracts through two new modifications, namely oligonucleotide spiking and dna phosphatase treatment. we show that both approaches increase tsms performance, with up to  <dig> -fold enrichment in the amount of endogenous sequence information recovered per sequencing channel. in addition, we confirm the existence of molecular preservation niches in bones  <cit> , from which dna can be preferentially extracted, leading to enriched fractions of endogenous dna. such niches should be preferentially extracted for characterizing the complete genomes of individuals and species from the past.

RESULTS
two horse bone fossils preserved in permafrost were tsms-sequenced on the helicos platform using from  <dig> to  <dig> fov  per channel. overall sequence yield was expected to be directly proportional to the number of fov. the first bone, ca, originated from thistle creek, yukon territory, canada, and was associated with infinite radiocarbon dates . the second bone, tp, was excavated in the taymir peninsula and was radiocarbon dated at  <dig>  ±  <dig> bp. each bone was extracted in duplicate, henceforth referred to as ca <dig> and ca <dig> for sample ca, and tp <dig> and tp <dig> for sample tp. in addition, for sample tp, the residual bone powder that remained undigested after the initial dna extraction was subjected to redigestion until completely digested. dna was subsequently purified from this second fraction, generating two additional extracts, referred to below as tp1re and tp2re.

dna denaturation temperatures
ancient dna molecules are short, damaged, and showing overhangs at both termini. in contrast to the denaturation temperature at 95°c used in standard template preparation for the helicos platform, mild denaturation temperatures limit further fragmentation of ancient dna molecules  <cit> . for all extracts considered, when compared to a high denaturation temperature of 95°c, a more mild denaturation temperature of 80°c was found to yield:  a higher fraction of endogenous sequences ;  longer reads ;  lower overall %gc contents , and;  higher levels of post-mortem cytosine deamination . such enrichment could not be explained by the difference in volumes of ca extracts sequenced following denaturation at the respective temperatures since this would be expected to yield differences in the overall total number of sequences recovered but not in the relative proportions of the different fractions of reads present in the extracts. these observations are in agreement with previous observations derived from a more limited number of bone extracts  <cit> . this suggests that the presence of deaminated cytosine residues reduces the number of hydrogen bonds between dna strands and thereby likely favor a preferential denaturation of endogenous ancient templates, especially compared to longer, hence more thermostable, exogenous templates. interestingly, the younger sample  exhibited lower levels of cytosine deamination than the older sample .

sample ca was extracted in duplicate , and identical volumes of the extracts were tsms sequenced on a helicos  <dig> fov platform following different template preparation procedures as described in the methods section. the total number of sequences without  and with  filtering for oligonucleotides used for spiking, as well as the number of hits mapping the horse reference nuclear  and mitochondrial  genome with mapping qualities higher than  <dig> but with no hit on the human reference genomes hg <dig> and rcrs are reported. the total sequence length covered by these reads is indicated in bp. the fraction of endogenous reads is estimated by summing the number of reads identified in nucdna and mtdna and dividing by the total number of reads generated per channel .

sample tp was extracted in duplicate, and identical volumes of the extracts were tsms sequenced on helicos  <dig> fov channels following different template preparation procedures as described in the methods section. the total number of sequences  as well as the number of hits mapping the horse reference nuclear  and mitochondrial  genome with mapping qualities higher than  <dig> but with no hit on the human reference genomes hg <dig> and rcrs are reported. the total sequence length covered by these reads is indicated in bp. the fraction of endogenous reads is estimated by summing the number of reads identified in nucdna and mtdna and dividing by the total number of reads generated per channel.

molecular niches
the cytosine deamination levels observed in sequencing reads recovered from the extracts generated by redigesting residual pellet that was left-over from the first extraction , were found to be significantly lower than those observed in the sequencing reads generated from the initial extraction  . in addition, re-extracted samples showed higher endogenous sequence yield regardless of the dna denaturation temperature used during the template preparation procedure . this confirmed our previous observations with other bone material  <cit> . we hypothesize that the initially undigested bone powder likely consisted of larger bone crystals, hence required additional time before full digestion could be completed. crystal growth, and the related diagenetic increase in bone crystallinity observed post-mortem, could contribute to the entrapment and protection of endogenous dna molecules in larger crystals, as observed with the tp1re and tp2re extracts. conversely, an increase in bone porosity, and related fluid circulation, could result in microbial attack and the dissolution of crystals, which could potentiate the deposition of exogenous dna templates on the fraction of bone powder that appeared easily decalcified   <cit> . we anticipate that the preferential extraction of larger bone crystals would offer a simple strategy for acquiring a higher proportion of endogenous dna, thus improving the performance of shotgun sequencing.

oligonucleotide spiking
we additionally explored the potential of two other sequencing template preparation approaches, namely, oligonucleotide spiking and dna phosphatase treatment, to improve the performance of tsms on ancient dna extracts. such improvement could be either direct by increasing the relative ratio of endogenous content, or indirect, through higher total sequence recovery rates per channel.

in comparison to fresh material, degraded bone samples yield relatively low dna concentrations that are up to several orders of magnitude below those observed in fresh bone extracts  <cit> . while samples with extremely low dna yields are expected to perform poorly on any sequencing platform, such samples are still sequenceable on the helicos platform when they are spiked with oligonucleotides. in this system, a camera scans the sequencing flow cell and records images of each field of view. after each nucleotide addition, the images must be aligned with each other in order to properly assign sequence information. if the dna is at a very low concentration the images cannot be aligned properly, but the addition of spikes increases the total yield of dna sequences, allowing more accurate image alignment so that it becomes possible to obtain sequences from extremely small numbers of endogenous dna molecules  <cit> . this method has been shown to work effectively with modern dna samples present at very low concentrations.

in order to test this idea on ancient dna extracts, we focused on extracts ca <dig> and ca <dig>  these extracts showed relatively low levels of endogenous dna content  and delivered low numbers of sequences per channel on a  <dig> fov platform . for each extract, dna templates prepared using 80°c and 95°c as denaturation temperatures were pooled, and spiked just prior to sequencing with a  <dig> pm solution consisting of  <dig> oligonucleotides just prior to sequencing . the reads that derived from oligonucleotides were identified and filtered by mapping against those  <dig> known sequences. the results were then compared to the sequencing performance observed when no oligonucleotide spiking was performed. the fractions of extracts that were spiked with a mixture of exogenous oligonucleotides exhibited lower endogenous sequence ratios than unspiked extracts . if the spiking procedure was equivalent to the standard procedure then a larger number of endogenous sequences would have been expected . in particular,  <dig>  –  <dig>  and  <dig>  –  <dig>  horse reads would have been expected following spiking for extracts ca <dig> and ca <dig>  respectively, in contrast to the  <dig>  and  <dig>  actually observed . this difference shows that oligonucleotide spiking reduced our capability to access endogenous ancient reads. blast analyses revealed that the subset of sequence reads that was filtered for the sequence of oligonucleotide spikes presented higher proportions of unidentified sequences  compared to unspiked controls . likewise, we detected a  <dig> -fold to  <dig> -fold reduction in the proportion of blast hits assigned to bacteria following oligonucleotide spiking. this change in sequence composition suggests that a significant fraction of the reads consisted in oligonucleotide sequences that could not be filtered, possibly due to the presence of substantial levels of sequencing errors and/or the formation of chimeric sequencing reads.

further analyses of the sequences revealed that the population of horse dna sequences recovered following oligonucleotide spiking exhibited a skewed %gc contents . this lower %gc-content  might have resulted from the presence of unfiltered oligonucleotide sequences. following oligonucleotide spiking, we found levels of cytosine deamination similar to the ones observed in the absence of spiking at a denaturation temperature of 80°c . the observed misincorporation pattern was in agreement with that expected for ancient dna molecules, ie. an excess of g to a mismatches at the 5’-ends of reads .

despite its ability to access genuine ancient sequence information, the oligonucleotide spiking approach tested here could not be recommended for sequencing ancient dna extracts unless further developments are performed in order to optimize the filtering of oligonucleotide sequences and to prevent the shifts observed both in base composition and sequence diversity.

dna phosphatase treatment
a previous comparison of tsms shotgun sequencing of modern versus ancient  dna extracts revealed no major difference in the base composition of the genomic region preceding sequencing reads  <cit> . in particular, blocking sites were found to be enriched in guanine residues due to the preferential incorporation of dgtp virtual terminator during the locking reaction . additionally, genomic coordinates located upstream of blocking sites were enriched for thymine residues most likely resulting from the preferential capture of poly-a rich genomic regions by oligo-dt probes linked to the surface of the flow cell  <cit>  . in contrast, illumina sequencing of the same extracts has confirmed the model of dna fragmentation through depurination presented by briggs and colleagues, with excessive proportions of guanine and adenine residues at genomic positions preceding the sequencing start site  <cit> .

the absence of a clear signal for depurination in tsms reads has been proposed to result from the terminal transferase enzyme used for poly-a tailing in the helicos template preparation procedure, which might show non-optimal activity on modified 3’-ends of depurinated sites  <cit> . after depurination the dna backbone undergoes further cleavage at the site of base loss through β-elimination reactions, leaving dna fragments with modified 3’-ends, which could be incompatible with poly-a tailing and further tsms sequencing  <cit> . phosphorylation is one of the many modifications possibly present at 3’-ends of ancient templates. hence, we decided to test whether dephosphorylation of ancient dna extracts could restore access to a significant fraction of ancient templates and therefore could improve the overall performance of tsms by increasing either the overall number of sequences generated per channel or the fraction of endogenous sequences recovered. as mild denaturation temperatures had been shown to deliver higher endogenous sequence yields , we selected an enzyme with 3’ dna phosphatase activity that could be heat inactivated at 65°c. in addition, the enzymatic buffer was selected to be compatible with a further polya-tailing reaction in order to avoid extra template purification steps. for each of the four extracts generated from sample tp a fraction was treated with dna phosphatase and the template preparation procedure was performed using 80°c as the denaturation temperature. controls were run using an identical template preparation procedure but with no phosphatase treatment.

in all but one duplicate  dna phosphatase treatment generated a  <dig>  –  <dig> -fold enrichment in the overall number of sequences produced per sequencing channel . this enrichment was paralleled by a  <dig>  –  <dig> -fold decrease in the ratio of endogenous sequences , suggesting that exogenous templates benefited more from the dna phosphatase treatment than endogenous dna molecules. this was observed for the four independent experiments performed and could result from a saturation effect whereby dna phosphatase restored all ancient molecules with the phosphorylated 3’-ends that were present in the relatively small volume of extracts analyzed .

except for extract tp2re, dna phosphatase treatment resulted in a higher coverage of the horse genome per channel, as the increase in the overall number of sequences outweighed the loss resulting from the decrease in relative endogenous content. in this way the dna phosphatase treatment allowed us to retrieve  <dig>  mb of sequence information from four  <dig> fov channels, while only  <dig>  mb could be recovered in controls with a similar dna denaturation temperature but no dna phosphatase treatment. one sample  showed, however, lower absolute sequence yield after phosphatase treatment, most likely due to a channel-specific drop in sequencing quality. even though all  <dig> fov channels were sequenced on the same run, a series of known factors can lead to channel-to-channel variation, including 1) inhomogeneous deposition of primers ; 2) air bubbles in the channel that cause inefficient distribution of reagents, and; 3) laser focusing issues caused by inhomogeneity of the flow cell surface. with the channel considered, the overall yield of aligned sequences was lower than all the other channels, phosphatased or not; additionally, the rates of endogenous sequences appears lower than non-phosphatased samples of the same type, in agreement with all the other phosphatased samples . this channel-specific drop in sequencing quality has limited the number of sequences recovered, but has not changed misincorporation patterns, cumulative damage distributions and %gc content, that all appear similar to what observed for sample tp1re.

following dna phosphatase treatment the base composition at the genomic position preceding the sequencing start was found to be enriched in pyrimidines . this position corresponds to the blocking site, which was previously shown to preferentially consist of guanine residues  <cit> . in addition to affecting the base composition at the blocking site, the dna phosphatase treatment was found to change the base composition at position − <dig> from the sequencing start, which corresponds to the position of the first nucleotide following the 3’-end of the ancient dna strand . after dna phosphatase treatment this position was found to be enriched in cytosine residues, and depleted in equivalent proportions of adenine residues . as helicos sequencing reads provide the sequence of the strand complementary to the ancient dna template, this suggests that the first nucleotide following the 3’-end of the ancient dna strand consisted of an excess of guanine residues, in agreement with the model of dna fragmentation through depurination  <cit> , and with previous analyses using illumina sequencing that have reported a preferential enrichment in guanine residues at the genomic coordinate preceding the beginning of sequencing reads  <cit> . hence, the dna phosphatase treatment restored the signal of dna depurination which was nearly absent from previous tsms analyses of ancient dna templates, confirming that modification of 3’-ends, in particular phosphorylation, precluded efficient poly-a tailing of ancient dna templates with terminal transferase.

furthermore, we noted that, following dna phosphatase treatment, the base composition of the first nucleotide sequenced was enriched in cytosine residues . this enrichment occurred at the expense of adenine residues. overall, horse reads recovered from the dna phosphatase treatment were found to be slightly shorter than reads recovered without dna phosphatase treatment  and the base composition of these reads was similar to those recovered following the use of a 95°c denaturation temperature . the fraction of horse reads recovered after treatment of tp <dig> and tp <dig> extracts with dna phosphatase exhibited g→a cumulative misincorporation rates that were lower than those observed without dna phosphatase treatment, suggesting that dna phosphatase allowed preferential access to ancient dna templates with lower levels of cytosine deamination . more specifically, g→a cumulative misincorporation rates ranged from  <dig> % –  <dig> % in the first  <dig> nucleotides sequenced following dna phosphatase treatment in contrast to  <dig> % –  <dig> % in the absence of this treatment. no significant difference in overall g→a cumulative misincorporation rates were found in horse sequences recovered from extracts tp1re and tp2re, despite different dna denaturation temperatures and/or dna phosphatase treatment.

we should caution that dna phosphatase treatments of ancient dna extracts could be deleterious if second-generation sequencing methods and not tsms were used as sequencing approaches, since the former require building ancient templates into dna libraries through adapter ligation at phosphorylated 5’-ends. this has been demonstrated by briggs et al.  <cit>  who have shown that the fraction of mammoth reads was drastically reduced following incubation with calf intestinal alkaline phosphatase in the absence of further rephosphorylation of 5’ ends with pnk. conversely, treatment with dna phosphatase increased the amount of templates accessible to dna polymerases used for filling-in adapter sequences by restoring 3’ hydroxyl termini. therefore the pre-treatment of ancient dna extracts with dna phosphatase before library building, followed by a proper end repair step rephosphorylating 5’ ends, could be used for improving our ability to insert ancient dna fragments into dna libraries and consequently for improving the performance of  <dig> and illumina sequencing of ancient dna templates. the exact benefit of this approach for second-generation sequencing, however, remains to be determined. we anticipate that it will prove highly dependent on the relative efficiency of antarctic phosphatase over t <dig> polynucleotide kinase, as the latter is part of the standard end-repair enzymatic cocktail used for library building and could also catalyse the removal of 3’-phosphoryl groups from polynucleotides.

mitogenome analysis
overall, we have demonstrated that sequencing of dna purified from redigested bone powder, and the use of dna template preparation procedures combining a mild dna denaturation temperature and dna phosphatase treatment, significantly increased the amount of endogenous sequences retrieved from ancient bones using tsms. following these findings, we decided to perform further tsms sequencing on the tp1re extract using our modified dna template preparation procedure . a total of eight channels were used on a  <dig> fov platform, generating  <dig>  mb of horse dna sequences. when added to the information recovered from the twelve  <dig> fov channels this yielded  <dig>  mb of horse dna sequence for the 13ky-old sample . a total of  <dig>  nucleotides could be aligned with no ambiguity on the horse mitochondrial genome, corresponding to a global coverage of  <dig> x .

we subsequently used the mitochondrial information to assess further the quality of tsms sequences. we first focused on nucleotide positions  covered with a depth of  <dig> and calculated the proportion of sites showing identical bases among reads as a conservative estimate of the quality of the data generated by tsms on ancient dna templates. in addition, we further considered sites showing a minimal sequencing depth of  <dig> and calculated the proportion of these with >50% base agreement among reads. ignoring indels, we found identical sequences in  <dig> % of the sites covered at a depth of  <dig>  furthermore, levels of accuracy ranging from  <dig> % –  <dig> % were found at sequence depths equal to or greater than  <dig> , suggesting that a strict consensus approach considering sites with minimal sequencing depth of  <dig> should deliver high quality mitochondrial data. we consequently built a maximum likelihood phylogenetic tree using such sites  together with donkey and horse mitogenomic data available from the literature  <cit> . as expected, the late pleistocene mitogenome sequence data recovered from sample tp was found to cluster among horse sequences with maximal bootstrap support . interestingly, one haplotype characterized from the wild przewalski’s horse exhibited maximum sequence similarity to the late pleistocene sequence. however, the latter grouping was not supported by high bootstrap values, but is in agreement with the notion of this haplotype originating from a przewaski’s horse specimen that is thought to have no recent domestic horse genetic contribution to its known pedigree  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
in this study we have confirmed that large bone crystals that resist a first digestion step in edta-rich buffers provide access to molecular preservation niches in ancient bones, resulting in high endogenous sequence contents as well as lower levels of cytosine deamination. pending further confirmation for a wider range of preservation conditions, such niches could be targeted as a means of optimizing the characterization of complete ancient genome sequences through shotgun sequencing. this further shows that non-destructive extraction methods consisting of smooth digestion in decalcifying buffers do not provide access to the optimal fraction of dna templates preserved in bone specimens. in addition, we show that even simple temperature shifts and/or enzymatic treatments, have a major impact on the population of molecules retrieved from tsms. overall, this suggests that the amount of ancient dna sequences that are accessible using current methods could potentially be increased by improving extraction procedures and restoring accessibility to 3’ termini. we therefore suggest that dna from large bone crystals should be preferentially extracted, and when tsms is used as a sequencing method, dna templates should be prepared following dna phosphatase treatment and using mild denaturation temperatures. spiking of ancient dna extracts with oligonucleotides of known sequences also appears to be a promising means to increase tsms yields further.

