BACKGROUND
human ips cells are potentially valuable tools for the study of human development and disease. if human ips cells are generated from specific patients they offer an opportunity to study the molecular mechanism underlying the pathogenesis  <cit> . because human ips cells can be derived from a patient's own cells they may ultimately provide the means for effective cell therapy, avoiding concerns associated with immune rejection. however, before ips cell-based therapeutics can be realized, it is important that a reliable, reproducible, accessible, and safe reprogramming protocol is adopted.

current human ips production techniques have several limitations that restrict their clinical usefulness. for example, most reprogramming procedures result in clones of ips cells in which the extent of reprogramming can be heterogeneous. the derivation of fully reprogrammed ips cells, therefore, requires fastidious attention to detail with laborious, time-consuming production and screening procedures. recent studies have suggested that the inclusion of valproic acid or sodium butyrate may enhance complete reprogramming  <cit> .

in addition to the heterogeneity associated with reprogramming, the most commonly used reprogramming protocols use lentiviruses, which integrate into the host cell's genome and are potentially mutagenic. the choice of using lentiviruses to reprogram is partly historical. initial studies showed that the use of lentiviruses to transduce exogenous factors  into genomic dna was sufficient to reprogram human somatic cells  <cit> . since expression of the viral cdnas was repressed by methylation this allows transient expression of reprogramming factors until endogenous regulators of pluripotency take over. the transient expression of reprogramming factors may be important because even subtle changes in expression of these genes can induce cell differentiation  <cit> . studies using mouse cells have shown that expression of the exogenous reprogramming factors is required for a minimum of  <dig> days to produce ips cells  <cit> . although the need for extended expression of introduced cdnas suggested that the use of non-integrating approaches would be challenging, stadtfeld et al. demonstrated that genomic integration was not essential to successfully reprogram mouse fibroblasts, by using adenoviruses to supply cdnas encoding reprogramming factors  <cit> .

recently, a number of publications  <cit>  have reported the production of human ips cells that are free of transgenic sequences using a variety of strategies including infection of cells with recombinant adenoviruses and sendai viruses. although the use of these viruses circumvent genomic integration of dna, they require a knowledge of virology to produce high titer viruses and adherence to increasingly strict biosafety regulations. kim et al  <cit>  were able to generate human ips cells by directly delivering reprogramming proteins . the reprogramming proteins were fused to a peptide highly enriched in basic amino acids, which allowed them to cross the cell membrane barrier. the cells were then seeded on mouse feeder cells, and human ips-like colonies were picked  <dig> days after first exposure to the reprogramming proteins. this protocol was advantageous as it did not directly use genetic material to reprogram the somatic cells. however, one limitation was that a cell extract of stably transfected hek-293t cells had to be added once a week for six weeks.

a number of reports have shown that nucleic acids that do not integrate into the recipient genome can be used successfully to make ips cells. yu et al  <cit>  demonstrated that human ips cells could be generated from a single nucleofection of three orip/ebna <dig> -based episomal vectors coding for seven factors , after drug selection and seeding on mouse feeder cells. however, although the presence of orip/ebna <dig> ensured maintenance of the plasmids even after reprogramming, all human ips cells generated by this approach therefore had to be subcloned to isolate human ips cell lines void of vector dna.

while all of these techniques could be valuable, they all suffer from a lack of simplicity and in some cases require substantial knowledge of virology or protein biochemistry. we reasoned that an ideal reprogramming approach would rely on the use of elementary procedures that were readily accessible to any lab with even rudimentary experience in molecular biology. since yu and colleagues  <cit>  had successfully used nucleofection with episomal vectors, we addressed whether simple transient transfection of plasmid dna could generate human ips cells. we show that two sequential transfections of non-episomal plasmids that independently encode four reprogramming factors  are sufficient to generate human ips cells. in addition to exhibiting pluripotent cell features, the resulting integration-free human ips cells have the ability to generate hepatocyte-like cells and cardiac myocytes following directed differentiation in culture.

RESULTS
generation of integration-free virus-free human induced pluripotent stem cells
human foreskin fibroblasts previously used for generating lentiviral-derived human ips cells  <cit>  were co-transfected with four plasmid constructs coding for oct <dig>  nanog, sox <dig> and lin <dig> . our protocol used plasmid vectors identical to those used to generate the lentiviruses described by yu et al  <cit> ; however, the absence of packaging vectors from the transfection prevented the possibility of generating virions. a second transfection was carried out one week after the first. two weeks later, transfected cells were incubated with the mek inhibitor pd <dig> . four weeks after the first transfection, human ips-like colonies were picked.

at the end of the reprogramming protocol, alkaline phosphatase activity was evaluated . compared to the lentivirus-based reprogramming protocol, plasmid transfection led to a similar number of colonies displaying alkaline phosphatase activity. however, even though alkaline phosphatase activity is considered to be a marker of pluripotency in embryonic stem cells  <cit> , it is detected early in the reprogramming process and does not necessarily reflect a fully reprogrammed state  <cit> .

in three independent experiments a total of  <dig> colonies were collected whose morphology resembled that of hues cells. cells were collected by manual dissection and seeded onto mefs. although we were unable to culture the majority of the colonies as stable lines, a single human ips cell colony  was successfully expanded for further analyses. as shown in figure 2a, ipsk <dig> cells displayed a morphology that was indistinguishable from human embryonic stem cells . the cells also possessed alkaline phosphatase activity  and expressed pluripotent markers including oct <dig> and ssea <dig> . in addition, facs analyses revealed that ≥ 99% of cells expressed oct <dig>  ssea <dig>  tra1- <dig> and tra1- <dig>  while in contrast the fibroblast marker cd <dig> was not detected . after subcutaneous injection into immunodeficient rag2-/-; il2rgamma-/- mice, ipsk <dig> cells generated teratomas containing tissues derived from all three germ layers . finally, g-banding of genomic dna revealed a normal karyotype  and short tandem repeat analysis found that the dna fingerprint of ipsk <dig> cells matched that of the human foreskin fibroblast originally used for reprogramming .

since the plasmids used to reprogram lacked sequences required for replication in eukaryotic cells we expected that exogenous dna would by lost from ipsk <dig> cells during cell division. we, therefore screened for the presence of plasmid dna by southern blot and pcr analysis of ipsk <dig> genomic dna. southern blot analysis was performed after digestion by bamhi and developed using a probe to detect the puromycin n-acetyl transferase gene that is present on each of the plasmids used for reprogramming but is absent from human genome . blots were stripped and hybridized to a probe that detected foxd <dig>  to ensure the presence of dna in each sample . while integrated exogenous dna was detected in lentiviral-derived human ips cells , plasmid dna was not detected in control hues cell lines h <dig>  h <dig>  and h <dig>   or in ipsk <dig> cells. since genomic dna was obtained by precipitation from whole cell lysates, without separation between cytosolic and nuclear compartments, the absence of exogenous dna by southern blot suggests that ipsk <dig> cells were also devoid of episomal plasmid dna .

the absence of plasmid dna was confirmed by performing genomic pcr using primers that specifically amplify puromycin n-acetyl-transferase sequence . an amplification product was successfully detected when dna from control lentiviral-derived ipsc <dig> cells was used as a template. in contrast, amplicons were not identified in dna from control h <dig> cells or from ipsk <dig> cells. from these data we conclude that the reprogrammed ipsk <dig> cells are devoid of plasmid sequences, at least within the resolution offered by the assays.

differentiation of ipsk <dig> cells into hepatocyte-like cells
we previously reported that human ips cells can be used to efficiently generate cells that possess features and functional characteristics that are similar to those of human hepatocytes  <cit> . we, therefore, tested whether ipsk <dig> cells retained competency to adopt a hepatic fate by directed differentiation in culture. following completion of the four-step differentiation protocol  <cit> , cells derived from ipsk <dig> cells displayed features that are associated with hepatocytes. such features included an epithelial organization, large cytoplasmic-to-nuclear ration, prominent nucleoli, the presence of lipid vesicles, and the presence of binucleated cells in the culture .

differentiated cells were then incubated with 5--carboxy-2'-7'-dichlorofluorescein diacetate . dcf-da is membrane permeable and becomes trapped inside the cells after cleavage by intracellular esterase into dcf and da. dcf, however, can be secreted between hepatocyte-like cells via bile canaliculi through specific transporters  <cit> . hepatocyte-like cells derived from ipsk <dig> efficiently secreted the fluorescent compound, demonstrating the presence of functional bile transporters . finally, the differentiated cells also expressed several hepatic markers including foxa <dig>  e-cadherin, hnf4α, α-fetoprotein, and albumin . overall, our data suggest that the ipsk <dig> were competent to form hepatocyte-like cells.

directed differentiation of human ipsk <dig> cells into cardiac myocytes
to ensure that the cells' ability to differentiate in culture was not restricted to cells derived only from endodermal lineages, we examined the potential of the ipsk <dig> cells to differentiate toward a cardiac myocyte cell fate using a directed cardiac myocyte differentiation protocol based on previously published procedures  <cit> . clusters of rhythmically contracting cells were observed  <dig> weeks following the start of the differentiation protocol and continued to beat  <dig> days later . the beating areas expressed the transcription factor gata <dig>  and the cardiac-specific marker troponin-t in a striated manner, consistent with these cells being cardiac myocytes .

cytosolic calcium transients were monitored using the fluo- <dig> am fluorescent indicator, which is calcium sensitive. figure 5b shows a montage of rhythmic oscillation of intracellular calcium waves based on video acquisition . analysis of intracellular calcium released from individual cells among the beating network  showed a heterogeneous population consisting of atrial-like cardiac myocytes  that displayed a higher frequency of intracellular calcium oscillation and shorter periodicity, along with ventricular-like cardiac myocytes , with a lower frequency of intracellular oscillation and longer periods. these data confirm that ipsk <dig> cells can be induced to differentiate into distinct populations of functional cardiac myocytes in culture.

discussion
in this report, we describe the generation of human ips cells devoid of exogenous dna by the simple transient transfection of plasmids that express reprogramming factors. these newly reprogrammed somatic cells display pluripotent markers and were found to form teratomas in immunodeficient mice that were composed of all three germ layers. in addition, our data demonstrate that the ipsk <dig> cells produced by this process could form hepatocyte-like cells and contracting cardiac myocytes upon directed differentiation in culture.

despite the observation that similar numbers of colonies expressing alkaline phosphatase activity were identified between lentiviral transduction and plasmid transfection, the use of plasmids is less efficient for full reprogramming of somatic cells. based on the successful isolation of a single fully reprogrammed colony, the efficiency of human ips cell reprogramming by plasmid transfection  was similar to that reported for the use of adenovirus   <cit> , which is approximately ten-fold lower  when reprogramming is performed with lentiviruses  <cit> . this lower efficiency presumably reflects a reduction in sustainable expression of the reprogramming factors because the presence of plasmid dna within the cells is transient. a substantial effort by multiple labs has resulted in the description of small molecules that can enhance the efficiency of reprogramming . for example increases up to 200-fold in reprogramming efficiency have been reported by including antagonists of tgfbeta signaling in addition to mek-erk inhibitors and passaging the cells in the presence of thiazovivin  <cit> . in addition, inclusion of valproic acid or sodium butyrate may enhance complete reprogramming  <cit> . it therefore seems likely that such drug combinations could be used to increase the efficiency of reprogramming by transient transfection of expression plasmids.

the main advantage of the current approach is that it allows direct reprogramming of human somatic cells into human ips cells devoid of exogenous dna without the need for extensive experimental procedures  <cit> . while several other procedures have been described for producing ips cells free of integrating dna, most require some level of specialized knowledge of virology or biochemistry. although the frequency of recovering completely reprogrammed ips cells is lower than using lentiviral transduction, the simplicity and accessibility of using transient transfection should also compensate for the reduced efficiency.

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, we have shown that simple transient transfection of plasmid dna encoding reprogramming factors is sufficient to generate human ips cells from primary fibroblasts that are free of exogenous dna integrations. this approach is simple, highly accessible and could expand the use of ips cells in the study of human disease and development, as well as increase the availability of safer ips cells for potentially therapeutic uses.

