BACKGROUND
gene expression was for a long time considered to consist of a chain of distinct events starting with synthesis of rna, followed by splicing and ending with mature mrnas being translated in the cytoplasm. the discovery of multifunctional rna-binding proteins has since then joined transcription, rna processing, transport of rna species and translation into an integrated tightly regulated cellular machinery  <cit> . one such group of proteins is the fet  family of rna-binding proteins  <cit> . the fet family consists of mammalian fus   <cit> , ews  <cit> , taf <dig>   <cit>  and the closely related drosophila cabeza/sarfh  <cit> . all four proteins are structurally similar and contain a number of evolutionary conserved regions  <cit> . the fus, ews and taf <dig> proteins bind rna as well as dna and have both unique and overlapping functions. the human fet proteins are associated with transcription, splicing, microrna  processing  <cit> , rna transport, signaling and maintenance of genomic integrity. furthermore, the 5' parts of the human fet genes are as a result of chromosomal translocations rearranged and fused to various transcription factor genes in multiple human malignancies. these events are considered the driving forces of cancer development in their associated diseases  <cit> .

although the fet family proteins are implicated in numerous cellular processes their functions remain poorly characterized. this together with the fact that the proteins are structurally similar prompted us to investigate their cell type-specific expression. in the present study, we used immunostaining and ectopically expressed proteins to examine the expression patterns of fet family members in multiple human tissues and cell types. our results show that the three fet proteins are heterogeneously expressed throughout human tissues with fus and taf <dig> having highly correlated expression patterns. in addition, we here report that the fet proteins display alterations in expression at both mrna and protein level upon differentiation and that they are involved in cellular stress response as well as cell spreading.

RESULTS
fus, ews and taf <dig> show cell type-specific localization in vivo
tissue microarrays  were stained with antibodies against fus, ews and taf <dig> and the percentage of positively staining cells within  <dig> organs were estimated . the fet proteins showed almost ubiquitous expression with fus and taf <dig> having highly correlated expression patterns . however, fet proteins were not detected in melanocytes and cardiac muscle cells and neither fus nor taf <dig> were detected in cardiac endothelium. most cell types showing fet expression had nuclear localization of the proteins but fus and taf <dig> was absent from the nuclei of hepatocytes. moreover, fus and taf <dig> often showed cytoplasmic localization while ews was more rarely found in this compartment . cytoplasmic ews was mainly detected in secretory cell types. in salivary gland, ews showed a striking divergence in cytoplasmic expression between different cell types. ews was restricted to the nuclei of mucous cells while being expressed in both the nucleus and cytoplasm of ducts and serous cells .

the percentage of fet positive cells within an organ is indicated as: +++ , ++ , +  and - .

asterisks indicate statistical significance with p <  <dig> . n – nuclear, cp – cytoplasmic.

the fet proteins show conserved localization in cultured cells
in cultured human cells, the fet proteins displayed smooth nuclear localization with infrequent nuclear speckles . none of the proteins localized to nucleoli. fus and taf <dig> showed a diffuse distribution in the cytoplasm but were in some cases localized to small cytoplasmic granules. ews was not detected in the cytoplasm. these patterns were similar for all cell lines tested. stably expressed gfp-tagged fet proteins demonstrated similar expression patterns as the corresponding endogenous proteins  while overexpressed fet proteins showed protein aggregation . fet protein expression in stable transfectants was confirmed by western blot analysis . cell measurements performed on stable transfectants showed that cells with ectopic fus or fusa expression were somewhat larger than other cells .

the fet family proteins are targeted to stress granules upon environmental stress
cells transiently transfected with fet-gfp expression vectors showed occasional nuclear and more commonly cytoplasmic fet-gfp protein aggregation . the cytoplasmic aggregates resembled stress granules   <cit> . when such cells were stained with antibodies against the sg marker tia- <dig>  <cit> , colocalization was seen between this marker and the ectopically expressed gfp-tagged fet proteins . however, there were clear differences between the individual fet proteins. ews-gfp rarely localized to sgs , while fus-gfp and taf15-gfp localized to stress granules in the majority of transiently transfected cells. to further confirm that the fet proteins localize to sgs following stress, stable fet transfectants ) and hela cells were exposed to oxidative stress by sodium arsenite treatment . fet-gfp proteins as well as endogenous fet proteins localized to stress granules following these experiments. ews-gfp was only detected in a minority of cells and in cases were two smaller cells were located in close proximity to each other. endogenous ews on the other hand was found in sgs in all hela cells. the fet proteins showed similar sg localization after both heat-shock and arsenite treatment . a stably expressed fus mutant lacking the rna-binding domain showed background signal in sgs similar to the gfp control .

fus and taf <dig> localize to spreading initiation centers
fus and taf <dig>  but not ews, were detected in large cytoplasmic granules forming close to the plasma membrane in a subset of adhering f <dig> and ht- <dig> cells. these cells were rounded-up and seemingly not completely attached to the underlying surface. when such cells were further co-stained with the focal adhesion/spreading initiation center  markers vinculin, fak and rack <dig>  <cit> , colocalization was apparent between these markers and both fus and taf <dig> .

fus, ews and taf <dig> show heterogeneous expression within the same cell type in vivo
when comparing individual cells of the same type within tissues, we found that in addition to differences in localizations there were quantitative differences in the amount of fet protein expression. epithelial cells of the esophagus displayed the most pronounced variations ranging from strong to complete lack of expression within the same cell type . similar observations were made for many other cell types and tissues . in addition, markedly attenuated fet expression was seen in secretory endometrium compared with proliferative endometrium . immunostained cultured cells showed more homogeneous fet expression .

fet family expression is downregulated in neuroblastoma cells following retinoic acid treatment
to investigate a possible connection between fet expression and differentiation, we analyzed fet expression in sh-sy5y neuroblastoma cells treated with all-trans retinoic acid . cells were monitored by light microscopy and harvested after  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> days of treatment. an increased neurite formation was visual in ra treated cells compared to untreated cells. western blot analysis of protein extracts from these cells demonstrated a marked decrease in fet expression upon prolonged retinoic acid treatment . no change in localization of the fet proteins was detected by immunofluorescence analysis after ra treatment of sh-sy5y cells .

fus, ews and taf <dig> gene expression is gradually attenuated in differentiating human embryonic stem cells
we further investigated fet family gene expression during spontaneous differentiation of cultured human embryonic stem cells . samples were collected from morphologically distinct inner and peripheral parts of the hesc colonies . quantitative rt-pcr was used to assay fet gene expression as well as markers for differentiation and proliferation . fet gene expression was over time downregulated in the peripheral parts of the hesc colonies. however, the expression of individual fet genes diverged partially from each other. fus and taf <dig> expression was considerably reduced in the peripheral parts while ews showed only weak attenuation here. in addition, taf <dig> was slightly downregulated in the inner parts, while fus and ews expression was maintained in these cells. an overall downregulation of pou5f <dig>  indicated that all hescs had initiated differentiation . over time, peripheral colonies spontaneously differentiated towards a mesodermal cell fate defined by an upregulation of vim expression. the inner parts showed a very weak upregulation of sox <dig>  an early ectodermal marker as well as downregulation of the proliferation marker ccna <dig>  fus, ews and taf <dig> expression at the protein level was confirmed in hescs by immunofluorescence .

fet protein expression is maintained in growth arrested cells and unaltered by serum starvation or stimulation
as fet gene expression correlated with the proliferation marker ccna <dig> in hescs we investigated whether actively proliferating cells have increased fet expression compared to quiescent cells. proliferating, semi-confluent f <dig> primary human fibroblasts were compared with confluent contact-inhibited cells. also, experiments studying fet expression following serum-stimulation/starvation were performed in ht- <dig> cells. these experiments did no reveal any significant differences in fet expression as analyzed by western blot .

discussion
in the present study, we show that the fet proteins are ubiquitously expressed throughout human tissues and only a few cell types lack fet expression. the proteins display cell type-specific localization with fus and taf <dig> having highly similar expression patterns. fus and ews have previously been found in the nucleus as well as in the cytoplasm and shown to shuttle between these locations  <cit> . we here report that taf <dig> is also present in both of these compartments in numerous human cell types. this implies that taf <dig> may participate in nuclear-cytoplasmic shuttling in much the same way as the other fet family members do. in general, fus and taf <dig> showed cytoplasmic localization in most cell types while ews was more rarely seen in this compartment. expression data obtained for ews in the present study differed from that recently made available on the internet  <cit> , where the ews expression was judged to be restricted to the nucleus throughout human tissues. differences in staining procedure and analysis could explain discrepancies between our studies. in this study, cytoplasmic ews was mainly detected in secretory cell types, suggesting that ews is involved in the expression of secreted proteins. in salivary gland, the ews protein was expressed in both the cytoplasm and nucleus of ductal and serous cells. in contrast, ews was restricted to a nuclear localization in mucous cells. this and other examples of differential expression of the fet proteins in closely related cell types indicate specific roles in regulation of specialized functions. in cultured cells of different tissue origins, ews expression was limited to the nucleus whereas fus and taf <dig> were observed in both compartments. this pattern reflected the most common type of expression seen in tissues and may be explained by homogeneous culture conditions. the strong nuclear preference of ews in most cell types in contrast to fus and taf <dig> may be connected to its more frequent mutation in human cancers were the oncoprotein is restricted to nuclear functions as an aberrant transcription factor. the localization of normal ews in various subcellular compartments has previously been shown to be affected by methylation  <cit>  but it is unknown whether localization of fus and taf <dig> is regulated in a similar manner.

a majority of cells overexpressing gfp-tagged fus and taf <dig> showed cytoplasmic aggregates that colocalized with the stress granule marker tia- <dig>  these results implied that the fet proteins might target sgs as part of cellular stress response. sgs are phase-dense particles that are composed of stalled translation pre-initiation complexes, mrnas and rna-binding proteins and appear in the cytoplasm of cells exposed to environmental stress  <cit> . to further confirm sg localization of fet proteins, we exposed stable fet transfectants and hela cells to oxidative stress and heat shock. exogenous as well as endogenous fet proteins localized to sgs in these experiments. however, exogenous ews was detected in sgs only in occasional cells and endogenous ews showed weak sg staining compared to fus and taf <dig>  this could be explained by higher amounts of cytoplasmic ews during and post mitosis. fus was recently reported in stress granules in a small subset of thapsigargin treated cells and also when expressed as an rfp-tagged protein  <cit> . we here further show that the entire fet family is targeted to sgs upon environmental stress. fusa and gfp expressing cells showed similar degrees of signal in sgs which seemed to correlate with the amount of gfp tagged protein present in the cell. it is therefore possible that a certain amount of ectopically expressed protein associates with stress granules as a consequence of overexpression and non-specific protein aggregation. the sg signals from the full-length fet members were judged to far exceed those of the fus mutant and the gfp protein alone. it is therefore likely that the rna-binding domain of fus is needed for stress granule targeting. several other rna-binding proteins have previously been found in stress granules, e.g. tia- <dig>  hur, hnrnpa <dig>  yb- <dig> and fmrp  <cit> , and many of these proteins have been shown to regulate translation of specific mrnas  <cit> . for the fmrp protein, this regulation was proposed to be mediated by mirna-coupled translational repression  <cit> . fmrp, hnrnpa <dig> and yb- <dig> have previously been found together with fus and ews in messenger ribonucleoprotein complexes  <cit> , suggesting related functions of these proteins. in addition, the fet proteins are part of nuclear mirna processing complexes  <cit>  and in our work detected in cytoplasmic sgs known to contain mirnas  <cit> . hence, it is possible that the fet proteins interact with mirnas and shuttle in protein-rna complexes containing these non-coding rnas. fus has previously been associated with polysomes  <cit>  and implicated in regulation of localized protein synthesis in dendritic spines  <cit> . the protein is also proposed to be a component of processing bodies, cellular structures with a direct role in mrna degradation and with implications in rnai-mediated post-transcriptional gene silencing  <cit> . however, we could not detect any structures resembling p-bodies and the fet family was restricted to stress granules in our hands. based on these data we speculate that the fet proteins have functions in regulation of post-transcriptional gene expression during both normal and stress-induced situations.

the fus protein has earlier been detected in spreading initiation centers, focal adhesion-like complexes that assembles upon early cell spreading  <cit> . we here show that taf <dig> is also present in these structures. however, ews was undetectable in sics, possibly is due to a low abundance of cytoplasmic ews protein under normal conditions. fus has previously been reported in nmda receptor-adhesion protein signaling complexes  <cit>  and all three fet proteins have been found to interact with v-src  <cit> , a protein known to indirectly induce adhesion turnover and actin remodeling  <cit> . de hoog et al. have also found that perturbation of rna-binding proteins  affects cell spreading  <cit> . these data suggest that at least two of the fet proteins are involved in focal adhesion-related processes. we noted that stable transfectants expressing fus variants were somewhat larger than other stably transfected cells but seemingly not flatter when visually inspected in the z-axis by confocal microscopy. the reason for this larger phenotype of fus-expressing cells and a putative connection with cell spreading is currently not understood.

in addition to in vivo cell type-specific localization, the fet proteins showed heterogeneous expression levels within the same cell type in multiple organs. these results suggested that the expression of the fet proteins may be regulated in individual cells by external factors provided by neighboring cells and the microenvironment. observations from cell cultures with uniform growth conditions and cell populations, showing only small variances in fet expression between individual cells, supported this assumption. however, we saw no change in fet expression following experimental serum starvation or stimulation of fibrosarcoma tumor cells, implying that externally provided serum factors are not directly affecting fet expression in these cells. an alternative hypothesis is that the observed heterogeneity depends on differentiation, attributing a developmental role for the proteins. we investigated this hypothesis experimentally by measuring fet expression in sh-sy5y neuroblastoma cells induced to differentiate by retinoic acid. in these experiments, fet expression was markedly decreased in cells receiving ra treatment compared to untreated cells. to further investigate expression of the fet family during differentiation, we measured fet gene expression in spontaneously differentiating human embryonic stem cells. we conclude from these data that the three fet genes are regulated upon early differentiation in a lineage-specific manner.

altered fus and ews expression during differentiation has been reported by several studies  <cit> . furthermore, fus and ews have been shown to be required for b lymphocyte development and for spermatogenesis in mice  <cit> . one study showed that an alternative ews isoform is augmented during neuronal development  <cit> . in the present study, we could however not distinguish between ews isoforms. nevertheless, our data together with previous reports point to functions for the fet family in specialized cells, rather than the housekeeping functions inferred from earlier promoter studies  <cit> . this conclusion is further supported by the lack of fet expression in terminally differentiated melanocytes and cardiac muscle cells. bertolotti et al. previously showed that the fet proteins associate with both common and distinct tfiid complexes and rna polymerase ii subunits  <cit> . these results implied overlapping as well as unique functions within the fet family. our data showing differences in regulation and expression patterns of the individual fet proteins in specific cell types supports this interpretation and suggests that these unique functions are manifested at a cell type-specific level.

a previous study showed that the fus homolog pigpen is regulated during the transition between proliferating and quiescent endothelial cells  <cit> , providing an alternative explanation for the heterogenic fet expression seen in tissues and under experimental conditions. therefore, we investigated a possible correlation between proliferation and fet expression by comparing fet expression in proliferating and growth arrested cells. however, no relationship between active proliferation and fet protein expression was seen in these experiments. in support of our data is an earlier study showing that fus expression is uncorrelated to proliferative status  <cit> . thus, we conclude differentiation rather than proliferation as an expression determinant for the fet family proteins.

fet proteins have been shown to be part of the splicing machinery  <cit>  and oncogenic variants of the fet proteins are reported to promote aberrant splicing  <cit> . interestingly, altered subcellular localization of the fus and ews associated hnrnpa <dig> protein results in alternative splicing. in addition, an overall change in subcellular distribution of splicing factors has been proposed to influence pre-mrna processing  <cit> . we thus speculate that the heterogeneous tissue and cell type-specific expression patterns shown by the fet proteins and their involvement in rna processing link these proteins to cell type-specific splicing. the mirna profile of a given cell could in a similar manner be affected by fet protein expression as many mirnas are spliced out of introns of protein-coding genes  <cit> . the tumor type-specific fet fusion oncogenes present in multiple human cancers have documented strong transforming properties and the tumors display few other cytogenetic aberrations  <cit> . as alternative splicing and mirna maturation are emerging as central for both development and disease  <cit> , abnormal fet oncoproteins disturbing these vital processes could thereby instigate significant biological changes resulting in cancer. analogously, altered adhesion and stress response are common traits of many human cancers and these properties could be targeted by oncogenic variants of fet proteins.

CONCLUSIONS
we conclude that the fus, ews and taf <dig> proto-oncoproteins are regulated and expressed in a cell type-specific manner. our results expand on previous knowledge and imply multiple functions for the fet family proteins in specialized cells during both normal and stress-induced situations. these results suggest functions for all fet family members in differentiation, stress response and cell spreading in addition to their previously known activities as transcription factors. the multifunctionality of the fet family proteins makes them vulnerable targets for cancer-causing mutations as such events could affect several cellular control systems simultaneously. a deregulation of multiple vital processes may explain why fet oncogenes resulting from single mutations can disturb cellular homeostasis and in the extension lead to the development of cancer.

