BACKGROUND
during the last decade, the advent of chromosome conformation capture   <cit>  and its derived technologies   <cit>  allowed to explore genome organization with unprecedented resolution and accuracy. by capturing all chromatin contacts present at a given time in their physiological nuclear context, and then by averaging these events over several millions of cells, the quantitative 3c method  <cit>  allows to access the relative contact frequencies between chromatin segments in vivo. this feature is key to understanding chromatin dynamics in vivo because it depends not only on fundamental biophysical parameters of the chromatin  that determine its local organization at the nucleosomal scale, but also on constraints that impact its higher-order/supranucleosomal organization. these latter constraints can result either from nuclear determinants that organize chromatin at higher scales  or from some intrinsic locus-specific components of the chromatin that are controlling genomic functions, like epigenetic modifications or the binding of specific factors   <cit> .

hi-c approaches  provided genome-wide profiling of contact frequencies in the yeast   <cit> , fly   <cit> , mouse   <cit>  and human  <cit>  genomes. while these data confirmed that higher-order chromatin dynamics appears to be globally unconstrained in yeast, they showed that this organization level is constrained in higher eukaryotes where the chromatin is compartmentalized into chromosomal territories that are themselves further partitioned into the so-called “topologically associating domains”   <cit>  or contact domains  <cit> . tads and contact domains are defined as chromosomal sub-compartments that display preferential contacts in cis. however, they are restricted to interphase cells and disappear in mitotic chromosomes  <cit> , to be re-acquired in the early g <dig> phase  <cit> . they are physically delimited by borders that are gene-rich regions enriched in specific factors like the insulator protein ctcf  <cit> . noticeably, the location of tad borders appears to be quite stable across cell types. it is commonly accepted that, within tads, chromatin is organized into chromatin loops, via locus-specific interactions, and that this organization is tightly related to genome function . it has recently been evidenced that such interactions occur in the context of fluctuating structures rather than being stable loops  <cit> , and we previously showed that, in the absence of strong long-range locus-specific interactions, this underlying dynamics of the chromatin undergo constraints in gene-rich regions resulting in modulated contact frequencies over large genomic distances  <cit> . while the involvement of locus-specific factors in chromatin-loop formation, within tads, is now well established  <cit> , the physical properties that govern the underlying chromatin dynamics at that scale remains unknown.

here, using quantitative 3c experiments, we report that the modulation of contact frequencies previously described in liver cells  <cit>  is also present in pluripotent mouse embryonic stem cells , not only in gene-rich tads, but also in gene-poor and gene-desert domains. therefore, the constraints that affect higher-order chromatin dynamics in mammals appear to widely affect tads in diverse genomic contexts. we show that the equilibrium/crumpled globule models do not reproduce chromatin dynamics within mammalian tads. in contrast, models derived from polymer physics can accurately describe chromatin dynamics at that scale in both mouse and drosophila tads. in the mouse, we found that chromatin dynamics is less constrained in esc than in liver cells, and that this constraint is also strongly attenuated in a tad spanning a gene-desert compared to gene-poor or gene-rich tads. in drosophila melanogaster, using hi-c data obtained from embryos, we show that, on a local scale, chromatin dynamics is finely tuned according to the epigenetic landscape: the nucleofilament is less compact and more flexible in active than in heterochromatic domains. however, in contrast to mammals, the higher-order chromatin dynamics in drosophila appears largely unconstrained.

RESULTS
to explore the influence of the genomic context on chromatin dynamics, we first investigated mouse esc, for which tads have been finely defined  <cit> . we focused on three types of domains: five gene-rich tads, two gene-poor tads  <cit>  and one gene-desert tad . the regions investigated in the two gene-poor tads  are devoid of any known genes or putative regulatory elements, and their homozygous deletion in mouse results in fully viable pups, with no obvious alteration  <cit> . these tads actually do contain several genes, but the closest from the regions analysed are located around 300 kb away. in contrast, the gene-desert tad is containing a single gene located more than  <dig>  mb away from the region analysed .

equilibrium/crumpled globule models do not reproduce chromatin dynamics within mammalian tads
equilibrium and crumpled/fractal globule models, have been developed to describe chromatin dynamics in vivo. it was shown that, when one looks at decreasing contact frequencies as a function of increasing genomic distances in a log-log plot, the equilibrium globule model follows a power-law scaling associated to a slope of −3/ <dig> over two orders of magnitude while the crumpled globule model has a slope of − <dig>  <cit> . using hi-c data, it was shown that crumpled globule features are characteristic of chromatin dynamics above 1 mb  but that they may not be valid for separation distances shorter than 100 kb  <cit> .

to assess whether such organization principles apply to chromatin dynamics within tads, we thus performed quantitative 3c experiments in the different tads described above and, using log-log plots, we showed that gene-rich, as well as gene-poor and gene-desert tads display slopes superior to − <dig>   which are incompatible with the equilibrium or crumpled globule models. therefore, neither the equilibrium nor the crumpled globule models accurately reproduce chromatin dynamics within mammalian tads.fig.  <dig> fitting globule models to contact frequencies quantified in mesc. experimental 3c-qpcr data obtained for wt mesc in gene-rich tads  have been displayed into a log-log plot and globule models were fitted to the following power-law: x = k*s
α , where x is the cross-linking frequency, s  is the site separation along the genome, k is representing the efficiency of cross-linking and the exponent α is the slope associated to this power-law. best-fits  show that the slope associated to our experimental data  is approximately α = −1/ <dig>  with a correlation coefficient r
2 =  <dig> , while correlation coefficients associated to the equilibrium   or crumpled globules   are much lower



chromatin dynamics is less constrained in pluripotent mesc than in liver cells
we then fitted our data to two models, derived from polymer physics, that were previously used to describe chromatin dynamics in the yeast saccharomyces cerevisiae  <cit>  and in mammals  <cit> . the first model  provides measurements of three key parameters of local chromatin dynamics : k reflects features of the experimental setting ; l is the length of a chromatin segment  containing 1 kb of genomic dna, thus reflecting chromatin compaction ; s  is a measure of chromatin flexibility  <cit> . the higher cross-linking efficiency, chromatin compaction and flexibility, the lower the values of parameters k, l and s will be. this model assumes that, at higher-order organization levels, chromatin does not undergo any special constraints. therefore, we define it as “unconstrained chromatin” model. the second model is named “statistical helix” model. it provides measurements of the same parameters of local chromatin dynamics, but it also takes into account constraints that may impact chromatin dynamics at the higher-order level . in this model, the higher-order chromatin dynamics is described as if constraints imposed onto chromatin were folding, statistically, the chromatin into a helical shape that can be characterized by two parameters: its mean diameter   and its mean pitch     <cit> . these two parameters are thus describing the presence of constraints that impact higher-order chromatin dynamics. the weaker the effects of the constraints, the less pronounced the parameters of the statistical helix will be .

as previously found in mouse liver cells  <cit> , gene-rich tads display modulated contact frequencies and the statistical helix model  can be very well fitted to our experimental data while the unconstrained chromatin model  does not fit for site separation larger than 35 kb . this confirms that, in both liver cells and mesc, chromatin dynamics in gene-rich tads undergoes constraints that can be described by polymer models as if, at the supranucleosomal scale, the chromatin was statistically folded into a helix.fig.  <dig> fitting the statistical helix model to contact frequencies quantified in mesc. quantitative 3c data were obtained from wild-type mouse esc in five gene-rich tads , two gene-poor tads  and one gene-desert tad  . for each type of tad, data obtained from all the anchor primers used for each locus  were compiled in a single graph . error bars are standard error of the mean of three independent quantitative 3c assays each quantified at least in triplicate. dashed lines delimit supranucleosomal domains that encompass separation distances where contact frequencies are alternatively lower and higher . the graphs show the best fit analyses obtained with the unconstrained chromatin model   or the statistical helix model  . correlation coefficients  are indicated on the graphs. best fit parameters, and the genomic distance contained within one statistical helix turn , are given in the upper part of table  <dig>  for each supranucleosomal domains, the mean contact frequencies and the number  of experimental points are indicated on the graphs. p-values  account for the significance of the differences observed between the experimental means of two adjacent domains 



however, close examination of best-fit parameters indicates that the statistical helix organization of the chromatin in gene-rich tads is considerably more relaxed in mesc compared to liver cells . the mean pitch  of the statistical helix is 201 ± 13 nm in mesc while it is only 160 ± 9 nm in liver cells, and the mean diameter  is 255 ± 8 nm and 287 ± 5 nm respectively. consequently, one turn of the statistical helix  contains 97 ± 1 kb of genomic dna in liver cells while it encompasses only 85 ± 2 kb in mesc. therefore, higher-order chromatin dynamics is less constrained in pluripotent mesc than in liver cells. remarkably, this clear difference is not linked to local chromatin flexibility since the s parameter is identical  in both cell types . finally, the values of the k parameter suggest that cross-linking efficiency is higher in liver cells than in mesc .table  <dig> fitting the statistical helix model to the relative contact frequencies observed in wild-type  and triple ko  mouse es cells 

k *10
3
255 ± 8
201 ± 13
85 ± 2
 <dig>  ±  <dig> 
 <dig>  ±  <dig> 
72 ± 13
 <dig>  ±  <dig> 
parameters obtained for mouse liver cells  <cit>  are indicated for comparisons . remarkable values are indicated in bold 



effects of constraints on chromatin dynamics correlate with gene density in mesc tads
interestingly, inside both gene-poor and gene-desert tads, chromatin also displayed modulated contact frequencies , indicating that the constraints that impact higher-order chromatin dynamics are present in all genomic contexts investigated. however, while the statistical helix model fits again better than the unconstrained chromatin model to gene-poor tad data , both models could be equally well fitted to the gene-desert data , indicating that chromatin dynamics in this latter tad is not subject to strong constraints. indeed, the statistical helix is relaxed in gene-desert tads since one helix turn contains only 72 kb of genomic dna while it encompasses more than 85/87 kb in gene-rich or gene-poor tads . globally, these results indicate that the shape of the statistical helix is progressively more elongated as we go from gene-rich and gene-poor to gene-desert tads approaching an unconstrained chromatin configuration. therefore, while the constraints impacting chromatin dynamics can be detected in all genomic contexts investigated, their effects are clearly stronger in gene-rich and in gene-poor than in gene-desert tads.

the models also show that, at the nucleosomal scale, the chromatin is much less flexible in gene-poor  and gene-desert  tads than in gene-rich tads  . however, these changes in chromatin flexibility do not necessarily translate into changes in higher-order chromatin dynamics. indeed, gene-poor and gene-desert tads have similar flexibility but different statistical helix organization: one helix turn encompasses 85/87 kb of genomic dna in gene-poor tads but only 72 kb in the gene-desert tad . conversely, gene-rich and gene-poor tads have different chromatin flexibility but very similar statistical helix: pitch  is around 200 nm, diameter  is about 250 nm and one helix turn encompasses 85/87 kb of genomic dna . finally, as we noted above, the statistical helix in gene-rich tads is in a much more open configuration in mesc than in liver while chromatin flexibility is identical in both cell types . therefore, the variations of the higher-order chromatin dynamics observed in vivo in different genomic contexts appear to be largely independent of chromatin flexibility.

histone h <dig> depletion alters chromatin flexibility but not statistical helix organization
to ascertain that variations of chromatin flexibility do not necessarily impact higher-order chromatin dynamics, we performed quantitative 3c experiments in mesc that are triple knock-out  for histone h <dig> genes h1c, h1d and h1e  <cit> . indeed, since it binds between nucleosomes, the linker histone h <dig> is thought to be a major factor regulating chromatin compaction and flexibility at the nucleosomal scale  <cit> , but a precise evaluation of its potential role for chromatin dynamics at the supranucleosomal scale is missing. its depletion should thus allow us to assess whether altering chromatin stiffness will impact higher-order chromatin dynamics. mice lacking the h1c, h1d and h1e die during embryonic development, but h <dig> tko mesc lines can be established, which bear various chromatin structure changes  <cit> . identical experiments as described above were thus performed in h <dig> tko mesc  and best-fit parameters of the statistical helix model were obtained for each category of tads .fig.  <dig> fitting the statistical helix model to contact frequencies quantified in mouse h <dig> tko esc. quantitative 3c data were obtained from mouse esc that are triple knock-out for histone h <dig> genes , for five gene-rich tads , two gene-poor tads  and one gene-desert tad . the graphs show the best-fit analyses obtained with the unconstrained chromatin model   or the statistical helix model  . the data  were analyzed and are depicted as described in the legend of fig.  <dig>  best-fit parameters, and the genomic distance contained within one statistical helix turn , are given in the lower part of table 1




in both gene-poor and gene-desert tads , where histone h <dig> density is very high  <cit> , identical results were obtained in both h <dig> tko and wild-type  mesc . in these tads, histone h <dig> depletion was apparently not sufficient to alter chromatin flexibility. one can note, however, that the values of the k parameter are higher in h <dig> tko than in wt mesc  indicating that cross-linking efficiency is lower upon partial histone h <dig> depletion.

in gene-rich tads , where histone h <dig> density is lower  <cit>  histone h <dig> depletion in mouse mesc resulted in a very significant decrease in chromatin flexibility compared to wt mouse mesc  . this result is in agreement with previous finding indicating that the stiffness of a disordered and poorly condensed chromatin fiber  is large, being directly influenced by the high stiffness of the embedded dna stretch, while a more organized and condensed fiber  is far more flexible  <cit> , provided that nucleosome stacking does not occur   <cit> . however, despite the significant decrease in chromatin flexibility observed in gene-rich tads, the parameters of the statistical helix  were not significantly altered. the shape of the statistical helix tends to be slightly more elongated in h <dig> tko mesc than in wt mesc, but this apparent tendency is not sufficiently strong to be considered as really significant. therefore, the results presented in fig. 3a demonstrate that altering chromatin flexibility at the nucleosomal scale in gene-rich tads, where the statistical helix is prominent, does not necessarily impact significantly the higher-order chromatin organization of these regions.

this indicates that chromatin dynamics at the nucleosomal and supranucleosomal scales are somewhat uncoupled, suggesting that the constraints imposed on higher-order chromatin dynamics within tads may not necessarily rely on intrinsic local features of the chromatin, like the presence of h <dig> linker histone or histone epigenetic modifications, which would affect its nucleosomal organization and oligonucleosome compaction  <cit> . therefore, this raises the question of the role of the epigenetic landscapes on chromatin dynamics.

higher-order chromatin dynamics within drosophila tads is unconstrained
to investigate the influence of the epigenetic contexts on chromatin dynamics, we generated and used hi-c data from the fly drosophila melanogaster for which epigenetic domains have been extensively described  <cit> . the drosophila genome is relatively small in size allowing ultra-high genomic resolution of chromatin contacts. five billion paired-end hi-c reads were obtained from late drosophila embryos  <cit>  and normalized hi-c data were processed in order to produce thousands of “virtual 3c” profiles providing relative contact frequencies at 5 kb resolution throughout the drosophila genome .

to check whether some constraints impact chromatin dynamics in the drosophila, we first focused our analyses on a subset of “virtual-3c” profiles spanning separation distances of at least 65 kb without crossing any tad borders. among the  <dig> “virtual-3c” profiles that could be appropriately fitted to the unconstrained chromatin model  , 66 % had a correlation coefficient  above  <dig> . this result indicates that the unconstrained chromatin model fits appropriately to most “virtual 3c” profiles and thus, in contrast to previous observation made in mammals  <cit>  , chromatin dynamics within drosophila tads appears as globally unconstrained, and hence non-helical, at the scale of several tens of kilo-bases.

local properties of drosophila chromatin are finely tuned according to the epigenetic landscape
“virtual 3c” generated were then classified according to chromosomal location and to the previously defined epigenomic domains   <cit> : d <dig>  corresponds to domains with “active” epigenetic marks, d <dig>  displays no specific epigenetic modifications, d <dig>  is polycomb  associated chromatin and d <dig>  is hp1/heterochromatin. finally, for each “virtual 3c”, the unconstrained chromatin model was fitted and the three best-fit parameters were extracted . for each chromosome, statistical analyses of best-fit parameters were performed separately according to the epigenetic domains.

box-plots in fig.  <dig> show the results of statistical analyses of best-fit parameters obtained for chromosome 2 l. we found that “active” domains  are less compact , more efficiently cross-linked  and more flexible  than the other domains  . as expected, we found that hp1/heterochromatin  is much less flexible and more compact than any other type of chromatin. however, “black”  and pcg  chromatins have very similar flexibility and compaction, suggesting that pcg proteins do not significantly impact on local chromatin dynamics . identical results were found for all the other drosophila chromosomes, except for the tiny chromosome  <dig>  which displayed quite flexible and poorly compacted chromatin despite being entirely heterochromatic  . this finding is consistent with a recent work demonstrating that chromosome  <dig> displays distinct epigenetic profiles compared to both pericentric heterochromatin and euchromatic regions and that enrichment of hp1a on chromosome  <dig> genes creates an alternate chromatin structure which is critical for their regulation  <cit> . globally, these experiments confirm that the epigenetic contexts influence significantly the local chromatin dynamics in vivo. however, quantitatively, their effects on chromatin compaction and flexibility appear as being quite limited. indeed, the largest variations observed  for chromatin compaction and flexibility are  <dig>  to  <dig>  nm/kb, i.e. about 7 %, on chromosome 2r, and  <dig>  to  <dig>  kb, i.e. about 24 %, on chromosome 3 l, respectively . therefore, the epigenetic landscape in the fly appears to be involved in fine-tuning the local chromatin dynamics.fig.  <dig> epigenetic landscapes and chromatin dynamics of the drosophila chromosome 2 l. “virtual 3c”, obtained from hi-c experiments in the drosophila, were classified according to the four previously defined epigenetic domains   <cit> : d <dig>  corresponds to domains with “active” epigenetic marks, d <dig>  displays no specific epigenetic modifications, d <dig>  is pcg associated chromatin and d <dig>  is hp1/heterochromatin. the unconstrained chromatin model  was then fitted and the three best-fit parameters  were recovered from each “virtual 3c”. statistical analyses of best-fit parameters were performed separately according to the epigenetic domains. box-plots show the results obtained for each type of domains on the chromosome 2 l. stars indicate statistically significant differences: single asterisk indicates a p-value <  <dig>  and >  <dig> , a double asterisk a p-value <  <dig>  and >  <dig>  and a triple asterisk a p-value <  <dig>  . the number of best-fits  performed in each domain is as follows: d1: n = 990; d2: n = 2481; d3: n = 624; d4: n = 239). the results obtained from the other drosophila chromosomes are given in additional file 3



median values of  <dig> best-fit parameters obtained on the autosomal chromosomes in each type of tads


ahi-c samples were prepared from unsexed flies, and therefore the x chromosome was not analysed since, in males, this chromosome undergoes dosage compensation that largely affects its epigenetic features



discussion
modulated contact frequencies, the statistical helix and their relevance for genome functions
our work shows that, in the mouse, a modulation in contact frequency over large genomic distances can be detected in all the three genomic contexts investigated: gene-rich, gene-poor and gene-desert tads. this demonstrates that the constraints responsible for the emergence of the statistical helix apply widely to the mammalian genome . however, their effects on higher-order chromatin dynamics are progressively attenuated as we shift from gene-rich and gene-poor to gene-desert tads where, in this latter case, an unconstrained polymer model can be fitted appropriately to contact frequency data . this situation is reminiscent to experiments performed in the yeast saccharomyces cerevisiae  <cit>  where the unconstrained model could be fitted appropriately in at-rich regions while the statistical helix model provides better fits in gc-rich regions  <cit> .

furthermore, the statistical helix organization, and its underlying dynamics, seems to be finely tuned according to the cell-type. indeed, chromatin appears to be less constrained in mesc than in mouse liver cells  . this finding is in agreement with several pieces of evidence indicating that, in mesc, chromatin is characterized by an abundance of active chromatin marks  <cit>  and that it displays less compact heterochromatin domains  <cit> . therefore, the configuration of the genome makes it more accessible in mesc than in differentiated cells. it is assumed that this specific chromatin organization is essential to establish pluripotency by maintaining the genome in an open, readily accessible state, allowing for maximum plasticity  <cit> .

“virtual 3c” profiles reconstructed from 5c data obtained in mesc  <cit>  also shows the presence of a very significant modulation in contact frequencies in a 572 kb gene-poor region displaying no apparent locus-specific interaction  . interestingly, here again, the statistical helix model fits better to these data  than the unconstrained chromatin model . therefore, 5c, as well as quantitative 3c data , are able to evidence, in mesc, a long-range modulation in contact frequencies which is best described by the statistical helix model.

as previously indicated  <cit> , the existence of a modulation in contact frequencies has important functional implications, at least in the gene-rich tads where it is prominent. indeed, locus-specific functional interactions in these tads necessarily occur from this underlying dynamics of the chromatin. therefore, any constraints favouring intrinsically the probability of contact between two genomic regions will also favour the probability of interaction between the regulatory elements that they contain. long-range interactions should thus tend to occur at preferred relative separation distances where the probability of contact is the highest. we previously showed that, in loci containing co-expressed genes, conserved elements  are overrepresented at a distance of ~100 kb from the surrounding transcriptional start sites   <cit> . in the same line, chip-seq experiments at  <dig> loci containing genes overexpressed in the mouse forebrain showed that p <dig> peaks linked to enhancer activities are more significantly enriched for separation distances of about  <dig> to 80 kb from the nearest tss  <cit> . finally, extensive 5c experiments focusing on the encode pilot project regions  have recently shown that long-range interactions between tss and distal elements display a marked asymmetry with a bias for interactions with elements located about 120 kb upstream of the tss  <cit> . altogether, these observations are in agreement with the existence of a long-range  modulation of contact frequencies in gene-rich-tads, suggesting that the constraints governing statistical helix organization underlie higher-order chromatin dynamics of a very significant part of the genome.

simple polymer-physics principles govern chromatin dynamics within tads
in addition to polymer models as those used in the present work, several other physical models, like the equilibrium and crumpled/fractal globule models, have been developed to describe chromatin dynamics in vivo  <cit> . crumpled globule features are characteristic of chromatin dynamics above 1 mb   <cit> . however, at that scale, simple polymer-physic models, like the “strings and binders switch”  model  <cit> , can also reproduce crumpled globule conformations, and finally globule features of chromatin organization within tads remain unexplored. using quantitative 3c data , we showed that, in the absence of any strong locus-specific interaction, contact profiles obtained in gene-rich tads  follow a power-law scaling associated to a slope of −1/ <dig>  a similar value has been described for mitotic chromosomes for separation distances encompassing 40 kb to 10 mb  <cit> . however, our samples are devoid of mitotic chromosomes  and therefore, as previously suggested for distances shorter than 100 kb  <cit> , the contact profiles observed in gene-rich tads are incompatible with the equilibrium or crumpled globule models. in contrast, they are in good agreement with a more compact conformation as suggested by the sbs model  <cit> . therefore, our work reinforce the idea that simple polymer-physics models of chromatin are sufficient to describe chromatin dynamics in vivo  <cit>  and it shows that such models and principles also apply within tads both in mammals and in the fly drosophila melanogaster. importantly, neither the equilibrium or crumpled globule models nor the “unconstrained chromatin” model, or so far any other known globule or polymer models, including the sbs model, are able to describe the discrete modulation in contact frequencies that we consistently observed within mammalian tads in diverse experimental and cellular contexts . only the statistical helix model is able to account for this feature and it is thus, so far, the simplest model to accurately describe the fundamental chromatin dynamics observed within mammalian tads. however, this model is clearly not sufficient to describe chromatin dynamics when significant locus-specific interactions take place and, in such conditions, more complex polymer models may indeed be required, taking into account chromatin contacts with nuclear compartments and/or attachment of diffusible factors to binding sites on the chromatin  <cit> .

finally, while the existence of modulated contact frequencies has important implications for chromatin dynamics in a cell population, its interpretation as a helical organization may be far from the reality of an individual conformation at a given time in a single cell. one can note, however, that this model may also be valid to describe chromatin dynamics at the single cell level if the ergodicity of the fluctuations could be verified .

CONCLUSIONS
two general types of constraints could contribute to the emergence of the statistical helix organization frequencies within mammalian tads: “bottom-up” constraints, inherent to some intrinsic constituents of the chromatin, or “top-down” constraints imposed by higher-order superstructures, like chromosome territories and tads. despite its remarkable impact on chromatin flexibility in gene-rich tads, histone h <dig> depletion does not significantly affects statistical helix parameters in mesc . this indicates that chromatin dynamics at the nucleosomal and supranucleosomal scales could be somewhat uncoupled, suggesting that the constraints imposed on higher-order chromatin dynamics during the interphase may not necessarily rely on intrinsic factors of the chromatin that would affect its nucleosomal organization .

hi-c data have shown that contact frequencies across tad borders are extremely low  <cit> . the statistical helix organization observed in mammals is thus necessarily confined within tads and cannot extend throughout tad borders. it is therefore tempting to speculate that, in mammals, tads borders may represent “top-down” constraints impacting chromatin dynamics at higher-order levels by restricting the space that the chromatin could possibly explore at that scale, thus contributing to the emergence of the statistical helix organization. however, this hypothesis is challenged by the fact that no such constraints are observed in drosophila tads.

how to explain such a difference between these two organisms? rather than speculating that genome organization principles are intrinsically different , it seems more realistic to postulate that the underlying organization principles are similar, but that constraints applied to higher-order chromatin dynamics have different impacts because of distinct critical features of tad organization in these two organisms. indeed, drosophila tads display a median size of 70 kb  <cit>  which is considerably smaller than that of mammalian tads. with a median size of more than 800 kb  <cit> , mammalian tads are more prone to constraints that impact chromatin dynamics at higher-order levels i.e. over large genomic distances. therefore, we propose that, beyond locus-specific interactions, higher-order chromatin dynamics in higher eukaryotes may also rely on “top-down” constraints whose effects are depending on the exact size and organization of the tads.

