BACKGROUND
tumor development results from a progressive sequence of genetic and epigenetic alterations that promote the malignant transformation of the cell by disrupting key processes involved in normal growth control and tissue homeostasis  <cit> . since complex biological networks control these processes, there are many genes that, mutated, can provide the cell with a specific aberrant capability. alterations in three types of genes are responsible for tumorigenesis: oncogenes, tumor-suppressor genes, and stability genes  <cit> . most oncogenes are involved in controlling the rate of cell growth, while tumor suppressor genes are usually negative regulators of growth or other functions that may affect invasive and metastatic potential, such as cell adhesion and regulation of protease activity. on the other hand, stability genes control the rate of dna mutation, and their alteration can result in mutations in oncogenes or tumor suppressor genes, thus contributing to the development of cancer  <cit> .

the completion of the human genome project and the development of high-throughput experimental techniques have enabled new approaches for studying cancer. for example, gene-expression profiling using microarrays has improved the classification of some tumor types  <cit> . moreover, data from large-scale screenings of protein-protein interactions has been used to identify interaction subnetworks activated in cancer  <cit> . finally, genome scanning for gene copy-number alterations has detected many loci harboring candidate cancer genes  <cit> . because of these advances, efforts to catalog all of the mutational events that contribute to human cancer can now be envisioned. for example, the cancer genome atlas initiative  <cit>  is resequencing a substantial fraction of human genes in order to elucidate the contribution of somatic mutations to cancer development and progression. due to the complexity of these initiatives, methods to characterize and prioritize gene candidates likely to be involved in cancer are being developed  <cit> .

protein interaction networks are a useful tool for better understanding the biology of the cell  <cit> . moreover, the topology of the networks and the neighborhood of a given protein within the network have been used to functionally characterize proteins  <cit> . it has also been observed that proteins related to a disease tend to have a high connectivity between them  <cit> , specifically in inherited diseases  <cit>  and ataxia  <cit> . moreover, in a recent work by barabasi and coworkers, somatic cancer genes  were found to be more likely than other genes to encode proteins with many interaction partners   <cit> .

gene expression profiling with dna microarrays is a powerful approach for identifying cancer genes. numerous studies have presented analyses of human cancer samples in which they identify gene expression signatures for different cancer types and subtypes  <cit> . in these experiments, genes are ranked according to their differential expression in the majority of cancer samples with respect to normal tissues, and genes above a predefined threshold are considered as candidate genes for the type of cancer being studied. often, more in-depth analyses are performed to evaluate the involvement of candidate genes in the cancer, either by means of proteomics techniques  <cit> , real-time polymerase chain reaction   <cit> , or literature search  <cit> . however, validating the results of microarray experiments can be a long and costly effort, due to the large number of candidate genes typically involved. often, only a handful of genes of interest are selected for experimental validation, and hundreds of others are ignored. moreover, due to limitations in dna microarray technology, higher differential expressions of a gene do not necessarily reflect a greater likelihood of the gene being related to cancer  <cit>  and therefore, focusing only on the candidate genes with the highest differential expressions might not be the optimal procedure. thus, there is a need for better techniques for selecting which genes will be analyzed in detail. several procedures address the issue of selecting genes related to cancer  <cit>  by further processing microarray data, either using more powerful statistics  <cit>  or integrating multiple expression studies  <cit> .

in order to improve the candidate gene selection process, several works have combined gene expression with other types of genomic data  <cit> . one popular approach is gene set enrichment analysis, in which statistical tests are used to identify sets of dysregulated genes with a common biological function  <cit> . recently, chinnaiyan and coworkers have combined the molecular concept map and expression signatures to profile prostate cancer progression from benign epithelium to metastatic disease  <cit> . in the work of rhodes et al.  <cit> , instead of relying on predefined gene annotations, they applied a human interactome to genome-wide gene expression data in cancer for identifying a potential tumor suppressor gene in the integrin signaling pathway, and then demonstrated the utility of protein-protein interaction data for identifying interaction subnetworks activated in cancer. finally, other approaches avoid the use of high throughput data by predicting cancer genes candidates based on their sequence, structure and functional properties  <cit> .

here, we have implemented a systematic approach for identifying genes  involved in cancer. our method produces lists of reliable candidate cancer genes by combining  a list of known cancer genes  <cit> ;  protein-protein interaction data  <cit> ;  expression information from multiple cancer studies  <cit> ; and  probabilities derived from structural, functional and evolutionary properties  <cit> . we begin by evaluating each method separately and comparing their results. next, we present the integrative approach and evaluate its potential for predicting cancer genes. we provide candidate cancer genes obtained as a result of this work and assess them using public repositories of biological information and literature search. we conclude by discussing potential applications of our method.

RESULTS
we were interested in assessing different methodologies for identifying cancer genes. specifically, we tested the use of  protein interaction networks;  microarray differential expression data;  structural, functional and evolutionary properties of genes; and  an integration of the three previous type of data. for the evaluation, we relied on a cancer gene list compiled from a variety of curated lists, cancer and sarcoma reviews, and entrez gene queries, followed by additional curation  <cit>  . we refer to genes annotated as "tumor suppressors", "oncogenes" or "stability genes" in this list as the known cancer genes. moreover, we use the term "cancer genes" to refer to genes and proteins involved in cancer.

predicting cancer genes based on protein interaction partners
we assessed the use of protein interaction networks for predicting cancer genes. we hypothesized that proteins whose partners have been annotated as cancer genes are likely to be cancer genes as well: if a mutated gene is perturbing a pathway related to cancer , mutations to interaction partners are also likely to perturb the same pathway. as corollary, proteins with many interactions with cancer genes should be more likely to be involved in cancer than proteins with just one cancer gene partner. we used the piana  tool  <cit>  to build a cancer protein interaction network, using as seeds the gene products of the known cancer genes . thus, the cancer protein interaction network is composed of the known genes and their direct interaction partners. in this network, we define the cancer linker degree  of a protein as the number of cancer genes to which it is connected, excluding the protein itself . we examined the relationship between the cld of a protein and its likelihood of being a known cancer gene, finding that that the cancer linker degree of a protein is a good indicator of the probability of being a cancer gene . the significance of this observation  was confirmed by both a fisher's exact test and a permutation analysis . the latter was performed by using a wilcoxon signed rank test to compare the ratio of cancer genes among proteins with cld ≥ threshold to the percentage of cancer genes in  <dig> random samples of n proteins with at least one interaction in piana .

furthermore, we used the cancer linker degree of proteins to predict cancer genes , obtaining a positive predictive value of ~54% at sensitivity of ~10% . we studied the robustness of this method to variations in the input cancer gene list by i) randomly removing 10%, 25%, 50% and 75% of proteins from the set of known cancer genes; and ii) using a different input cancer gene list  <cit> . in the first case , the removal of 10% or 25% of the proteins did not affect the high positive predictive value obtained when using the complete input list. removing 50% or 75% of input cancer genes decreased the positive predictive value, but this remained higher for proteins with cld ≥  <dig> than that of the average protein from the dataset. in the second case , using a different input list of known cancer genes obtained a positive predictive value of 10% for proteins with cld ≥  <dig>  which is significantly higher than the 6% obtained for proteins with cld ≥  <dig> .

the cld of a protein depends on the number of interactions that have been reported for the protein and thus, it might be influenced by how much interest has been placed on a protein by the research community. to exclude this potential bias we calculated the cancer linker degree of proteins i) using only interactions from high-throughput studies ; and ii) using all interactions in piana except for those in the human protein reference database  <cit> , which is a manually curated database of interactions extracted from the literature, with a preference towards disease related proteins. in the first case, we observed a decrease in positive predictive value , while in the second scenario there was a slight increase in the positive predictive value . in both cases, there is a significant enrichment of proteins with cld ≥  <dig> with respect to the average protein in the dataset , concluding that the literature bias does not invalidate our initial hypothesis. besides, similarly to previous studies  <cit> , we observed that proteins with a large number of interaction partners  are more likely to be cancer genes than proteins with few interaction partners . however, using the total number of interacting partners of a protein to predict cancer genes performed worse than using the cancer linker degree: for sensitivity of ~10%, the positive predictive value was ~34%.

predicting cancer genes based on microarray data
we evaluated the use of differential expression data to predict cancer genes. we based our study on oncomine  <cit>  lists of over- and under-expressed genes in  <dig> differential expression studies, which we manually grouped in  <dig> different cancer types . the positive predictive value was between 9–16% for all cancer types, with sensitivity ranging from 84%  to 8%  . in contrast, only 4% of human genes from our dataset were found to be known cancer genes. we confirmed the significance of this observation by performing the fisher's exact test for count data and the wilcoxon signed rank test on the enrichment of cancer genes on  <dig> random samples of n human genes . we also observed that genes appearing differentially expressed in multiple cancer types are significantly more likely to be known cancer genes than those appearing differentially expressed in just one cancer type . for example, 22% of genes found differentially expressed in at least  <dig> cancer types are cancer genes, compared to 8% of genes found differentially expressed in at least one cancer type. these results confirm the need for post-processing in differential expression studies: microarrays detect many cancer genes, but they are usually mixed with many non-cancer genes.

moreover, we studied the effect of looking at over- and under-expressed genes by their differential expression rank in a given experiment . for each differential expression study, we calculated the enrichment of cancer genes among i) the  <dig> most differentially expressed genes; and ii) all differentially expressed genes. none of the  <dig> experiments tested showed a significant increase in positive predictive value when restricting the predictions to the  <dig> most differentially expressed genes. these results suggest that the number of cancer types in which a gene is observed differentially expressed is a better strategy for predicting cancer genes than using its differential expression rank.

predicting cancer genes by structural, functional and evolutionary properties
cancer genes have been shown to have common structural, functional and evolutionary properties  <cit>  and therefore, the properties of a gene can be used to estimate its probability of being a cancer gene  <cit> . we used the results from the work of lópez-bigas and coworkers  <cit>  to calculate the positive predictive value and sensitivity when predicting cancer genes based on the structural, functional and evolutionary properties of genes . as shown on figure  <dig>  sf-probabilities higher or equal to  <dig>  yielded a positive predictive value of 21% at sensitivity of 13%, while for the average protein in the dataset  the positive predictive value was 8% at sensitivity of 67%. moreover, the observed greater enrichment of cancer genes among proteins with sf-probability ≥  <dig>  with respect to the average protein in the data set is significant .

relating the cancer linker degree to differential expression and sf-probability
proteins with a high cancer linker degree tend to be differentially expressed in multiple cancer types
we were interested in examining the relationship between the cancer linker degree  of a protein and the number of cancer types in which its corresponding gene was differentially expressed. if proteins with high cld tended to be differentially expressed in more cancer types than other proteins, that would suggest an involvement of high-cld proteins in cancer. we observed that proteins with high cld are significantly more likely to be found differentially expressed in multiple cancer types than the average protein in the dataset . for example, proteins with cld ≥  <dig> appear differentially expressed in an average of  <dig>  cancer types, which is significantly higher than for proteins with cld ≥  <dig> , but significantly lower than for proteins with cld ≥  <dig> . furthermore, known cancer genes are found over- or under-expressed in an average of  <dig>  cancer types.

proteins with a high cancer linker degree tend to have common functional, structural and evolutionary properties with cancer genes
we tested the correlation between the cancer linker degree  of proteins and their probabilities of being cancer genes according to their structural, functional and evolutionary properties . we observed a significant difference between the sf-probabilities of random proteins from the database  and the sf-probabilities of proteins with interactions to cancer genes . for example, we found that proteins with cld ≥  <dig> had an average sf-probability of  <dig> , which is significantly higher than for proteins with cld ≥  <dig>  but significantly lower than for proteins with cld ≥  <dig> . the lower sf-probability of proteins with very high clds is explained by the few cases found with multiple interactions to known cancer genes. these results suggest that proteins with interactions to cancer genes show structural, functional and evolutionary properties similar to cancer genes.

predicting cancer genes by integrating multiple types of data
we evaluated the approach that predicts cancer genes by taking into account three different methodologies: 1) the cancer linker degree  of proteins; 2) the number of cancer types in which a gene appears differentially expressed with respect to normal tissue; and 3) the probability of being a cancer gene according to structural, functional and evolutionary properties   <cit> . first, each methodology was applied independently, obtaining three different scores for each human gene. next, for each possible combination of score thresholds, a list of cancer gene candidates was produced by selecting genes that respected the three thresholds. the positive predictive values of this integrative approach range from 23% at sensitivity of 15%  to 73% at sensitivity of 1% . figure  <dig> shows the positive predictive value and sensitivity obtained when using multiple combinations of thresholds. the two criteria that most contribute towards obtaining high positive predictive values are the cld threshold and the number of cancer types in which a gene must be differentially expressed. we also studied the difference between using the integrative approach and applying the cld method alone , observing that the integrative approach should be used when high cld thresholds cannot be applied . for example , the positive predictive value for each type of data used independently is  34% for proteins with cld ≥ 5;  17% for genes differentially expressed in at least  <dig> cancer types; and  14% for sf-probability ≥  <dig> , while the combined use of these three thresholds obtains a significantly greater positive predictive value of 51% .

• sf-probability ≥  <dig> 
cancer gene candidates
the procedure followed to predict cancer gene candidates consists of four steps :  using piana  <cit>  to build the protein interaction network by using the known cancer genes as seeds;  mapping differentially expressed genes onto the network for each cancer type;  mapping sf-probabilities from  <cit>  onto the network;  producing an ordered list of candidates.

we provide the complete list of human cancer gene candidates for which at least one type of data indicated a relationship to cancer . this list comprises  <dig>  candidates,  <dig>  of which scored in the three approaches . we have also produced a short list of  <dig> candidate cancer genes . proteins in table  <dig> have a cancer linker degree  equal or greater than  <dig>  are differentially expressed in at least three cancer types and their sf-probability is equal or greater than  <dig> . we analyzed  cancer gene candidates from table  <dig> based on literature search  <cit>  and descriptions from uniprot  <cit> , reactome  <cit>  and the gene ontology   <cit> . this analysis suggests that our approach to identifying cancer genes is reliable: 60% of the proposed candidates have been directly related to cancer in experimental studies described in the literature, and an extra 25% participates in pathways known to be implicated in cancer. for example, the spleen tyrosine kinase , predicted by the method to be a cancer gene, has been recently added  to the sanger cancer gene census  <cit> . syk, with a cancer linker degree of  <dig>  found differentially expressed in  <dig> types of cancer and with a sf-probability of  <dig> , is a positive effector of bcr-stimulated responses  <cit>  and has been found to be involved in urinary bladder carcinoma  <cit>  and primary liver cancer  <cit> . besides, other candidate cancer genes have been very recently related to cancer in the literature  or are known to be involved in pathways implicated in cancer . finally, genes such as surb <dig> and kin <dig> were not found to be involved in cancer according to the literature and thus we suggest future experimental studies to focus on evaluating their potential involvement in cancer. literature references for each cancer gene candidate found to be involved in cancer are provided as additional file  <dig> 

discussion
we analyzed the use of three different criteria for predicting cancer gene candidates and concluded that:  the number of interaction partners of a protein that have been previously annotated as cancer gene  is a good indicator of the likelihood of the protein to be involved in cancer;  using differences in gene expression between normal tissue and cancer identifies many known cancer genes, but many non cancer genes as well; and  probabilities based on structural, functional and evolutionary properties of known cancer genes  are useful for filtering false positives from other cancer gene prediction methods. moreover, we implemented and evaluated a method that integrates these criteria to produce reliable lists of cancer gene candidates, obtaining a positive predictive value of 73% when using very restrictive thresholds. finally, we provided lists of cancer gene candidates and analyzed them using literature sources and information from public repositories, showing that our predictions are reliable.

most methods used for predicting or prioritizing cancer gene candidates are biased towards genes that are well annotated and/or familiar to the researcher. this leaves unexplored many potential cancer gene candidates. however, high throughput genomic and proteomic work has now yielded relatively unbiased, although noisy, genome- and proteome-wide data sets. for example, expression studies produce large lists of over- and under-expressed genes, which are then prioritized by their differential expression rank, usually with help of a limited number of literature searches. our integrative approach to finding cancer gene candidates can be used to obtain unbiased lists of cancer gene candidates by using the cancer linker degree of proteins to filter expression studies. we observed that the low positive predictive value obtained when using differential expression data alone  shows a four-fold increase when combined with protein-protein interaction data. we expect that further experimental study of our proposed cancer gene candidates will find useful the methodology presented in this work.

separately, each of the criterion presented here for cancer gene candidate prediction has its limitations. first, methods based on protein interaction networks are limited by the fact that many cancers are the result of perturbations in the regulation of genes, which is not captured by protein-protein interaction data. second, differential expression based methods have the drawback that many differentially expressed genes are not a cause for the cancer but rather a consequence of it. besides, we are mapping expression levels of mrna onto a network of protein interactions. however, it is known that the mrna expression levels do not always match the protein expression levels  <cit> . finally, methods based on structural, functional and evolutionary properties are very dependent on existing functional annotations  and their predictions are more stochastic than based on biological observations. these limitations could be avoided by the use of types of information such as gene regulatory networks  <cit>  and gene copy-number alterations  <cit> . moreover, recently developed experimental techniques promise an increase in the amount and types of data available  <cit> , including protein post-translational modifications  <cit> , tissue localization  <cit>  and protein expression in specific cancers  <cit> . finally, the integrative approach is constrained by the limitations of each independent method. however, depending on the context of application, these limitations can be avoided by ignoring irrelevant data: for example, sf-probabilities should not be used when searching for cancer genes of unknown function.

our reported performance results on the use of sf-probabilities differ markedly from the evaluation presented by lopez-bigas and coworkers  <cit> . we attribute this difference to two factors:  we used a more extensive set of known cancer genes;  we used different evaluation metrics and methods: for example, lopez-bigas and coworkers used a balanced dataset to evaluate their method, whereas we considered as non-cancer gene any gene that was not a known cancer gene. we believe that the performance metrics and evaluation method used in this work are more representative of predictions done on the full human genome.

the methods presented here were evaluated by comparing their cancer gene predictions with a curated list of oncogenes, tumor suppressors and stability genes  <cit> . this list of known cancer genes attempts to be as comprehensive as possible, but two possible biases arise from it:  not all methods cover the space of cancer genes to the same extent ; and  the method based on protein interaction networks heavily relies on the initial set of seed cancer genes and thus, genes isolated in the cancer network will never be pinpointed. an alternative approach to seeding our method with a list of known cancer genes is one where the seeds for building the protein interaction network are cancer-related proteins obtained with low-throughput experimental methods  <cit> . this would remove the bias introduced by the input list of known cancer genes.

CONCLUSIONS
we showed that the integration of multiple sources of data is more reliable for predicting cancer genes than the use of one single criterion. for example, differential expression studies could benefit from the use of protein-protein interaction data to further validate their results: in the best case scenario, combining the cancer linker degree of a protein with differential expression data increased from 17% to 73% the fraction of known cancer genes within the cancer gene candidates. in conclusion, systems capable of integrating all available sources of data are fundamental to the discovery of proteins involved in cancer.

