BACKGROUND
despite the vast number of amino-acid sequences, protein folds  are quantitatively limited  <cit> . consequently, protein fold classification is an important subject for elucidating the construction of protein tertiary structures. a key word to characterize protein folds is "hierarchy". well-known databases – scop  <cit>  and cath  <cit>  – have classified the tertiary structures of protein domains hierarchically. similarly, a tree diagram was produced to classify the folds  <cit> .

mapping the tertiary structures of full-length protein domains to a conformational space, a structure distribution is generated: a so-called protein fold universe  <cit> . a key word to characterize the fold universe is "space partitioning". a two-dimensional  representation of the fold universe was proposed in earlier reports  <cit> , where the universe was partitioned into three fold  regions. a three-dimensional  fold universe was partitioned into four fold regions: all-α, all-β, α/β, and α+β  <cit> . software that is accessible on a web site, pdbj , serves the distribution on a global surface  <cit> .

the structures of short protein segments have also been studied: segments of a few  amino-acid residues long were projected in a two-dimensional  space, where some typical combinations frequently appeared  <cit> . fold universes of segments of 4– <dig> residues long  <cit>  and 10– <dig> residues long  <cit>  showed several clearly distinguishable structural clusters. a systematic survey for 10– <dig> residue segments has shown that the fold universe is classifiable into segment universes of three types: short , medium , and long   <cit> . in this work, the 3d shape of the universe varied abruptly at  <dig> and  <dig> residues long. a sequence-structure correlation found in short segments supports the tertiary structure prediction of full-length proteins  <cit> .

these studies of protein segments and domains exemplify some structural clusters existing in the low-dimensional  conformational space. the benefit of the low-dimensional expression is that one can readily imagine the shape of the universe. increasing the segment length, however, the lowering of the space dimensionality hides the internal architecture of the structure distribution. consequently, the internal architecture of the distribution for 50-residue segments  is unclear  <cit> . to compensate the full-dimensional information to the low-dimensional expression, a network is helpful in which two structures close to each other in the full-dimensional conformational space are connected.

presume an ensemble of points . inter-node linkages form the networks. the network concept has been applied recently to biological systems  <cit> . structurally similar segments can be linked for the segment fold universe. the structural similarity is computed for the overall structures of two segments . therefore, the similarity is a quantity defined in full-dimensional space. consequently, a 2d or 3d universe consisting of linked nodes involves full-dimensional information. to assign inter-node linkage in the ensemble, a score is important to quantify the structural similarity between two tertiary structures. inter-residue contact  patterns have been used as reaction coordinates in protein folding studies  <cit> . when two structures have similar native contact patterns, they exhibit similar inter-residue packing. results of several studies indicate that the native contacts are useful indicators to assess the protein folding process  <cit>  and folding time scale  <cit> .

herein, we constructed a fold network of 50-residue segments taken from four major structural classes of protein domains. we used the inter-residue contact pattern for the similarity score. the resultant networks showed the main partitioning, as expected. furthermore, as a new finding, the network of the segment structures was partitioned into dozens of universal communities . from these observations, we propose a novel protein structure hierarchy with community sites at a hierarchy level. the novelty of the currently identified hierarchy was ensured by non-power-law statistics in the hierarchy, which differs from power-law statistics characterizing other hierarchies ever found for protein tertiary structures.

RESULTS
as described in methods, 50-residue segments were taken from representative proteins and classified into kc clusters, each of which consists of structurally similar segments. we calculated the native contact patterns that are common in each cluster, and constructed networks by connecting the clusters according to their contact pattern similarity. in results, we first examine the general aspects of the obtained clusters. second, we check the conformational distribution using a 3d map. finally, we analyze the characterization of 50-residue segment universe using a network analysis.

as described in this paper, indices i and j are used for specifying residue positions in a 50-residue segment, s and t for segment ordinal numbers, u and v for cluster ordinal numbers, and w for a community ordinal number.

general aspects for clusters
the segments were generated by sliding a 50-residue window one residue by one residue along the domain sequences . consequently, two segments taken from the same protein domain with mutual adjacency in the sequence might have similar structures and might therefore be involved in a cluster. we did the following analysis to verify this possibility quantitatively: presume that a cluster u involves nm segments originated in a protein m. subsequently, we introduced a quantity: , where the summation is taken over proteins that supply segment to the cluster u, and np is the number of those proteins. figure 1b presents a plot of the average of ou as a function of kc: . for kc =  <dig>  <o > converged to  <dig> . consequently, a protein supplies only two or three segments to a cluster on average: i.e., a cluster does not contain excessive segments derived from a single protein for kc ≥  <dig> 

fold universe and network of clusters
the inter-cluster  links were assigned to the kc clusters according to the adjacency matrix auv. directly connected clusters have mutually similar inter-residue contact patterns. internal architectures of the networks were investigated by dividing the networks into communities  using newman's method  <cit> . in parallel, we projected the networks into a 3d space to obtain positions in the conformational space . although the clusters were embedded in the 3d space, the inter-cluster links were given to clusters that are mutually close in the full-dimensional space.

each community was characterized by five biophysical structural features: the α, β, αβ secondary-structure elements, the radius of gyration, and the number of inter-residue contacts, denoted respectively as nα, nβ, nαβ, rg, and ncontact. then, the communities were classified into four types  depending on the five structural features .

non-power-law statistics
the protein-domain universe is known to be an extremely biased distribution  <cit> . many studies have suggested a power-law statistic to represent the relation between the number of families and the number of folds  <cit> . for instance, shakhnovich and co-workers created a protein-domain universe graph  with adoption of a dali z-score for the similarity score, and showed that the domain universe followed a power-law distribution  <cit> . consequently, it is interesting to check if the currently produced network of the 50-residue segments follows the power law distribution.

first, we calculated the number  of segments involved in each cluster. figures 8a, b, and 8c portray the relation between nseg and the number of clusters that respectively involve nseg segments at kc =  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig>  the distributions were symmetric  on the x-axis, log, and far from the power-law statistics. therefore, the currently obtained universe differs from those that have ever been reported. additionally, we calculated the number  of segments involved in each community, and showed the relation between n'seg and the number of communities involved n'seg fragments for kc =  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig>  we again obtained non-power-law statistics in the relation .

next, we calculated a connectivity distribution, p, of the networks to investigate details of the cluster network  <cit> . the p is defined as a distribution function of clusters that have k links to other clusters. figures 9a, b, and 9c respectively present p at kc =  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig>  subsequently, p decays exponentially with increasing k. therefore, these distributions are exponential ones . consequently, non-power-law networks  are again observed for the current networks.

robustness of communities
we conducted modularity analysis to study cluster networks from another perspective. first, the networks were divided into communities . a modularity qmod is an index to assess how well the network is divided into communities  <cit> :  <dig> ≤ qmod ≤  <dig>  a network with a large qmod is characterized by numerous intra-community links and a few inter-community links. figure 10a portrays the kc dependence of qmod, which has the maximum at kc =  <dig>  indicating that the communities were highly isolated at kc =  <dig>  for kc >  <dig>  the communities were connected gradually by links, thereby decreasing qmod. for kc ≥  <dig>  qmod converged to a value , which indicates that the 50-residue segment network is characterized by high modularity.

we next calculated the number of communities at various kc. we classified the communities into major and minor communities. major ones are communities consisting of more than three clusters. then, minor ones are small isolated communities consisting of only one or two clusters without links to other communities. no community involves only one cluster linked to another community. the kc dependence of the number  of the major communities is presented in figure 10b. the minor communities do not characterize the overall property of the network because only 10% of clusters belong to the minor communities at any kc. the increment of ncom with increasing kc was rapid for  <dig> ≤ kc ≤  <dig> and slow for kc ≥  <dig>  the values of ncom were, respectively,  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> at kc =  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig>  this result shows that the number of communities was conserved for kc ≥  <dig> 

in addition to the analysis presented above, we checked to determine whether the contents  involved in the communities are conserved with variation of kc. subsequently, we assigned a single color to communities common to the universes at kc =  <dig> ,  <dig> , and  <dig> . for instance, the majority of segments in the orange community of figure 11a were involved in the orange ones in figures 11b and 11c. consequently, the communities are conserved well in the universes at different kc. in other words, the network partitioning into communities is universal, independent of the spatial resolution . we termed this inter-community partitioning as "sub-partitioning", whereas the main partitioning is inter-regional partitioning .

discussion
herein, we described universal partitioning of two types in the 50-residue segment networks  based on the network analysis. the main partitioning  resembles that in the classification scheme of existing databases such as cath and scop. the mainly α, mainly β, αβ, and randomly structured regions consist respectively of α, β, αβ, and randomly structured communities. however, for the first time, we found communities in the segment fold universe: this sub-partitioning  is a novel finding. high modularity ensures persistently existing communities, where the intra-community clusters are linked tightly and the inter-community clusters are linked weakly. the universality of the sub-partitioning was remarkable for f <dig> . nevertheless, outside this range, the universality vanishes gradually. our results reveal a hierarchically structured universe for 50-residue segments, as depicted in figure  <dig>  this hierarchy is robust because the main and sub-partitionings are independent of kc for kc ≥  <dig> 

the currently observed 50-residue segment universe was characterized by the non-power-law distribution. our result apparently differs from the power-law distribution widely known for the hierarchical protein domain universe  <cit> . the emergence of the non-power-law statistics might be related to the usage of the inter-residue contact, which is a more relaxed similarity measure than widely used ones such as rmsd or the dali z-score. it is known that in the power-law statistics the rate for isolated clusters in the entire clusters is high  <cit> . in our non-power law statistics, the rate was low because the relaxed measure provided linkages between clusters. thus, the two statistics compensate to each other to survey the fold universe. from the non-power-law universe, we could show a novel hierarchy  in the universe and the existence of  <dig> repertories  to construct the protein tertiary structures, which have not been reported from the power-law universe. these results were also found in the 60- and 70-residue segment universes . this suggests that the non-power law is likely to be a general property for segment universes.

the current network helps to trace conformational changes of segments along the network linkages. supplementary results displays that the conformation gradually changes when shifting the view from a cluster to another .

the inter-residue contact  has been widely used as a reaction coordinate in protein folding . we intend to use the currently obtained networks for protein folding study. the networks of fixed-length segments are readily applicable for conformational sampling in protein folding, where the chain length is usually fixed. the randomly structured clusters are located at the root of the distribution , from which the segment conformation can diversify to mainly α, mainly β, or αβ regions with increased compactness .

CONCLUSIONS
we constructed a 50-residue segment network for investigating the protein local structure universe. the network was partitioned into some dozens  of major communities with high modularity , independent of the spatial resolution . the major communities existed universally and persistently in the universe. surprisingly, 90% of all segments were covered by the major communities. consequently, numerous similarities exist among local regions  of proteins. furthermore, the currently constructed segments networks are characterized by non-power-law  statistics, which apparently differs from reported characteristics for the fold universe of full-length proteins.

