BACKGROUND
island archipelagoes have played a crucial role in the diversification of biotas, and oceanic islands have long been recognized as natural laboratories for the study of evolutionary processes  <cit> . geographically isolated populations of a colonist lineage on different islands often diverge, leading to the accumulation of species on individual islands within an archipelago  <cit> . furthermore, different selection pressures acting on populations within a single island can promote intra-island speciation, yet this depends mostly upon the spatial scale of both intraspecific gene flow and divergent natural selection pressures relative to the size of the island  <cit> . thus, for a given colonist lineage, intra-island speciation should contribute to an increase in species richness within an archipelago only if some islands are large enough to prevent the homogenizing effect of gene flow, or divergent selection pressures are sufficiently strong to drive speciation in spite of gene flow. while geographic isolation has long been recognized as a key factor in speciation  <cit> , it appears that intra-island speciation can take place only when island size exceeds a clade-specific threshold  <cit> . below that threshold, small islands are thought to simply lack opportunities for geographic isolation or spatially heterogeneous selection  <cit> . in birds, several recent studies have emphasized the lack of examples of intra-island speciation on islands smaller than madagascar, with all cases of related endemic species within an island being best explained by multiple invasions  <cit> . yet evidence of evolutionary divergence in bird populations within small islands exists  <cit> , suggesting that population differentiation is possible under strong selection despite gene flow and may lead to speciation if historical events combine with ecological differentiation to generate strong ecogeographic barriers. because of their unique characteristics as "closed systems", cases of within-island population structure provide unique opportunities to investigate the relative roles of ecological and allopatric factors in driving differentiation, as well as the magnitude and spatial scale at which gene flow precludes divergence.

here we examine patterns of genetic and morphological differentiation in the mascarene grey white-eye endemic to réunion  and mauritius  in the mascarene islands, some  <dig> km off the coast of madagascar in the southern indian ocean  <cit> . a single light-grey plumage morph is found on the relatively old and flat island of mauritius , yet the species is composed of four distinct plumage morphs on the topographically and ecologically complex island of réunion . the colour morphs on réunion were first described as different species or as individual, age or sex variants  <cit> , and then as four endemic subspecies  <cit> . the morphs are geographically structured and separated by either sharp contact zones at rivers and lava flows, or by less defined altitudinal clines of colouration , a unique pattern within a bird species on a small oceanic island. the grey morph is restricted to the highland areas , where it is sympatric with the all brown morph. the latter is also found on the west side of the island down to sea level . the all brown morph comes into contact with the grey-headed brown morph of the eastern side of the island at the galets river, and with the grey-headed brown-nape morph from the south end of the island at the st. etienne river. our field sampling since  <dig> revealed that the geographic structure of colour morphs  and the position of contact zones separating them has remained unchanged since first described by gill  <cit>  over  <dig> years ago, suggesting that some mechanisms maintain the distinctiveness of the morphs in spite of the birds' high vagility.

a = brown, b = grey, c = grey-headed brown, d = grey-headed brown nape, e = mauritius grey, u = uncertain. the latter category includes individuals with mixed brown and grey plumage, representing either juvenal plumage or potential inter-morph hybrids. see fig.  <dig> for depictions of plumage morphs.

analyses of mitochondrial dna sequences revealed a deep phylogenetic break between reciprocally monophyletic populations of réunion and mauritius  <cit> , and an estimated coalescence time to a common ancestor within the last  <dig>  years. as shown by warren et al.  <cit> , z. borbonicus forms a monophyletic clade that is sister to the divergent z. olivaceus clade . the divergence of these two clades  along with z. mouroniensis and z. semiflavus  from their closest continental relatives occurs deep within the zosteropidae phylogeny and substantially pre-dates the divergence of all other western indian ocean zosterops from their closest continental relative. therefore, while multiple hypotheses for the direction of inter-island zosterops colonization in the mascarenes are plausible, based on mtdna data and the sampling of all known living and extinct western indian ocean island forms, the réunion population of z. borbonicus can only result from a single colonization of the island and long-term divergence from the mauritian population. this leaves open the possibility of an intra-island evolutionary radiation on reunion.

while initial divergence could have resulted from drift or divergent selection in geographically separate areas within the island, three lines of evidence suggest the role of assortative mating in maintaining réunion morphs separated:  the birds are good flyers and the geographic barriers separating the morphs are very narrow  relative to the birds' dispersal ability;  although intermediates occur, most sympatric grey and brown individuals in the highlands are easily assigned to either morph despite forming highly-social, mixed foraging groups; and  putative hybrids can be easily identified by a clear mixing of brown and grey colour, and are rare in nature  <cit> . given this evidence for at least incipient reproductive isolation among z. borbonicus morphs within réunion, we carried out a survey of genome-wide genetic variation using amplified fragment length polymorphism  to investigate inter-island divergence as well as the relationship between any genetic structure of populations within réunion and the geographic distribution of colour morphs, geographic barriers, and ecological gradients. we also analyzed variation in fitness-related morphological traits to assess the role of selection in driving phenotypic divergence.

RESULTS
morphological variation
a principal components analysis  revealed the separation of individuals along pc <dig> into two main clusters corresponding mainly to lowland  and highland  populations . the pc <dig> axis represents size, with high positive factor loadings for wing, tail and tarsus lengths, and negative values for bill length, width and depth . birds in the highlands are therefore characterized by longer wings, tails and tarsi, yet smaller beaks than birds in the lowlands. birds from mauritius had significantly shorter tarsi and narrower bills than réunion birds , yet overall clustered with lowland réunion birds from the eastern side of the island in the multivariate analysis .


coefficients of correlation between morphological variables and the derived principal components extracted by principal components analysis.

wing, tail and tarsus length means per site showed a strong positive correlation with elevation, whereas bill measurements showed a weak, inverse pattern . according to a linear regression analysis, elevation was a good predictor of tarsus length , wing length  and tail length , yet explained less of the variance in bill length , bill depth , and bill width .

genetic diversity and structure
the four pairs of selective primers used to generate aflp markers yielded a total of  <dig> scorable loci, out of which  <dig>  were polymorphic . the proportion of variable loci per primer pair ranged from  <dig> to 39%, which is within the range of values found in birds and other vertebrates  <cit> . however, the difference in genetic diversity between islands was marked, with réunion showing more than twice the percent of polymorphic loci  and expected heterozygosity  than mauritius .



scorable
morphic
variable
%
allele frequencies are calculated according to the method by lynch and milligan  <cit> . a total number of alleles per locality. b number of alleles with frequency greater than 5%. c percentage of loci  that are polymorphic out of the total  <dig> loci. d number of alleles unique to a single population. e mean expected heterozygosity. see table  <dig> for locality names.

differentiation between the two islands accounted for almost one third of the variance in genetic variation, with structuring among populations within islands and within-population variation explaining 10% and 63% of the variance, respectively . a plot of the first two coordinates  from a principal coordinate analysis  of aflp variation revealed a clear separation between réunion and mauritian localities along the first coordinate  . no structure was apparent within mauritius, although sampling there was limited and restricted to the southern part of the island. however, clear separation of populations was apparent within réunion, with some highland sites appearing differentiated from lowland sites  along the first principal coordinate .

z. borbonicus individuals from  <dig> localities grouped into two groups corresponding to réunion and mauritius.

a bayesian population assignment analysis using structure  <dig>  corroborated the marked separation of mauritius with respect to réunion. an optimal k of  <dig> revealed a mauritian cluster and three additional clusters within réunion . separate analysis for each island did not change these results, yielding optimal k values of  <dig> and  <dig> for réunion and mauritius, respectively. the three clusters identified within réunion are geographically structured and correspond roughly to lowland areas , western highlands  and eastern highlands , respectively. several individuals within each of these main areas clustered with other groups, suggesting either ongoing movement of individuals or past events of gene flow. for example,  <dig> individuals from the volcano site  showed high assignment probability to the green lowland cluster. interestingly, and despite the relatively low sample sizes, individuals from locality vb had high probabilities of assignment to the blue cluster, whereas in locality dd, just  <dig> km downhill from vb , the probability of belonging to the green cluster was higher. overall, our results suggest that population structuring within réunion occurs at a very small spatial scale.


fst values between islands were high , with an average Φpt of  <dig>  . within réunion, differentiation between populations was remarkably high, with an average pairwise Φpt of  <dig> , and highest values were obtained in highland-lowland comparisons. a mantel test of the correlation between a matrix of geographic distances  and fst values among localities was not significant , suggesting that factors other than mere isolation-by-distance are responsible for the observed genetic structure.

pairwise values of Φpt among localities , and geographic distances among sites in km . all Φpt values above zero are significant at the  <dig>  level, except for dd vs. sl, which had a p value of  <dig> . mauritian localities are ca, br and bo.

to examine the potential role of selection in driving the marked genetic differentiation between highland and lowland populations, we calculated fst values per locus between le maido  and st. leu  on the east side of the island. a distribution of fst values shows that differentiation is not due to just a few loci but to the contribution of many different ones, with  <dig> out of  <dig> loci  showing fst values >  <dig>  . none of these loci were significant outliers in a distribution of fst against heterozygosity, indicating that they are not likely to be under selection  <cit> .

discussion
geographic differentiation of z. borbonicus in the mascarenes
genetic and morphological data examined here revealed a high degree of divergence between zosterops borbonicus populations in mauritius and réunion, suggesting prolonged independent evolutionary history with little or no gene flow for a very long time, as well as high levels of structure within the island of réunion. inter-island differentiation in both mitochondrial dna  <cit>  and genome-wide aflp loci is extensive, suggesting that diversification on réunion has likely evolved in situ and is the product of a single colonization. indeed, given additional diagnostic characters in plumage and morphology, the two populations of zosterops borbonicus might in fact constitute two separate species  <cit> .

the remarkable degree of differentiation in both aflp markers and morphological traits within réunion, reveals very low dispersal rates in z. borbonicus and a strong role for neutral and selective factors in promoting divergence despite the island's small size. the pattern of genetic structure identified with our aflp data does not correspond to the current distribution of the four plumage morphs on the island, suggesting that differences in plumage colour are of relatively recent origin. given that the plumage traits are likely controlled by relatively few genes  <cit> , and that only a small fraction of the genome was surveyed with our aflp markers, the lack of congruence is not surprising and more exhaustive genome-wide surveying and examination of pigmentation-related candidate genes  will be needed to identify those loci.

the current pattern of geographic variation of z. borbonicus on the island as revealed by our different datasets is likely the product of four main evolutionary processes:  microallopatric isolation of ancestral populations into at least three disjunct demographic units, which has resulted in divergence in neutral genomic markers;  morphological differentiation along altitudinal gradients through local adaptation;  the appearance of distinct plumage morphs which now exist  in different parts of the island; and  the maintenance of these patterns in place over time, through a combination of restricted dispersal and pre and/or post-zygotic mechanisms of reproductive isolation. the combined effect of these different processes has likely given rise to the patterns of divergence and structure observed on réunion, which are remarkable given the small geographic scale of the island and thus the opportunity for high levels of homogenizing gene flow in a highly vagile organism.

although the establishment of isolated allopatric populations of birds in a small island is generally unlikely, the inferred pattern of microallopatry responsible for the genetic structure found in neutral markers could be tied to the active eruptive history of réunion's volcanoes, the "piton des neiges" on the northwest, and the "piton de la fournaise" in the southeast. whereas the island of mauritius is about  <dig> million years old  <cit> , the emergence of lava above sea level in réunion was around  <dig>  mya  <cit> , and was followed by two periods of frequent explosive eruptions, one between  <dig>  and  <dig>  mya , and one between  <dig>  and  <dig>  mya  <cit> . in turn, the still active "piton de la fournaise", which originated about  <dig>  mya, has had three main eruptive phases from  <dig>  to  <dig>  mya, from  <dig>  to  <dig>  mya, and from  <dig>  to the present  <cit> . given the combined activity of both volcanoes, barren lava fields have covered most of the island at different times over the last  <dig>  years. for at least part of this period, areas with suitable vegetation for the maintenance of z. borbonicus populations were probably restricted to isolated patches. the presence of small areas  with original basaltic shields at ground level in areas scattered around réunion  suggests that these areas have remained free of lava for hundreds of thousands of years, and thus could have harboured forested areas capable of sustaining bird populations. since the time of the last eruption of the "piton des neiges", as recent as  <dig>  years ago, forested areas would have expanded throughout the island, bringing differentiated z. borbonicus populations into contact. given the very limited rates of dispersal inferred from our genetic and morphological results, and the apparent reluctance to cross barren areas such as river beds, large lava flows must have represented formidable barriers to dispersal among patches across the island.

the lack of congruence between the pattern of neutral structure found and the distribution of color morphs suggests that the latter evolved at a later stage and could indeed be of recent origin, as changes in plumage pigmentation can be fast in birds  <cit> .

the relative roles of drift and selection in restricting gene flow and driving divergence
phenotypic evolution on island populations can be fast under strong natural selection  <cit> . in z. borbonicus, the altitudinal increase of size-related traits like wing, tail and tarsus length, combined with an opposite trend for diet-related traits like beak dimensions, suggests the role of natural selection in driving morphological divergence along steep altitudinal gradients, as has been documented in other similar avian systems  <cit> . rapid morphological evolution has been documented in other zosterops species  <cit> , yet adaptive changes in morphology can often evolve too fast for neutral genetic markers to show congruent patterns of differentiation  <cit> . therefore, the congruent morphological and genetic differentiation between lowland and highland individuals in z. borbonicus , poses the question of whether genetic divergence represents in situ differentiation through isolation by adaptation  will be necessary to investigate this question, the morphological results suggest that selection may be an important factor in restricting gene flow up and down the slope, and thus may be important in at least maintaining this marked genetic break despite the short geographic distances involved.

zosterops as "great speciators"
our results are in line with previous work documenting the high diversification capacity of white-eyes   <cit> . members of the group are successful colonizers due to their high dispersal capacity, which enables them to reach remote islands, yet appear to quickly evolve shifts in dispersal ability that reduce gene flow and promote diversification. this so-called "great speciator paradox"  <cit>  is clearly illustrated by z. borbonicus in the mascarenes, where upon colonization, and despite the species' good flying capacity, dispersal rate has been dramatically reduced. the evolution of "behavioral flightlessness" has been documented in other members of the genus  <cit> , and together with sociality, rapid morphological evolution, generalist ecology and short generation time, contribute to the high diversification rates observed in this group  <cit> . indeed, the relatively high levels of genetic diversity found in aflp could be attributed to the high levels of sociality observed in z. borbonicus  <cit> , which increases the probability of group colonization and reduces the chance of founder events  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
our results shed light on some of the evolutionary mechanisms underlying an extreme case of small-scale intra-island diversification in a passerine bird. the presence of three genetic clusters on réunion island as revealed by neutral aflp markers suggests the role of geography in differentiating populations at some time in the past despite the island's small size. in turn, morphometric data suggest the role of ecology-driven selection in differentiating populations and restricting gene flow across habitat types and geographic barriers. however, the fact that patterns of neutral genetic divergence are not geographically congruent with the distribution of plumage morphs, suggests that in addition to genetic drift and natural selection, social or sexual selection may have played a role in driving recent plumage divergence. future research will be necessary to determine the degree of reproductive isolation between morphs, and thus the extent to which morphs represent incipient species. thus, whether diversification in réunion's z. borbonicus is ongoing and represents a case of incipient speciation, or instead the process has been truncated by widespread gene flow upon secondary contact among morphs, remains to be addressed. previous work on zosterops lateralis in australia has shown that selection can act upon colonization and then remain static for thousands of years  <cit> . however, maintenance of narrow hybrid zones between colour morphs and the sympatry of grey and brown morphs in the highlands suggest that reproductive isolating mechanisms are at play. our results provide a first attempt at unraveling the doubtlessly complex combination of neutral and selective factors that underlie the evolutionary history of the species. further research along hybrid zones and areas of plumage intergradation will be necessary to better understand this striking case of intra-island diversification.

