BACKGROUND
blending of ethanol with fossil fuel is recommended to address the problem of increasing demand for transportation fuel without environmental pollution. this implementation was planned because ethanol is derived from renewable biological sources, and has promising properties such as anti-knock potential  <cit>  and cleaner combustion  <cit> . several countries around the world are adopting this strategy, and are planning to increase the percentage of ethanol blending in a phased manner  <cit> . in this context, allocation of natural resources for ethanol production in place of food production, and completing interests in ethanol for industrial and potable purposes are the major concerns to be addressed. for example, sugarcane molasses serves as the sole feedstock for bioethanol production in india where the annual production is approximately  <dig>  billion litres of which only 30 % is offered for fuel purposes  <cit> . when considering the supply of feedstock, increasing the production of ethanol from sugarcane molasses is questionable because land allocation for sugarcane cultivation is limited  <cit> , and it requires  <dig> megalitres of water per hectare  <cit> . diverting land and water resources from production of food crops such as wheat and rice to sugarcane will threaten the food security of the countries. therefore, plant materials from forests, urban wastes, and agricultural wastes were considered for their utility as feedstock for ethanol production  <cit> .

a revolution of using cellulosic agricultural wastes such as corn stalk, wheat and rice straw, husk, and bran as feedstock for ethanol production was explored in many countries. microorganisms having the capacity of utilizing cellulosic substrates for ethanol production were exploited for this purpose  <cit> . clostridium thermocellum is one of the most efficient cellulolytic microorganisms due to the presence of cellulosomes that bind and metabolize cellulose and hemicellulose  <cit> . it is an anaerobic, thermophilic, and ethanol producing organism, which can be used as a biocatalyst for ethanol production from cellulosic substrates. however, the ethanol production pathway of c. thermocellum is not efficient because pyruvate ferrodoxin oxidoreductase, the key enzyme of this pathway  <cit> , has lower affinity than lactate dehydrogenase and phosphotransacetylase towards the common substrate, pyruvate. as a result, the yield of ethanol is reduced, and other undesirable by-products like acetic acid and lactic acid accumulate .

zymomonas mobilis has a distinctive entner-doudoroff pathway to metabolize glucose to pyruvate  <cit> , and also a homoethanol pathway to metabolize pyruvate to ethanol. two key enzymes of homoethanol pathway are pyruvate decarboxylase and alcohol dehydrogenase, which convert pyruvate to acetaldehyde and acetaldehyde to ethanol, respectively. genes coding for these two enzymes from z. mobilis were successfully used for metabolic engineering of enhanced ethanol production in geobacillus thermoglucosidasus  <cit> , escherichia coli  <cit> , clostridium cellulolyticum  <cit> , and synechococcus sp.  <cit> . the present study reports genetic modification of c. thermocellum for enhanced ethanol production by introducing the pyruvate decarboxylase and alcohol dehydrogenase genes from z. mobilis. the recombinant c. thermocellum strains were analysed for the expression of the cloned genes and ethanol production efficiency.

RESULTS
the present study explored the possibility of enhancing the ethanol production capacity of clostridium thermocellum by transferring pyruvate decarboxylase  and alcohol dehydrogenase  genes from zymomonas mobilis. the pdc and adh genes were successfully pcr amplified and cloned in pnw33n to obtain pnw33n-pdc, pnw33n-adh, and pnw33n-pdc-adh, which contained pdc, adh and both genes, respectively. the vector contained chloramphenicol acetyltransferase gene, which functions in gram negative and gram positive bacteria  <cit> . c. thermocellum is a difficult species for plasmid transformation due to endospore formation and strict anaerobic growth  <cit> . electroporation method of plasmid transformation in c. thermocellum was illustrated by olson and lynd  <cit> , and increasing the pulse duration and amplitude improved the transformation efficiency of larger plasmids  <cit> . in the present study, pnw33n-adh  was the smallest plasmid, followed by pnw33n-pdc  and pnw33n-pdc-adh . we have varied the pulse duration from  <dig>  to  <dig>  milliseconds , and amplitude from  <dig> to  <dig> v in order to get successful transformation. a transformation efficiency of  <dig>  × 103/μg,  <dig>  × 103/μg, and  <dig>  × 103/μg was obtained for pnw33n-adh, pnw33n-pdc, and pnw33n-pdc-adh by applying  <dig>  ms with 1500 v,  <dig>  ms with 1600 v, and  <dig>  ms with 1800 v, respectively. bigger plasmids required longer pulse duration and higher amplitude of voltage for successful transformation. the recombinant stains were continuously sub-cultured ten times in ctfud medium supplemented with  <dig>  mg/l thiamphenicol, and genetic stability was monitored after every sub-culture . the plasmids were found to be stably retained in the recombinant strains as determined by colony pcr amplification of plasmid-borne genes.

growth profile of the wild type and recombinant strains was monitored every 24 h for 96 h after inoculation. growth of c. thermocellum can be visually observed by the development of a deep yellow tinge in the growth medium due to the release of an insoluble yellow affinity substance as a result of cellulose utilization by the organism  <cit> . wild type and the recombinant cth-pdc strain developed the deep yellow tinge 24 h after inoculation indicating cellulose utilization and growth. in contrast, the recombinant cth-adh and cth-pdc-adh strains developed the deep yellow tinge only after 48 h. considering the turbidity caused by the cellulose in the medium as hindrance, growth of c. thermocellum in ctfud medium was monitored by estimating protein content instead of measuring the optical density. the comparative growth pattern of the wild type and recombinant strains is illustrated in fig.  <dig>  growth rate of recombinant cth-pdc strain was comparable with that of the wild type strain. however, the growth rate of the recombinant strain that carried either adh gene alone or adh and pdc genes showed significantly lower growth rate when compared with wild type or recombinant cth-pdc strain. the same was observed when these constructs were present in e. coli, which may be due to the reverse catalysis of ethanol to acetaldehyde by alcohol dehydrogenase  <cit> .fig.  <dig> growth pattern of wild type and recombinant cth-pdc, cth-adh and cth-pdc-adh strains measured in terms of increase in protein content with time



metabolically engineered klebsiella oxytoca with the pyruvate decarboxylase gene from z. mobilis was reported to augment its pyruvate decarboxylation capacity  <cit> . c. thermocellum contains native pyruvate ferredoxin oxidoreductase enzyme for the decarboxylation of pyruvate to which the recombinant pyruvate decarboxylase enzyme from z. mobilis was added by genetic engineering. cell free extracts from the fermented cultures of wild type and recombinant cth-pdc strains were assayed for pyruvate decarboxylation based on pyruvate-dependant reduction of nad+. the recombinant cth-pdc strain showed faster reduction of nad+ than the wild type strain . specific activity of pdc was  <dig>  u/mg in the wild type and  <dig>  u/mg in the recombinant cth-pdc. these results showed that the pyruvate decarboxylase from z. mobilis was functional in the recombinant cth-pdc strain and enhanced its capacity for pyruvate decarboxylation.fig.  <dig> pyruvate dependent reduction of nad+ assay in wild type and recombinant cth-pdc strains



time course experiment on ethanol production by dichromate oxidation assay, and estimation of ethanol content by gas chromatography were carried out only for the recombinant cth-pdc strain. ethanol concentration remained undetectable in both wild type and cth-pdc recombinant strain until 24 h. time dependent increase in ethanol production was observed in 48 h and 72 h. there was no significant increase in ethanol production beyond 72 h of fermentation. therefore, wild type and recombinant cth-pdc strains were batch fermented for 72 h, and ethanol was solvent extracted, and analysed in gas chromatography. the che-pdc recombinant strain yielded  <dig>  g/l ethanol  compared to  <dig>  g/l ethanol  from the wild type strain. earlier studies in c. thermocellum have shown theoretical ethanol yield of 51 % by deleting the genes for acetate dehydrogenase and phosphotransacetylase  <cit> , and 69 % by deleting all the genes for hydrogenase activity, except ech gene  <cit> . metabolic engineering of geobacillus thermoglucosidasius with the pdc gene of z. mobilis was also reported to increase the ethanol yield  <cit> . two-fold increase in ethanol production reported in the current study due to the recombinant expression of z. mobilis pyruvate decarboxylase gene in c. thermocellum indicates the potential of this approach towards developing c. thermocellum as an efficient biocatalyst for ethanol production from cellulosic plant materials. feedback inhibition of ethanol production and accumulation of growth limiting compounds might be limiting ethanol production beyond 72 h as indicated by the declining growth rate and static ethanol production. though there is still scope for further strain improvement by genetic engineering, bioprocess interventions such as simultaneous distillation of ethanol from the fermenting media, fed-batch method of fermentation, and optimization of media and growth conditions may further improve the productivity.

CONCLUSIONS
cellulolytic potential of c. thermocellum will be highly useful in the green chemistry approach towards the production of ethanol from cellulosic plant materials; however, its ability to produce ethanol from pyruvate is limited. the present study showed that ethanol production from c. thermocellum can be enhanced by transferring pdc gene that codes for pyruvate decarboxylase, a key enzyme in the homoethanol pathway of z. mobilis. further improvement in ethanol production can be warranted by the strain improvement and bioprocess optimization.

