BACKGROUND
in mating systems with elaborate male-male competition, the winners usually get most mates and sire most of the offspring  <cit> . such a skewed male mating success may either be explained by physically limited access of subdominant males to females and/or by female preference for dominant males  <cit> . females may prefer more dominant and more attractive males because they provide more resources, better parental care  <cit>  or better genes for the common offspring  <cit> . the latter hypothesis corresponds to the so-called 'good-genes' hypotheses of sexual selection, i.e. variation in genetic quality is then predicted to be linked to male characteristics that influence female mate choice. the problem of how such genetic variation can be maintained under sexual selection is known as the "lek paradox"  <cit> , and a number of possible solutions for this paradox have been offered . although it is still not fully clear how the genetic variation is maintained, there is much evidence in various species that females can gain genetic advantages by preferring males with well-developed attractiveness traits  <cit> . whether females gain genetic benefits by mating with dominant males is less clear.

experimental tests of the 'good-genes' hypotheses of sexual selection usually suffer from at least one of two problems: first, the predicted genetic effects could be confounded with non-genetic effects. this is especially so in species with some form of parental care. males with more elaborate secondary sexual characters could, for example provide good genes and much paternal care  <cit> . second, females sometimes adjust their investment in the offspring  according to their perception of male attractiveness  <cit> . as a consequence of such differential allocation, 'good genes' effects can be confounded with maternal effects. however, some recent in vitro fertilization experiments could control for these potential confounding factors. they demonstrate that offspring viability can indeed have a genetic basis that is revealed by potential attractiveness traits  <cit> . in salmonids, not much is known about female preference for attractiveness traits, but males usually fight intensely for access to spawning territories or to females, i.e. intra-sexual selection is often very important  <cit> . females seem to generally prefer spawning with dominant males  <cit> . here we test whether male characteristics that are important in intra-sexual selection are also linked to genetic quality.

'genetic quality' is, in the context of sexual selection, an umbrella term that includes additive  and non-additive genetic effects  on offspring survival  <cit> . if male dominance is linked to genetic quality and also positively to breeding success, we predict dominance to be linked to the additive genetic variance in fitness, i.e. to variation in 'good genes', since only additive genetic effects can lead to an universally valid order of mate quality while with non-additive genetic effects the order of mate quality would differ for different females  <cit> . because embryogenesis is a crucial life-history stage with usually high mortalities  <cit> , and male brown trout provide only genes to their offspring, we used embryo survival as a measure of genetic quality, and we used full-factorial breeding designs to separate and compare additive and non-additive genetic effects on embryo survival.

in a first experiment we caught brown trouts , shortly before spawning season and released them into an artificial channel to study intra-sexual selection. we used the outcomes of all male fights to construct a dominance hierarchy and to test whether there are male characteristics that are linked to dominance. we stripped the fish and used their gametes in a  <dig> males ×  <dig> females full-factorial breeding design . the embryos of the resulting  <dig> families were raised individually under controlled conditions. we then tested whether males differed in their genetic quality, and if so, whether dominance indicators are linked to superior genetic quality. the last two questions were tested again in a second experiment where we determined and analysed embryo and juvenile survival of additional  <dig> brown trout males from another river. in the first experiment we found that older, heavier and larger males are more dominant in male-male interactions. in both experiments males differ in their genetic quality, but dominant males do not seem to be of superior genetic quality.

RESULTS
first experiment
two males were  <dig> years old,  <dig> males were  <dig> years old and  <dig> males were  <dig> years old . male age, body weight, and body length were all strongly correlated to each other . larger males were on average more dominant : spearman's rank order correlation coefficient rs =  <dig> , p =  <dig> ; and with clutton-brock et al.'s index : rs =  <dig> , p =  <dig> ). we found analogous positive relationship between dominance and male age  or male weight .

average embryo survival was  <dig> % . offspring of different females differed in their survival as the female effect explained a significant part of the variance in offspring mortality  differed significantly in its goodness of fit from the reference model; table 1). males also differed significantly in their offspring survival  explains significantly less variance in offspring mortality than the reference model; table 1). we found no significant male × female interaction effect on embryo survival . the aics of the different models and the differences between the aics also indicate that the reference model is the most parsimonious one that fits our data best . the fixed temperature effect in the reference model was not found to have a significant influence on embryo mortality .

four logistic mixed effect models are compared to test if male , female , and male × female interaction  effects explain a significant part of the variance in embryo mortality . the random, fixed, and total number  of parameters are given for every model. the goodness of fit is given by the logarithm of the approximated likelihood  and the akaikes information criterion . a measure to compare the quality of fit between two models is the difference of aics  between two models. the reference model explains our data best as the more complex full model does not significantly improve the qualtiy of fit , i.e. the male × female interaction effect did not explain a significant part of the variance in embryo mortality. the table therefore gives the differences in aics between the reference model and the other models. furthermore, likelihood ratio tests  between the reference model and the other models are given to test which parameter significantly improves the goodness of fit.

embryo survival was not positively linked to male dominance  and male body length . the 95% confidence interval for the latter correlation is - <dig>  < r <  <dig> . a power analysis revealed that if the correlation between male length and offspring viability were at the upper limit of our calculated confidence interval, a minimal sample size of  <dig> males and more than  <dig>  experimentally fertilized eggs would be necessary to demonstrate the effect at alpha ≤  <dig>  with our experimental methods and with a statistical power of at least 80%. since this power analysis is for a possible correlation at the upper extreme of our observed confidence interval, we conclude that there is no or only a very weak positive correlation between male length and offspring survival. there was also no positive link between embryo survival and male age  or weight .

second experiment
male age ranged from  <dig> to  <dig> years ). average embryo survival was  <dig> % . we found again significant sire effects on embryo survival , i.e. the males differed in genetic quality. we also found maternal effects on embryo survival, but no significant sire × dam interaction . embryo survival was again not significantly linked to male age , body weight , or body length . the correlation coefficient that describes the link between male body length and offspring viability in the second experiment  lies within the 95% confidence interval that we had obtained from the first experiment.

two-way anova on embryo mortalities observed in the second breeding experiment when  <dig> males are crossed with  <dig> females in a full-factorial design and the embryos raised in  <dig> petri dishes per sibship. because the experimental set-up is fully balanced, results are based on ems . sire, dam, and sire × dam interaction were random effects in the model. the negative estimate for the variance component of the interaction term is put to zero.

the statistical model in table  <dig> explains a significant fraction of the total variance in embryo mortality. dam effects include direct genetic effects, as well as maternal genetic and maternal environmental effects. significant sire effects directly reveal variation in genetic quality. assuming that epistatic genetic variance is of negligible importance, the additive genetic variance can be calculated as four times the sire component of variance  <cit>  and explains, in our second experiment, about  <dig> %  of the total phenotypic variance in embryo mortality. the dam × sire effect can be used to estimate the non-additive genetic variance which here represents 0% of the total phenotypic variance in embryo mortality. the difference between the dam and sire component of variance is negative, i.e. the total maternal effect variance seems to be very low in the six females we used here.

we released  <dig> hatchlings from this 2nd experiment into the streamlet. nineteen juveniles could be caught back  <dig> months later . juvenile survival was not significantly linked to embryo survival , and there was no significant positive relationship between juvenile survival and sire body length , body weight , or age .

discussion
our first experiment shows that larger, heavier and older males were more dominant in male-male interactions than smaller, lighter and younger ones. this supports findings on other salmonid species where size was a good indicator for dominance status  <cit> . we have to leave it open whether body length, weight, or age is the better predictor for dominance rank as they were, as expected  <cit> , highly correlated to each other. we used embryo survival until hatching as a main measure of sire 'good genes' because embryogenesis is a critical stage in offspring development .

we found in both experiments that males differ in their offspring survival. we also tested for female effects on offspring survival. such latter effects could be explained by differences in genetic quality among the females and/or by differences in egg quality. variation in egg quality could be linked to female age, condition, and/or life history. such differences in female investment are expected to be a crucial factor for egg survival in this development stage  <cit> . accordingly, we found evidence for significant maternal effects on embryo survival in both experiments. our experimental setup allowed us to control for these female effects. analogously, males may differ in their sperm quality , which could influence their fertilisation success  <cit> . we controlled for these potential differences by including only fertilised eggs in our measure of embryo survival in the first experiment. the second experiment was done with males that did not differ significantly in their fertilization ability . therefore the sire effect that we found is directly linked to differences in male genetic quality and reveals additive genetic variation in embryo viability.

although males differed in the viability of their embryos and hence in their genetic quality, male dominance or dominance-related characteristics were no indicators of 'good genes'. a power analysis shows that the chance of missing an existing correlation  is very low. in a second experiment, offspring viability was determined at two stages, as embryo survival in the laboratory and as juvenile survival in the field. in this second experiment we found again differences in male genetic quality but no significant connection between dominance traits and 'good genes'. hence, we found no support for the hypothesis that dominant males are genetically superior. this seems to be in agreement with previous studies on species with parental care where no link between fathers' dominance and offspring viability was found  <cit> , but the relative importance of variation in genetic quality and in parental care remains unclear in these studies.

because male age, body length, body weight, and dominance are all strongly correlated in brown trout, we expect that older males will have a comparatively high reproductive success simply because they tend to be more dominant. however, according to our results females may not receive genetic benefits from mating with older males, contrary to some predictions from the literature  <cit> . it remains to be tested whether, for males that grow old, an original higher genetic quality is later in life reduced by an accumulation of germ-line mutations  <cit> . if so, larger and dominant males may still provide 'good genes' that may, however, only be revealed under certain environmental conditions. the observed embryo survival rates in our laboratory are high compared to more natural conditions  <cit> , especially so in our first experiment, i.e. we incubated the embryos under conditions that may be less challenging than they would usually experience in the wild, giving lower quality embryos a higher survival chance. if so, it is possible that we missed some kinds of sire effects on embryo survival that may be revealed under more challenging conditions.

CONCLUSIONS
some theory of sexual selection predicts that dominant and older males provide better genes to their offspring than subdominant and younger males. we found that larger, heavier, and older brown trout male are indeed more dominant in male-male interactions, but females may not improve their offspring's genetic viability by mating with such males. any advantage of mating with dominant males in brown trout may therefore be linked to a possibly increased fertilization success , potential benefits linked to the nest site  <cit> , or to genetic advantages that are more context-dependent and not revealed at our experimental conditions  <cit>  – even if we can demonstrate significant additive genetic variation for embryo viability under such conditions.

