BACKGROUND
meiotic recombination is a fundamental evolutionary process, which is believed to have been central to the evolutionary success of eukaryotes. when crossover recombination occurs, dna strands are exchanged between homologous chromosomes, resulting in allele shuffling. this generates novel genetic variation  <cit> , by breaking the associations that occur both within and between linked genes  <cit> . as this genetic variation is sieved by natural selection, it shapes the adaptive evolution of living organisms and thus, indirectly, genome evolution.

aside from allele shuffling, recent studies have identified four other processes by which recombination directly influences genome evolution  <cit> . these are: gc-biased gene conversion, whereby recombination promotes gc enrichment at repair sites; hotspot drive, through which a higher transmission of non-recombinant alleles likely contributes to rapid shifts in the location of recombination hotspots  <cit> ; through the potential mutagenic effect of recombination itself, which causes structural mutations; and indel drive, a neutral mechanism that may drive genome contraction by a higher transmission of chromosomal deletions compared to insertions  <cit> . in combination, these processes enable recombination to substantially influence genome evolution at a variety of genomic scales.

historically, recombination was studied through observation of chiasmata using microscopy  <cit> , or by genetic linkage mapping using phenotypic markers. more recently, recombination has been studied through variation in recombination rate ; estimated from genetic distance  divided by physical distance  using three main approaches, linkage disequilibrium mapping, sperm typing and linkage mapping using molecular markers. the major differences between these approaches are whether they measure historical or current recombination and their applicability to populations, a single, or few individuals  <cit> . linkage disequilibrium mapping estimates historical recombination at the population level, and is thus useful for understanding population evolution, but is affected by factors such as genetic drift, demography, mutation rate and natural selection. in contrast, both sperm typing and linkage mapping are little affected by these factors and provide direct estimates of current recombination across a single generation  <cit> . linkage mapping is a classic technique widely used to study recombination in selfed or bi-parental families. direct estimates of rr can be obtained from the genetic distance between pairs of linked markers compared to their physical distance. the resolution of linkage mapping studies is limited by sample size and the density of molecular markers. however, the use of high-throughput marker systems and whole genome sequences potentially allows fine scale study of rr, as well as comparison between sexes, populations and individuals  <cit> .

understanding variation in rr will contribute to a better understanding of genome evolution and is fundamental to many aspects of genetics. for example, knowing the genomic distribution of rr is important for predicting the potential of populations to respond to environmental change, as well as for breeding using both traditional and genomic approaches. specifically, characterising rr will help predict the degree of linkage disequilibrium to guide marker densities needed for genomic selection, a technique which is showing promise for both animal and plant breeding  <cit> . it also has practical applications when trying to isolate the specific genes underlying quantitative trait loci  that have been detected in linkage mapping or association genetic studies, and for attempts to introduce favourable alleles into breeding lines  <cit> .

most detailed studies of recombination and linkage disequilibrium have been accomplished in human, yeast, drosophila or arabidopsis, which have the required genomic resources . although many of the factors which influence rr are conserved across eukaryotic organisms, empirical studies consistently report variation in rr between taxa, individuals and across genomes  <cit> . in view of this variation, it is important to obtain a broad understanding of rr across diverse taxa. this is particularly true for long-lived organisms such as forest trees which often have many genetic features, including low rates of selfing, high heterozygosity and high population genetic diversity  <cit>  which distinguish them from most model species. trees often define and structure forest ecosystems; play vital ecosystem services, including climate-change mitigation; provide invaluable products; and are widely used for human recreation. given their environmental and economic significance, understanding the genetic mechanisms which shape the evolution and diversity of trees is of major importance.

the genomic resources required to study rr have only recently become available in forest trees  thus there is little knowledge of the genomic distribution of rr in these organisms. nonetheless, insights into the patterns of recombination in tree species have been gained from studies of linkage disequilibrium  and comparative mapping  <cit> . assembled reference genomes are available for hardwood forest trees, such as populus  <cit> , eucalyptus  <cit> , quercus  <cit>  and castanea  <cit>  providing the opportunity to directly estimate genome-wide rr using linkage maps. recent studies in eucalyptus have compared genetic to physical map distance and reported rr averaged over the whole genome  <cit>  or for each chromosome  <cit> . silva-junior and grattapaglia  <cit>  also calculated high resolution estimates of linkage disequilibrium and ‘population scaled recombination’ rate , and its genomic correlates. however, for direct estimates of rr there is little information regarding variation between individuals, factors influencing this variation, nor its correlation with genomic features in forest trees.

eucalyptus is a diverse genus containing over  <dig> species across thirteen subgenera  <cit> . most species belong to subgenus symphyomyrtus including the majority of economically important plantation species  <cit> , and the two species used in this study; e. grandis  and e. globulus   <cit> . eucalypts generally have a mixed-mating system , and are mostly animal pollinated. their outcrossing rate is variable, but generally high and most species are highly polymorphic  <cit> . for example, recent findings indicate genome-wide diversity in e. grandis  <cit>  is at the high end for plants, in line with other angiosperm trees such as populus trichocarpa and an order of magnitude higher than most conifers, corroborating previous findings in eucalypt  <cit> . all eucalypt species studied to date possess the same chromosome number , although their genomes vary in size from 360 mb  to 640 mb   <cit> . despite this variation in genome size, there is a high degree of karyotype stability between species  <cit> , which includes broad conservation of chromosome structure such as the location of centromeres and heterochromatin content within the subgenus symphyomyrtus  <cit> , and this is supported by comparative mapping studies  <cit> . specifically, there was no evidence for gross chromosomal rearrangements between  e. globulus and an e. grandis/urophylla consensus map based on nearly  <dig> shared markers  <cit> . re-sequencing of the e. globulus and e. grandis genomes suggested that the differences in genome size between these species are largely attributable to many small changes distributed throughout their genomes  <cit> . further, the genomic distribution of diversity within and divergence between eucalypt species in subgenus symphyomyrtus, appears stable and correlated with genomic architecture  <cit> , providing further evidence for genome stability. in view of this stability, the numbering of chromosomes in most recent molecular studies in eucalypt has followed the consensus linkage map of brondani et al.  <cit> , and this order was used for the  <dig> major scaffolds in the e. grandis genome  <cit> .

we here focus on eucalyptus globulus, and exploit the recently published eucalyptus grandis reference genome in conjunction with  <dig> linkage maps constructed with sequenced anchored markers. this experimental design allowed testing of the effects of various factors reported in other species to be associated with chromosomal variation in rr, including chromosome, sex, and cross-type; genomic features such as gc content, density of genes and transposable elements; and the population genetic parameters, genetic diversity and divergence .

RESULTS
variation between individuals
the difference in rr amongst parents  was highly significant  and due mainly to the high rr of two f <dig> parents  and low rr in the male and female parents of one of the f <dig> families . the rr of the f <dig> families  was greater than that of the f <dig> families , but not significantly so . the f <dig> families had higher levels of heterozygosity than the f <dig> . however while negative, the correlation between parental heterozygosity and rr was not significant. there was no significant differences in rr between sexes . the genome-wide rr ranged between  <dig>  and  <dig>  cm/mb between the  <dig> e. globulus parents, and averaged  <dig>  cm/mb . these values were calculated across linkage maps ranging in size  from  <dig> to 1787 cm , averaging 1545 cm.fig.  <dig> variation in recombination rate between individuals and chromosomes in eucalyptus globulus.
a mean genome-wide rr for each of the  <dig> eucalyptus globulus individuals. b mean rr in each chromosome across the  <dig> individuals. means with different letters were significantly different in pairwise comparisons following the tukey-kramer  adjustment



chromosome averages 
 diversity b
 divergence c

individual genome-wide averages 
 heterozygosityd

adiversity and divergence were estimated by hudson et al.  <cit> . the remaining variables were estimated from our e. globulus data and the e. grandis genome  <cit> 


bthe diversity within  <dig> eucalyptus species, including e. globulus



cdivergence between the  <dig> eucalyptus species


destimated from the total number of polymorphic markers derived from the dart assay 


ecoefficient of variation


ap = parent, f = female, m = male bphys. size = physical size



variation between chromosomes
the  <dig> chromosomes of e. globulus differed markedly in rr. averaged across parents, chromosome-wide rr ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig>  cm/mb . the difference between chromosome averages was highly significant when tested using parents as replicates , and was also significant  after removing the correlated effect of chromosome size . the variation between chromosomes was mainly due to the high rr in chromosomes  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> and low rr in chromosomes  <dig> and  <dig> . the difference between chromosomes was moderately to highly positively correlated with previously published estimates for e. grandis x urophylla consensus maps  as well as parental maps  <cit>  of e. grandis  and e. urophylla  although the latter was not significant . in no case was the interaction of chromosome with either sex  or cross type  significant, indicating that the chromosomal differences in rr were stable across sex and cross-type in this study.

several genomic features of the e. grandis reference genome were correlated with the chromosomal variation in rr . chromosomes with high rr were smaller, had higher gc content, higher gene density, lower frequencies of several categories of transposable elements and fewer tandemly duplicated genes . while the association with transposable elements as a whole was not significant , significant negative correlations were observed for specific classes of transposable elements , and superfamilies within both the retrotransposons  and dna transposable elements . chromosomes with high rr also tended to have a lower density of tandem gene duplications . however, most of these genomic features were inter-correlated  and when the effect of gene density  was removed by calculation of partial correlation coefficients, correlations between rr and all other factors listed in table  <dig> became insignificant. partialling out the effect of chromosome size had little effect on the correlation between rr and other genome features, and the correlations involving gene density  and %gc  remained significant.table  <dig> pearson correlations among chromosome attributes 

diversity a
divergence b

athe diversity within  <dig> eucalyptus species, including e. globulus



bdivergence between the  <dig> eucalyptus species

significance levels are: *** p <  <dig> , ** p <  <dig> , * p <  <dig> , ns p ≥  <dig> 



aall chromosome attributes are from the eucalyptus grandis reference genome  <cit> , except diversity and divergence which were estimated by hudson et al.  <cit> 


bequivalent to 'scaffold size' in table 2



c number of genes per mbp


d number of transposable elements per mbp


e the proportion of annotated genes which are tandem duplicates



chromosomal variation in rr was also associated with differences in marker diversity  and species divergence . it was highly negatively correlated with the pooled genetic diversity  within the six eucalyptus species studied by hudson et al.  <cit>  . the correlation between chromosomal rr and hhw of each individual species, including e. globulus, were similar in size and all also negative . the trends in global diversity were also evident regardless of whether markers were intra- or intergenic. however, for global hhw the correlation was only significant for intragenic markers . the global fst amongst the six species studied by hudson et al.  <cit>  was positively correlated with rr at the chromosome level . this relationship with fst was also found for both intragenic  and intergenic  markers.

discussion
this is the first study in forest trees to present direct, genome-wide, estimates of rr from multiple mapping pedigrees. we show rr varies between individuals as well as between chromosomes. the relative differences amongst chromosomes appear stable across eucalypt species, and are correlated with genomic features commonly related to rr in diverse taxa; including gc content, gene density and the density of specific transposable elements. significantly, we show that the differences in rr are negatively correlated with species-wide genetic diversity at the chromosome level. the direction of this correlation is the opposite to that commonly observed  and, we argue, is likely to reflect an interaction of selection and genome architecture.

variation between individuals
the variation we found in genome-wide rr between individuals is consistent with reports in other studies  <cit>  and may be due to environmental or genetic factors. rr has been shown to be affected by the environment in both plants and animals . however, the role of the environment cannot be clarified in the present study as our parents come from different environments as well as being genetically distinct. genetic factors which may influence rr, include sex and cross type. sex specific differences have been reported in some taxa, with elevated rr often occurring in the gender subject to gametic selection  <cit> . however, no difference in rr between sexes was evident in e. globulus. there was a signal in our data, albeit not significant, that cross type could explain some of the variation between individuals, with lower average rr in the f2’s compared with the f1’s. however further study will be required to validate this. irrespective of whether the genome-wide variation in rr we observed between individuals is due to genetic or environmental factors, it is clear that representative maps of the rr landscape in eucalyptus species will need to integrate results from multiple crosses and individuals.

our genome-wide average rr for e. globulus  was higher than estimates from e. grandis , e. urophylla   <cit> , and e. grandis/urophylla consensus maps . however, differences in the scale over which rr was estimated is likely to have influenced the different estimates. differences in genome coverage also no doubt influenced the estimates of rr between studies, particularly in the case of kullan et al.  <cit> , which estimated rr based on  <dig> windows of approximately 1 cm across the genome. direct comparison of the estimates from different studies is also problematic because different mapping techniques produce different genetic distances and thus different estimates of genetic to physical distance. our estimates of genetic distance  were derived from joinmap software, using the maximum likelihood algorithm, which uses haldane’s mapping function. the estimates of genetic distance used by petroli et al.  <cit>  were derived from record software  <cit> . record produces distances very similar to the joinmap maximum likelihood algorithm, if haldane’s mapping function is used  <cit> . however, silva-junior and grattapaglia  <cit>  used kosambi’s mapping function, which produces smaller estimates of genetic distance relative to haldane’s function. similarly, both kullan et al.  <cit>  and petroli et al.  <cit>  used the regression algorithm and kosambi’s mapping function in joinmap, which produce considerably smaller genetic distances than joinmap’s maximum likelihood algorithm. therefore, the greater estimate of genome-wide rr in our study may simply reflect greater estimates of genetic distance due to methodological issues. clearly, further study is required to draw robust conclusions regarding genome-wide differences in rr within and between eucalypt species, ideally using linkage maps constructed from similar techniques in multiple representatives of each species.

variation between chromosomes
there was substantial variation in rr between chromosomes in our study, indeed chromosome was the most significant explanatory variable in our analysis of variance. few studies in plants have examined genome-wide rr using multiple crosses, which are needed to provide the replication to test for significant differences between chromosomes. nonetheless, chromosomal variation in rr has been demonstrated in a range of taxa  <cit> , including plants such as maize in which intraspecific variation was of a similar magnitude to our findings  <cit> . chromosomal variation in rr is likely to at least in part reflect variation in chromosome size, due to the requirement for at least one crossover per chromosome per meiosis  <cit> . however, in our study the variation in rr between chromosomes remained significant after removing the correlated effect of chromosome size, arguing that other aspects of genomic architecture also contribute to this variation.

despite the significant differences in genome-wide rr between individuals, three lines of evidence suggest that the relative rr in each chromosome is highly stable; not only within e. globulus, but between eucalyptus species, and across evolutionary time. first, the differences between chromosomes in e. globulus were evident even when the significant effect of variation amongst the individuals was removed; and there was no significant interaction between chromosome and either sex or cross type within e. globulus. indeed, the difference in rr amongst chromosomes was nearly two fold, whereas that amongst individuals was only  <dig>  fold. second, the high positive correlation between our chromosomal estimates of rr from e. globulus  and those in e. grandis/urophylla   <cit>  suggests the relative chromosomal differences in rr are stable across these eucalyptus sections, despite an estimated  <dig> to <dig> ma since their divergence  <cit> . third, a positive correlation between gc content and rr is expected based on studies in other taxa . the high positive chromosome-level correlation between gc content  and rr , also points to stability of rr between e. grandis and e. globulus. further, because our estimate of rr is from a single generation of recombination, while gc content in e. grandis reflects historical rr, the high positive correlation also points to a long term stability of rr at the chromosome level.

association with genomic features and population genetic parameters
the chromosome level correlation between gc content and rr we observe is consistent with the theory of ‘gc-biased gene conversion’, whereby dna repair during recombination promotes enrichment in gc bases, accounting for the positive correlation between rr and gc content seen in most eukaryotes studied to date  <cit> . the particularly strong positive correlation observed between chromosome level rr and gc in e. globulus may reflect the unusually high gc content seen in the family myrtales, compared with other eudicots  <cit> . in contrast, arabidopsis is relatively gc poor and gc content and rr are uncorrelated, in line with a general pattern of greater gc enrichment in more derived plant genomes  <cit> .

our results also suggest a strong positive correlation between chromosomal estimates of rr and gene density. this finding is consistent with the positive correlation between rr and gene density observed at the whole-genome level in a range of taxa  <cit> . in plants such as maize, rice, wheat, and a. thaliana much of this correlation is attributable to the low density of genes in recombination-poor heterochromatin  <cit> . while in vertebrate genomes, nam and ellegren  <cit>  hypothesise neutral processes associated with recombination, including a bias in deletions over insertions, contribute to a more compact genome structure and greater gene density in regions of elevated rr. however, the correlation between gene density and rr varies in strength and direction amongst taxa  <cit> . the positive correlation we observe at the chromosome level is particularly strong relative to other reports. consistent with our findings, gene density was positively correlated with historical recombination rate in e. grandis , suggesting the relationship between gene density and rr may be widespread in eucalyptus, at least across the subgenus symphyomyrtus.

a negative correlation between rr and some categories of transposable elements was also evident in our study. transposable elements comprise over 50 % of most eukaryotes genomes and have a significant impact on genome evolution  <cit> . in particular, it is well accepted that the accumulation of transposable elements is a major factor driving genome expansion  <cit> . the relative density of transposable elements across the genome reflects a balance between transposable element insertion and deletion. transposable element deletion is believed to be primarily driven by recombinational processes, consistent with the observed transposable element accumulation in areas of low recombination in many taxa  <cit>  and in line with the correlation we observe. the mechanisms contributing to transposable elements accumulation in regions of low rr are the subject of some debate. leading hypothesis involve relaxation of various forms of selection in these regions ; biased insertion of transposable elements in areas of low rr  <cit> ; and a general deletion bias associated with recombination  <cit> . regardless of the causative factors, in our study it is possible that in chromosomes with relatively low rr, a greater density of transposable elements has contributed to a reduced gene density, and thus contributed to the positive correlation we observe between rr and gene density at the chromosome level.

a notable finding to emerge from this study is our strong negative correlation between rr at the chromosome-level and species-wide genetic diversity. the common trend in animals is for a positive association between rr and genetic diversity, whereas the association in plants is more variable, but generally zero or positive  <cit> . the relationship between rr and genetic diversity may be affected by the scale and type of measures of rr  and genetic diversity  both of which differ widely between studies  <cit> . nevertheless, only in oryza species  have negative correlations between rr and genetic diversity been previously reported  <cit> . in o. sativa, this association involved 100 kb intervals across three chromosomes   <cit> .

the more commonly observed positive correlation between rr and genetic diversity is often attributed to the impact of linked selection  <cit> . linked selection predicts a positive relationship between rr and genetic diversity due to the homogenising effects of selection being spread further in regions of low recombination  <cit> . however, as noted above there is disparity in this relationship between species  <cit>  suggesting other factors also influence how selection impacts the genomic distribution of diversity, such as gene density  <cit> . gene dense regions will be on average subject to greater selection, reducing diversity. therefore, a more general prediction for the effect of selection across genomes is that the distribution of genetic diversity will be related to the density of elements under selection, i.e., gene density   <cit> . this was the case in a recent study of e. grandis, where nucleotide diversity  was negatively correlated with gene density in 100 kb windows across the e. grandis genome; and amongst the genomic features analysed, gene density yielded the highest correlation with nucleotide diversity, far exceeding the strength of the correlation between historical recombination rate and nucleotide diversity  <cit> .

thus when gene density and rr are strongly positively correlated, as in e. globulus, this may counter the influence of rr on linked selection, disrupting the relationship between rr and genetic diversity  <cit> . indeed, there is growing evidence that the effects of linked selection are not confined to areas of low recombination but are often pervasive throughout genomes  <cit> , including in the forest tree poplar  <cit> . in support of this hypothesis, many plants exhibit a positive correlation between rr and gene density and a weak to no correlation between rr and genetic diversity  <cit> . in the case of oryza sativa  <cit>  and e. globulus the strong negative correlation between rr and diversity is likely to reflect, at least in part, the strong correlation between gene density and rr. however, in the case of eucalypts the contribution of other factors, such as their high genetic diversity  <cit>   other facets of genome architecture, and the history of population size within each species, requires further investigation. further, we cannot completely dismiss the possibly that other mechanisms are involved. for example, diversity per se could be affecting rr. it is well known that sequence divergence between individuals can inhibit recombination in adjacent regions of the genome, associated with the dna mis-match repair system  <cit>  and this process could also contribute to the negative correlation between rr and diversity we observe.

CONCLUSIONS
comparison of our results with previously published estimates provides evidence for stability in chromosomal level recombination rates across eucalypt species. together with the previously reported stability in karyotypes, genome synteny/colinearity and the genomic distribution of population diversity and divergence across the globally significant lineages of eucalyptus, our finding bode well for the transfer of genomic information between species within these lineages. we also demonstrate that the differences in rr between chromosomes are negatively correlated with species-wide genetic diversity at the chromosome level, which is opposite to the correlation observed in most other taxa. while our findings may in part reflect the scale of investigation, these insights into the recombination landscape of eucalyptus provide testable hypotheses for future research in forest trees. future research will investigate whether chromosomal differences in recombination rate are conserved between more distantly related eucalypt species, as well as investigating correlations between rr and genomic attributes at finer genomic scales.

