BACKGROUND
a comprehensive understanding of the evolution of mate choice requires thorough knowledge of the costs and benefits, both direct and indirect, that arise from it  <cit> . the relative magnitudes of these effects is a subject of much current empirical interest. for example, considerable evidence has accumulated from a number of species demonstrating that females can suffer direct harm from their interactions with males  <cit> . this is especially true in drosophila melanogaster, for which extensive data have demonstrated that males harm females during courtship and mating  <cit> . this male-induced harm causes selection in females to resist it and, if the resulting female counter-adaptations reduce male mating and/or fertilization success, a process of antagonistic co-evolution between the sexes, driven by interlocus sexual conflict, may result  <cit> . such a process appears to be ongoing in at least one well studied d. melanogaster laboratory population  <cit> .

in contrast to such direct costs, whether females also gain a net indirect benefit from their choice of mates is poorly understood. known as good genes mate choice, theory predicts that, because of a positive genetic correlation between a male's attractiveness and his condition, females mating with attractive males gain an indirect benefit by passing the male's superior genes on to their offspring  <cit> . good genes mate choice requires that male display traits are honest indicators of a male's overall genetic quality or condition  <cit> . this is suggested to be true whenever sexual display traits are costly to produce and their exaggeration increases male mating success because, once genetic variation in the display trait is exhausted, variation in numerous other loci that affect overall condition will be recruited via a process known as 'genic capture'  <cit> . because higher condition individuals are better able to pay the cost of trait exaggeration, display traits become honest indicators of male condition. the extent to which display traits are condition dependent, however, is unresolved  <cit> .

much attention has been directed at good genes indirect benefits because their magnitude is key to determining the net fitness effects of mate choice, especially in systems in which direct benefits are weak or lacking and direct costs exist . contrasting theoretical analyses have suggested that good genes indirect benefits are capable of overcoming direct costs of mate choice  <cit> , or that direct selection on mate choice , will commonly overwhelm any indirect benefits  <cit> . empirical data on the magnitudes of these costs and benefits will therefore be crucial to evaluating these different perspectives  <cit> .

results of empirical tests of the magnitude and nature of indirect benefits are mixed. while there are many data demonstrating that mating with attractive males can benefit specific components of offspring fitness  <cit> , in some cases other components suffer  <cit> . in addition, in the majority of studies key components of sexual and nonsexual fitness were not considered, meaning the net indirect benefit of mating with attractive males could not be determined. a related approach, in which the opportunity for mate choice is manipulated and then the consequences for offspring fitness are measured , has also produced inconsistent results. benefits to offspring viability, for example, have been found in some studies but not in others  <cit> . finally, quantitative genetic studies estimating the genetic correlations necessary for indirect selection to occur  have also provided mixed results  <cit> , although data of this type are sparse.

the focus of past studies on specific components of offspring fitness occurred in part because it was thought to be a means of distinguishing between two types of indirect benefit: good genes and an alternative 'sexy sons' process in which the indirect benefits of mate choice for a female arise solely from her production of more attractive sons  <cit> . the idea was that improved offspring viability  was indicative of good genes, whereas increased attractiveness  of male offspring was indicative of a sexy sons process. however, as recent theory has stressed, this is wrong for two reasons  <cit> . first, under a good genes process, individuals may be able to allocate condition dynamically to different fitness components at the cost of others; an increase in mating success could therefore give the mistaken appearance of a sexy sons process  <cit> . second, good genes and sexy sons processes are likely not mutually exclusive  <cit> . this is because some form of sexy sons indirect benefit is inherent whenever mate choice occurs ; there may also be few traits unaffected in some way by overall condition  <cit> , although there are little data with which to evaluate the extent of such a relationship  <cit> .

how fitness should be measured is a controversial topic  <cit> . as stressed above, however, the existence of indirect benefits of mate choice cannot be evaluated using data that examine a restricted subset of fitness components: long term success in future generations is the ultimate currency  <cit> . although lifetime fitness may be experimentally intractable, effort must clearly be made to simultaneously consider the major components of sexual  and non-sexual  fitness relevant to a population. this has been attempted in just two cases. in the first, results from a series of experiments using the well-studied lhm laboratory population of d. melanogaster have suggested that both sexy-sons and good genes indirect benefits are lacking  <cit> . in contrast, another experiment using house crickets concluded that significant indirect benefits existed, primarily in the form of sexy sons, and that these may even be sufficient to offset estimated direct costs  <cit> .

here we use a novel experimental design to test for the existence of any indirect benefits in a laboratory-adapted population of d. melanogaster . our approach involves measuring major components of sexual and non-sexual fitness relevant to their laboratory environment on two sets of individuals: those with genomes that trace their ancestry to males that were highly successful at obtaining mates , and those with genomes that trace their ancestry to males that were entirely unsuccessful at obtaining mates . three successive rounds of mating trials are used to sort males into these two groups . these males are then mated individually to random females from the same population; their offspring are again mated as random pairs within the stud and dud treatments  to form grandchildren possessing genomes that trace their ancestry ultimately to either stud  or dud  males. using these grandchildren, we then measure the following major fitness components: 1) male mating success; 2) a composite measure of adult fecundity and offspring survival to emergence as adults; and 3) adult longevity .

we measure these fitness components on grandchildren of random females mated to stud vs. dud males because indirect genetic benefits, deriving from the superior genes that preferred males may pass on, may arise in generations subsequent to a female's immediate offspring. this may be particularly true for male mating success  because there is some evidence that its genetic basis may involve a disproportionate contribution of the female sex chromosome . although the data are mixed and heavily dependent on only two taxa , the genetic basis of sexual display traits and behavioural reproductive isolation appear to map disproportionately to the x  chromosome  <cit>  . this is consistent with the long hypothesized role of the x chromosome in the evolution of sexual dimorphism  <cit> . a disproportionate contribution of the x chromosome to male attractiveness is of concern because male offspring receive their x chromosome from their mother, not their father. male grandchildren, however, can trace the origin of their x chromosome to their maternal grandfather 50% of the time on average, and any increased attractiveness resulting from this x will be first manifest in this generation. we therefore use grandchildren of stud and dud males to provide a more powerful test for the existence of any good genes indirect benefit: that is, whether males that are successful at obtaining mates possess superior genes, on average, than do unsuccessful males.

RESULTS
male mating success
the grandsons of stud males were, on average, 30% more successful at securing mates than were the grandsons of dud males . treating cages as replicates, this difference in mating success is highly significant .

productivity
the average productivity  of individual male-female pairs was slightly greater for the grandchildren of dud males as compared to the grandchildren of stud males when measured at three days  and  <dig> days  post-emergence. these treatment differences, however, are not significant . productivity declined significantly with age and there was no evidence of an interaction between age and treatment .

sources of variation include the effects of treatment , individual age , and their interaction. productivity is a composite measure that includes the fecundity and fertility of the parents, and the subsequent viability to emergence of their offspring. productivity values were squared prior to analysis.

longevity
on average, females lived longer than males when held alone , but shorter than males when housed under mixed sex conditions . this effect of milieu in females was highly significant . no overall effect of milieu was present in males. in both sexes, treatment  had no overall effect on mean life span , although there was some indication that the grandsons of stud males survived longer than the grandsons of dud males when housed in a single sex milieu . this treatment × milieu interaction, however, was not significant .

*one cage of females  was lost due to experimental error.

sources of variation include treatment , milieu , and their interaction.

in line with the results for mean life span, gompertz mortality parameters for females did not differ significantly between stud and dud treatments, but did differ between single and mixed sex milieu . there was no evidence of any treatment × milieu interaction . the effect of milieu was caused by an increase in baseline mortality of females in the presence of males , whereas the presence of males did not appear to affect the rate of senescence in females .

mean  gompertz mortality parameters as fit by winmodest  <cit> . α represents baseline mortality and β represents the rate of increase of mortality with age .

in males, mortality rates were similar between stud and dud treatments when measured in a mixed sex milieu , but when measured in a single sex milieu, males from the stud treatment outperformed males from the dud treatment, having reduced rates of baseline mortality fig 4a and senescence . this treatment × milieu interaction was significant overall , although it was non-significant when the two mortality parameters were each tested in isolation . as noted earlier, this treatment × milieu interaction was also present in average male life span , although the effect was not significant .

discussion
whether females gain any indirect benefit from their choice of mates is a long standing question in evolutionary biology. when present, theory suggests that such benefits may have important implications such as promoting adaptation and increasing population mean fitness  <cit> , potentially even providing an advantage to sexual reproduction  <cit> . empirical evidence for such benefits, however, is mixed, with few experiments addressing both sexual and non-sexual components of fitness in a single design. here we present the results of an experiment using d. melanogaster that evaluated components of both sexual and non-sexual fitness relevant to the laboratory environment to which the population is adapted. instead of manipulating the opportunity for mate choice with unknown effects on the process of sexual selection, we employed a novel design that allowed us to sample and measure the major components of fitness of individuals with genomes that derived ultimately from males that were either repeatedly successful  or repeatedly unsuccessful  at obtaining mates.

according to our results, individuals with genomes deriving from stud males outperformed individuals with genomes derived from dud males almost exclusively in a single fitness component, male mating success, suggesting that the only indirect benefit to a female in this population of mating with a stud male may arise via an increase in the mating success of her male descendants. this potential sexy son benefit was substantial: males in the stud treatment were 30% more successful on average at securing a mate than males in the dud treatment. in contrast, there was no evidence that productivity  differed between individuals from the stud and dud treatments. similarly for longevity and the mortality parameters determining it, there was no evidence of any differences between stud and dud treatments when measured in a mixed sex milieu . surprisingly, however, when held alone , males in the stud treatment did have lower rates of baseline mortality and senescence than males in the dud treatment. a benefit of sexual selection in the form of increased longevity has been observed before during experimental evolution in d. melanogaster  <cit> , although results were complex with males benefiting independent of milieu whereas females paid a cost when alone but benefited when males were present. in our case, the benefit is small  and did not translate into a significant effect on longevity . it therefore appears unlikely that such a benefit is a key component in the evolution of mate choice in this population.

on one hand, our results are consistent with a previous study using house cricket in which significant indirect benefits were found and that appeared to arise in large part from the increased attractiveness of male offspring  <cit> . on the other hand, in apparent contrast to our results, a series of experiments using the lhm population of d. melanogaster failed to find any significant indirect benefits, including sexy sons  <cit> , despite previous work demonstrating the heritability of lifetime fitness  <cit> .  a number of these experiments, however, compared treatments that varied the strength of sexual selection  <cit> , thereby estimating an absolute cost of sexual selection. our experiment, in contrast, addressed the relative costs and benefits of mating with different males ; the presence of an absolute cost was not addressed. nevertheless, at least two past studies using the lhm population examined the fitness effects of male identity  <cit> , thereby addressing a relative cost/benefit. the explanation for these contrasting results in the same species is unknown, although it could represent among-population variation in the costs and benefits of mate choice. alternately, it could trace its origin to difficulties in the empirical measurement of lifetime fitness using fitness components – important components, including male mating success, may been overlooked  <cit> . we return to this topic later.

what role might these indirect benefits play in the evolution of female mate preferences in our population? answering this question will require comparable estimates of the direct costs of mating with successful vs. unsuccessful males, as well as information about how these costs and benefits integrate across generations. there are two main possibilities, however. first, these indirect benefits may outweigh any direct costs and mate preferences may therefore represent adaptations in females to gain these benefits. according to theoretical analyses, however, a pure sexy sons process, in which the only benefit to females of mating with attractive males comes from the increased mating success of sons  <cit> , cannot maintain a costly female preference at equilibrium  <cit> . although there is evidence from various taxa that mate preferences are costly  <cit> , it is possible that they have little or no cost in our d. melanogaster laboratory population, where females can readily sample numerous males and rejected unwanted males with little effort. determining the cost of female preferences is an empirical issue, albeit a difficult one, that therefore demands attention if we wish a comprehensive understanding of the nature of indirect benefits.

alternatively, indirect benefits to females in this population may have arisen through the production of offspring of superior genetic quality, and hence higher condition , with males simply allocating their surplus condition primarily to traits that increase their mating success. mating success may be a dominant component of male fitness in laboratory drosophila populations, although the maintenance of our population with overlapping generations would be expected to make longevity an additional key component. consistent with such a good genes scenario, when denied the opportunity to mate due to the complete absence of females, males from the stud treatment lived longer than males from the dud treatment, consistent with the idea that they may have shifted their allocation of surplus condition to traits affecting longevity in that particular environment. however, such a good genes scenario also predicts that females from the stud treatment should have been of superior genetic quality, and thus have had higher condition on average, when compared with females from the dud treatment. the lack of any detectable difference in female fitness between our stud and dud treatments suggests that this is not the case.

the second possibility is that these indirect benefits do not outweigh the direct costs of mating in this population and mate choice is therefore dominated by sexual conflict. under such a scenario, instead of indicating attractiveness, variation in male mating success  may reflect differences in the ability of males to coerce or otherwise cause females to mate beyond their natural selection optimum, and the ability of females to resist this. females need not benefit indirectly in any way from their 'choice' of males and 'mate preferences' in females, which may be more accurately construed as varying levels of resistance, may evolve because they minimize direct costs of mating arising from this sexual conflict  <cit> . there is ample evidence that sexual conflict dominates in the lhm population of d. melanogaster  <cit> . however, in our population, being housed with males from the stud vs. dud treatments had no differential effect on the longevity or mortality rates of females, nor did female productivity differ when mated with either type of male. nevertheless, we do not know what effect, if any, mating with these two types of males may have on the longer term reproductive success of females , and we lack data on the absolute cost of sexual selection. determining whether such absolute costs exist will be key to understanding the role of sexual conflict in the evolution of mate choice in this population.

as the above discussion highlights, the evolution of mate choice depends ultimately on the net fitness effects of mating with 'preferred' males, including both direct effects on the individuals and indirect effects arising from variation in the sexual and non-sexual fitness of their descendants. simultaneous measurement of direct and indirect fitness effects is an empirical challenge that has rarely been attempted. as recently demonstrated in d. melanogaster  <cit> , experimental evolution, in which the organisms themselves integrate the relevant fitness components over multiple generations in their representative environment, may be a powerful approach for achieving this goal  <cit> . in this case, the evidence supports the latter scenario of sexual conflict.  valuable insight may also be gained from long-term studies of populations in nature  <cit>  in which an extensive pedigree is known, long-term reproductive success can be measured in the wild, and quantitative genetic parameters can be estimated. in addition to such 'net fitness' approaches, however, a comprehensive understanding of the evolution of mate choice will require an understanding of how individuals allocate condition to various fitness components and how this varies with environment. detailed experimental estimates of the various direct and indirect costs and benefits that integrate to determine net fitness will therefore remain a difficult yet important endeavour in sexual selection research.

CONCLUSIONS
individuals with genomes deriving ultimately from males that were successful at obtaining mates tended to outperform individuals with genomes deriving ultimately from males that were unsuccessful at obtaining mates, suggesting the existence of an indirect benefit of mating with successful males in this population. this advantage, however, came almost exclusively in the form of a single fitness component: male mating success. it is important to note, however, that as with all studies that measure components of fitness, it is possible that individuals may allocate condition differently under different situations; the absence of indirect longevity or productivity benefits in our experiment cannot therefore preclude their absence in this population in other environments. therefore, whether our results represent a traditional sexy sons benefit or are also indicative of a good genes process in which surplus condition was being allocated by males primarily to enhance their mating success, is a crucial question that remains. future studies are needed that address how allocation to various life history components varies with environment. it will also be important to estimate the direct costs of mating in this population, and to determine how the various costs and benefits integrate across generations. although experimentally challenging, such work promises to shed light on the selective mechanisms responsible for the evolution of female 'mate preferences'.

