BACKGROUND
post-translational modification  of proteins is a key mechanism for cellular regulation including protein-protein interactions, protein functions, protein turnover, protein localization, cell signaling, and proteomic diversity  <cit> . more than  <dig> different types of amino acid-specific ptms have been identified, including acetylation, methylation, glycosylation, phosphorylation, sumoylation, ubiquitylation and so on  <cit> . several types of ptms are known to have specific functions regarding protein-protein interactions: for example, phosphorylation sites tend to be localized on protein binding hotspots and modulate the stability of protein interactions  <cit> ; ubiquitylation plays an important role in cellular signaling such as protein degradation, autophagy, and protein turnover by promoting interactions with various proteins which recognize this ptm ; acetylation controls a variety of cellular processes, and alters the properties of protein-binding interfaces by neutralizing the positive charge of the lysine residues or disrupting hydrogen bonds on lysine side-chains  <cit> .

because of advances in high-throughput technologies especially in protein mass spectrometry, enormous amounts of data related to ptms have been obtained. at the present, there are multiple databases available for studying ptms such as uniprot  <cit> , dbptm  <cit> , ptmcuration  <cit> , ptmcode  <cit> , and phosphositeplus  <cit> . among these databases, phosphositeplus is the largest, most frequently updated and curated ptm database which both stores non-redundant information and provides tools for studying ptms  <cit> . while the rate of new ptm identification is rapid, the functional annotation process of these ptms is relatively slow. functional annotation of ptm sites is usually obtained from different experimental methods, e.g., site-directed mutagenesis, radiolabeling, immunoblot analysis, and multidimensional liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry  <cit> . however, these methods typically take a long time to implement. computational methods that can help to predict the functional significance of new ptm sites will allow researchers to prioritize their targets for the functional validation. several attributes of ptm sites, such as the degree of conservation and the localization in functional domains, have been used for such predictions  <cit> . one of the important functional domains on proteins is a protein-protein interacting region , which is a binding/interacting interface between a protein and its protein partner/substrate. ptms that occur in the ppir can either interfere with or facilitate the interaction between proteins, thus they are functionally important.

ppirs can only be confidently identified from protein structures that were determined using high resolution techniques such as x-ray crystallography, nmr spectroscopy, and/or cryo-electron microscopy. the protein data bank  is a rapidly expanding resource consisting of a large number of structures for protein-protein complexes, including detailed information of ppirs at the amino acid residue level  <cit> . these structures can be represented as 3d images and enable the interacting regions of proteins to be visualized and identified. the integration of this structural information with ptm identification could greatly facilitate the determination of the functional relationship between specific ptms and protein-protein interactions.

we began this study with a simple question: for any detected protein modification, can we predict whether that modification is inside or outside of a ppir? to address this question, we first integrated the information from the pdb and phosphositeplus databases to generate new supervised datasets indicating which ptm sites are experimentally confirmed to be inside or outside of ppirs . subsequently, we used several conventional features including hydropathy index, secondary structure, pssm , and sequence conservation , along with existing web-based applications, to perform the prediction. however, these features and applications proved to be insufficient to accomplish the task. therefore, a different approach was required.

one strategy that has been used successfully to make predictions based on pattern recognition is “machine learning”. in fact, this strategy has been recently employed to predict individual sites of protein modification with high performance , although with no indication of whether the modified sites are inside or outside of ppirs. therefore, we applied a machine learning strategy to generate the models for predicting whether a known ptm site is inside or outside of a ppir. since most machine learning algorithms require numeric data, the mapped ptm-specific sequence datasets from phosphositeplus database were first encoded numerically using aaindex  <cit> , a database of numerical indices representing physicochemical and biochemical properties of amino acids, which has been utilized in numerous previous applications for decades. for example, the aaindex database was recently used in a machine learning strategy to develop the paaqd  <cit>  and epiccapo  <cit>  applications for immunogenicity and epitope predictions, respectively. the performance of paaqd and epiccapo was high and outperformed other applications at the time they were developed, supporting the use of both the aaindex database and a machine learning strategy for predictive modeling.

in this study, the integrated pdb/ptm-specific datasets were analyzed and modeled using machine learning algorithms. our predictive models showed high performance measures, and important features contributing to predictive power were identified. these predictive models are available online and may be useful in providing additional insight related to the functional relationship between specific ptms and protein-protein interactions.

RESULTS
preparation of datasets for generating predictive models
figure  <dig> illustrates the workflow and overall results of the data generation and preparation processes. starting with the entire pdb database, filtering steps were employed to generate a dataset containing only structures for proteins with interacting protein partners. the number of pdb files was decreased by slightly more than half during the filtering processes. for the phosphositeplus database, entries are provided as sequences with lengths up to  <dig> amino acid residues, with up to ± <dig> neighboring aas surrounding the ptm site. after removing sequences with lengths <  <dig> residues , the number of remaining sequences was further dramatically reduced  following the sequence mapping process. the distribution of modification sites inside and outside of ppirs for each individual type of ptm is shown in fig.  <dig> fig.  <dig> flow diagram of the data generation and preparation processes. numerical results are shown for each step of the overall process

fig.  <dig> the numbers of modification sites inside and outside of ppirs



although the number of data points required for machine learning is a function of the variability and complexity of the datasets and research problems being addressed, at least 75– <dig> data points have been reported as the minimum necessary for achieving acceptable performance levels  <cit> . this suggests that a total of approximately  <dig> data points might be needed to generate reliable predictive models using 5-fold cross-validation as employed in this study. consequently, only the three datasets for acetylation, phosphorylation, and ubiquitylation included enough sequences to be used for further analyses.

use of conventional features to generate predictive models
initially, we focused on the phosphorylation dataset and performed position-specific sequence analysis surrounding the phosphorylation sites found either within or outside of ppirs using phosphologo  <cit> .

using this conventional approach, a few general conclusions were possible: 1) there was a rather strong preference for tyrosine as the phosphorylation site within ppirs ; 2) the identity of amino acid residues surrounding the phosphorylation site within ppirs was not completely random, revealing a preference for certain amino acid properties at some specific positions ; 3) the anti-logo analysis showed that serine and threonine were strongly disfavored as the phosphorylation site within ppirs ; 4) the anti-logo analysis also demonstrated that polar amino acids were strongly disfavored at all positions surrounding the phosphorylation site within ppirs ; and 5). finally, nonpolar amino acids were favored for all positions surrounding the phosphorylation site outside ppirs , and no preference was detected for amino acid residues surrounding that phosphorylation site following anti-logo analysis . while this analysis revealed some possible patterns, no quantitative rules were generated that would enable development of a prediction tool. furthermore, when the same type of analysis was performed on ubiquitylation and acetylation datasets using motif-x  <cit> , no pattern of preferences was detected.fig.  <dig> results of phosphologo analysis. the x- and y-axes correspond to residue positions and bit scores , respectively. for phosphorylated sequences within ppirs, position-specific sequence analyses revealed favored  and disfavored  amino acid residues. similar analyses of phosphorylated sequences outside ppirs were performed . amino acid types for neighboring positions of central phosphorylated residues  are indicated by symbols as follows: Φ = nonpolar, Δ = polar, Θ = acidic, Ψ = basic



next, we used individual conventional features  in a machine learning strategy in an attempt to develop models for predicting whether modification sites are inside or outside of ppirs . table  <dig> shows the final results for the initial machine learning strategy using these three conventional features. obviously, the predictive performance was poor, essentially being no better than random chance. therefore, we developed an alternate machine learning strategy based on encoding a large number of features representing various physicochemical and biochemical properties of amino acids.table  <dig> classification results for each ptm-specific dataset using conventional features and the svm as a classifiera



athis table shows results when datasets were balanced . the results using unbalanced datasets are shown in additional file 7: table s1



initial predictive models for ptm-specific datasets using multiple features
three ptm-specific datasets  were individually encoded into numerical arrays using  <dig> indices of aaindex <dig>  <cit>  and then analyzed using the svm, with  <dig> independent iterations of 5-fold cross-validation to evaluate for classification performance measures.

as shown in fig.  <dig>  all ptm-specific datasets were imbalanced, i.e., the number of modification sites outside of ppirs is substantially greater than that of sites inside of ppirs. as we expected, by using all data without correcting for imbalance, sn, auc, and mcc were low , while sp could reach the maximum at  <dig> . thus, it was necessary to correct for imbalance before proceeding to the model generation process, and the gibbscluster  <cit>  clustering algorithm was employed in the balancing process . subsequently, the balanced datasets were analyzed in classification tasks using the svm as the classifier; the results are shown in table  <dig>  the performance measures are shown as averaged values of  <dig> iterations of 5-fold cross-validation. overall, the resulting performance measures were quite good, with minimum values greater than  <dig>  and most values greater than  <dig> . this indicated that the predictive power of our machine learning strategy was relatively robust.table  <dig> averaged performance measures for each ptm-specific dataset using the svm as a classifier and  <dig> indices of aaindex <dig> in the encoding process

the highest possible value for all measures is 1

standard deviations for all values were < ± <dig> 



predictive model refinement by feature selection
in order to improve the power of the predictive models and to eliminate indices making no contribution to the predictive power, the datasets were analyzed using individual indices which were then combined one at a time in an iterative process. for each encoded ptm-specific dataset, the results using the svm for each individual index were ranked based on cps . classification tasks were then repeated by consecutive addition of each index-specific sub-dataset in order of rank until an optimal set of indices was identified, based on reaching a maximum value for cps. this rank based optimization uncovered and preserved information related to the relative importance of each index in contributing to the predictive power of the models.

table  <dig> shows the result of classification when only sub-datasets corresponding to indices in the optimal sets were used. from the total of  <dig> indices in aaindex <dig>  the numbers of indices after optimization were decreased to  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> for acetylation, phosphorylation, and ubiquitylation, respectively. for acetylation and phosphorylation, many of the performance measures were significantly increased after optimization when compared with the use of all  <dig> indices. however, except for mcc, the performance measures were unchanged for the ubiquitylation dataset. figure  <dig> shows the overlap of optimal sets of indices for the ptm-specific datasets, including the  <dig> indices that were common to all three datasets after optimization. interestingly,  <dig> of the  <dig> indices were related to the same basic property of amino acids, namely hydrophobicity. in addition, all  <dig> of the indices from the optimized acetylation-specific dataset were also present in the optimized ubiquitylation-specific dataset. the full list of indices included in the optimized sets is shown in additional file 2: table s <dig>  additional file 3: table s <dig>  additional file 4: table s <dig> table  <dig> resulting performance measures when only sub-datasets corresponding to indices in the optimal sets were used in the classification tasks

the maximum possible value for all measures is 1


asignificantly increased  when compared with the use of all  <dig> indices

fig.  <dig> overlap among of the three ptm-specific optimized sets of indices. reference for each index is showed in additional file 14: table s6



for further refinement of the predictive models, relief-f  <cit>  and information gain  <cit>  algorithms were employed to rank the features. the best-feature subsets were constructed by including the features sequentially, one by one, from the top ranked feature to the last one in the classification task using the svm . table  <dig> shows the resulting performance measures when best-feature subsets were used in the classification tasks. acc, auc, and mcc were comparable for both feature selection algorithms, and were significantly increased compared with the performance measures without feature selection. in addition, both algorithms dramatically reduced the number of features required for generating predictive models, with information gain requiring only about half as many features as relief-f.table  <dig> resulting performance measures when best-feature sets were used in the classification tasks, using two different feature selection algorithms


aexcept for these values, others were significantly increased  when compared with the results using optimized sets of indices shown in table 3




comparisons of classifiers
for the predictive models described in the preceding sections, the svm was used as a classifier. next, using the optimized lists of indices and features identified in previous section as an input, we evaluated the performance of five additional classifiers: k-nearest neighbors , random forest , c <dig> , kstar, and multilayer perceptron . table  <dig> compares the resulting performance measures of all six classifiers for all three ptm-specific datasets.table  <dig> resulting performance measures of all six classifiers for all three ptm-specific datasets, using the optimized lists of indices and features as an input



except for rf , the svm provided the best performance overall , and the best individual performance for two of the three ptm-specific datasets, namely acetylation and ubiquitylation. for the phosphorylation-specific dataset, the k-nn and c <dig>  classifiers  provided slightly better performance than the svm. despite the latter results, since the svm was used to obtain the optimized lists of indices and features for subsequent modeling by the other classifiers, some biases may have been introduced  that compromised the performance of the other classifiers. to address this issue, the phosphorylation-specific dataset was re-evaluated using either k-nn or c <dig>  exclusively as the classifiers  for all feature selection and classification tasks. as shown in table  <dig>  the performance measures using the optimized lists of indices and features identified by k-nn or c <dig>  were both lower than those using the svm. this indicated that no significant bias in the refinement processes was introduced when the svm was used. finally, while the performance of rf appeared to be “perfect”  for the acetylation and ubiquitylation datasets, this result is clearly an anomaly, resulting from over-fitting  <cit> . over-fitting as a result of using rf was not surprising, since previous experiments showed that the performance of rf implemented in weka frequently outperformed other classifiers, but the resulting predictive models using rf tend to be over-fitted  <cit> .table  <dig> resulting performance measures for the phosphorylation dataset, using k-nn or c <dig>  as the classifiers  for all feature selection and classification tasks, including identification of optimized sets of indices and features



implementation and evaluation of final predictive models
in order to maximize performance and minimize the number of features required, the final ptm-specific predictive models were generated using the optimized lists of indices and features as described , employing relief-f for the acetylation dataset and information gain for the phosphorylation and ubiquitylation datasets. we used the svm implemented in the r package “kernlab”  <cit>  as the classifier for all three final predictive models, based on  performance measures ,  cross-platform compatibility, and  ease of computational coding. these models were then implemented as an r package which is available at http://sysbio.chula.ac.th/ptmppir.

the final models were evaluated using  <dig> independent iterations of 5-fold cross-validation, and the resulting calculated performance measures for the models were high . nevertheless, to independently confirm the robustness of our models, an ideal approach would be to test the models using sequences with known localization in relation to ppirs but which were not previously used in generation of the models. therefore, we collected additional non-overlapped sequences from dbptm  <cit> , huebner et al.  <cit> , and hou et al.  <cit>  to construct the validation datasets for acetylation, phosphorylation, and ubiquitylation that reflected reality, i.e., possessing large class imbalances . table  <dig> shows the results following predictions by the final models for the validation datasets. overall, performance measures were relatively good: auc for the predictions was ≥  <dig>  for all three ptm datasets, ppv  was similar , and fpr was ≤ 4 %.table  <dig> the validation datasets of sequences collected from dbptm  <cit> , huebner et al.  <cit> , and hou et al.  <cit> 



finally, the overall performance of our predictive models was compared with that of nps-homppi  <cit> , a more general method for predicting protein interaction sites . after employing our models and nps-homppi to perform predictions for the validation datasets, our method outperformed nps-homppi , again indicating that the method described here is relatively good at identifying the characteristics of ptm sites on protein-protein interfaces.

prediction of ppir localization for ptms in the absence of 3d structure information
finally, we applied our predictive models to the large number of sequences from the phosphositeplus database that have no corresponding 3d structure in the pdb database . table  <dig> shows the prediction results for these sequences with currently unknown ppir localization. for the three ptms studied here, 1–4 % of the modification sites were predicted to be located inside ppirs.table  <dig> results of predictions using sequences with unknown ppir localization 



discussion
in this study, we developed machine learning models for predicting whether post-translationally modified sites in proteins are inside or outside of ppirs . we combined data from two of the most comprehensive databases currently available, namely 3d structural and protein-protein interaction data from the pdb, and protein modification site data from the phosphositeplus database. after the filtering and mapping processes , only the three most abundant types of modifications  had sufficient numbers of modification sites  for further analyses. in addition, the number of interacting residues in the final ppir map represented only a minor fraction  of the total residues present in pdb polypeptide chains, and only 16 % of the known ptm sites  were located inside ppirs. despite these limitations which reduced the number of sequences available for analysis, the final predictive models generated in this study were characterized by relatively high performance measures. these results were in contrast to those obtained during our initial attempts to generate such predictive models, using either existing web-based applications or a machine learning approach based on a limited set of conventional features .

during the initial generation of the predictive models, the imbalance between the total numbers of interacting and non-interacting sites caused misclassifying during the learning process, as indicated by poor performance measures . in addition, computational times required for generating predictive models were relatively long for the imbalanced datasets . after balancing by under-sampling techniques using a clustering algorithm, performance measures were significantly improved  and computational times were decreased approximately 10-fold . besides under-sampling techniques, over-sampling techniques also have been used to cope with imbalanced datasets  <cit> . however, it has been reported that certain over-sampling techniques may lead to over-fitting, a phenomenon in which the resulting models perform well with the training dataset but subsequently exhibit poor performance measures during the validation process  <cit> .table  <dig> relative computational time required for generating predictive models

all tests were performed on a personal computer 



the initial predictive models were generated using  <dig> individual indices from aaindex <dig> and then refined by index ranking and feature selection processes to identify the optimal reduced set of indices and features for each ptm-specific dataset . for the initial collection of indices from aaindex <dig>  approximately half were related to hydrophobic properties of the amino acids; after optimization, a similar representation of hydrophobicity-related indices was observed for each ptm-specific dataset, as well as for the overlapping set of  <dig> indices common to all three ptms . this finding is not surprising and is consistent with previous studies demonstrating the importance of hydrophobicity to protein-protein interactions  <cit> . nevertheless, no single property can distinguish between residues located inside and outside of ppirs, and most methods for predicting residues at protein-protein interfaces use a combination of several properties  <cit> . furthermore, factors other than hydrophobicity were also important to the performance of the models presented here—and presumably, to the actual protein-protein interaction themselves—as evident from the values of performance measures determined separately for the hydrophobicity- and non-hydrophobicity-related indices .

while the final predictive models generated in this study were characterized by relatively high performance measures, one limitation needs to be mentioned. independent evaluation of the models’ performance was only possible for ptms located outside ppirs, since all the ptms known to be located inside ppirs were used to generate the models. thus, the high level of predicted accuracy observed for ptms located outside ppirs  should not be directly extrapolated to the other class of ptms . nevertheless, when the models were applied to the large number of ptm sequences with no pdb structure information , between 1–4 % of the modification sites were predicted to be located inside ppirs . as already mentioned above, ~16 % of the mapped ptm sites with known 3d structures were actually located inside ppirs . the apparent discrepancy between this latter value for sites with known structure  and the value of 1–4 % for sites lacking structure information can be explained. proteins with no interacting partners were removed from the downloaded dataset of pdb structures prior to mapping ptm sites. therefore, the mapped ptm sites were enriched with interacting sequences relative to the broader population of ptm sequences with unknown structure.

we anticipate that the predictive models presented here will be useful in several ways. first, as large numbers of new ptms are identified using high-throughput proteomics techniques , it will be necessary to prioritize which individual ptms will be selected for further studies of their roles in regulating protein functions. the prediction for any newly identified ptms as being localized inside ppirs would help with this prioritization, since ptms located inside ppirs are likely to significantly impact  protein-protein interactions. however, we should note one caveat to this generalized approach in predicting the importance of specific ptms for their effects on protein-protein interactions: some ptms located outside of ppirs could also affect protein-protein interactions , but such ptms would not be identified using our approach. as a second potential use for the data generated by these models, investigators can search the lists provided here of known ptms either determined or predicted to be located inside ppirs . such searches for specific ptm sites in proteins of interest could facilitate prioritization for further functional studies. as one final note, since our tool was designed and trained based on sites of known modifications, it should not be used for predictions of sites for which modification status is unknown.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study, we developed the first models for predicting whether sites of protein modifications are inside or outside of protein-protein interacting regions , based on the existing structural and ptm databases. our models show relatively high predictive performance measures. as more data become available, the performance of these models should be even better. specifically, discovery of new ppirs as a result of rapidly increasing 3d structure determinations should increase the accuracy of the predictive models. these predictive models are available online and may be useful in providing additional insight related to the functional relationship between specific ptms and protein-protein interactions.

