BACKGROUND
the class mammalia provides a classic example of an adaptive radiation, characterized by a proliferation of lineages displaying a diverse array of ecomorphological specializations for feeding and locomotion  <cit> . many additional biological attributes , coupled with this diversity in form and function, have allowed mammals to exploit a broad range of habitats worldwide. there are approximately  <dig> families of living mammals apportioned into  <dig> orders and two major subclasses, prototheria and theria, with the former subclass containing the order monotremata  and the latter containing the infraclasses metatheria  and eutheria , which are subdivided into  <dig> and  <dig> orders, respectively  <cit> . lineage-specific rate heterogeneity in terms of morphological diversification  <cit>  and molecular divergence  <cit>  is a trademark of the various orders and families of mammals, especially within the eutheria, and this has complicated efforts to resolve phylogenetic relationships among the higher categories of mammals.

until relatively recently, most contributions to the "mammal tree of life," as it relates to phylogeny and classification, were made by functional morphologists and paleontologists  <cit> . more recent molecular efforts have resulted in confirmation of some previous hypotheses, the refutation of others, and the proposal of novel arrangements  <cit> .

the most severe disagreements between morphology and molecules originated from studies based on mitochondrial genome sequences. for example, monophyly of rodentia  is based on a combination of dentition, skull morphology, soft anatomy, the postcranial skeleton, and the jaw mechanism  <cit> , and early classifications never questioned the naturalness of this clade. nevertheless, several early studies of nuclear genes  <cit>  and mitochondrial genomes  <cit>  argued that guinea pigs and presumably their relatives  were "not rodents," but represented a separate and more basal eutherian lineage, apart from muroid rodents . these same data challenged the monophyly of glires, a group recognized on the basis of morphology  <cit>  and containing the orders lagomorpha  and rodentia, by suggesting a sister-group relationship between lagomorphs and primates  <cit> . the morphological placement of the order xenarthra  at the base of the eutherian radiation was also challenged, with mitochondrial data suggesting either the erinaecidae  or rodents at the base. in contrast to the morphology, xenarthrans were considered sister to a clade containing the orders carnivora, perrisodactyla , artiodactyla , and cetacea   <cit> . two of the more startling results from the analysis of mitochondrial genomes included: 1) the placement the order monotremata as sister to metatheria, thus making the subclass theria paraphyletic  <cit> , and 2) a sister-group relationship between the anthropoid primates and dermoptera , thus rendering the order primates paraphyletic  <cit> . neither of these hypotheses is supported from either other molecular data or morphology  <cit> .

more extensive studies employing greater taxon sampling as well as larger amounts of nucleotide sequence data from mitochondrial rna  and/or nuclear genes  <cit>  have resulted in higher levels of congruence with earlier morphological studies, including increased support for a more basal position of xenarthra, the monophyly of rodentia, glires, and primates, a monophyletic theria, the paenungulata , tetytheria , and euarchonta .

in contrast to recent studies employing primarily nuclear dna sequences, a more recent study of whole mitochondrial genomes  <cit>  failed to retrieve many of the well-supported clades identified by nuclear gene studies. springer et al.'s  <cit>  comparison of mitochondrial and nuclear gene sequences implied that mitochondrial data are less effective at resolving relationships at deeper nodes of the mammalian tree, and in many cases mitochondrial sequences failed to recover "benchmark clades," that are well-supported by both morphology and nuclear genes. in this particular comparison, nuclear genes apparently outperformed mitochondrial genomes because they evolve at a rate appropriate for resolving more divergent relationships among major lineages of mammals.

unless mitochondrial genomes are evolving at rates where saturation becomes a problem at deeper nodes, one would expect the inclusion of analytical procedures that accommodate asymmetries observed for mtdna  <cit> , coupled with appropriate placement of the root of the eutherian tree  <cit>  and increased taxon sampling  <cit> , to result in mitochondrial phylogenies that are more congruent with the consensus reached by nuclear genes. for the most part, a consideration of these factors has improved more recent results, primarily because model-based analyses of more mitochondrial genomes were employed  <cit> . nevertheless, as with earlier studies employing whole mitochondrial genomes, reyes et al.  <cit>  excluded several regions of the genome prior to analysis with a model that accommodated multiple rates of substitution. for instance, 3rd codon positions, first positions involving leucine, and the control region are generally excluded to reduce homoplasy resulting saturation effects. the nd <dig> gene, encoded on the l-strand, is omitted because of presumed differences in constraints  relative to genes encoded on the h-strand. finally, ribosomal genes  and transfer rnas  are frequently left out, presumably because they are difficult to align.

it is our contention that exclusion of data is unnecessary if appropriate model-based analyses are employed. if fast evolving sites like 3rd codon positions can be appropriately modeled, then there is little reason for excluding them from a likelihood-based analysis. similarly, if rrnas and trnas can be reasonably well aligned with secondary structure, we see little justification for excluding these characters. in this paper we provide an analysis of whole mitochondrial genomes from  <dig> mammalian taxa and investigate relationships among major lineages of eutherians. except for the control region, which is difficult to align across highly divergent taxa, all sequences were used in an analysis employing a pseudoreplicate-generated, site-specific rate model, first proposed by kjer et al.  <cit> . our major goal is to evaluate the effectiveness of this model to negate a prior exclusion of potentially useful data, and we base our conclusions on comparison of results to more extensive studies based on a large panel of nuclear gene sequences and extensive taxon sampling.

RESULTS
the annotated nexus file consists of  <dig>  nucleotides, includes  <dig>  amino acid characters as well as additional taxa , and is available on kjer's website  <cit> . the nexus file on the website includes character set definitions  that allow the user to identify and analyze single gene partitions, codon positions, and rate classes separately, and taxon set definitions  that allow the user to evaluate relationships among specific taxa. the most likely tree from the bayesian analysis is shown in fig.  <dig>  this phylogeny reveals strong support for several major groups of eutherians including: 1) a monophyletic afrotheria, a basal clade containing proboscidea , sirenia , hyracoidea , macroscelidea , tubulidentata , afrosoricidea ; 2) a monophyletic xenarthra sister to afrotheria; 3) euarchontoglires represented by two major clades, one containing the primates , with dermoptera  nested inside, and the other containing a monophyletic glires ; 4) euarchontan order scandentia  sister to the two major groups of euarchontoglires; 5) laurasiatheria containing a paraphyletic eulipotyphyla , chiroptera , pholidota , cetartiodactyla , perrisodactyla , and carnivora; 6) a sister-group relationship between euarchontoglires and laurasiatheria. in addition to these major clades, monophyly of paenungulata , tethytheria , and cetartiodactyla  with cetaceans sister to hippo is strongly supported.

"character" refers to the number of characters in a partition. "const." is the number of constant  sites, and "inform" is the number of parsimony informative sites. "rc" is the rescaled consistency index. the next six lines are the values from the rmatrix, followed by the percentages of each of the nucleotides. "alpha" is the shape parameter from the gamma distribution, and "m" refers to the relative rates among partitions. rates increase from classes  <dig> to  <dig> 

discussion
this analysis shows that third codon positions, redundant first codon  positions, the nd <dig>  and the rna genes can be included in a combined model-based analysis without drastically contradicting the general consensus from previous molecular studies. in fact, all benchmark clades for eutherian mammals that could be compared to the list provided by springer et al.  <cit>  were retrieved in our analysis and received high support. these benchmark clades include : 1) carnivora ; 2) cetacea ; 3) cetartiodactyla ; 4) chiroptera ; 5) diprotodontia ; 6) paenungulata ; 7) perrisodactyla ; 8) rumantia ; and 9) xenarthra . the mitochondrial genome-based phylogeny shown in fig.  <dig> is congruent with previous nuclear gene studies  <cit>  in several respects. although placement of the root varies among studies  <cit> , the nuclear gene studies and our study place the groups afrotheria and xenarthra at the base of the eutherian phylogeny followed by a sister-group relationship between the monophyletic groups euarchontoglires and laurasiatheria . several other monophyletic groups appear to be well-supported and congruent between our mtdna and previous nuclear dna studies including paenungulata , cetartiodactyla , chiroptera, and glires .

although several groups are identified by both our whole mitochondrial genome analysis and nuclear genes, not all of these molecularly-defined groups are necessarily congruent with morphological data. for instance, some morphological studies support a monophyletic archonta containing the euarchontans as well as chiroptera  <cit> , and although a relationship between the orders artiodactyla and cetacea has support from morphology, a sister-group relationship between cetacea and the family hippopotamidae  denoted by both nuclear genes and mitochondrial genomes  <cit>  is supported by some  <cit>  but not all morphological analyses  <cit> . some earlier morphological comparisons  <cit> , but none of the molecular data, support volitantia, a group containing chiroptera and dermoptera. more recent molecular studies, including the one presented here, have indicated paraphyly for the chiropteran suborder microchiroptera with the family rhinolophidae grouping closer to the megachiroptera, a clade containing non-echolocating taxa  <cit> , and this is not corroborated by morphological data.

our phylogenetic results are similar to those presented by reyes et al.  <cit> , which was based on a gtr+i+g bayesian analysis that excluded rnas, nd <dig>  and redundant codon positions. gibson et al.  <cit>  also showed that there were lineage and gene specific biases of c and t compositions, and performed an analysis with a model that reduced the character complexity of these nucleotides to y, creating a three-state model. while gibson et al.  <cit>  included rnas, they also excluded third codon positions and the nd <dig>  resulting in a dataset of  <dig>  sites. while we agree with the corrections proposed by both gibson et al.  <cit>  and reyes et al.  <cit>  in reducing the influence of homoplastic and biased characters, our approach differed in including a site specific rate model that rendered noisy sites less influential at deeper nodes, while retaining them as characters toward the tips of the tree. our matrix is nearly twice the size of the largest previous analyses. in performing the pseudoreplicate reweighting, the noisiest sites are presumably identified and accommodated in a model. many different partitions, including those that were excluded by others, can be explored by downloading the nexus file and including specific "charsets" such as the nd <dig>  for example, a parsimony analysis of the nd <dig> gene results in the recovery of therians, metatherians, eutherians, anthropoid primates , whales, and carnivores, among other groups . clearly, the nd <dig> contains some non-random signal, including 26% of its  <dig> nucleotides in rate class  <dig> .

the trees in our analysis of the combined data differ from others in the placement of xenarthra; ours with afrotheria , supporting a northern-southern hemisphere split, and gibson et al.  <cit>  and reyes et al.  <cit>  with euarchontoglires. note, both this analysis and the analysis of gibson et al.  <cit>  compensate for the large number of homoplastic c-t transitions but in different ways. kriegs et al.  <cit> , using retrotransposed elements , supported xenarthra as the sister taxon of the rest of eutheria. while we agree that the two retrotransposed elements supporting this relationship are exceedingly strong characters, we prefer to consider the independent loss of these in the sloth and the armadillo as "possible but unlikely." the rest of kriegs et al.'s  <cit>  conclusions are supported by our analysis. the placement of manis  also differs between this hypothesis and gibson et al.  <cit>  and reyes et al  <cit> . although we show 100% posterior probability for our hypothesis, we also note the exceedingly short branch length of the internode placing manis as the sister taxon to )). lewis et al.  <cit>  describe conditions under which bayesian posterior probabilities may be inflated, and we have not corrected for potentially inflated support for our placement of both manis and xenartha. the placement of xenarthra with afrotheria and the position of manis in our phylogenetic hypothesis are congruent with hudelot et al.  <cit> , who used a 7-state doublet model to accommodate paired rna sites. similarities between this study and hudelot et al  <cit>  could be attributed to the inclusion of rnas in both studies, while differences are more likely due to differences between models.

finally, the mitochondrial genome data, even after inclusion of all sequences and a model that incorporates multiple rate classes, reveal several anomalies that are not congruent with recent nuclear gene phylogenies. some particular anomalies appear to be inherent to all mitogenomic analyses  <cit> , regardless of either taxon sampling or the phylogenetic methods employed. rather than a monophyletic primates, as revealed by nuclear genes, our analyses as well as previous mitochondrial phylogenies indicate a paraphyletic primates with the order dermoptera  sister to anthropoid primates  to the exclusion of the other primate lineages such as tarsiers and prosimians . monophyly of the insectivore group eulipotyphla, containing the families erinaceidae, soricidae, and talpidae, is supported by nuclear gene phylogenies  <cit>  but not by mitochondrial data, which in our case indicates eulipotyphlan diphyly with the erinaceidae  at the base of the laurasiatheria clade. the order scandentia  is generally considered sister to either dermoptera or primates based on recent molecular and morphological data  <cit> , whereas mitogenomic analyses place scandentians at the base of euarchontoglires. additionally, mitochondrial data support a monophyletic tethytheria , whereas the more recent nuclear studies  <cit>  do not, and although recent molecular data  <cit>  place marsupial moles  as part of a monophyletic group  confined to australia, our analysis places them basal to other lineages of metatheria.

persistent incongruence between mitochondrial and nuclear gene phylogenies relative to the placement of some mammalian lineages may have more than one explanation. long-branch attraction is often used as an explanation for misplacement of taxa  <cit> , and many of the ambiguous placements involve lineages with longer branches . as indicated by bergsten  <cit> , outgroups can often influence placement of ingroup taxa, which may be the case for the position of the marsupial mole. increased taxon sampling and the incorporation of maximum likelihood models for mitogenomic analyses  <cit>  did remove the erinaceidae from a basal position in the placental phylogeny to one associated with the laurasiatheria. nevertheless, these modifications do not result in a monophyletic eulipotyphla, as suggested by nuclear genes. in the case of the placement of dermoptera, there is no apparent reason to consider this as the result of either long branches or branch support from character partitions in the higher rate classes. schmitz et al.  <cit>  suggested an association between demopteran and anthropoid primate mitochondrial sequences being the result of similarities in nucleotide and amino acid composition. however, hudelot et al.  <cit>  recovered a monophyletic primates with their doublet model, with the flying lemur as its sister taxon, despite similarities in nucleotide composition at third positions between the flying lemur and anthropoidea. finally, if these areas of incongruence are the result of similarities in base composition, covariotide/covarion effects, or some other source of heterogeneity  <cit> , it may very well be that no existing model adequately corrects for all anomalies observed for the mammalian mitochondrial genome.

CONCLUSIONS
although some incongruence still remains between phylogenies derived from mitochondrial and nuclear sequences, our results indicate that the exclusion of data is not necessary for an effective reconstruction of eutherian relationships . rather, selection of an appropriate model that accommodates rate heterogeneity across data partitions and proper treatment of rna genes can yield information highly congruent with more extensive nuclear sequences, even when addressing the deepest nodes of the eutherian phylogeny. and while we are using "expected" clades to support our conclusions, we note that we are not using phylogenetic expectations as a rationale to exclude data, as is often the case, but rather to retain data. arguments to retain data should be met with a lower burden of proof than arguments to exclude data.

