BACKGROUND
discovery of molecular markers has facilitated mapping of both qualitative and quantitative traits. tightly linked molecular markers facilitate  isolation of the genes encoding these traits and  selection of genotypes carrying the desirable alleles. several molecular marker technologies such as, rflp, rapd, daf, ssr, sslp, aflp, caps, snp have been discovered for molecular mapping experiments  <cit> . fingerprinting of genotypes for restriction fragment length polymorphisms  has been regarded as the most sensitive method of genotyping. this procedure, however, requires a large quantity of genomic dna and use of radioactive probes. in the random amplified polymorphic dna  marker technology, multiple random loci of the genomes are pcr amplified with a single,  <dig> nucleotide long primer of arbitrary sequence  <cit> . in dna amplification fingerprinting , many loci are pcr amplified with the aid of a single, short arbitrary primer, as short as 5-nucleotides long  <cit> . simple sequence repeat  markers, also known as microsatellite markers, utilize the variation for tandem repeats such as n repeats observed between genotypes  <cit> . simple sequence length polymorphism  markers, similar to ssr markers, are designed based on a unique segment of genomic dna sequence that contains a simple tandem repeat that distinguishes the genotypes. in arabidopsis, sslps are largely based on the n repeats  <cit> . cleaved amplified polymorphic sequences  markers are designed based on restriction fragment length polymorphisms of pcr amplified fragments, when sequence information of one of the haplotypes is unknown  <cit> .

the high-throughput amplified fragment length polymorphism  marker technology combines principles of rflp and random pcr amplification for rapid identification of molecular loci of the entire genome  <cit> . aflp technology is particularly suitable for developing high density molecular marker maps, essential for both map-based cloning of genes and the isolation of molecular markers for selecting desirable genotypes in breeding programs. aflp technology identifies molecular markers based on a fraction of the restriction fragment length polymorphisms between two genotypes. restriction site associated dna  marker technology, on the other hand, generates markers for all polymorphic sites of a restriction endonuclease between two genotypes; and thus, it is a very sensitive marker technology for developing a high density molecular map  <cit> .

polymorphisms detected by various marker technologies have been used to generate molecular marker maps of those species that do not have any genome sequences and physical maps. since assembled genome sequence of many species are available, and the cost of sequencing has declined significantly with advent of the next generation sequencing technologies, single nucleotide polymorphism  is becoming the most popular molecular marker  <cit> . however, snp assays are not always simple or flexible. here, a strategy of using snps for rapid generation of molecular markers, termed sequence based polymorphic  marker technology, is described.

the assembled arabidopsis thaliana genome sequence is selected for this study  <cit> . many of the ecotypes of this species are available and have been used in mapping experiments to conduct genetic and biological studies. snps among some of the accessions or ecotypes of this model plant species are available . niederzenz- <dig> , used for mapping the phytophthora sojae susceptible  mutants that are infected by the soybean pathogen, p. sojae , was selected for this study. the pss mutants were created in the pen1- <dig> mutant of the ecotype, columbia- <dig> . to facilitate mapping of the putative pss gene loci conferring nonhost resistance of arabidopsis against p. sojae, sbp markers were developed as follows. seventy-five nucleotide long sequencing reads obtained by conducting solexa sequencing of the nd- <dig> genome were compared to col- <dig> sequences to identify the snps, which were subsequently converted to sbp markers if either of the ecotypes was cut by at least one restriction endonuclease at the snp sites. by applying this technology,  <dig> co-dominant sbp markers were generated for the marker-poor regions of the arabidopsis genome. this novel sbp marker technology should be applicable to any higher eukaryotic species with assembled genome sequences for rapid development of high density molecular marker maps for map-based cloning of genes or identification of suitable molecular markers for selection of desirable genotypes in breeding programs.

RESULTS
generation of a global molecular map for the polymorphic loci of the arabidopsis thaliana ecotypes, col- <dig> and nd-0
arabidopsis is a nonhost for the soybean pathogen, phytophthora sojae. several putative p. sojae susceptible  arabidopsis mutants that are infected by this oomycete pathogen were identified . in order to map the putative pss genes that confer nonhost resistance of arabidopsis against the soybean pathogen, p. sojae, a global map of the sslp and caps markers that are polymorphic between ecotypes, col- <dig> and nd- <dig> was generated. a group of  <dig> simple sequence length polymorphism  markers  that mapped evenly throughout the entire genome was investigated for polymorphisms. of these,  <dig> sslps were polymorphic between the two ecotypes. a group of  <dig> cleaved amplified polymorphic sequences  markers also were investigated for polymorphisms between the two ecotypes . of these,  <dig> were polymorphic between the two ecotypes. the map positions of all  <dig> polymorphic sslp and caps markers are presented in additional file  <dig>  phenotypes of these markers are presented in additional file  <dig> 

restriction endonucleases used for generating individual caps markers are shown. f, forward primer; r, reverse primer.

generation of sbp markers for saturating a global genome map in arabidopsis thaliana
the global genome map of sslp and caps was marker poor in some genomic regions . in order to fill out some of the marker poor regions, single nucleotide polymorphism -based molecular markers were generated as follows. first, the nd- <dig> genome was sequenced in an illumina/solexa genome analyzer ii  at the dna facility, iowa state university. three genome equivalents of nd- <dig> sequence in  <dig> bp reads then were analyzed to discover snps  between col- <dig> and nd- <dig> by conducting reference guided sequence analysis for all five chromosomes with the aid of the shore program  <cit> .

one can also identify candidate snps  for targeted genomic regions by comparing nd- <dig> query sequence with col- <dig> sequence in batches of ~ <dig> kb . this was achieved by aligning the two sequences using blast  program at the ncbi website . in solexa sequencing, many sequencing reads could be originated from pcr products of a single dna molecule . snps originating from  <dig> bp reads of single pcr molecules are less reliable, because some of such single nucleotide polymorphisms may be generated from pcr-based mutations. this limitation was overcome by selecting those snps that originated from at least two staggered  <dig> bp sequence reads . staggered reads are considered to originate from independent dna molecules. thus, snps observed in at least two overlapping reads with staggered ends are considered most likely authentic and selected for the next step. in parallel, to eliminate any possible snps originating from sequencing errors in the publicly available col- <dig> sequence, the snps containing single copy col- <dig> sequences were investigated for possible 100% nucleotide matches with  expressed sequence tags  or  genomic sequences of at least two bacs  in genbank. the col- <dig> sequences that met one of these criteria were considered further for sbp marker development. use of the above two criteria in selecting snp-containing sequences increased the chance of sbp marker identification. high quality snps identified through shore analysis could be directly applied for developing sbp markers, if genomes are sequenced to higher depth .

in the last step of the sbp marker development, snps were converted to possible restriction endonuclease site-specific polymorphisms between the col- <dig> and nd- <dig> haplotypes by analyzing restriction enzyme digestion patterns of the selected nd- <dig> and col- <dig> sequences using a suitable program . pcr amplicons of approximately  <dig> nucleotides and that contained variations for restriction endonuclease sites between col- <dig> and nd- <dig> ecotypes were considered as putative sbp markers. finally, primers for pcr amplification were designed in such a way that one can easily distinguish the haplotype-specific restriction enzyme length polymorphisms following separation of the restriction enzyme digested pcr products on a 4%  agarose gel. following this protocol,  <dig> sbp markers for some of the marker poor regions of the arabidopsis genome were identified .

ch.
restriction endonucleases used for generating individual sbp markers are shown. f, forward primer; r, reverse primer; c, col-0; n, nd- <dig> 

discussion
the use of molecular markers has gained importance in genetic studies particularly for map based cloning of genes  <cit> . the relatively low cost of sequencing a genome, with the emergence of high throughput sequencing technology, has facilitated genome wide polymorphism studies  <cit> . the sbp marker technology can convert most of the single nucleotide polymorphisms to molecular markers for any genomic regions. sbp markers developed based on sequence information are ideal for those species, whose genomes are sequenced and assembled. reference genome sequence can be utilized to develop sbp markers for a specific genomic region with known physical location. thus, marker-poor regions can be enriched with sbp markers. in this study, the applicability of the sbp marker technology for generating markers is shown for improving a genetic map that represents polymorphisms between two arabidopsis ecotypes, col- <dig> and nd- <dig> . sbp markers were generated from just three genome equivalents nd- <dig> genome sequence of  <dig> bp solexa reads. the method also has been successfully applied in developing a high density molecular map of the pss <dig> gene that confers nonhost resistance against the soybean pathogens, phytophthora sojae and fusarium virguliforme .

the shore program used in this study is highly powerful and has been employed successfully in identification of a mutation through analysis of deep sequence data of a bulk of  <dig> mutant f <dig> progenies  <cit> . if the genome sequencing is not conducted to a higher depth , snps identified through shore analyses can be verified by conducting blast analyses. staggered solexa sequence reads  containing snps are considered for generating sbp markers for such a scenario. similarly, candidate snp containing regions of the reference genome should be supported by multiple sequences, such as transcript sequences and/or sequences from more than one bac clone to avoid any possible sequencing errors .

if none of the haplotypes of interest are sequenced, then reference genome sequence should be used to define the snp maps of individual haplotypes by running the shore program. the snp maps then can be compared to determine the snps between the haplotypes of interest. once the candidate snps are identified, small pcr amplicons of ~  <dig> bp can be amplified and digested with suitable restriction endonuceases to release the restriction length polymorphisms. a significant proportion of the snps could be unusable in sbp marker development because they may not be digested with restriction endonucleases in a haplotype- or genotype-specific manner. in such a case, one can apply derived caps  technology to improve the efficiency of sbp marker development  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
a new molecular marker technology, based on genome sequence and physical map locations, is reported for those species whose assembled genome sequences are available. the technology was applied in identifying  <dig> sbp markers for some of the marker-poor genomic regions of the arabidopsis molecular marker map that represent polymorphisms between ecotypes, col- <dig> and nd- <dig> . the sbp marker technology should be applicable to any genomic regions and will facilitate  map-based cloning genes as well as  the development of tightly linked molecular markers for selecting desirable genotypes in animal and plant breeding experiments.

ease in sbp marker development and application to any genomic regions, and genome-wide abundance of snps make this technology suitable for mapping experiments, especially to develop high density molecular maps for positional gene cloning experiments, if the assembled genome sequence and physical maps of the studied species are available. innumerable sbp markers can be developed rapidly for a genomic region containing a target gene in a map-based cloning experiment. co-dominant gel-based sbp markers are ideal to identify genetic recombination events between two loci. such pcr-based markers can be used to screen a large number of segregants to identify informative recombinants of the target gene region. these recombinants will then facilitate the development of high resolution maps of a large number of sbp markers, essential for cloning genes based on their map position. thus, high-throughput deep sequencing, together with sbp markers, should expedite map-based cloning in higher eukaryotes.

