BACKGROUND
understanding the mode of action of antitumor drugs is considered an absolute prerequisite for the advancement on the design of new drugs. it is generally believed that antitumor activity is mediated by the capacity of certain drugs to induce dna damage and trigger apoptosis. however, there are many indications that this mechanism, whatever relevant may it be, does not account for all therapeutic effects of some antitumor drugs  <cit> .

the anthracycline antibiotic daunorubicin is widely used in cancer chemotherapy  <cit> . it accumulates in the nuclei of living cells and intercalates into dna quantitatively  <cit> , a property associated to some of the most relevant effects of the drug: inhibition of dna replication and gene transcription  <cit> , displacement of protein factors from the transcription complex  <cit>  and topoisomerase ii poisoning  <cit> . daunorubicin has the property of arresting cell growth at drug concentrations not sufficient for promoting noticeable dna damage, and through mechanisms that differ from the apoptotic pathway  <cit> . these findings impelled to define new mechanisms of daunorubicin antiproliferative activity at clinically relevant concentrations.

daunorubicin shows remarkable sequence specificity for 5'-wcg-3' dna tracts  <cit> . this property has led to the suggestion that daunorubicin may compete with transcription factors with overlapping recognition sites for binding to dna. this model would explain several effects of daunorubicin, such as inhibition of rna polymerase ii  <cit>  and the suppression of the co-ordinate initiation of dna replication in xenopus oocyte extracts  <cit> .

to test the capacity of daunorubicin to displace key transcription factors from their binding sites in chromatin in vivo, and, therefore, to inhibit their action  <cit> , we used the yeast saccharomyces cerevisiae as a model. in a previous work  <cit> , we showed that yeast strains deficient in ergosterol synthesis  are particularly sensitive to daunorubicin, overcoming one of the main setbacks to the use of yeast in pharmacological studies, which is their resistance to many anti-tumour drugs  <cit> .

we demonstrated that daunorubicin treatment in Δerg <dig> cells precluded activation of several genes required for galactose utilization  and, consequently, treated cells were unable to growth in galactose. this effect was related to the presence of cpg steps in the cognate dna binding sequence of gal4p, the key transcription factor for activation of gal genes  <cit> . the present work aims to extend this type of analysis to the totality of the yeast genome, in order to assess the generality of this model.

RESULTS
effects of daunorubicin on the yeast transcriptome
the effects of daunorubicin on the yeast transcriptome were studied after  <dig> h and  <dig> h of treatment . the results indicate a general inhibitory effect of daunorubicin at both time points, as down regulated genes predominate over up regulated ones, and this trend was especially significant when considering genes whose expression changed by more than four-fold . multi-array analysis of the expression changes in the whole dataset confirmed these trends. anova analysis of normalized data showed statistically significant differences in expression upon daunorubicin treatment for  <dig> genes  at least in one of the time points analysed. affected genes were grouped in four clusters by a self-organising maps  algorithm, according to their differential expression at the three time points analysed . clusters a to c  corresponded to genes whose transcription decreased upon daunorubicin treatment, whereas all genes that became activated by the treatment  were grouped in cluster d. genes in clusters c and d showed very little or no difference in expression between one and four hours of treatment , whereas genes in cluster a were the only ones in which the effect  after four hours of treatment was significantly stronger than the observed after one hour . cluster b, consisting only in three genes, was the only one in which the effect was stronger at one hour than at four hours. our data thus indicated that most daunorubicin-related changes in gene expression were already significant after only one hour of treatment and that these effects either increased or remained stable after four hours for essentially all analysed genes.

gene ontology  analysis of genes activated and repressed by daunorubicin treatment showed a very different distribution of go categories for both groups. up-regulated genes fell into three main functional categories: genes related to ribosome assembly and metabolism, ty transposition, and proteolytic processes . whereas the two last categories may indicate a certain level of stress, up regulation of ribosome assembling-related genes usually correlates with a positive effect in cell growth. in contrast, go analysis of genes down regulated by daunorubicin showed a general decrease of energy-producing metabolism, including genes involved in fermentation and in the tricarboxylic acid cycle. a significant proportion of down-regulated genes appeared involved in the metabolism of nitrogen compounds, including amino acids . the dissociation between expression of ribosomal and glycolytic genes upon daunorubicin treatment can be observed in figure  <dig>  which shows up-regulation of most ribosomal protein genes and down-regulation of sugar and alcohol-metabolism related genes at one and four hours of daunorubicin treatment. figure  <dig> shows a scheme of the glycolytic pathway, highlighting genes down regulated by daunorubicin. these genes codify the enzymes responsible for no less than  <dig> consecutive steps of the pathway. therefore, the data suggests that the fermentation capacity should be depressed in daunorubicin-treated yeast cells.

the effects of daunorubicin treatment in gene expression of  <dig> selected genes were validated by qrt-pcr . the results, presented as ratios between treated and untreated cells at  <dig> h and  <dig> h of treatment, include data from up to  <dig> biological replicates, showed a general good agreement with microarray data. most  sugar and alcohol-metabolism related genes showed a  <dig> to  <dig> fold decrease on expression of after  <dig> h of treatment, a behaviour comparable to the one observed in the microarray analysis. similarly, two out of the three amino acid metabolism genes analysed showed a  <dig> to  <dig> fold decrease on expression. in contrast, a small, but significant, increase on the expression of the ribosomal protein genes rps28a was also observed, also in agreement with the general trend observed for ribosomal-protein genes in the microarray data. we added to this analysis the heat-shock protein hsp <dig>  as a representative of a small group of hsp genes  with appeared down regulated by daunorubicin in the microarray analysis . these results were corroborated by qrt-pcr quantitation, which showed 8-fold reduction of hsp <dig> transcription after four hours of daunorubicin treatment . these results confirmed the general decrease in genes related with glucose utilisation while transcription of ribosomal protein gene was either not affected or slightly increased.

a) data expressed as dual logarithmic values of expression ratios, treated versus untreated. corrected by rpo <dig> expression.

b) student's t-test, time  <dig> versus time  <dig> h ratios

identification of transcription factors associated to daunorubicin-repressed genes
transcription factors reported to bind to the promoters of daunorubicin-repressed genes were identified using the on-line bioinformatics tools available at the yeastract web page . from the  <dig> transcription factors included in the yeastract database,  <dig> of them were found to bind to daunorubicin-repressed gene promoters in a significantly higher proportion than expected only by chance . the table indicates the total number of genes associated to each transcription factor present in the whole dataset , the number of these genes showing down-regulation by daunorubicin, the expected number by a random distribution  and the "enrichment factor", that is, the ratio between observed and expected absolute frequencies for each factor.

a) number of genes associated to each factor, following yeastract. only genes used in the microarray analysis  were considered.

some of these factors  are intimately related to stress response, whereas others, such as gcr2p, adr1p, mig1p and rgt1p, are associated to carbohydrate and alcohol metabolism. in addition, gcn4p and met4p are known regulators of amino acids biosynthetic pathways. in this regard, the transcription factor list recapitulates the functional distribution of daunorubicin down regulated genes in table  <dig>  fourteen transcription factors showed enrichment factors over  <dig> fold, indicating that their associated genes were found in the daunorubicin down regulated dataset at  <dig> to  <dig> times higher frequencies than expected . many of these factors are known regulators of glycolytic genes, such as rgt1p, mig1p, gcr2p or adr1p; therefore, their inclusion in the list may merely reflect the general decrease of transcription of the regulated genes. in addition, this list includes a strikingly high proportion  of transcription factors encompassing cpg steps in their dna binding sites, irrespectively their relationship with the glycolytic pathway. this observation is consistent with a preferential effect of daunorubicin on the expression of genes regulated by transcription factors with cpg steps in their dna recognition sequences, in keeping with previous results  <cit> . this specific inhibition of transcriptional activation by daunorubicin suggests that it may compete with some transcription factors for dna binding in cpg-reach sequences in gene promoters.

a) hypergeometric distribution with bonferroni correction

correlation of daunorubicin effects and deletions of transcription factor genes
a direct prediction of the dna-binding competition model for daunorubicin action is that its presence in the cell should produce a phenocopy of genetic deletion of these factors  <cit> , or their partial depletion  <cit> . to test this prediction, we compared the effects of daunorubicin shown here with a large dataset of null deletions of  <dig> transcription factors, many of them coincident with the set in table  <dig> <cit> . table  <dig> shows the correlation between microarray data from six deletion strains  <cit>  and the corresponding figures from the  <dig> h daunorubicin-treatment dataset. for these calculations, ratios between deleted and wild type strains were compared to  <dig> h to  <dig> h ratios, only for those genes that showed significant variations in expression  due to daunorubicin treatment. the six strains shown in table  <dig> are the only ones in the dataset  <cit>  showing positive and significant correlation  with daunorubicin-treatment data. the best correlation values corresponded to three strains deleted for factors adr1p, cst6p and sok2p; graphs in figure  <dig> show expression ratios for these three strains plotted against the corresponding values from daunorubicin treatment. these plots strongly suggest that at least part of the changes in transcription ratios induced by daunorubicin may be due to competition of the drug with these and other transcription factors for binding to consensus dna sequences.

a) only genes significantly altered by daunorubicin treatment were considered .

discussion
the yeast saccharomyces cerevisiae is a favourite tool for testing drugs that interact and/or modify gene regulation, since it shares many common regulatory mechanisms with vertebrates, ranging from cell cycle to transcriptional regulation  <cit> . in a previous paper  <cit> , we showed that daunorubicin specifically inhibited genes required for galactose utilisation, a phenotype we proposed linked to the presence of cpg steps in the recognition sequence of the main regulator for these genes, gal4p. here we extended these studies to the whole yeast transcriptome, in conditions of mild inhibition of cell growth.

daunorubicin treatment affected transcription of a relative small proportion of genes. we chose a relatively mild treatment, slightly under the ic <dig>  in order to minimise general toxic effects in cell membranes and widespread dna damage. a conclusion from our analysis is the selective repression by daunorubicin of genes involved in the glycolytic pathway, whereas other genes involved in growth, like ribosomal protein genes, were either not affected or slightly activated. this pattern is very rarely observed in yeast, as glucose utilisation is required for fast growth. figure  <dig> shows ratios of expression changes for  <dig> glycolysis-related genes  and  <dig> ribosomal protein genes  in  <dig> stress conditions, including dna damage , oxidative and osmotic stress, amino acid and nitrogen starvation, entering in stationary phase, and temperature shifts . the graph shows both the ratio between both sets of genes and p-values associated to their differential response to each stress. low p-values  correspond to data sets in which the response of both sets of genes showed little or no overlap, whereas high p-values  implicate that both sets of genes responded similarly to that specific stress condition. the graph shows that ribosomal protein genes are preferentially inhibited in many stress conditions compared to glycolysis-related genes , whereas daunorubicin treatment datasets  differentiate clearly from the rest by specifically depressing glycolytic gene transcription without a parallel decrease of ribosomal synthesis . we concluded that daunorubicin effects couldn't be ascribed to any of the tested stresses, including dna damage and oxidative stress. this conclusion is further supported by the fact that many stress-related genes, like hsps, were down regulated, rather than up regulated upon daunorubicin treatment.

a) data from reference  <cit> 

b) data from reference  <cit> 

inspection of promoters of daunorubicin-inhibited genes showed that they present a significant high proportion of dna binding sites for a defined subset of transcription factors, most of them related to sugar metabolism. these data have to be interpreted not necessarily as an indication of direct interaction of the drug with these transcription factors, but only as a hint of the regulatory networks, or regulons, particularly affected by the drug. due to the complexity of eukaryotic promoters, several factors may appear in any particular affected promoter, although the putative direct effect of the drug may affect to only one or two of them. a particularly relevant example is mig1p, a transcriptional repressor central in the catabolite repression by glucose and that binds to many glycolytic gene promoters  <cit> . therefore, it appears on the lists of transcription factors preferentially associated to daunorubicin-inhibited genes , although the hypothetical suppression of its binding to dna would result in activation, rather than inhibition, of the affected gene. this is the most reasonable explanation by the appearance in these lists of some transcription factors that do not encompass daunorubicin-preferred sites in their recognition sequences .

data mining identified several microarray datasets with patterns resembling to the ones observed in daunorubicin-treated cells. best correlations were observed for strains deleted for some glucose-related transcription factor genes, especially adr <dig>  cst <dig> and sok <dig>  deletion of these genes results in a general decrease on transcription of glycolytic genes with relatively mild effects on transcription of genes related to cell growth, like ribosomal protein genes -exactly the pattern observed in daunorubicin-treated cells. two of these three factors  were identified as preferentially associated to genes down regulated by daunorubicin . this list also includes a high proportion of factors whose dna recognition sequences include cpg steps, the preferred binding site for daunorubicin  <cit> . therefore, we concluded that daunorubicin inhibition of yeast growth might be mediated by its interaction with dna at sequences also recognized by some transcription factors, resulting in a transcriptional repression of glycolytic genes, among others. these results corroborate the interest in using yeast mutants as an in vivo system to identify the determinants of chemosensitivity  <cit> .

the amazing conservation of regulatory elements among opisthokonta  allows identification of pathways and transcription factors common to yeast and humans. for example, cst6p is a basic leucine zipper transcription factor of the atf/creb family, which includes bona fide orthologues in mammals, not only in functional terms , but also by their binding to identical dna sequences, 5'-tgacgtca-3'  <cit> . this sequence includes a high affinity site for daunorubicin, providing an explanation for several of the effects observed in this work. sok2p is also known to participate in the camp regulatory pathway  <cit> , and, therefore, many camp-regulated promoters encompass binding sites for both factors. this circumstance provides a good explanation for the good correlation between the changes in gene expression due to the deletion of the corresponding gene and those observed upon daunorubicin treatment, although the dna recognition sequence for sok2p  does not include high affinity sites for daunorubicin. therefore, our data suggest that daunorubicin may target the camp signalling pathway of yeast, inhibiting expression of many regulated genes and particularly those under control of cst6p, ant that may be explained by binding of the drug to the cst6p dna recognition site. the question of whether daunorubicin may have similar effects in the camp-mediated regulation of proliferation of mammalian cells is still open.

extrapolation of these results to tumour cells can be undertaken at several levels. first, as a general model, they demonstrate that dna-intercalating drugs can block cell growth by selectively reducing the efficiency of different transcription factors. if these factors are required for cell growth, this would prevent tumour propagation at effective concentration of the drug much below the ones required for the massive dna damage required to trigger apoptosis  <cit> . in addition, the specific effects of daunorubicin on the glycolysis pathway may be relevant to its antitumor effect. one of the most outstanding alterations in cancer cells is their dependence on glycolytic pathways for the generation of atp  <cit> , and there is compelling evidence that mitochondrial defects in tumour cells under hypoxia are remarkably sensitive to glycolysis inhibition  <cit> . besides, it has been recently reported that some inhibitors of glucose uptake sensitize tumour cells to daunorubicin  <cit> . our data would suggest that daunorubicin might work not only as a dna-damaging agent but also as an inhibitor of glycolytic pathways, a combined effect that might have broad therapeutic implications against cancer cells growing under hypoxic conditions.

CONCLUSIONS
the yeast saccharomyces cerevisiae is a powerful tool for the study the effects of drugs on eukaryotic cells. we showed that the antitumor drug daunorubicin alters transcription of some very specific subsets of genes, in a pattern in which sugar- metabolising pathways become down-regulated whereas proliferation-related genes, like ribosomal protein genes, are unaffected or even activated. this pattern is very similar to the one observed in yeast strains deleted for some transcription factors related to the regulation of the glycolytic pathway, like adr1p, cst6p and sok2p. this results are consistent with the hypothesis that daunorubicin impairs binding of different transcription factors by competing for their dna binding sequences, therefore limiting their effectiveness and affecting the corresponding regulatory networks. this proposed mechanism might have broad therapeutic implications in cancer therapeutics.

