BACKGROUND
amplification of double-stranded dna occurs exponentially during the early stages of symmetric pcr, but eventually slows down and plateaus due to negative feedback between the double-stranded products and the taq polymerase  <cit> . the plateau value of symmetric pcr is unsuitable for endpoint analysis of starting target numbers because subtle differences in reaction components, thermal cycling conditions, and early mispriming events cause individual replicate samples to exit exponential amplification at slightly different times. as a result, amplicon yield at the end of a symmetric pcr amplification varies significantly among replicates and the amount of accumulated amplicon at plateau does not reflect the amount of dna present in the initial sample  <cit> . the coefficient of variation in amplicon yield among replicates can be as much as  <dig> %  <cit> .

to overcome these limitations of endpoint analysis, real-time pcr uses a variety of detection chemistries  to measure the amount of each amplicon accumulating during the exponential phase of the reaction  <cit> . the thermal cycle in which a fluorescent signal is first observed above background is called the threshold cycle, or ct value, and is inversely proportional to the initial amount of starting templates in the reaction. initial target numbers present in unknown samples are either measured relative to the ct values of known target amount standards analyzed in parallel under equivalent conditions or are measured relative to themselves in sets of replicates  <cit> .

while symmetric pcr assays are quantitatively valid for measuring initial sample copy numbers over seven to eight log orders of magnitude  <cit> , the reliability of individual assays makes it difficult to quantify copy number differences on the order of one to three  <cit> . however, such small changes in copy number are important because they are characteristic of aneuploidies seen in utero, of cancer progression , and of many other pathological conditions  <cit> . many groups have attempted to remedy this limitation of real-time symmetric pcr by including internal or external reference targets of known copy number , followed by normalization of the end product amounts using the ratio of test and reference signals  <cit> . these strategies require extensive reaction optimization to guarantee that test and control targets amplify with similar efficiencies. in the case of competitive pcr, it is also necessary that the target and the reference control samples are similar in abundance. an alternative approach is to assay repeatedly the same sample enough times to establish a statistically reliable mean copy number for the starting material  <cit> . this approach is costly and assumes an abundance of sample.

in the present report, linear-after-the-exponential  pcr is used to generate single-stranded amplicons  <cit> , and mismatch-tolerant probes are used to measure the levels of allelic variants among these amplicons via hybridization at an upper and a lower temperature at the end of pcr amplification. the resulting two-temperature late-pcr method significantly reduces the quantitative endpoint uncertainties inherent to symmetric pcr and does not require an external reference sequence for normalization. an oligonucleotide probe labelled with a single fluorophore can thereby readily distinguish between homozygous and heterozygous diploid genomes  based on the fluorescent signal intensity at the end of the assay. the assay also distinguishes heterozygous samples from samples where one of the assayed alleles has undergone a duplication or loss.

this paper demonstrates the utility of the two-temperature late-pcr endpoint assay by analyzing genomes that are either homozygous or heterozygous for the normal and mutant version of the g <dig> allele of the human hexosaminidase a , a single g-to-a point-mutation responsible for tay-sachs disease . tay-sachs disease is a devastating neurodegenerative disorder that occurs early in childhood due to accumulation of gm <dig> gangliosides in neurons as a result of hexa protein deficiency  <cit> . we also demonstrate the general use of two-temperature late-pcr endpoint assays by genotyping two single nucleotide polymorphisms  near the human p <dig> tumor suppressor gene. finally, we illustrate the ability of two-temperature late-pcr endpoint genotyping to identify allele ratios similar to those that arise from chromosomal duplications, discuss the improved multiplex detection capacity of the assay, and consider several applications of these technologies for mutation scanning and detection of chromosome trisomy or dna deletions.

RESULTS
the limitations of symmetric pcr
theoretically, homozygous samples with two identical alleles amplified by real-time symmetric pcr should consistently generate allele-specific probe signals that are one cycle earlier and twice as bright as probe signals from heterozygous samples with only one copy of the same allele, provided that both genotypes are used in equivalent amounts at the start of the reaction. in practice, this is not the case due to the inherent variability in amplicon yield at the plateau phase typical of symmetric pcr  <cit> . figure 1a illustrates this problem by comparing the amplification plots of replicate sets of genomic dna samples homozygous for the human wild-type hexa gene  against replicate sets of genomic dna samples heterozygous for the tsd Δ <dig> hexa allele  using symmetric pcr. a molecular beacon against the normal hexa allele was used to monitor both sets of reactions. this hybridization probe is very specific for the normal hexa allele because the tsd Δ <dig> hexa allele is comprised of a four-nucleotide insertion  <cit> . figure 1b demonstrates that the means values for the plateau levels of fluorescent signal intensities observed in the sets of homozygous and heterozygous samples in figure 1a are, in fact, statistically different  =  <dig> +/- 240; vs. heterozygous mean rfu =  <dig> +/- 133; p <  <dig>  for n =  <dig> samples). however, the high coefficient of variation  for the replicate reactions in each set  makes it impossible to reliably genotype individual samples in each set by means of probe fluorescent intensity at plateau. reliable genotyping via symmetric pcr therefore requires the use of two differently-colored sequence-specific probes, one for each allele  <cit> . our goal was to develop a reliable endpoint genotyping method where the fluorescent intensity of a single-hybridization probe would reflect genome composition.

the limitation of late-pcr assays
late-pcr is a form of asymmetric pcr that uses a limiting primer and an excess primer that differ 10– <dig> fold in their relative concentrations. late-pcr further stipulates that the concentration-adjusted melting temperature of the limiting primer, tml and the excess primer, tmx, must abide by the rule tml - tmx ≥ 0°c  <cit> . these primer design criteria make the exponential phase of late-pcr as efficient as that of conventional symmetric pcr. but, late-pcr assays enter linear amplification soon after they reach their ct values rather than continuing exponentially to the plateau phase along a stochastically determined path. thus, while small differences exist among replicate late-pcr assays shortly after ct, these differences are amplified linearly rather than exponentially as the reaction progresses. in addition, probe-target hybridization in late-pcr takes place at temperatures well below the extension temperature of the reaction, thereby significantly reducing background fluorescence due to primer-dependent probe degradation early during late-pcr amplification  <cit> .

a strategy for reducing probe signal scatter in late-pcr assays
one strategy for reducing probe signal scatter among replicate samples involves normalizing the allele-specific fluorescence probe signals from any given sample by the actual amount of total amplification products in that particular sample. late-pcr used in combination with mismatched-tolerant probes is ideally suited for this approach because these technologies permit determination of both probe-specific and total amplification products in individual reactions.

in late-pcr, single-stranded dna products remain available for detection with hybridization probes at any temperature after the extension step of the thermal cycle. as a result, late-pcr single-stranded products can be monitored at a detection step introduced after primer extension using a mismatch-tolerant probe whose melting temperature is lower than the melting temperature of the excess primer, tmx. because such low-tm probes hybridize well below the extension temperature, they can be used at concentrations that are high enough to saturate all single-stranded products without risk of interfering with primer extension and reaction efficiency  <cit> .

mismatch-tolerant probes hybridize to their perfectly complementary sequence at their melting temperature, but hybridize to more and more mismatched variants of those sequences as the temperature is decreased. if the temperature is lowered far enough, each probe eventually binds to the totality of variant target sequences in the reaction. thus, for reactions that amplify specific products using single pairs of primers, the signal from a single mismatch-tolerant probe can be read at an upper temperature to measure the level of the most perfectly matched sequence and at a lower temperature to measure all related sequences present in the reaction. the ratio of probe signals collected at these two temperatures for any individual reaction normalizes the amount of single-stranded dna products among replicate late-pcr assays and reveals the genotype of the sample. hence, a homozygous normal sample probed for the normal allele generates a full strength signal at both the upper temperature and the lower temperature, while a heterozygous sample probed for the normal allele generates a half strength signal at the upper temperature and a full strength signal at the lower temperature, assuming absolute allele discrimination by the probe at the high temperature and no effect of detection temperature on probe fluorescence. we call this strategy for signal normalization two-temperature late-pcr genotyping and demonstrate its use for endpoint analysis.

in the present report, resonsense® probes  <cit>  were used as mismatch-tolerant probes. a resonsense® probe consists of a linear fluorophore-labeled oligonucleotide used in combination with a double-stranded dna dye. once the probe-target hybrid forms, the resulting double-stranded dna binds the dna dye that then excites the probe fluorophore via fluorescence energy transfer, fret  <cit> . in the experiments described here, the chosen double-stranded dna dye  was excited by excitation light source of the abi  <dig> at  <dig> nm when bound to the probe-target hybrid and served, in turn to excite the cy <dig> fluorophore on the probe. as a result the probe-target hybrid emits light at 635– <dig> nm. unhybridized probes remain dark because the cy <dig> fluorophore is not excited at  <dig> nm by itself.

two-temperature endpoint genotyping using late-pcr and resonsense® probes
two-temperature late-pcr genotyping was implemented for the tsd g <dig> allele of the hexa gene by first determining the high temperature at which the resonsense® probe was allele-discriminating and then determining the lower temperature at which the probe was completely mismatch-tolerant . preliminary experiments revealed these temperatures to be 55°c for the normal allele and 40°c for both alleles, respectively . amplification was then repeated and the fluorescent signals were measured at both 55°c and 40°c after each extension step. figures 3a shows that under allele discriminating conditions , the means of the fluorescence signal distribution for the two sets of non-normalized plots for the homozygous and heterozygous samples are once again clearly different but the scatter among the replicates still resulted in overlapping sets of plots. in contrast, at the mismatch-tolerant temperature of 40°c the same replicate samples generated two sets of virtually identical linear plots . figure 3c demonstrates that the ratio of fluorescent signals collected at 55°c and 40°c for each sample are less scattered and clearly resolves the homozygous samples and the heterozygous samples into statistically significant different sets of assays. the mean ratio of fluorescence signals for the homozygous samples was  <dig>  +/-  <dig>  with a coefficient of variation of  <dig> %, while the mean ratio of fluorescence signal for the heterozygous samples was  <dig>  +/-  <dig>  with a coefficient of variation of  <dig> %. moreover, the identity of each sample as either homozygous or heterozygous was assured with an accuracy of  <dig> % . the results in figure  <dig> also demonstrate that, as anticipated, the characteristic fluorescence ratio of the two sets of samples is constant and independent of cycle number. as a result, two-temperature late-pcr genotyping can be used as an endpoint method at virtually any thermal cycle after the end of the exponential phase of the reaction is reached. notice, however, that the average two-temperature fluorescence ratio for the homozygous samples  is less than one and that the average two-temperature fluorescence ratios for homozygous and heterozygous samples  exhibit less than the expected two-fold difference. these deviations from the expected values are most likely due to the quenching effect of temperature on fluorescence and do not impact on the  <dig> % accuracy of the assay .

fluorescence ratios generated by two-temperature late-pcr genotyping are independent of starting genome copy number
fluorescence ratios generated by two-temperature late-pcr genotyping reflect solely the intrinsic thermodynamic properties governing the binding of the fluorescent probe to its matched and mismatched targets at two different temperatures as well as the quenching effect of temperature on fluorescence intensity. as a result, fluorescence ratios indicative of genotype should be independent of the number of starting genome copies in the amplification reaction. to test this hypothesis and to showcase the applicability of two-temperature late-pcr genotyping for different amplicons, figure  <dig> compares the two-temperature fluorescence ratios obtained in the course of late-pcr amplification for two replicate sets of samples homozygous for the c allele of the rs <dig>  a snp site located in the vicinity of the human tumor suppressor gene p <dig>  these samples consisted of either  <dig> genome equivalents or  <dig> genome equivalents of genomic dna at the start of the reaction. figure  <dig> shows that these two sets of samples begin amplification and reach the same fluorescence ratio shortly after each set of samples reached its own ct value. a single endpoint reading taken at any point after cycle  <dig> in figure  <dig> identifies these samples as having identical genotypes  despite their differences in starting copy number. we conclude that two-temperature late-pcr genotyping is robust because it allows for endpoint analysis independently of the starting number of genomes present in the sample.

detection of imbalanced allele ratios using two-temperature late-pcr
we evaluated the ability of two-temperature late-pcr to distinguish between tsd g <dig> heterozygous samples exhibiting a balanced allele ratio of 1: <dig> and samples exhibiting an imbalanced allele ratio of 2: <dig> for the same alleles. the latter were prepared by mixing tsd g <dig> homozygous and tsd g <dig> heterozygous dna in the proper amounts . such dna mixture serves as a model for cases of chromosomal dna duplication involving one of the alleles of a heterozygous marker. figure  <dig> demonstrates that two-temperature late-pcr can readily distinguish replicate samples with balanced allele ratios  from replicate samples with an imbalanced allele ratio of 2: <dig> with  <dig> % accuracy provided that the probe signals are further normalized for their background fluorescence values at the start of the assay . the same results were obtained with samples consisting of 1: <dig> allele ratios . preliminary experiments revealed that the assay could resolve allele-imbalances as small as  <dig> : <dig> at the present . these results suggest that two-temperature late-pcr assays may be capable of identifying allele imbalances that occur due to chromosome trisomies and gene duplications .

application of two-temperature late-pcr for endpoint genotyping
to illustrate the use of the two-temperature late-pcr for endpoint genotyping, blinded samples of known genotypes for an interrogated snp site were tested with this assay. the particular snp site genotyped in those experiments, rs <dig>  consists of a c/t polymorphism located in the vicinity of the human p <dig> gene. in each instance, samples were amplified with late-pcr primers in the presence of a resonsense® probe against the rs <dig> c polymorphism. at the end of the assay, fluorescent readings from the hybridization probe were collected at the two appropriate temperatures and then used to calculate fluorescence ratios . replicate control samples  of known genotypes for the rs <dig> snp  were initially processed to determine the distribution of normalized fluorescence ratios corresponding to each genotype. this data was then used to define the  <dig> % confidence intervals for the distribution of fluorescence ratios corresponding to each genotype based on three standard distributions around the mean fluorescence ratio for each genotype . then, in two separate experiments, sets of control samples and purified dna samples  from six different individuals whose rs <dig> genotypes were previously established by conventional methods but blinded to the experimenter were analyzed to generate duplicate endpoint fluorescence ratios for each sample. figure  <dig> shows that the fluorescence ratios from each of the blinded samples fell unambiguously within one of the defined ranges of normalized control fluorescence ratios. the same was observed for the set of control samples . there was 100% concordance in the genotype assignment when the blinded samples were decoded.

discussion
late-pcr efficiently generates single-stranded products that remain available at the end of the reaction for hybridization over a broad temperature range  <cit> . each two-temperature late-pcr endpoint assay uses a single mismatch-tolerant probe to detect both allele-specific sequences at an upper temperature and the totality of all sequence variants at a lower temperature. two-temperature late-pcr endpoint assays thus reduce the quantitative uncertainties inherent to symmetric pcr endpoint assays  <cit>  by constructing ratios of fluorescent signals acquired at these two temperatures that are characteristic of the targets involved, regardless of their absolute concentrations. two-temperature late-pcr endpoint assays are particularly robust and powerful because fluorescence ratios indicative of genotype are independent of the starting amount of dna present in the sample or the extent of product accumulation past the ct value. as a result, there is no need to adjust the starting amounts of materials used in the assay or to use a fixed endpoint for analysis. the reason for the high flexibility of two-temperature late-pcr assays is that the critical temperatures required for the probe to be either allele-discriminating or mismatch-tolerant are defined solely by the particular nucleotide composition of the probe under the condition of probe excess over target.

genotyping using the two-temperature late-pcr method is possible because the two-temperature fluorescence ratios reflect the fraction of amplification products that carry the interrogated allele in any given genotype. in theory, samples homozygous for an allele interrogated by the probe should yield a two-temperature fluorescence ratio of one because the probe detects the totality of amplification products at both high  and low  temperatures. according to the same logic, samples heterozygous for the interrogated allele should yield a fluorescent signal ratio of  <dig>  because the probe detects half of the amplification products at a high  temperature and the totality of the products at a low  temperature. in practice, the two-temperature fluorescence ratio of homozygous samples is less than one and the two-temperature fluorescence ratios of homozygous and heterozygous samples exhibit less than the expected two-fold difference probably because of the quenching effect of temperature on fluorescence intensity . correction for the quenching effect of temperature on fluorescence intensity is difficult in the case of resonsense® probes because probe signal intensity is determined by both the fluorophore and the sybr gold i dna dye  <cit> . we are currently designing mismatch- tolerant probe that rely on a single fluorophore to overcome this problem. however, even the current semi-quantitative design of two-temperature late-pcr is capable of successfully distinguishing heterozygous genomes with a 1: <dig> ratio of two alleles from dna mixtures comprised of 2: <dig> and 1: <dig> ratios of the same two alleles. allelic imbalances such as these occur in cases of chromosome or gene duplication due to cancer and other diseases  <cit> .

two-temperature late-pcr endpoint assays are currently being developed in our laboratory for identification of chromosome trisomies and gene duplication at numerous snp sites in the genome. two-temperature late-pcr is also suitable for detection of imbalance allele ratios on the order of  <dig> : <dig> that are generated by loss of heterozygosity  events involving tumor suppressor genes in human pre-malignant cells in the presence of a two-fold excess contaminating normal cells .

in order to address the inter-assay variability of the two-temperature late-pcr method, we showed in three separate experiments that the fluorescence ratios of samples of known genotypes fall unambiguously within a defined range of predetermined normalized control fluorescence ratios unique to each genotype. in the first experiment, control replicates sets for each genotype were used to define the  <dig> % confidence intervals for the distribution of fluorescence ratios corresponding to each genotype based on three standard distributions around the mean fluorescence ratio unique to each genotype. in two subsequent experiments, samples whose genotype was blinded to the experimenter as well as additional control samples were analyzed to determine their fluorescence ratios. in each case, fluorescence ratios from each of the blinded samples and control samples fell unambiguously within one of the defined ranges of normalized control fluorescence ratios. there was 100% concordance in the genotype assignment when the blinded samples were decoded. this experimental strategy addresses the problems associated with inter-assay variation of fluorescence ratios. until more different examples of two-temperature late-pcr assays are evaluated for inter-assay variability, however, we recommend the use of the use of reference samples of known genotypes as internal controls for every genotyping experiment. inter-assay variation is not a concern when such internal reference controls are present given the low intra-assay variability demonstrated here.

the difficulties associated with performing endpoint genotyping based on probe signal intensity using symmetric pcr that are successfully addressed by the two-temperature genotyping method are inherent to the amplification process itself. stochastic differences among replicate samples exiting exponential amplification result in significant differences in the final yield of double-stranded dna products. as a result, the final probe signal intensity does not reflect the starting number of alleles in the sample  <cit> . symmetric pcr amplification can be examined in real-time to circumvent the problem of endpoint product yield scatter among replicates  <cit> . two-temperature late-pcr assays permit semi-quantitative endpoint detection of allele-ratios at endpoint and do not require real-time pcr equipment; in principle, two-temperature late-pcr could be performed using only a standard thermal cycler and a temperature-regulated fluorimeter. in addition, the use of a single mismatch-tolerant probe makes two-temperature late-pcr assays easier to design.

two-temperature late-pcr also has distinct advantages over current qualitative approaches to closed-tube endpoint snp genotyping that employ symmetric pcr and allele-specific taqman or molecular beacon probes of two or more different colors  <cit> . in those approaches, genotype is qualitatively determined at endpoint by the mixture of probe signal colors present following pcr  <cit> . the requirement of two colors to define genotype restricts the number of snp sites that can be genotyped in multiplexed fashion in single-tube format given the limit on the number of fluorophores than can be simultaneously monitored in today's fluorimeters. in contrast, two-temperature late-pcr genotyping exhibits a greater multiplex detection capacity because each complete genotyping assay requires only a single-color hybridization probe. in addition, two-temperature late-pcr is capable of identifying the presence of allele ratio imbalances semi-quantitatively, a task that cannot be done by conventional endpoint genotyping relying on color probes .

alternative approaches for endpoint symmetric pcr genotyping are more quantitative but also more cumbersome to use. these assays  rely on internal or external control standards that serve as references with which to normalize test signals  <cit> . such normalization requires internal control standards with similar amplification efficiencies as the test target or external controls. in the case of exogenous controls, it is also important that the control and test samples have the same number of targets. two-temperature late-pcr does not require an external reference sequence and corrects for variations in total amplification product yield among replicate pcr samples by normalizing each sample to itself using mismatch-tolerant probes.

two-temperature late-pcr using a single mismatch-tolerant probe may also be suitable for mutation scanning. if a sequence variant allele arises at a particular homozygous locus the quantity of the bound probe at the end of the reaction would change thereby revealing the presence of an altered, yet unknown sequence. such "gain of heterozygosity" can then be further analyzed by directly sequencing the single-stranded dna of the late-pcr assay using either pyrosequencing  <cit>  or the "dilute-n'-go" dideoxysequencing methods developed for this purpose .

CONCLUSIONS
two-temperature late-pcr permits construction of robust and convenient endpoint genotyping assays. these assays are carried out in a single tube format, use a single hybridization probe, give consistent results for various amounts of starting templates in the reaction, and are indicative of genotype regardless of how many cycles of linear amplification have elapsed. this methodology is suitable for snp genotyping and is currently being used to construct novel, clinical compatible applications for endpoint detection of chromosomal gene duplication and deletions for cancer and prenatal genetic diagnosis.

