BACKGROUND
marine pelagic fishes show broad geographic distribution, large population sizes, and highly migratory movements that are thought to ultimately result in little genetic structuring . the above-mentioned biological peculiarities result in complex phylogeographic patterns , which do not often meet the assumptions  of classic statistics that measure gene flow   <cit> , and thus make the study of population genetic variation of marine pelagic fishes particularly challenging. in addition, philopatric behavior, local larval retention mechanism, and historical processes such as e.g. the effect of pleistocene sea level changes also complicate estimation of genetic differentiation for many marine pelagic fishes  <cit> .

given this complexity, accurate determination of marine pelagic fish genetic structuring would ideally require both temporal  and spatial  sampling, analysis of multiple loci  that improves the estimates considerably  <cit> , as well as complementation of classic summary statistics with more recent coalescent-based approaches  <cit>  that convey statistical efficiency and flexibility to the estimation of population genetic parameters by using maximum likelihood   <cit>  and bayesian inference   <cit> .

bigeye tuna, thunnus obesus  is a marine pelagic fish species characterized by large populations and a worldwide distribution  restricted to tropical and subtropical waters   <cit> . although capable of long distance movements, conventional and archival tagging indicate regional fidelity for bigeye tuna to geographical points of attraction  <cit> . catch data from surface gears  <cit>  indicate that the main breeding and nursery area of atlantic bigeye tuna is located in the gulf of guinea, whereas adult feeding grounds are placed at both northern and southern temperate areas . the exact timing of spawning migrations towards equatorial areas, and whether the adults return to their original northern and southern feeding zones after spawning remain open questions.

several studies  <cit> , reported geographic heterogeneity of bigeye tuna mt lineages within and among oceans. both mt sequence and rflp data revealed the existence of two highly divergent groups: clade i that is present both in the atlantic ocean and indo-pacific ocean, and clade ii that is almost exclusive to the atlantic ocean  <cit> . the origin of the two mt clades has been related to temperature fluctuations during the pleistocene  <cit>  that temporarily impeded bigeye tuna migration around the cape of good hope  <cit> . afterwards, unidirectional gene flow of mt clade i from the indo-pacific ocean into the atlantic ocean  during an interglacial period would have resulted in secondary contact and the contemporary asymmetrical distribution of the mt clades  <cit> .

the contemporary presence of individuals of both mt clades in sympatry across the atlantic ocean but not in the indo-pacific ocean poses several interesting questions that require further investigation using nuclear data. if individuals of mt clade i and clade ii show high genetic divergence at the nuclear level, the two lineages could represent distinct cryptic species. alternatively, individuals from both mt clades could interbreed in the atlantic ocean, a process that would render homogeneity at the nuclear level. on the other hand, the presence of individuals of mt clade i in both the atlantic ocean and indo-pacific ocean allows testing whether gene flow around the cape of good hope is still occurring at present within this clade, as well as the directionality of the process.

besides the above-mentioned historical factors, contemporary ecological factors such as e.g. phylopatric behaviour of adults could play an important role in shaping the current genetic structure of bigeye tuna. in order to discern the relative role of historical and ecological factors, the comparison of molecular markers of mt and nuclear origin is particularly informative. for instance, discordance between mt and nuclear markers in describing population structure have been used to asses sex-biased dispersal or philopatry  <cit> . in the case of the bigeye tuna, the comparison of allele-size frequencies at one mt and four nuclear loci in individuals from the atlantic ocean and indo-pacific ocean tentatively rejected the hypothesis that the two mt clades could correspond to two cryptic species  <cit> . however, the population genetic analyses were not conclusive regarding gene flow around the cape of good hope since allele frequencies of two nuclear loci supported the hypothesis of gene flow disruption between the atlantic ocean and the indo-pacific ocean whereas those of another two nuclear loci failed to support the potential genetic break  <cit> .

in this study, we gathered the most comprehensive genetic data set on atlantic bigeye tuna to date. we analyze allele size variation of nine polymorphic microsatellite loci in four atlantic locations that were surveyed in a previous study  <cit> , and analyzed using mitochondrial control region sequence data. for a comparison of gene flow between ocean basins, we added one sample from the pacific ocean and another from the indian ocean. microsatellite allele size data were analyzed with a variety of population genetic methods including hierarchical f-statistics, mantel tests to determine for isolation by distance, bayesian estimation of the number of populations, and coalescence-based estimation of the magnitude of gene flow. the main goal of these population genetic analyses was to determine genetic structure of bigeye tuna within the atlantic ocean based on nuclear data, and to compare it with mitochondrial evidence. we also tested the null hypothesis of genetic homogeneity  worldwide, and estimated the magnitude and direction of gene flow between the atlantic ocean, and the indo-pacific region.

RESULTS
temporal genetic stability within atlantic bigeye tuna populations
three locations in the atlantic ocean, namely canada, canary islands, and guinea were sampled in two different years  in order to test temporal stability of genetic variability. after bonferroni correction,  <dig> out of  <dig> exact tests remained significant, which indicates their departure from hardy-weinberg equilibrium  . of these, only one locus exact test  showed heterozygote excess characterized by a negative fis value. according to the geographical origin of the samples, most  of fis significant values were found to belong to guinea and guinea  <dig> sampling sites . to test for differences of fis values between different years and loci, we performed a repeated measure anova with year and locus as repeated measures. both year and locus were modeled as random factors. the selection of the final model was based on the akaike information criterion   <cit> . two models were considered significantly different when their aic difference was larger than  <dig>   <cit> . the best fitting model obtained  included the factor locus only, whereas year and the interaction between year and locus were not significant . furthermore, the analyses of the fst and rst pairwise comparisons between first and second year replicate comparisons at guinea, canary islands, and canada were each not significant .

* n = sample size, na = number of alleles per locus, ns = number of alleles per locus standarized to the smallest sample size , expected  and observed  heterozygosities, fis = wright's statistics. bold fis values are significant probability estimates after bonferroni correction  <cit> 

*bold p values are significant after sequential bonferroni correction for  <dig> multiple tests .

genetic variability and population structure among atlantic bigeye tuna population samples
in order to characterize population genetic variation among atlantic bigeye tuna, analyses were performed based on four atlantic ocean locations , and included also one indian ocean, and one pacific ocean locations as outgroups. genetic analyses were based only on those individuals that were correctly genotyped for at least seven loci . the amount of genetic variability, in terms of average number of alleles  and observed heterozygosity was similar among sampling sites for the same microsatellite locus . however, there were large differences among loci, with values of average observed heterozygosity per locus ranging from ht =  <dig>  at locus tth <dig> to ht =  <dig>  at locus ta <dig>  overall, the average observed heterozygosity per locus and population was high . the total ns varied from  <dig>   to  <dig>   . after bonferroni correction,  <dig> out of  <dig> locus exact tests remained significant, which supports their departure from hwe. all showed significant heterozygote deficits in three , and one  sampling sites. only locus ta <dig> deviated from hwe due to null alleles as detected using a null allele test based on expected homozygote and heterozygote allele size difference frequencies  <cit> . since taking this locus out of the analyses did not qualitatively affect population comparisons , it was included in further analyses. tests for linkage disequilibrium did not show any significant value for any of the comparisons.

the allele size permutation test rendered non-significant differences between fst and rst estimates . multilocus pairwise estimates of fst showed nine significant comparisons after bonferroni correction . pacific and indian ocean pairwise comparisons with guinea and canada sampling sites, but not with azores and canary islands, were each significant. within atlantic ocean comparisons were generally not significant. none of the rst pairwise comparisons were significant after bonferroni correction . according to a mantel test, we found no significant correlation between genetic and geographical distances for both atlantic ocean samples or across the entire studied geographic range when using fst  or rst  estimates .

the hierarchical amova revealed overall significant genetic structuring of the analyzed samples . most of the total genetic variance was found within populations. the hypothesis that nuclear variation could be structured according to mt clades was clearly rejected . geographic structuring of nuclear variation according to ocean basins  was also not supported by the amova , even when the indian ocean and the pacific ocean were grouped together  an analyzed against the atlantic ocean .

*bold p numbers are significant values.

the number of populations  was estimated using bayesian inferences. although the prior parameters for the f model  were chosen to allow the existence of two possible populations with very similar allele frequencies  <cit> , the highest posterior probability value was found at k =  <dig> . if the latent number of populations was not pre-specified  <cit> , the highest posterior probability was also found for a partition of one. a bayesian inference of jointly the probability of assignment of individuals to populations and the number of populations  <cit>  estimated that the number of populations with the highest posterior probability was also for k =  <dig> .

effective population size and migration rates
migration rates and effective population size of bigeye tuna populations were estimated based on geographic regions  of origin using both ml and bi methods  <cit> . the ml inferences did not return reliable confidence intervals using profile likelihoods even for very long runs , but none of the runs contradicted the bayesian analysis. the results from the bayesian inference were more stable and reliable. estimates of the mutation scaled population size parameter were higher in the atlantic ocean  than in the indian ocean  and the pacific ocean . these estimates were translated to an average effective population size  of  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> bigeye tuna individuals for the atlantic ocean, the indian ocean, and the pacific ocean, respectively . marked differences in ratios of effective population size  to census population size  are commonplace in marine fishes  <cit> , and can be explained either by historical events such as e.g. past population bottlenecks or by life history traits such as e.g. strong bias in reproductive success or size-dependent fecundity  <cit> . in order to discern among both competing hypotheses, we calculated values of m , which were above the theoretical threshold of  <dig> , indicating that none of the atlantic, indian and pacific ocean populations has experienced recent population reduction. hence, it is likely that the low ne observed in bigeye tuna may be due to life-history traits as previously reported for other marine fishes  <cit> .

migration rates seem to be symmetric between the indian ocean and the pacific ocean . however, immigration from and into the atlantic ocean seems to be highly asymmetrical with the atlantic population providing twice as many immigrants into the pacific ocean and the indian ocean than those inferred between the pacific ocean and the indian ocean . furthermore, immigration into the atlantic ocean showed the lowest rates. a likelihood ratio test revealed that these results were incompatible with symmetrical scaled immigration rates or with a common rate for all directions . inferred numbers of immigrants per generation between ocean basins ranged between  <dig>  and  <dig> , fig. 4b).

discussion
microsatellite data and hwe departures
despite cross-specific pcr amplification, all analyzed microsatellites showed relatively high levels of polymorphism. simulations using various combinations of effective population size  and time since divergence  showed that these loci provided enough statistical power  <cit>  for the detection of genetic variability in atlantic bigeye tuna. in fact, previously loci ta <dig>  ta <dig>  ta <dig>  and ta <dig> were applied to analyze population genetic structuring of bigeye tuna in the indian ocean  <cit> , and locus ta <dig> was able to detect weak genetic differentiation in the pacific ocean  <cit> . significant deviations from hwe were found in few populations at five loci, which were different to those showing departures from hwe in thunnus albacares  <cit> . the majority of the detected departures from hwe were due to significant heterozygote deficiency. most of the significant fis locus-population comparisons involved guinea samples of different years versus other atlantic populations, being deviations attributed to homozygote excess. according to the anova test only the genetic factor  and neither the time nor the combination of both factors was responsible for the deviation from hwe. on the other hand, the only case of departure from hwe due to null alleles was associated to the guinea location. all these results together highlight the singularity of the guinea location, and could be explained in terms of admixture of genetically distinct cohorts  within this site, owing to the fact that the gulf of guinea is known as the main spawning and nursery area for bigeye tuna in the atlantic ocean  <cit> . similar patterns of hwe departures have been associated with spawning or nursery populations in the atlantic bluefin tuna   <cit> , and lemon shark   <cit> .

genetic variation and population structure of atlantic bigeye tuna
high values of genetic variability  characterized all studied locations. these values are similar to those previously reported for other scombroid fishes, such as the bluefin tuna  <cit> , yellowfin tuna  <cit>  and bigeye tuna  <cit> , and consistent with the average for marine fishes  <cit> .

within the atlantic ocean, no significant genetic differentiation between temporal replicates or geographic locations was observed . additionally, the mantel test failed to detect significant correlation between geographical and genetic distances, which discarded isolation by distance among populations within the atlantic ocean. overall, these results support unrestricted gene flow among bigeye tuna populations within the atlantic ocean. similarly, no genetic structuring was reported for bigeye tuna within the pacific ocean  <cit>  nor within the indian ocean  <cit> . the lack of genetic differentiation within each ocean basin may not be that surprising given the relatively high dispersal capability of bigeye tunas  <cit> . nevertheless, some statistical tests and analyzed loci have shown weak evidence for small genetic differences between most separated locations in the pacific, suggesting that isolation by distance might be promoting subtle differentiation among populations, which could be at present difficult to document with the current loci and sample sizes  <cit> 

the hypothesis of a single panmictic unit for bigeye tuna worldwide is supported by microsatellite data based on the lack of significant differentiation in between-ocean rst comparisons, and the comparatively low fst and rst values obtained. these values are by far lower than the mean fst considered for marine fishes , but on the same order as those reported in other studies where range-wide panmixia was suggested  <cit> . hierarchical amova, mantel test, as well as clustering and assignment tests rendered consistent results, and also supported the hypothesis of no genetic structure for tuna populations at an inter-oceanic scale.

therefore, nuclear and mt evidence are clearly discordant with respect to inter-oceanic genetic differentiation. while the former, as mentioned above, fails to support any genetic structuring, the latter supports genetic differentiation between atlantic ocean and indo-pacific region bigeye tuna populations based on pairwise Φst comparisons  <cit> . strong phylogeographic association of mtdna , compared to microsatellites, has also been previously documented in e.g. blue marlin  <cit> . in the bigeye tuna, the main source of disagreement largely arises from the existence in the atlantic ocean of two highly divergent mt clades  <cit> , which were not recovered by amova tests based on nuclear data. the origin of the two mt clades  has been proposed to be associated with past genetic isolation of bigeye tuna atlantic ocean populations from those of the indo-pacific region during pleistocene glacial maxima  <cit> . once temperatures rose during inter-glacial periods, gene flow could be re-established through the cape of good hope. the present-day observed pattern would have been achieved when individuals belonging to mt clade i entered the atlantic ocean from the indo-pacific region, whereas individuals belonging to mt clade ii apparently remained within the atlantic ocean. microsatellite data indicate that despite the accumulated high sequence mt divergences, individuals from both clades were not reproductively isolated and thus, secondary contact in the atlantic ocean led to interbreeding, and present-day genetic homogenization at the nuclear level  <cit> .

migration patterns of bigeye tuna populations
bayesian inference of migration rates indicates gene flow rates of the same order of magnitude inferred for other pelagic fishes such as e.g. sardines  <cit> . there is migration in both directions between the pacific ocean and the indian ocean, likely facilitated by both the indonesian ocean current that flows from the pacific ocean into the indian ocean, as well as the seasonal reversal of this current  <cit> . however, according to our results, the main trans-oceanic migratory activity is occurring around the cape of good hope. the region off south africa is both topographically and hydrologically complex  <cit> , which complicates understanding of bigeye tuna migration patterns. at both sides of the cape of good hope, the south atlantic ocean  <cit>  and the southwest indian ocean  <cit>  gyres are connected by the strong agulhas current that flows from the indian ocean into the atlantic ocean  <cit> . as the agulhas current reaches the southern tip of the continental shelf of africa, it turns almost completely back on itself, and flows eastward as the agulhas retroflection or return current  <cit> . according to our results , immigration from the atlantic ocean into the indo-pacific region doubles that inferred between the indian ocean and the pacific ocean whereas scaled immigration rates into the atlantic ocean are the lowest, suggesting that immigration is less important for the maintenance of variability in the atlantic ocean than in other ocean basins.

our results indicate that the actual number of individuals moving per generation  is several orders of magnitude lower than bigeye population sizes in each ocean . thus, the possibility of detecting changes in mt clade proportions in each ocean through catch statistics is extremely small. in fact, the proportions of individuals of mt clade i  and mt clade ii  in the studied populations of atlantic bigeye tuna seemed to remain constant over the years  and virtually no individuals of mt clade ii have been reported from the indian ocean  <cit> . moreover, significant allele-frequency differences at one intronic locus and one microsatellite locus were found between atlantic and indo-pacific samples, supporting simple mixture but little movement of bigeye tuna individuals around the cape of good hope  <cit> . thus, it seems that the main invasion of individuals from the indo-pacific region carrying mt clade i haplotypes into the atlantic ocean may have occurred during an earlier warmer inter-glacial period rather than after the last glacial maximum.

alternatively, lack of nuclear differentiation coupled with strong mt divergences could also indicate instances of male-biased dispersal   <cit> . although, the existence of independent spawning areas in each ocean basin  <cit>  may support the existence of homing behavior in bigeye tuna, and there are reports of regional fidelity in bigeye tuna  <cit> , the existence of homing behavior remains an open question, and tagging data showing male trans-oceanic displacements is required to understand current gene flow among bigeye tuna populations.

finally, the inferred asymmetrical immigration pattern out and into the atlantic ocean could simply reflect the presence in this ocean basin of clade ii, which is not shared with the indo-pacific region. the number of immigrants into the atlantic ocean could be less extreme because of the presence of the two clades in the atlantic ocean, which would produce larger variability, and thus, larger effective population sizes. however, it is important to note here that the inferred migration rates may also reflect a sampling bias since the data set is allele-rich and the present study only includes samples from one indian ocean and one pacific ocean location. therefore, these two ocean basins may be underrepresented, and the estimates of the number of immigrants per generation  have a large variance associated .

fst as a measure of genetic structure and gene flow
most population genetic analyses performed in this study suggest lack of population structure, and relatively high levels of gene flow among bigeye tuna populations at a global scale in agreement with other population genetic analyses. however, nine out of  <dig> fst pairwise comparisons detected significant population structure, mostly involving comparisons between populations of the atlantic ocean and those of the indo-pacific region . in order to understand this discrepancy, fst analyses were performed using simulated data of three populations  . estimates of fst values from data with large number of immigrants  showed large 95% confidence intervals that include fst values up to about  <dig> . the presumed differentiation was most likely an artifact of the large number of alleles present in the sample. although fst statistics  <cit>  are widely used for describing population genetic structure, they present some limitations, including the implicit assumption of uniform effective population sizes, and symmetric migration rates. violation of these assumptions is particularly worrisome when using highly polymorphic molecular markers with high mutation rates  to analyze weakly structured populations  <cit>  with large effective population sizes  <cit> . fst estimations assume that there is no error in the sample frequencies, but with many alleles per locus the precision of sample frequencies is questionable. in such cases, the use of both rst, which is independent of the mutation rate  <cit> , and coalescent methods, which use sample frequencies and not the population frequencies render more accurate and reliable estimates of genetic differentiation than fst.

CONCLUSIONS
population genetic analyses based on microsatellite data of bigeye tuna populations showed unrestricted gene flow within the atlantic ocean, and supported the existence of a spawning and nursery region in the gulf of guinea. at a global scale, rst statistics, bayesian cluster analyses, and coalescence-based migration rate inferences based on nuclear markers supported lack of trans-oceanic genetic structure, which contrasts with previously detected significant mt divergence of bigeye tuna between atlantic ocean and indo-pacific region due to the existence of two clades, one restricted to the atlantic ocean. our results support interbreeding between individuals belonging to different clades in the atlantic ocean. given the current distribution of bigeye tuna individuals belonging to the two clades, and the inferred asymmetrical nuclear migration rates between the atlantic ocean and the indo-pacific region, it is likely that little number of individuals  may currently move between the atlantic ocean and the indo-pacific region, maintaining the proportions of the mt clades in both oceans. therefore, the current presence of individuals belonging to mt clade i would have originated in an earlier interglacial period.

