BACKGROUND
species are the fundamental units in biology  <cit> . in fact, species are the fundamental units of comparisons in all fields of biology, including anatomy, behavior, ecology, molecular biology or physiology, underlining the importance of taxonomic studies for all biological disciplines  <cit> . furthermore, species are also the currency for biodiversity classification and define regions of conservation priority, so-called biological hotspots  <cit> . despite their fundamental importance and widespread application, identifying, defining and delimiting species is still one of the most disputed and controversial tasks in evolutionary biology  <cit> .

dozens of species concepts have been formulated, but none of them seems to be operational for every individual taxon . de queiroz therefore proposed a definition of species that is in agreement with all modern species concepts. under this so-called general  lineage concept , the conceptualization of the notion of species and the operational criteria necessary to delimit them became separated  <cit> . instead of using a single operational criterion, such as monophyly or interbreeding, seeing species as separately evolving metapopulation lineages through time offers and highlights the importance of using multiple lines of evidence for their delimitation  <cit>  because different criteria can come to fixation at different times during the divergence process of two populations. in fact, different criteria can lead to important biases in estimates of biodiversity, especially in macroevolutionary and conservation studies depending on species lists  <cit> , and are expected to give incongruent results for the boundaries of recently evolved radiations  <cit> . however, evaluating multiple lines of evidence not only increases our capacity to detect recently diverged populations, but also can provide stronger evidence of lineage separation when different operational criteria are in concordance  <cit> .

the fauna of madagascar has enjoyed a constant increase in species numbers in recent years. descriptions of newly discovered species from all vertebrate groups were based on various criteria for species delimitation, however  <cit> . in this context, an almost threefold increase in the number of endemic primate species  over the last three decades has been questioned by several authors  <cit> . for example, newly described lemur species have been delimited solely based on minor variation in mitochondrial dna . moreover, sampling per “species” was often limited to one locality encompassed by a pair of madagascar’s larger rivers. thus, we have limited information on intraspecific genetic variation across a species’ geographic range, so that the documented extent of mtdna divergence might just be a result of local population structure. other taxa have been subject to taxonomic revision without new data and were raised to species level  <cit>  solely based on the application of the phylogenetic species concept  in favor of the the biological species concept . these taxonomic revisions, especially in the genus eulemur, were based on little evidence  <cit> , as we outline in the following.

based on behavioral, anatomical and cytogenetic evidence, simons and rumpler  <cit>  erected and defined the genus eulemur by splitting the former genus lemur into two taxa, one containing only lemur catta and the other containing the “true lemurs”, eulemur coronatus, e. mongoz, e. rubriventer, e. macaco, e. fulvus fulvus, e. f. albifrons, e. f. collaris, e. f. albocollaris, e. f. rufus and e. f. sanfordi. a further subspecies, e. f. cinereiceps, was resurrected by groves  <cit>  based on a drawing by milne-edwards from  <dig>  more recent investigations revealed that this taxon is identical to e. albocollaris and thus the older name e. cinereiceps was adopted for this taxon  <cit> .

although hybridization occurs between wild e. f. rufus and e. mongoz <cit> , lineage separation of e. coronatus, e. macaco, e. mongoz and e. rubriventer from each other and from the e. fulvus group is considered to be significant by most authors  <cit>  due to frequent sympatry, smaller social units and greater phenotypic differences. the remaining eulemur taxa were treated as subspecies of the common brown lemur  and grouped into the polytypic fulvus group  <cit> , also referred to as the “brown lemur complex”   <cit> . species status for e. f. albocollaris  and e. f. collaris was later proposed by wyner et al.  <cit> , although both taxa hybridize with e. f. rufifrons <cit> . in fact, hybrids of e. cinereiceps and e. collaris are not able to produce fertile offspring, but both taxa can produce fertile offspring with other members of the blc. although a number of studies tried to resolve the phylogeny among eulemur taxa using morphology  <cit> , loud calls  <cit> , hair banding patterns  <cit> , chromosomal banding patterns  <cit>  or molecular genetics  <cit> , phylogenetic relationships among eulemur taxa, especially among the members of the blc remain unresolved. nevertheless, groves  <cit>  elevated all members of the blc to species status without new evidence or new data.

groves  justified his decision to split e. fulvus into  <dig> species as follows: 

“what one can insist on is full species status for what are currently regarded as subspecies of e. fulvus. these species are not only sharply distinct externally, but they also appear to differ consistently in craniodental characters <cit> . two of them, collaris and albocollaris , have unique dna sequences and are already acknowledged as diagnosably distinct entities <cit> . there is no evidence of overlap in phenotypic character states among members of the group, so they qualify as species under the psc; there is little or no evidence that they form a genetic continuum in the wild, so they also qualify under the bsc.”

however, tattersall & schwartz  stated: "…so little of that 'craniodental’ variation can be made pertinent to relationships within the group. clearly we are dealing with a high degree of homoplasy.'' thus, apparently homoplastic characters have been used to delimit species under the psc. moreover hybridization sensu “a genetic continuum” is not only likely between members of the blc, but has also been suggested for e. rufifrons and e. fulvus at betsakafandrika  <cit>  and e. albifrons with either e. fulvus along the mananara-zahamena corridor or with e. sanfordi north of the bemarivo  <cit> . thus, it appears that there is more evidence that species of the blc form a genetic continuum in the wild than not, and explicit tests of overlap in phenotypic character states are still lacking. while all taxa may be said to represent potential new species, because of remarkable phenotypic differences of males, none of them can yet be shown to have speciated  <cit> .

considering the poorly justified decision to split the subspecies of the blc into seven different species, the main aim of this study was to test this taxonomic hypothesis with new data, and to critically appraise the conceptual and empirical approaches used in delineating these and other lemur species using an approach for species delimitation that covers intraspecific variation of hypothesized lineages for multiple independent data sets. with the present paper we aim to contribute to the topic of species delimitation in recently diverged populations in general, while clarifying the taxonomy of the blc using several lines of evidence. the usefulness of each type of data for delimiting populations of the blc can be characterized as follows:

genetic data
several studies have investigated the phylogenetic relationships of the members of the lemuridae <cit>  without completely resolving the relationships within the blc. moreover, these studies used either only mitochondrial dna  <cit>  or included not all taxa or only one specimen from captivity  <cit>  in their analyses, which limits their usefulness for delimitation of natural taxa. therefore, we analyzed one mitochondrial and three nuclear introns to infer species boundaries of natural populations, using phylo- and population genetic methods.

morphology
several authors, including groves & eaglen  <cit> , tattersall & schwartz  <cit>  and groves & trueman  <cit> , investigated cranidodental features of the lemuridae without resolving relationships between members of the blc. later, viguier  <cit>  claimed that skull disparity is more controlled by geography than by phylogeny, confirming the homoplasy found in previous studies. because sample size for taxa of the blc was quite small in the latter study, we revisit the morphology of lemur skulls, using a geometric morphometric approach.

acoustic data
vocalizations in non-human primates are predominantly innate  <cit>  and may thus provide an additional trait for species delimitation. loud or long distance calls represent the most distinctive calls in the vocal repertoire and are common in most primates  <cit> . they typically have a species-specific acoustic structure and have therefore been used to infer phylogenetic relationships  <cit> . macedonia & stanger  <cit>  investigated the phylogeny of the lemuridae based on loud calls which often, but not always, consist of an introducing series of short explosive elements , followed by a long lasting scream . these authors found considerable variation in what they called “disturbance advertisement calls” between members of the blc, but they lumped all of them together for practical purposes so that variation among members of the blc remains unknown.

pelage coloration
based on genetic data and pelage coloration of a single type specimen of e. f. rufus, this taxon was split into two species: e. rufus occurring north of the tsiribihina river and e. rufifrons south of it  <cit> . there are indeed phenotypic differences in pelage coloration among the members of the blc, but a quantitative comparison of variation within and between populations has not been conducted so far.

using new data from the field in combination with museum specimens, we examined variation in all four traits among the members of the blc in order to assess the validity of all species assignments as well as to evaluate the usefulness and consistency of these four data sets in delineating species.

RESULTS
acoustic data
results for the between group principal component analysis  of chucks and croaks are depicted in figure  <dig>  the overall randomization test of between-group differences was significant  for both call types. however, pairwise comparisons  between taxa of the permutational manova   revealed only significant differences between two dyads  for croaks. in contrast, chucks were significantly different between more species pairs. whereas e. collaris was significantly different from all other taxa, e. albifrons and e. cinereiceps showed the fewest significant differences in pairwise comparisons. in general, the decomposition of the total variance in between-group and within-group variation revealed that only 33% of the total variation in chucks was explained by variation between taxa. between-group variation was even lower  for croaks. this pattern is well reflected by extensive overlap of groups in the scatter plots for both call types and shows that most variation in both call types is explained by intra-specific variation.

morphometric data
figure  <dig> shows the scatterplot of the bgpca of procrustes shape coordinates of the members of the blc. for comparative reasons we included also the three more distantly related taxa e. coronatus, e. mongoz and e. rubriventer for the morphological shape analysis . variance decomposition revealed that variation is much higher within  than between  groups. nevertheless, the overall randomization test of between-group differences was significant . results of pairwise comparisons are presented in additional file 1: table s7; and revealed that only half of the pairwise comparisons among members of the blc complex showed significant differences in shape. eulemur cinereiceps was only significantly different from the three smaller bodied e. coronatus, e. mongoz and e. rubriventer, but not from any of the members of the blc. eulemur sanfordi did also not differ significantly in shape from e. albifrons, e.collaris, e. fulvus and e. rufus. however, p-values between the geographically adjacent taxa e. albifrons and e. fulvus approached significance with p= <dig>  and p= <dig> , respectively. eulemur rufus could not be distinguished from e. fulvus and e. rufifrons based on shape analyses. finally, e. coronatus, e. mongoz and e. rubriventer were significantly different from each other and differed from all members of the blc .

pelage coloration
variance decomposition of the pelage coloration data revealed that in males 64% and in females 50% of the variation is explained by differences between groups. the overall test of difference between groups was significant . as expected from widespread sexual dichromatism, differences were more pronounced in males .

subsequent pairwise comparisons significantly differentiated males of e. albifrons from all other taxa . female e. albifrons, however, were not different from e. cinereiceps and e. collaris, but were different from the geographically adjacent e. fulvus and e. sanfordi. in contrast to groves  <cit> , who postulated female color differences between e. rufus and e. rufifrons, the present analysis revealed massive overlap and no significant differences between females, but between males. eulemur cinereiceps was also significantly different from its neighbors, i.e. e. collaris and e. rufifrons.

genetic data
sequence data
in total, sequence data were generated from  <dig> field samples. due to high variation in the amount of genomic dna from feces, we were unable to sequence all four loci for all individuals. missing data are indicated in additional file 1: table s <dig>  genbank accession number are provided in additional file 3: table s <dig>  the complete cytochrome b of  <dig> basepairs had  <dig> individual haplotypes and  <dig> polymorphic sites. the smaller fragment of  <dig> bp was sequenced for additional  <dig> museum specimens and had  <dig> polymorphic sites. the number of alleles/haplotypes for the three nuclear loci were  <dig> for the vwf locus,  <dig> for the eno locus and  <dig> for the nramp locus, respectively . the vwf locus had a total length of  <dig> bp with  <dig> polymorphic sites and contained two indels of one bp, one indel of 2- <dig> bp and one indel with seven bp. the eno-locus was  <dig> bp in length, contained two indels of one and two bp, one indel of three bp and had  <dig> polymorphic sites. the nramp- locus was  <dig> bp in length had  <dig> polymorphic sites and contained one indel. table  <dig> shows the minimum, maximum and mean coverage for the individual genotyping of the three nuclear loci. overall, there was high mean coverage of individual alleles for all loci. the aic of jmodeltest found the best fit of the cytb loci with a hky+i+g model. the eno and vwf loci best fitted a tpm2uf+i  and a hky+g model was favored for the nramp locus.

phylogenetic analyses
the bayesian tree of the complete cytb is shown in figure  <dig>  the monophyly of the blc is strongly supported . there was strong support for the monophyly of e. coronatus, e. mongoz, e. macaco, e. flavifrons and e. rubriventer. the relationships among clades were only poorly supported. within the blc, we found e. rufus, e. rufifrons and e. collaris to be monophyletic. eulemur cinereiceps, e. fulvus, e. sanfordi and e. albifrons were polyphyletic. however, the individuals of e. cinereiceps from andringitra are known to be hybrids  <cit>  of e. rufifrons and e. cinereiceps.

the phylogenetic tree including museum samples revealed the same pattern as the bayesian phylogenetic tree without museum samples. most individuals were found in the expected clade based on their museum labels. museum samples of e. albifrons, e. sanfordi and e. fulvus confirmed the polyphyletic pattern described above .

bayesian gene trees for the three nuclear loci  showed no congruence with phylogenetic relationships revealed by the cytb locus. although e. coronatus, e. mongoz, e. macaco, and e. rubriventer clustered together for most of the nuclear loci, phylogenetic relationships among themselves and in relation to the blc remained unresolved. this pattern was confirmed by the statistical parsimony haplotype networks depicted in figure 5a-c for the three nuclear loci. eulemur coronatus, e. mongoz, e. rubriventer and e. macaco showed more species-specific distinct haplotypes and did not cluster together in the network. one individual of e. mongoz  shared haplotypes with members of the blc. this individual was sampled in katsepy and is a hybrid e. mongoz x e. rufus . some individuals labeled as e. flavifrons clustered within the blc. however, we have no phenotypic information on these individuals form manongarivo; thus they could also represent e. fulvus. among the members of the blc, we did not find any pattern corresponding to the relationships revealed by the mtdna analyses. several haplotypes are shared by members of different species, indicating incomplete lineage sorting for all three nuclear loci.

the genealogical sorting index showed considerable variation across loci and hypothesized lineages. nonetheless, measures of exclusive ancestry over all loci  were significant for all lineages except e. cinereiceps  and support lineage divergence. a gsi of  <dig>  was only estimated for several taxa for the cytb locus and for e. mongoz for the eno and vwf loci and for e. rubriventer and e. coronatus for the vwf locus, indicating substantial incomplete lineage sorting for our genetic loci.

x = no estimate.

population structure
bayesian population structure analysis for the members of the blc favored a k= <dig> for the number of populations after the method of evanno et al.  <cit>  and a k= <dig> after the estimated ln probability of the data. assignment plots for both k are shown in figure  <dig>  for k= <dig>  with exception of individuals  <dig> and  <dig>  all individuals of e. albifrons, e. fulvus, e. rufus and e. sanfordi were assigned to one cluster, and individuals of e. cinereceps, e. collaris and e. rufifrons formed a second cluster. for k= <dig>  individuals of e. albifrons and e. sanfordi clustered together, and individuals of e. cinereiceps, e.collaris and e. rufifrons as well as individuals of e. fulvus and e. rufus showed east-west connections .

results of the discriminant analysis of principal components  on the haplotype matrix for the blc are shown in figure  <dig>  the optimal alpha score suggested retention of six principal components and five discriminate functions. most individuals could be assigned with high probability to their respective taxon. however, there was also clear evidence for a mixed nuclear genetic composition of e. albifrons, e. fulvus and e. sanfordi, and e. cinereiceps, e. fulvus, e. rufus and e. rufifrons. eulemur collaris was best discriminated; e. cinereiceps worst. however, three out of the four e. cinereiceps samples were from the hybrid zone of andringitra.

integration of all analyses
figure  <dig> summarizes the results of four different datasets and shows significant results of pairwise comparisons for morphological data, pelage coloration and acoustic parameters as well as the gsi statistic. overall, our analyses revealed significant divergence between lineages of the blc in all four datasets. however, the different datasets showed also considerable variation in their ability to discriminate between our predefined groups, especially in subsequent pairwise comparisons of taxa. bgpcas of morphological shape and acoustic parameters showed that most variation in the data is explained by intraspecific variation.

for this reason, morphological shape and acoustic parameter analyses found also the smallest number of significant differences among species in pairwise comparisons. in contrast, variation in pelage coloration, especially in males, could be explained to a high degree by between-group variation, and consequently revealed significant differences between almost all species pairs. all species, except e. cinereiceps showed significant exclusive ancestry for the cytb locus, but also after inclusion of the three nuclear genetic loci. monophyly of the species of the blc for the cytb locus, however, is only evident for e. collaris, e. rufus and e. rufifrons . overall, results of the genetic analyses indicate a substantial amount of incomplete lineage sorting within the blc, especially for the nuclear loci. this is shown independently by discordance among the bayesian clustering results of structure and the dapc as well as in the nuclear gene trees and networks. morphological  and genetic divergence of e. coronatus, e. mongoz, e. rubriventer, e. macaco and e. flavifrons is much more pronounced than among the members of the blc.

as geographic and phylogenetic relationships between taxa of the blc are crucial for a taxonomic decision, we briefly summarize results for geographically adjacent populations.

e. albifrons and e. fulvus have adjacent geographical populations at the high plateau of tsaratanana in central northern madagascar and along the east coast between the national parks mananara nord and zahamena . eulemur sanfordi is supposed to be separated by the maevarano du nord river from western e. fulvus populations and by the bemarivo river from southern populations of e. albifrons. all three can potentially meet at the headwaters of the tasaratanana massif and/or crossing rivers. individuals seen at tsaratanana resemble phenotypically e. fulvus, but had a mixed genetic composition . all three are significantly different in male and female coloration. additionally, e. albifrons differs significantly from e. fulvus in shape. eulemur fulvus and e. sanfordi, and e. fulvus and e. albifrons seem to differ also in shape, although not significantly so . additionally, e. sanfordi had high gsi values for the cytb and eno loci, suggesting independent evolution for this lineage.

eulemur rufifrons is geographically adjacent to e. rufus in western madagascar and to e. fulvus and e. cinereiceps in eastern madagascar. furthermore, e. collaris and e. rufifrons are supposed to hybridize at berenty. excluding hybrids from andringitra, e. cinereiceps is different in mtdna from e. collaris and e. rufifrons, and differs from both in acoustic loud calls . differences in female and male pelage coloration of e. cinereiceps and e. rufifrons were also significant. eulemur collaris and e. rufifrons showed significant differences in all  <dig> datasets and e. rufifrons and e. rufus differed significantly in pelage coloration, genetics and acoustic parameters. finally, e. rufus and e. fulvus differed significantly in mtdna, female and male coloration and loud calls .

discussion
in this study, we investigated the ability of an integrative approach for the delimitation of species of a recently evolved radiation in order to falsify hypothesized lineages, in this case of the eulemur fulvus <cit> . results clearly indicate the difficulties and discordances that can arise among and within different criteria that are frequently used to delineate taxa. although we cannot assume that we have covered complete intraspecific variation for all taxa of this study our results also highlight the necessity for a detailed and geographically broad sampling in order to effectively compare intra- and inter- specific variation of hypothesized lineages. in the following, we discuss our results in relation to the taxonomy of the blc, as well as the significance of the discordances among data sets and their consequences for species delineation in this and other taxonomic groups.

how many species of true lemurs are there?
lineage divergence occurs when populations accumulate contingent properties, such as reciprocal monophyly for different genes, distinctive ecological or morphological characters, reproductive isolation or adaptive behavioral traits  <cit> . as speciation is a temporal process, these different contingent properties may not begin to accumulate at the same time during the lineage separation process. in fact, different contingent properties often yield conflicting results, especially in recent or adaptive radiations  <cit> . using different contingent properties to delimit species, however, can lead to more robust evidence of lineage separation when they are concordant  <cit> . in this study we combined multiple lines of evidence for the delimitation of seven allopatric populations of the blc across the island of madagascar. this evidence comprised data from mitochondrial and nuclear dna as well as comparisons of phenotypes in skull shape, pelage coloration and call structure.

under the general lineage concept of species, we found evidence for the lineage divergence of all seven taxa formerly considered as subspecies of eulemur fulvus. these lineages seem to have diverged very recently in allopatry, probably triggered by climatic shifts during the late pleistocene . as eulemurs are ecologically highly flexible and occupy most biogeographic regions of madagascar  <cit> , it can be assumed that genetic drift is the main mechanism generating the observed divergence of those lineages and that ecological selective processes presumably played a less important role  <cit> . therefore, we cannot assume that lineages that are separated by hundreds of kilometers, such as e. collaris and e. albifrons, but occupy similar ecological niches necessarily accumulate strong differences in skull morphology or call structure . hence, it seems reasonable to make taxonomic decisions based on lineage divergence of geographically adjacent and phylogenetically closer related lineages . following this approach, with the exception of e. cinereiceps, e. albifrons and e. sanfordi, we found evidence from three independent types of data supporting the delimitation of the taxa of the blc as separate species.

however, e. albifrons and e. sanfordi were not only significantly different in male pelage coloration, but also in female coloration, a pattern not expected considering the fact that females of these two species can be hardly distinguished externally. both species had significant gsi test statistics, indicating lineages divergence. moreover, e. sanfordi had very high gsi values for the cytb and the eno loci, and dapc could assign most e. sanfordi individuals with high probability to the respective cluster, suggesting exclusive ancestry for this taxon. a very recent split between these two taxa along with several past migration events  seem to be responsible for a high degree of incomplete lineage sorting and less divergence in other traits analyzed here. individual  <dig>  treated as e. albifrons in our analyses, was assigned with high probability to e. sanfordi. in fact, we lack phenotypic information for this sample, and it may well represent e. sanfordi as it was sampled north of the bemarivo. unfortunately, security issues did not allow us to sample the area north of the bemarivo more extensively. thus, it remains unresolved whether e. sanfordi is distributed south up to the bemarivo river, but species status is warranted. at least the museum sample from vohemar clusters with e. sanfordi, indicating that this taxon had a much larger distribution than assumed today.

a clear taxonomic decision based on our data for e. cinereiceps is difficult. the sample from manombo  clustered as a sister group to e. collaris in the mtdna gene tree. the rest of our samples were collected from the hybrid population of andringitra  <cit>  and had mitochondrial haplotypes introgressed from e. rufifrons. thus, genetically we have only one sample of “pure” e. cinereiceps from one locality and demarcation of this taxon based on genetics is difficult. additionally, sample size was also very small for the museum samples and could be one explanation why e. cinereiceps was not found to be significantly different from any of the other members of the blc in skull shape. however, e. cinereiceps differed in the acoustic structure of their chucks from adjacent e. rufifrons and e. collaris, and from e. rufifrons additionally in pelage coloration. furthermore, e. cinereiceps and e. collaris have different chromosome numbers. they can therefore not produce fertile offspring  <cit>  and would consequently qualify as species under the bsc. further genetic investigations of the hybrid zone at andringitra, which might shed additional light on the pattern of lineage divergence of e. cinereiceps in relation to e. rufifrons are under way .

discordance among data sets
we found considerable differences in the ability of different datasets to delimit among members of the blc. none of the four data sets alone could provide enough evidence for lineage separation of all species. genetic analyses and pelage coloration could discriminate between most members of the blc, followed by morphological shape analysis and acoustic analyses of loud calls.

the weak discriminatory ability and low interspecific variation of the acoustic data set might be due to the structure of the calls. most studies that used acoustic signals for species discrimination in primates analyzed calls with several syllables or even songs  <cit> . those signals show necessarily more variation due to the inherent structure of the call. furthermore, as allopatric populations normally never meet, selective pressure on calls, even those used during intergroup encounters, is probably very low. in fact, acoustic group distances and genetic group distances estimated for the cytb  were positively correlated, indicating that genetic drift might be mostly responsible for the small divergence in acoustic parameters. furthermore, loud calls of e. coronatus and e. rubriventer are much more different from loud calls of the members of the blc , suggesting that in sympatric species selective pressure on call diversity is higher than in allopatric species. future studies in areas of overlap should employ playbackexperiments to explore this topic in more depth.

the same can be assumed for the divergence of morphological shape, as allopatric populations occupy similar ecological niches. the large overlap of the members of the blc in the bgpca including the three smaller eulemurs  confirms the extensive homoplasy found in previous studies  <cit> .

it can be argued that variation in pelage coloration might be influenced by environmental factors  <cit>  and storing or preparation conditions of skins sampled in different museums. the same might be the case for acoustic variables that can be highly influenced by the environment and the distance to the animal during recordings  <cit> . to control for these potential errors, we used only mean values and those acoustic parameters that should be less influenced by the distance to the animal during recording  <cit> . and, prior to bgpca, we run general linear models for both data types and included habitat  as well as museum for the color analysis as factor in the model. none of them had significant effects on the variables . in general, data acquisition and analyses were conservative, and we aimed to cover as much intraspecific variation as possible. therefore, we included only  <dig> landmarks for the analysis of shape that could be easily reproduced and placed on all available specimens. because facial and ventral areas of museum skins were often in bad shape, areas for color measurements were chosen only on the dorsal view of the skins in order to avoid non-homologous placement of the measurement area and to cover variation of as many specimen as possible. hence, color differences of males are definitely underestimated. as such, however, the method can be easily reproduced by other researchers even for different species.

one obvious drawback of our approach is that all four kinds of data could not be collected for the same individuals. therefore, direct comparison or even combined analysis of morphological and genetic data such as offered in the software geneland  <cit>  could not be conducted. on the other hand we showed that species delimitation using several kinds of data is possible even with a completely non- invasive sampling. especially the amount of samples for genetic analyses could not have been collected with an invasive approach.

to the best of our knowledge, this is the first study that uses next generation sequencing technology to sequence multiple independent genetic loci from feces to infer species boundaries in endangered or critically endangered primates. following the conservative approach above, we intentionally used a high threshold to sort out potential genotyping errors. under the assumption that sequence variants with errors occur less frequently in the dataset than sequence variants without errors, and that false alleles occur less frequently in individuals than true alleles  <cit> , our filtering approach and a mean coverage per allele per individual ranging from 107-  <dig> among the three loci is unlikely to have produced false genotypes. in fact, after discarding sequence reads without both mids and unmatched target primers, most sequences were already filtered out. among the remaining sequences most sequence errors turned out to be chimeras of the two most abundant sequences for an individual. finally, that the nuclear dataset is unlikely to be influenced by genotyping errors is simply evident because of biological reasons. although members of the blc show a substantial mixed nuclear composition, the remaining eulemur taxa have distinct haplotypes. this pattern was not necessarily expected, but confirms phylogenetic results of previous studies  <cit>  and underlines the validity of our genotyping results.

although we had known hybrids in the data and these species can hybridize in the wild and in captivity, the mixed nuclear composition of members of the blc is more likely a consequence of incomplete lineage sorting. with the exception of the individuals from the andringitra hybrid zone there is no indication of any geographic locality with more admixed individuals as would be expected, if hybridization was the primary cause for admixed ancestry  <cit> . nevertheless, the structure results of k= <dig> revealed mixed ancestry for e. albifrons-e. sanfordi, e. collaris-e. cinereiceps-e. rufifrons and e. fulvus-e. rufus. however, whether this pattern is due to incomplete lineage sorting among phylogenetically closer related species or ongoing gene flow is beyond the scope of this article .

delimiting species with multiple data sources
using multiple lines of evidence, we showed that delimitation of members of recent radiations can be particularly challenging. because different datasets can come to different conclusions about the status of species, the use of several independent data is highly recommended in order to avoid false positives. because taxonomic classification can be treated as a hypothesis that can be modified as new evidence accumulates  <cit> , several independent data sets allow much stronger tests of a given hypothesis.

species delimitation in lemurs, however, has been recently criticized for relying too strongly on evidence from mtdna alone or for using different secondary species concepts   <cit> . it is obvious that species delimitation based on pelage coloration or morphology alone will not be very promising in cryptic species. nevertheless, there are other methods one could think of to falsify taxonomic hypothesis in cryptic species. although not intended to clarify species boundaries, delbarco-trillo et al.  <cit>  recently showed that chemical composition in scent marks between some eulemurs are significantly different from each other. integrating this approach into the methods for species delimitation in lemurs would be particularly useful for many of the cryptic species, as scent marks may play a role in species recognition  <cit> . the same applies to visual and acoustic signals, whose meaning and function to the animals in this context can be tested experimentally .

lemurs are not the only group of mammals that has been subjected to a substantial increase in species numbers. the number of primates in general more than tripled during the last two decades  <cit> . in fact, the order primates has been completely revisited following the psc  <cit> , resulting of the elevation of many taxa from subspecies to species level without new data. a similar trend can be observed in many other mammalian orders  <cit> , where similar biases have been introduced by the use of the psc, as e.g. in ungulates  <cit> . although a discussion of species concepts is way beyond the scope of this article, the psc, which was also used to give species status to the members of the blc, has several shortcomings that make its application inappropriate for theoretical and practical reasons. although there are many versions of the psc, they all emphasize a common descent, mostly referred to as monophyly, in conjunction with diagnosability, such as “a species is the smallest diagnosable cluster of individual organisms within which there is a parental pattern of ancestry and descent”  <cit> . diagnosability, however, can be achieved even for the smallest possible units that might well represent demes, populations or even family groups due to limited dispersal and reproduction among geographically close individuals of the same species  <cit> . therefore, the psc is very prone to overestimating species diversity based on local genetic structure, as has recently been demonstrated with genetic data from wild mouse lemurs  <cit> . cracraft  <cit> , for example, applied the psc and proposed species status for the sumatran tiger based on three diagnostic characters of the cytochrome b unique to tigers from sumatra and different from all tigers from the mainland. our three samples of e. rufifrons from ambadira have three sites diagnosably distinct from sequences of the cytochrome b of e. rufifrons ~ <dig> km to the south along continuous forest. do they qualify as distinct species? they could under the psc, but they definitively do not, if we consider that haplotypes of the cytb are shared among individuals from kirindy and ranomafana, which is more than  <dig> km apart and separated by madagascar’s deforested central highlands.

as evolution below and at the species level is shaped by population-level processes, taxonomic decisions require sample sizes that cover the whole intraspecific variation  <cit> . furthermore, it has been shown repeatedly that gene trees  can substantially differ from the species tree  <cit> . considering this and the fact that evolution at the species level is often reticulate, monophyly, especially of single genes, is in general not a good criterion for species delimitation. using multiple genes to estimate phylogenies and delimit species is becoming popular due to advances in sequencing technology, and several new coalescent-based methods for species delimitation have recently been developed  <cit> . these methods seem very promising for reliably identifying recently diverged lineages. however, any deviation from the standard coalescent model  is likely to overestimate species diversity, and these methods should therefore also be complemented with standard methods from morphology, ecology or behavior  <cit> .

as conservation organizations and national governments are relying strongly on the decisions of taxonomists to assess the value of protected areas or the allocation of resources for conservation, describing and raising species based on insufficient data can also be a waste of resources and additionally lead to false decisions concerning captive or natural breeding for conservation  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
we conclude that according to the criteria investigated in this study members of the brown lemur complex  are at present best classified as species according to the general lineage concept of species. as different contingent properties can arise at different times during the lineage separation process and potentially lead to ambiguous conclusions, we suggest, independent of the species concept, the utility of several independent lines of evidence, coupled with field sampling that covers intraspecific variation of the taxa under study for the delimitation of species.

