BACKGROUND
gene expression analysis is a useful technique for determining and comparing gene expression levels in healthy and diseased tissues. one of the most commonly used tools in the area of gene expression quantification is quantitative real-time reverse transcription pcr . when small amounts of nucleic acids are available, qrt-pcr is especially suitable and provides simultaneous measurement of gene expression in many different samples. if we compare this technique with others such as in situ hybridisation, qrt-pcr offers several advantages: it is not time-consuming, only a small amount of tissue is required, it can be used in high throughput systems and no post-reaction manipulation is needed. however, the use of qrt-pcr requires compensation for differences between samples, arising from the varying quality and quantity of the starting material, especially when starting with solid tissue, due to the method of rna extraction and cdna synthesis  <cit> . normalisation should include endogenous control genes , and some of the most frequently used reference genes are housekeeping genes. the ideal endogenous control should be expressed at a constant level in the different tissues of an organism at all stages of development and should be unaffected by experimental treatments. it should also be constitutively expressed in the same tissue under different circumstances. there is, however, no universal control gene that is expressed at a constant level under all conditions and in all tissues. hence, experimental treatments  <cit>  and hormonal stimulation  <cit> , as well as the different methods used to process tissue specimens  <cit>  can induce changes in the expression of typical housekeeping genes.

consequently, the success of the technique used depends on the adequate choice of the appropriate reference genes. despite many qrt-pcr studies having reported the use of a single endogenous control  <cit> , a normalisation strategy based on a single housekeeping gene can lead to erroneous results  <cit> . vandesompele et al.  <cit>  propose the use of a panel of putative reference genes on a representative number of samples, to identify the most stable of these and then establish the optimal number of genes required for the reliable normalisation of rt-pcr data. in the present study, we tested ten commonly used reference genes  of different functional classes  in heart tissue obtained from organ donors. using genorm software  <cit> , we were able to assess gene expression stability under our experimental conditions and determine how many reference genes were needed for accurate normalisation. then, by comparing these results with those generated by a similar programme, normfinder  <cit> , we identified a set of reference genes that offers reliable results for qrt-pcr data normalisation for use in gene expression studies involving heart tissue from brain-dead multiorgan donors.

RESULTS
thirty five samples of left ventricular tissue were obtained from  <dig> multiorgan donors. rna was successfully isolated and cdna synthesised from all these specimens. all the samples analysed showed a single β-actin band in the 2% agarose gel stained with ethidium bromide at the expected size , confirming the total absence of residual dna.

in each sample, qrt-pcr using sybr green was performed for ten frequently-used reference genes . the accuracy of the qrt-pcr was assessed by melt curve analysis and gel electrophoresis. gene-specific amplification was verified, by both a single peak in the melt curve and a single band in the agarose gel, for the  <dig> genes analysed in the  <dig> cdna samples. correlation coefficients  ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig>  and pcr efficiencies from  <dig> % to 104%. using the proc varcomp in the sas/stat™ software  <cit> , the reproducibility of the assay was assessed using as control material samples obtained by pooling the whole set of samples analysed in the present study. the high average correlation coefficient observed of  <dig>  indicated good intra-sample reproducibility. observed ct values for each gene were similar across different samples indicating low variability  .

the genorm software also provided a rank order of the ten candidate reference genes according to their m values . ppia, rplp and gadph were the three most stable genes. m values increased moderately for all genes, while tbp abruptly attained the highest m value. the pairwise variation  upon normalisation with the two most stable genes and introduction of the third one was  <dig> . this value decreased gradually until the addition of the fifth gene, when the trend became more or less stable but increased considerably upon the incorporation of the tenth gene .

discussion
human heart tissue specimens are very difficult to acquire. however, we managed to obtain  <dig> samples from the left ventricles of  <dig> organ donors of different age, weights and sex, whose hearts could not be used for transplant purposes for various reasons . thus, we can assume that the number and type of samples used was sufficiently high and diverse to ensure their representativity and randomness. reports of the use of qrt-pcr in human heart tissue are scarce because of the technical difficulties involved in obtaining such samples. however, given that qrt-pcr is especially suitable for determining gene expression in small pieces of tissue, we tried to establish guidelines for accurate data normalisation intended for human heart studies based on qrt-pcr.

our technical procedure proved to be a valid method of quantifying gene expression, rendering high correlation coefficients  and robust pcr efficiencies.

through genorm analysis, ppia, rplp and gadph appeared as the most stable genes and tbp the least stable . it has been reported that in over 90% of cases, gene expression data are normalised using gadph, actb, 18s rrna or 28s rrna as single control genes  <cit> . however, several studies have shown that these reference genes undergo variation according to the experimental conditions, treatment and cell cycle stage  <cit> .

in human adipocytes and preadipocytes, actb and 18s rrna gene expression levels change under hormonal stimulation  <cit> . moreover, it has been reported that actb is unsuitable as a control for gene expression analysis in interstitial cells derived from sheep heart valves  <cit> . the 18s rrna gene has been considered an ideal internal control in qrt-pcr analysis. however, ribosomal rna accounts for up to 80–90% of total cellular rna, and several studies have shown that rrna varies less under conditions that affect the expression of mrnas  <cit>  but that possible imbalances in rrna and mrna fractions between different samples makes genes encoding ribosomal rnas unsuitable as references  <cit> . as far as we are aware, no previous study has tried to identify adequate housekeeping genes for use in human heart tissue. morgan et al.  <cit>  examined the expression of genes related to the renin-angiotensin system in human atrial tissue using gadph as an endogenous control. other authors  <cit>  have used rna extracted from human endomyocardial biopsies and isolated cardiomyocytes for real-time rt-pcr using gadph, hprt and the oncogene abl as housekeeping genes. these endogenous controls showed very low variation in individual gene expression levels across cardiac pathologies, suggesting their suitable use as reference genes for quantitative pcr studies in cardiac tissue. in these previous studies, the specific testing of several candidate reference genes to determine the most suitable reference for use in cardiac tissue was not reported  <cit> . in contrast, radonic et al.  <cit>  determined transcription levels of several housekeeping genes in different human tissues, including heart, and identified tbp as the gene with the lowest range of rna transcription across tissues. this finding is in agreement with the present results.

we found ppia, rplp plus gadph to be a reliable set of genes for normalising data  according to the genorm programme. as reported by vandesompele et al.  <cit> , genorm proposes a pairwise variation of  <dig>  as the cut-off under which the inclusion of an additional control gene is not required. using our set of candidate genes, this would mean that adding a fifth gene to the four most stable genes identified would really provide the best results. notwithstanding, this cut-off of  <dig>  should not be considered in a strict sense, but rather as a reference to determine the optimal number of housekeeping genes. sometimes the observed trend can be equally informative, and using the three best reference genes is, in most cases, a valid strategy for much more accurate and reliable normalisation compared to the use of a single housekeeping gene.

using normfinder software  <cit>  as another tool to validate the expression stability of the ten candidate reference genes; gadph, ppia and rplp also achieved the best stability values. while genorm detected the two genes whose expression ratios showed least variation from those of the other genes tested, normfinder was able to identify the single gene with the most stable expression. hence, the most stable candidate gene was found to be gadph, and the least stable tbp. using this programme, we obtained the same results as with genorm except for the rank position ascribed to gadph as the most stable single gene. however, the least stable genes and most stable ones identified by genorm and normfinder were generally well-matched.

as a limitation to our study, we should mention that although we established the purity of our rna samples, due to the amount of rna available, we could not run electrophoretic tests to check rna integrity.

finally, the set of reference genes determined here as the best endogenous controls to be used in qrt-pcr studies in heart tissue has applications in developing cardiovascular diagnostic tests and therapeutic strategies that will substantially improve human health  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
it is commonly accepted that gene expression studies should be normalised using more than one reference gene. based on our results, we propose the use of the mean result rendered by ppia, rplp and gadph as housekeeping genes to normalise gene expression values obtained by qrt-pcr in heart tissue.

