BACKGROUND
new caledonian  crows  manufacture a diversity of tools, which they use for extracting embedded prey  <cit> . two of their tool types have ‘hooks’: pandanus tools  and hooked stick tools   <cit> . while the former have multiple barbs that occur naturally on the plant material , the latter have a single terminal hook that is actively crafted by the bird  <cit> , representing the only known example of hook production by a non-human species  <cit> . hooks were one of the key technological innovations of middle stone age humans , leading to the development of productive fishing technologies  and weapons of enhanced killing power  <cit> . nc crows provide unique opportunities to study the behavioural ecology, and possible evolutionary origins, of basic hook-making skills in a non-human study system.

the manufacture of hooked stick tools in nc crows has previously been described as a complex but highly standardised process, consisting of several basic steps  <cit> : selection of an appropriate forked plant stem; consecutive removal of material above and below the fork to produce a basic tool; and finally shaping of the hooked end by removing further material . given the number of possible behavioural sequences that could potentially produce a hooked stick tool , the low level of observed variation seems surprising, but may be due to small sample sizes. so far, only  <dig> manufacture episodes have been documented: four for unmarked, free-ranging crows  <cit> , and another  <dig> for two wild subjects that visited a baited feeding table  <cit> .fig.  <dig> experimental set-up for investigating hooked stick tool manufacture in new caledonian crows, and key terminology. a top view of set-up in an experimental chamber , as used in experiment  <dig>  in experiment  <dig>  only one ‘food log’ with a single extraction hole was presented. new caledonian crow b examining seven plant stems of different properties in experiment  <dig> , and c and d processing a basic tool . e schematic drawing of a forked plant stem, and terminology used to score crows’ manufacture actions. the position of the basic tool is highlighted in white. f crows can detach plant material from the stem at the:  root shaft;  hook shaft;  tool shaft ; or  joint. note that, by definition, detachment at the tool shaft is only possible through ‘cutting’, and detachment at the joint only through ‘pulling’. g description of the two methods of detaching plant material from the stem. colour-coding in panels e and g is the same as in fig.  <dig>  h photo of a hooked stick tool showing three design features: the crafted hook; stripped bark at the hooked end; and moderate crow-induced curvature of the tool shaft



behavioural variation within or between populations is the outcome of complex interactions between animals’ genetic predispositions, individual  and social learning, and/or ecological factors  <cit> . it has been suggested that, if all mechanisms except social learning can be ruled out, the observed variation can be ascribed to ‘cultural’ processes  <cit> . although widely adopted , this ‘method of exclusion’ to assess putative examples of animal cultures remains highly controversial . importantly, despite good progress with charting genetic and learning effects , researchers have only recently started investigating the role of ecological factors . in a pioneering study on chimpanzees’  ant-dipping behaviour, for example, it was found that ecology explained much of the observed between-population differences  <cit>  that had previously been attributed to cultural variation . even though subsequent investigations revealed further subtleties  <cit>  – and it is clear that behavioural variants can be both cultural and locally adaptive  <cit>  – this well-documented case study emphasised that ecological differences can underpin apparent cases of culture to a much greater extent than previously assumed. for nc crows, it has been suggested that geographic variation in the shape of their pandanus tools  is due to cumulative evolution  <cit> , where basic tool designs were progressively refined over time, but evidence for material cultures is still lacking  <cit> .

in tool making  <cit> , and construction behaviour more generally  <cit> , the properties of raw materials are likely to have profound effects on both the behaviour expressed and the morphology of the resulting artefacts – simply by permitting or restricting certain actions – but very few studies have explored these relationships. for humans, the distribution and design of prehistoric tools appear to be correlated with both the quality and quantity of available raw materials  <cit> , although recent experiments revealed that it is possible, in principle, to produce similar stone tools from a range of stone types  <cit> . amongst non-human animals, experimentally-provided raw materials have been shown to induce structural differences  in diverse artefacts, for example, in the protective cases of caddis fly larvae , when produced from un-preferred raw materials  <cit> , or in the nests of zebra finches , when built from floppy pieces of string  <cit> . given the potentially strong links between raw materials, behaviour and artefacts, and ultimately, their combined effects on fitness components, it is surprising that this topic has received so little attention to date.

to investigate intra- and inter-individual variation in nc crows’ manufacture of hooked stick tools, we provided wild-caught subjects with naturalistic extraction tasks, and multiple stems of the plant material they prefer for tool making . using a large sample of nc crows, we documented considerable variation in manufacture sequences, as well as novel tool-detachment and processing behaviours. having observed seasonal change in the abundance and properties of plant materials in our study area, we designed a companion experiment to investigate whether raw-material properties influence behavioural actions during tool production . taken together, our results show that hooked stick tool manufacture is more variable than previously thought and that the observed variation is at least partly due to plant properties. apart from providing valuable insights into our crow study system, our findings more generally caution against making premature claims of cultural variation, whilst at the same time highlighting exciting opportunities for future studies of the effects of raw materials on animal construction behaviour.

RESULTS
experiment  <dig> – variation in tool-manufacture behaviour
each crow was provided with an extraction task and several forked stems of desmanthus virgatus  that were judged to be suitable for hooked stick tool manufacture . we distinguished two methods of releasing a ‘basic tool’, by scoring the place where the subject gripped the plant material  and the place of subsequent detachment : if these were identical, the behavioural action was considered a ‘cut’, and otherwise a ‘pull’ . releasing a basic tool from a forked stem thus requires two cuts, a cut and a pull, or a single pull. while the cut method had been observed before  <cit> , we report here the first conclusive documentation of techniques involving pulls, which are commonly employed by crows in our study population .fig.  <dig> new caledonian crows’ manufacture of hooked stick tools in experiment  <dig>  a stacked bars are  <dig> sequences of behavioural actions from  <dig> subjects. actions are colour-coded, and grouped into three main stages:  release of the basic tool;  processing of the basic tool; and  deployment of the tool. note that, when the subject first detaches the raw material at the hook shaft or the root shaft, it can carry out other actions before releasing the basic tool at the root shaft, the hook shaft, or the joint . sequences are ordered from left to right according to subjects’ gape colouration  and identity . sequences during which crows stripped bark are marked with black bars at the top. for manufacture sequences of experiment  <dig>  see additional file 6: figure s <dig>  b, c and d show, respectively, the number of action types per sequence, the time spent processing the hook, and the time spent bending the tool shaft, for  <dig> subjects that had each produced three or more sequences. boxplots show, where applicable, the median , the first and third quartiles , an approximate 95 % confidence interval , and outliers 



after the release of the basic tool, crows used seven different processing action types , including bark stripping and bending of the tool shaft. following an initial observation that tools recovered in our study site often lacked bark at the hooked end and exhibited pronounced curvature  <cit>  , we confirmed with our behavioural experiments that these design features are actively induced by crows , rather than merely being a by-product of tool detachment or deployment. although we did not score bark stripping systematically, since it often coincided with the processing of the hook,  <dig> of our  <dig>  subjects unambiguously expressed the behaviour at least once during experimental trials . ten of our  <dig> subjects  exhibited tool-bending behaviour, which involved:  trapping the tool under one or both feet and bending the tool shaft by bill ;  holding the tool in the bill and pressing the tool shaft or tool tip against a firm substrate, such as the floor or a log ; or  inserting one end of the tool into a hole and pulling the tool shaft sideways by bill  . the majority of tools produced during trials were noticeably curved , but it remains to be quantified how much extra curvature crows manage to add to stems during tool processing.

individuals differed significantly in the median: number of action types per manufacture sequence ; time spent processing the hook ; and time spent bending the tool shaft . none of these measures was significantly related to gape colouration . sequences of behavioural actions during processing varied significantly more between subjects, than within subjects , but differences were not correlated with gape colouration .

there was some variation in how consistently individuals expressed key behaviours . for instance, ha <dig> and eu <dig> used both cut and pull as their first actions interchangeably, while ce <dig>  and cs <dig>  exclusively used pulls and cuts, respectively. similarly, an <dig> only sometimes bent the tool shaft, in contrast to an <dig> and ha <dig>  who bent in every sequence, and eu <dig> and am <dig> who never exhibited the behaviour. finally, some birds – such as an <dig>  ha <dig> and ce <dig> – stripped bark occasionally, while others were more consistent: an <dig> and hj <dig> always peeled bark, and es <dig> and am <dig> never did. since birds were kept in aviaries for comparatively brief periods of time, some of these seemingly idiosyncratic differences may have been due to seasonally changing raw-material properties, as explored in detail below.

experiment  <dig> – effects of raw material on tool-manufacture behaviour
seven subjects were each provided with eight plant stems of different properties , ranging from green and flexible  to woody and rigid , with the two stems in the middle of the range  matched as closely as possible . initially, only seven of these stems were presented for the crow to choose from, with the control stem held in reserve . when a bird had chosen one of these seven stems to manufacture a tool and extract bait, this tool was removed and the crow could choose again from the remaining stems; at the end of the trial the control stem was presented. all birds manufactured tools from – and extracted bait with – the control stem, confirming that non-manufacture of tools from any of the seven earlier stems reflected the subject’s assessment of plant properties, rather than resulting from satiation or demotivation. taken together, the subjects of this experiment manufactured  <dig> tools  out of the  <dig> provided stems . thirty-seven of the manufactured tools were hooked stick tools, and five were non-hooked stick tools.fig.  <dig> influence of raw-material properties on the tool-manufacture behaviour of new caledonian crows in experiment  <dig>  a percentage of crows manufacturing tools from the stems provided in choice trials . b order  in which stems were chosen by crows . black values are for all stems, with unchosen stems being assigned a value of  <dig> , and grey values are for chosen stems only . c time to release the basic tool 



we recorded the order  in which crows chose the provided stems . stems that were not used by subjects were assigned a value of  <dig>  using a permutation test  <cit> , we found that subjects chose stems of material score  <dig> significantly earlier than expected by chance  and tended to do so for stems of material scores  <dig> and  <dig> . controlling for individual differences , material score predicted whether or not crows manufactured a hooked stick tool out of a stem , with fewer hooked stick tools produced from stems at either end of the presented range . crows spent least time gripping a stem before releasing the basic tool  when handling stems of material score  <dig> .

sequences tended to contain more actions when the stems’ material score was high . pulls appeared to be used more frequently with higher material scores , but this relationship was non-significant . given the multitude of possible release strategies , it is unsurprising that this global statistical model failed to pick up an effect of raw-material properties. interestingly, however, closer inspection of the data revealed a very consistent pattern in a subset of cases: if the first detachment happened at the hook shaft, the second action was always a cut for stems of material scores 1– <dig>  and a pull for stems of scores 5– <dig> . of the five birds with valid manufacture sequences for both matched and control stems, three used the same first action  for both stems, one attempted to do so , and one bird used different first action types. this sample is insufficient for formal statistical analyses, but the repeatability of results is qualitatively consistent with an effect of raw materials on manufacture behaviour.fig.  <dig> new caledonian crows’ method of releasing basic tools in experiment  <dig>  place and mode of detachment for the first  and second  actions of manufacture sequences; for a detailed explanation of colour-coding and terminology, see fig.  <dig>  the attempted and realised place of detachment is only shown for first actions, as they were the same for all second actions. tool icons indicate when the basic tool  was released from the plant stem, and numbers above bars are manufacture sample sizes across subjects. three manufacture sequences  are not shown, as they deviated from the general pattern 



seasonal patterns of tool-manufacture behaviour
the availability and properties of the crows’ preferred plant materials change significantly in our study site over the course of a few months, from august onwards, as the rainy season is approaching . initially, young growing stems are relatively thin in diameter and flexible, while later on, stems will get thicker in diameter and/or become woodier. although we attempted to standardise the stems used for experiment  <dig>  to correspond to the tools we had previously recovered from free-ranging crows , our selection was inevitably subject to environmental availability. given that raw material influenced hooked stick tool manufacture in experiment  <dig>  we investigated the possibility that temporal changes in raw materials might have driven at least part of the variation observed in experiment  <dig> 

the diameter of stems used by crows in trials of experiment  <dig> changed  over the course of the season , peaking in october . while this change in itself is not very informative, as it is due to the combined effects of our sampling of raw materials and crows’ choices , it is noteworthy that the pattern was mirrored by our estimate of manufacture effort, which was lowest in october and increased afterwards . in fact, in experiment  <dig>  the stems that crows detached most quickly  were of comparable diameter to early-october tools in experiment  <dig> , providing further support for a link between material properties and crow behaviour.fig.  <dig> seasonal variation in new caledonian crows’ tool-manufacture behaviour. a manufacture sequences from experiment  <dig>  reordered by calendar date, and with information added on incomplete behavioural actions and actions that were completed through multiple attempts. for a description of colour coding and manufacture stages, see fig.  <dig>  sequences produced on the same day are grouped with a bracket underneath. most-effective attempts and incomplete attempts are marked  and last attempts are marked ; note that  and  can coincide . temporal change in b the diameter of manufactured tools, and c the time taken to release the basic tool, with corresponding model fits 



in order to examine possible seasonal changes in hook tool manufacture sequences, we re-plotted all sequences from experiment  <dig> in temporal order, this time including incomplete behavioural actions and actions that were completed through multiple attempts, to highlight cases where birds may have struggled with the material . the number of actions in manufacture sequences increased  over time , and processing sequences became significantly more dissimilar to each other the more time had passed between trials . for reference, in experiment  <dig>  processing sequences tended to be more dissimilar for stems of divergent material scores .

discussion
we conducted the largest-ever experimental study on nc crows, to elucidate aspects of the species’ intriguing hook-making behaviour. experiment  <dig> revealed high levels of within- and between-individual variation in the manufacture sequences of hooked stick tools, including hitherto-undescribed behaviours. experiment  <dig> demonstrated that plant properties significantly influenced the manufacture process, and complementary analyses suggested that at least part of the behavioural variation observed in experiment  <dig> can be explained by seasonally-changing raw materials.

the release of the basic tool is an important step in the manufacturing process of hooked stick tools, since it results in a functional tool, even though crows will usually continue with further processing. in contrast to an earlier study  <cit> , where two crows were observed to release basic tools from the plant by cutting the hook shaft, and then cutting the root shaft, our subjects released basic tools also by a combination of cutting and pulling actions, or simply by pulling the tool shaft . the latter technique enables crows to manufacture a functional, albeit crude, hooked stick tool with a single behavioural action. based on first glimpses of manufactures in the wild, hunt  <cit>  inferred that crows may use a single ‘nipping cut’ for detaching a basic tool, but he later appeared doubtful of this interpretation  <cit> . it is impossible to tell whether these were behaviours that we would now class as detachments at the joint using a single ‘pull’, but some of our subjects clearly gripped tool shafts some distance away from the joint when pulling, which has not been previously described. it is also interesting to note that we observed crows making distinctly hooked tools with a single swift pull action, and deploying them straightaway, without any hook processing , which contrasts with hunt’s  <cit>  earlier observations. we suggest that such a one-step approach is a likely precursor of multi-step manufacture techniques, such as ‘cut–pull’ or ‘cut–cut’. these more involved techniques would not only afford more control over the eventual shape of hooks, but they would also permit hooks to be produced from plant species, or stems with certain material properties, where a simple pull might not work  <cit> .

if hooked tools are more efficient than non-hooked variants for foraging, we would expect selection to favour their production by crows, and potentially, even their progressive technological refinement  <cit> . apart from the hook itself, hooked stick tools produced by nc crows in our study site have two additional design features that are likely to increase foraging efficiency   <cit> : a curved tool shaft , and a bark-free functional end . our experiments provided the first detailed documentation of how nc crows induce these features during the manufacture process . given that they are not necessary, but may significantly improve tool functionality, bending and bark stripping may have been  additions to the hooked stick tool manufacture repertoire, following the discovery of the initial detachment step.

natural variation in behaviour can be generated by a range of factors, including differences in genetic make-up, individual and social learning, and/or ecological conditions  <cit> . the absence of age-dependent changes in tool-manufacture behaviour  was surprising, since nc crows have been previously reported to hone their tool-related skills during a protracted developmental period . notwithstanding some uncertainty in the ageing of corvids based on gape colouration , we are confident that birds with black gapes  were adults – a group of subjects that was found in our experiments to exhibit considerable variation in manufacturing behaviour . at the other extreme, some subjects in our sample were evidently still very young, based both on their physical appearance and behaviour , yet exhibited highly dexterous tool-manufacture behaviour . this could indicate either the existence of specific genetic predispositions  <cit> , or that crows learn the required manufacture techniques very early on during development. it seems likely that individual and social learning contribute to the acquisition of manufacture techniques, but further work is required to quantify such effects.

the properties of raw materials affected several aspects of nc crows’ manufacture behaviour. although subjects were able to manufacture tools from material that varied substantially in robustness, they exhibited a clear preference for stems in the mid- to high-end of the provided range . manufacture from stems of either extreme of the provided spectrum proved difficult, and we had the impression  that tools produced from very thin and green material were generally too flexible or fragile to be functional. exactly how raw-material properties influence the morphology, and efficiency, of the resulting tools, remains to be investigated, but our study cautions that plant materials may contribute to between-population variation in nc crow behaviour . thus, when assessing the possibility of material culture in these birds  <cit> , it is essential to chart the availability and usage of different plant species  <cit>  , as well as their mechanical properties.

plants change seasonally, as rainfall and rising temperatures promote growth, flowering and fruiting. indeed, we found in our study site that the abundance and appearance of plant stems used by crows for tool manufacture changes considerably over relatively short time periods . despite our efforts to standardise the materials presented to crows in experiment  <dig>  the diameter of tools changed as the season progressed, peaking in october . a concurrent change in manufacture effort  suggested that crows found it easiest to handle stems of a diameter that matched the ‘optimal’ range identified by experiment  <dig> . furthermore, in experiment  <dig>  sequences became more divergent the more time had passed between trials, which again appears to agree with experiment  <dig>  where sequence dissimilarity was a function of material properties. on the other hand, based on results from experiment  <dig>  we would have expected sequence length in experiment  <dig> to track changes in stem/tool diameter , resulting in shorter sequences towards the end of the study period – instead, we observed a progressive increase in sequence length , which would imply that material properties other than diameter had changed. this said, temporal patterns shown in fig.  <dig> should be treated cautiously, as we had to pool data from two study years , which may have differed in plant phenology and/or fieldworkers’ selection of experimental stems. although it is admittedly difficult at present to reconcile all available pieces of evidence, our analyses provide important first pointers that changes in raw materials may influence nc crows’ hook tool manufacture behaviour. future studies must now take on the challenge of experimentally isolating the effects of purely dimensional and mechanical plant properties, and of systematically charting seasonal changes in raw materials. this topic is of wider significance, as such seasonality effects are likely to play a role for a range of other animal construction behaviours, most notably avian nest building  <cit> , as indicated by first data for two weaver bird species  <cit> .

a number of studies have investigated how animals choose raw materials for their constructions  <cit> , including tool manufacture  <cit> . such selectivity is crucial, as the properties of the raw material may influence subsequent behaviour, and the morphology of the resulting artefact, simply by requiring, allowing or preventing certain actions. wild bearded capuchin monkeys  select materials that allow them to crack nuts efficiently  <cit> ; chimpanzees prefer particular tree species for the construction of their night nests  <cit> , and manufacture different tool types from different plants  <cit> ; and orang-utans  choose rigid branches for building the main structure of their nests, and thinner ones of the same tree for lining them  <cit> . all these examples suggest that, for certain tasks, some materials are better than others, presumably because of their properties and the way they can be handled. but, they do not answer the crucial question of how the material itself influences construction behaviour, and the morphology of the resulting artefact.

although this topic has been largely overlooked in the literature on non-human animals, the influence of raw materials on the morphology of human stone-tool artefacts has been discussed for over a century  <cit> . interestingly, experimental studies have reached different conclusions about the degree to which variation in artefacts can be attributed to raw-material constraints. raw material had a predictable influence on flake-breakage patterns during knapping, which highlights the fact that any attempt to use these patterns to infer past human behaviour should control for material properties  <cit> . on the other hand, a modern stone-knapper was able to produce morphologically indistinguishable tools from a range of raw materials, which emphasises the danger of assuming that differences in raw materials between sites can entirely account for variation in tool morphology  <cit> . both raw-material constraints and the manufacturer’s technical competence  can mediate the influence of raw material on tool manufacture. whereas archaeologists are confined to investigating the manufacture process and material properties separately – either by observing modern humans creating replica tool artefacts from different materials, or by searching for associations between the morphology of pre-historic artefacts and the environmental distribution of raw materials – non-human study systems provide unique opportunities to study the complex interactions between material properties, manufacturing behaviour, and the morphology of the resulting tools.

CONCLUSIONS
our discovery of novel tool manufacture behaviours in nc crows enabled us to construct a plausible scenario for the evolutionary origins, and gradual refinement, of the species’ remarkable hooked stick tool making. furthermore, our experimental demonstration of a link between raw-material properties and aspects of tool manufacture provides an alternative hypothesis for some of the regional differences in tool behaviour observed in nc crows, and a range of primate species. while many earlier studies have treated possible ecological correlates of animal tool behaviour as inconvenient confounds, our study highlights opportunities for exciting future research in this area  <cit> . our experimental approach can be applied, in principle, to any animal species that is known to manufacture tools, nests, or other artefacts  <cit> , providing scope for broad taxonomic comparisons.

