BACKGROUND
connective tissue, including the fasciae surrounding all muscles and organs, forms a continuous network throughout the body. this network also includes superficial subcutaneous connective tissue  which forms interconnecting longitudinal fibrous sheets intermixed with adipose tissue and linked to the skin by string-like "skin ligaments"  <cit> . recent evidence suggests that this body-wide connective tissue network is not only composed of a web-like collagenous matrix, but also includes a network of fibroblasts that are dynamically responsive to mechanical stimulation  <cit> . these fibroblasts are linked to the collagen matrix by specialized proteins, as well as to each other by abundant cell-to-cell contacts  <cit> . modern understanding of complex systems suggests that, given these two types of interconnections, the dynamic responsiveness of fibroblasts within connective tissue may be affected by the structural characteristics of the collagenous network both locally and at a distance  <cit> . understanding these potentially important phenomena requires non-invasive measurements of both collagen network structure and cell function that can be performed in live animals or humans. such measurements could be used to quantify changes over time and in response to specific experimental stimuli. recently developed techniques using injectable fluorescent tagged proteins allow functional assessment of cells in live animals  <cit> . non-invasive in vivo measurement of collagen network microstructure has been previously achieved using polarization sensitive optical coherence tomography   <cit> . however, this technique can only visualize structures within 1– <dig> millimeters of the skin surface, and is not well suited to the examination of deeper subcutaneous and perimuscular connective tissues. a technique allowing quantitative evaluation of both superficial and deep connective tissue network structure therefore may open up a new area of investigation in systems biology.

for many organ systems , ultrasound is increasingly used to visualize human anatomy non-invasively and obtain in vivo tissue measurements  <cit> . in addition, elasticity imaging techniques use signal processing methods on consecutive ultrasound frames to detect tissue motion and strain, providing biomechanical as well as morphological information from ultrasound data  <cit> . elastography also has had an important impact on several clinical and research applications, such as the detection of differences in tissue stiffness associated with pathology in the breast  <cit> , prostate  <cit> , blood vessels  <cit> , heart  <cit> , skin  <cit> and cartilage  <cit> . during ultrasound imaging of biological materials, echoes generated by homogeneous material  produce diffusely scattered signals, while echoes generated by interfaces of organized tissues with different acoustic impedances  produce more correlated "specular" signals  <cit> . it is generally assumed that the echogenic bands seen in human subcutaneous tissue correspond to connective tissue. this notion is supported by studies of connective tissue structures using both ultrasound and magnetic resonance imaging   <cit> , as well as the successful use of echogenic bands as landmarks during ultrasound-guided percutaneous procedures such as regional anesthesia  <cit> . however, to our knowledge, the correspondence between connective tissue structures revealed by ultrasound and "gold-standard" histological tissue identification has not been demonstrated quantitatively. since human connective tissue contains a combination of adipose and fibrous  tissues, the majority of specular echoes forming ultrasound images of connective tissue are expected to originate from interfaces between regions with predominantly fat , regions with predominantly collagen , and regions with predominantly glycosaminoglycans and water . several parameters, including the ratio of specular-to-diffuse backscatter coefficients and the ultrasound intensity signal-to-noise ratio, have been used to assess tissue organization by quantifying the presence of organizational scatterers within tissues  <cit> . these measures, however, do not reflect structural continuity in a given plane or direction, which is one of principal characteristics of connective tissue. semi-variogram  analysis is a technique so far little applied to biology but commonly used in the hydrogeological and geophysical communities to evaluate the organization of laminar structures beneath the earth's surface  <cit> . statistical analysis of ultrasound images using semi-variograms therefore offers a new way to quantify the organizational pattern of connective tissue in vivo, specifically regarding the structural continuity of longitudinal collagenous sheets, as well as changes in this structural organization over time.

the goals of this study were 1) examine the degree of correspondence between the three dimensional pattern of echoes generated by ultrasound imaging of connective tissue and the three dimensional pattern formed by fibrous connective tissue in histological serial sections of the same piece of tissue and 2) show that ultrasound can be used to quantify dynamic changes in connective tissue structure in vivo induced using a previously developed robotic acupuncture needling technique  <cit> . we have previously demonstrated in animal experiments that rotation of an inserted ultra-fine acupuncture needle will cause winding and gathering of collagen fibers from the periphery toward the needle, and therefore can be used to achieve highly specific mechanical perturbations of fibrous connective tissue  <cit> . in this study, we have combined robotic needling with ultrasound elasticity imaging techniques, ultrasound semi-variogram analyses and histology to quantify structural changes occurring in connective tissue as a result of needle rotation. we used 1) elasticity imaging techniques to map areas of tissue motion, 2) histology to identify tissue structures in relation to ultrasound images and 3) semi-variograms to quantify changes in tissue spatial organization over time.

RESULTS
comparison of three dimensional ultrasound and histology image visualizations
in one anesthetized subject undergoing spinal fusion surgery, we first performed ultrasound examination of a  <dig> ×  <dig> ×  <dig> cm <dig> cube of tissue at the bone graft site, then excised a corresponding subcutaneous tissue biopsy specimen that was fixed and processed for histology , . our goal was to compare the three dimensional pattern formed by echoes in the ultrasound images with the three dimensional pattern formed by fibrous connective tissue in the same piece of tissue. distinct transverse echogenic bands in the 2-d ultrasound images  visually matched with collagenous bands on the corresponding histology images . computerized visualizations of serial ultrasound  and histology  images showed similar longitudinal "sheet-like" structures with both methods .

dynamic changes in connective tissue structure during needle rotation
we first examined the effect of acupuncture needle rotation in one subject undergoing surgery using a combination of ultrasound and histology. we acquired ultrasound images continuously during robotic acupuncture needle rotation at the bone graft site, then excised the corresponding piece of tissue with the needle still in place. figure 4a shows the relative locations of ultrasound images, biopsy and needle. in figure 4b, a spatial plot of cumulative tissue displacement during needle rotation  shows that tissue displacement was maximal in the area surrounding the needle. figure 4d–k show that, in histological sections, a "whorl" of connective tissue was present in the area surrounding the needle corresponding to the area of maximal tissue displacement in figure 4b. this connective tissue whorl was similar to that observed in previous animal studies  <cit> . at the same location surrounding the needle, semi-variogram analysis of b-scan ultrasound images revealed a gradual change in the shape of the semi-variogram curve during the successive ultrasound frames acquired during needle rotation . this suggested that needle rotation caused not only tissue movement, but also change in tissue structure.

in order to further investigate whether needle rotation consistently induces change in tissue structure that is measurable with ultrasound, we tested ten non-surgical subjects. in each subject, we acquired ultrasound images during needling at the same point on the thigh bilaterally, with right and left sides of the body randomized to needle rotation vs. no rotation. figure  <dig> shows ultrasound b-scans, cumulative tissue displacement and semi-variograms in a representative subject during needle rotation  compared with no rotation . figure 5b shows that cumulative tissue displacement during rotation was greatest in the area surrounding the needle. comparison of semi-variograms computed for successive ultrasound frames with and without rotation revealed that a greater change in the shape of the semi-variogram curve occurred during rotation , compared with no rotation . the greatest effects of rotation were seen at the intersection of the needle with the perimuscular connective tissue plane, indicating a specific effect of the needle on connective tissue, rather than non-specific movement of the entire tissue region . in some subjects, the area under the semi-variogram curve  increased during rotation, while it decreased in others . the change in auc in some cases persisted during the post-rotation period,  suggesting that plastic, rather than transient, tissue deformation had occurred. in other cases, the tissue appeared to "rebound" toward its original conformation after the end of rotation . consistent with this heterogeneous response across subjects, we found no evidence of differences in the mean auc  between rotation and no rotation conditions among the ten subjects tested . rotation did, however, produce a significant increase in frame-to-frame variability: there was a greater than 10-fold increase  in the variability of the area under the semi-variogram curve  during rotation compared with no rotation among the ten subjects. for semi-variograms calculated parallel to the skin, vauc was  <dig>  during rotation compared with  <dig>  no rotation. similar results were obtained in the perpendicular direction . when the order of frames was taken into consideration, the mean absolute change in area under the semi-variogram curve  across successive frames was approximately two-fold greater during rotation compared to no-rotation both parallel  and perpendicular  to the skin.

together, our results show that 1) needle rotation produced changes in connective tissue structure and 2) individuals responded differently from one another in response to the same mechanical input . this heterogeneous response of tissues observed among subjects was interesting and may be due to differences in initial tissue structure. increased or decreased structural continuity over time may correspond to collagenous bundles either becoming more straight and tightly organized  or "breaking up" due to the mechanical pull resulting from the tissue winding around the needle. whether collagen bundles straighten or break in response to a given mechanical input may depend on a number of factors including collagen bundle size, cross-linking, tissue glycosaminoglycan concentration and water content  <cit> . further studies will be needed to examine dynamic tissue behavior in relation to initial tissue factors and may lead to important new insights on how connective tissue behaves in the presence of pathology including injury, inflammation, scarring and fibrosis.

a potential limitation of structural tissue analysis based on ultrasound imaging is that the strength of reflected ultrasound signals is dependent to some degree on the orientation of a given structure relative to the direction of the incident wave. in this study, because the ultrasound transducer was placed perpendicular to the skin, organized structures oriented parallel to the skin would be expected to generate stronger echoes than structures perpendicular to the skin. figure  <dig> indeed suggests that the small transverse septae within subcutaneous tissue are less well seen in the ultrasound images compared with the large longitudinal sheets. however, the close similarity between ultrasound and histology semi-variograms for both directions  indicates that ultrasound, nevertheless, captured the dominant structural characteristics of the tissue. further studies examining other types of connective tissue should consider this limitation and control for ultrasound transducer position when comparing different experimental conditions.

CONCLUSIONS
the complementary techniques used in this study show that the laminar collagenous structures seen with ultrasound reorganized during rotation of an inserted needle. these changes were localized to the area of the needle and were accompanied by a "whorl" of collagen in corresponding biopsy sections. the combination of ultrasound and semi-variogram analysis used in this study is novel in biology. these imaging methods may be used along with dynamic visualization of molecular markers and computational modeling to investigate connective tissue as a functional network system capable of responding to local perturbations.

