BACKGROUND
neuronal networks are strongly influenced by neuromodulatory systems; consequently, the properties and dynamics of particular networks can vary enormously depending on the levels, timing and composition of neuromodulatory influences  <cit> . while such influences often vary on short time scales, neurons are also influenced by changes in neuromodulatory input over relatively long time scales. in many biological systems, prolonged exposure to agonists is associated with adaptation to those substances or their effects. neurons, in particular, are known to adapt or react homeostatically to changes in their input levels or in their milieu , raising the possibility that prolonged neuromodulation will be associated with some recovery of the affected properties. at present, however, the question of adaptive or homeostatic reactivity to long-term neuromodulation has rarely been addressed.

some of the most important long-term neuromodulatory processes in the mammalian brain are those that regulate a striking form of cortical synchrony known as ‘slow oscillations’, ‘slow wave’ or ‘slow rhythmic’ activity. this activity pattern is characterized by transitions between periods of neuronal discharges  and periods of near-complete quiescence  which occur in remarkably synchronous fashion in large cortical domains. macroscopically, these synchronous transitions appear in electroencephalogram  recordings as low frequency, high amplitude waves . at the single neuron level, these transitions typically coincide with transitions between relatively depolarized membrane potentials , which are often accompanied by action potential firing and strong hyperpolarizations  during which neurons are silent. following the lead of harris and thiele  <cit>  we will refer to these network-wide, synchronous transitions between ‘on’ and ‘off’ periods as ‘synchrony’. note that in this context synchrony does not refer to the degree to which multiple neurons fire action potentials simultaneously at millisecond time precision.

in the intact brain, synchrony as defined above is strongly regulated by brainstem and basal forebrain noradrenergic and cholinergic neurons which project to widespread cortical regions  <cit> . the activation of these neuromodulatory systems strongly suppresses network synchrony and promotes asynchronous activity patterns typical of aroused and attentive behavioral states. in contrast, reduced activity of these systems, which occurs mainly during periods of nrem  sleep, is associated with the prominent appearance of network synchrony as defined above. importantly, however, neither these forms of network synchrony nor their modulation by acetylcholine  and noradrenaline  are limited to the intact cortex, as similar activity patterns occur in brain slabs  <cit> , acute and organotypic cortical preparations  and even in networks of dissociated cortical neurons .

where networks of dissociated cortical neurons in culture are concerned, synchrony takes the form of network-wide bursting activity which lasts for several hundreds of milliseconds, separated by longer periods  of near-complete quiescence or sparse, asynchronous action potentials  <cit> . these network-wide bursts are less frequent and more stereotyped as compared to those observed in the intact brain, which might be expected given the smaller size and lower connection density of these networks as well as the lack of reentrant pathways  <cit> ). moreover, it has been suggested that the degree of synchrony in these and other in vitro preparations is exacerbated by various homeostatic responses to deafferentation, resulting in activity forms that share some similarities with seizure-related paroxysmal activity . yet, while the forms of synchrony observed in vitro differ in many respects from those associated with low arousal levels in the intact brain, their underlying biophysical mechanisms share important similarities. both in vivo  <cit>  and in vitro  <cit>  experiments, as well as modeling studies  <cit> , indicate that these forms of synchrony are not imposed by some external circuitry, global inhibition or pacemaker cells, but probably arise from the interplay of spontaneous synaptic activity, nonlinear neuronal recruitment cascades, refractoriness and network wide synaptic depression , effectively giving rise to a default activity mode, as it has been referred to  <cit>  . furthermore, and in full concordance with their activities in vivo  <cit> , cholinergic and adrenergic agonists suppress network synchrony in cell culture and slice preparations, shifting spontaneous activity away from this ‘default’ mode towards desynchronized, tonic firing modes  <cit> . thus, while synchrony in networks of cultured cortical neurons does not fully replicate the forms of synchrony related to low neuromodulatory tone in the intact brain, the similarities in underlying mechanisms and the comparable effects of neuromodulation suggest that this preparation is a useful model system for studying relationships between prolonged neuromodulation and network synchrony.

as mentioned above, the tendency of neurons and neuronal networks to adapt or react homeostatically raises the possibility that prolonged neuromodulation will be associated with some reactive adaptation over long time scales. indeed, in a prior study  <cit>  we found that the chronic, prolonged  exposure of networks of cultured cortical neurons to a cholinergic agonist is associated with the gradual growth of excitatory synapses and, intriguingly, to the gradual reemergence of synchrony . if neuronal networks adapt to neuromodulatory input, it might be asked how the necessity to suppress network synchrony is ultimately addressed, in particular given that this activity form seems to be incompatible with attentive states and arousal  <cit> . conceivably, the contradiction between this necessity and diminishing neuromodulator efficacy might have been resolved by adjusting neuromodulatory input to match instantaneous neuromodulator efficacy. alternatively, this contradiction might have been alleviated by the existence of multiple neuromodulatory systems  <cit>  that exert similar effects but employ different cellular mechanisms. if, however, neither of these routes resolve the need to suppress synchrony, periodic neuromodulator withdrawal periods  might be ultimately required. to date, however, none of these possibilities have been explored or addressed experimentally.

here we used a system based on networks of cultured cortical neurons, ach microinjections and a novel closed-loop ‘synchrony-clamp’ to address these questions. specifically, we examined the capacity of both fixed and feedback-based adjusted cholinergic input to suppress network synchrony continually as defined above. we then examined the ability of multiple neuromodulators to suppress network synchrony continually. finally we examined the possibility that cholinergic neuromodulatory efficacy might be preserved on extended time scales by periodically withdrawing cholinergic input.

RESULTS
rational and experimental approach
to examine relationships between prolonged cholinergic input and network synchrony we developed an experimental system which allowed us to tightly control and manipulate cholinergic input, measure its effects on network activity and synchrony, and assay changes in its capacity to suppress synchrony, with the latter serving as a measure of adaptive or homeostatic reactions occurring in the same networks. this system, shown schematically in figure  <dig>  is based on primary cultures of dissociated rat cortical neurons growing on substrate integrated multielectrode arrays , a microinjection system used to apply minute ach solution volumes in the form of brief pulses, and a controller used to apply ach at fixed intervals  or at intervals modified online as required to ‘clamp’ synchrony at fixed, low levels . to terminate ach signaling after each application and avoid ach buildup in the media, acetylcholine esterase  was added to the network cell culture media , assuring continuous and efficient ach enzymatic breakdown  <cit> . ach injections were delivered via a needle immersed in the culture media, hovering about  <dig> mm above the neuronal network , whereas a slow continuous mixing system was used to accelerate the dilution and distribution of the applied ach and facilitate its subsequent enzymatic breakdown . in addition, the system also included provisions for optimal environmental conditions , providing a stable environment of 37°c, 5% co <dig> and one to two media replacements/day, resulting in experiments which were effectively open-ended  <cit> .figure  <dig> 
setup used to examine long-term effects of ach applications on network synchrony in open-and closed-loop regimes. a) schematic illustration of the experimental system used to record from neurons growing on mea substrates, maintain their viability, and apply ach pulses at predetermined rates or at rates adjusted online to maintain network synchrony at predefined levels. b) schematic illustration of open- and closed-loop experimental protocols. note that in open-loop experiments ach application timings are predefined, whereas in closed-loop experiments, ach application timings are determined online according to instantaneous sync ratio values calculated by the real-time controller . c) preparatory and experimental phases. each experiment was preceded by the following preparatory phases: phase i, slow perfusion ; phase ii, activation of continuous mixing system ; phase iii, addition of ache  to the mea dish and perfusion media reservoir ; phase iv, insertion of ach application needle into the mea dish; and phase v, experiment . note that the experimental component added in each phase was in effect from that moment until the end of the experiment. see methods for further details. ach, acetylcholine; ache, acetylcholine esterase; mea, multielectrode array.



pulsed ach applications effectively suppress network synchrony, but synchrony eventually reemerges
under baseline conditions, and in agreement with many reports  <cit> , spontaneous activity in the cortical networks used here occurs as periods of synchronous, network-wide bursting activity which lasts for several hundreds of milliseconds, separated by longer periods  of near-complete quiescence or sparse, asynchronous action potentials . as mentioned in the introduction, these network activity patterns share many similarities with the forms of synchrony observed in vivo under regimes of low neuromodulatory levels. as shown in figure 2b, this similarity also extends to the single neuron level: intracellular whole-cell recordings from individual neurons  performed concomitantly with extracellular recordings from the  <dig> electrodes of the meas invariably showed that periods of network-wide bursting activity were tightly correlated with neuronal membrane potential depolarizations, often accompanied by the firing of action potentials, whereas network quiescence periods were associated with deep and constant membrane hyperpolarizations . closer examination  revealed that these depolarizations and hyperpolarizations exhibited a marked resemblance to ‘up’ and ‘down’ states recorded in vivo , as did their tight temporal correlation with network ‘on’ and ‘off’ periods , although their occurrence was less frequent .figure  <dig> 
synchronous bursts and quiescent periods are well correlated with neuronal membrane potential depolarization  and hyperpolarization . combined intracellular whole-cell patch clamp and extracellular recordings from neurons growing on mea substrates are shown. a) a raster plot depicting  <dig> seconds of network activity recorded from  <dig> extracellular electrodes. each point represents an action potential recorded from that electrode. b) concomitant intracellular recording of membrane potential from one neuron in the network over the same period. an excellent correspondence between membrane potential depolarizations and network-wide bursting is evident. c) six events from the pink rectangle in a, shown at higher temporal resolution. d) corresponding intracellular voltage traces for the same events shown in c. note that each network burst is associated with strong membrane depolarization, usually crowned by one or more action potentials. these events are remarkably similar to cortical ‘up’ states observed in sleeping and anesthetized animals. each trace in c and d is one second long. backslashes denote omitted time periods. the initial membrane potential in b and d was approximately - <dig> mv. mea, multielectrode array.



our first goal was to examine how the forms of network synchrony described above are affected by cholinergic input delivered at a fixed rate. to that end, we performed the following experiments: cortical networks growing on mea dishes  were mounted on the mea headstage and provided with optimal environmental conditions as described above. after several preparatory phases , including the activation of the slow continuous mixing system mentioned above , the experiments were started by initiating automated ach applications at fixed intervals , that is, in an ‘open-loop’ regime as illustrated in figure 1b. ach applications consisted of minute volumes  of concentrated ach solution  briefly injected at five minute intervals into the media bathing the cortical networks, which, as mentioned above, contained ache and was continually mixed. ignoring ach breakdown, a single, well-mixed ach application would be expected to elevate ach concentration to a final value of  <dig> μm. the particular experimental profile used here was chosen after an extensive series of preliminary experiments in which we explored a wide range of ach concentrations and application rates, settling on this regime as a compromise between the desire to mimic physiological profiles of cholinergic neuromodulation and the constraints imposed by the finite volumes of the injection syringe and mea dish, mixing rates, synchrony stability and the time course of synchrony recovery.

one fixed input rate experiment is shown in figure 3a,b. as shown here, prior to ach applications synchrony levels were high and quite stable . the initiation of ach applications  had major effects on the characteristics of spontaneous activity, the most obvious being the replacement of stereotyped, network-wide alternating periods of activity and silence with much more diverse activity forms . these ranged from near continuous tonic firing, through intermittent tonic firing, through sporadic firing to near silence. importantly, and in excellent agreement with prior in vitro  <cit>  and in vivo  <cit>  studies, the network-wide synchrony of neural activity was strongly reduced. to quantify the effects of ach on network synchrony we developed a robust measure that was termed the ‘sync ratio’ which ranges from  <dig> to  <dig> . in this experiment, the sync ratio was reduced from approximately  <dig>   to approximately  <dig> . in general, each ach application was associated with a transient decrease in the sync ratio which then partially recovered over the next few minutes . as applications were delivered at five minute intervals, network synchrony did not have sufficient time to recover fully. importantly, after about  <dig> hours, sync ratio values started to gradually increase, finally settling on an intermediate sync ratio value after about  <dig> hours . this reemergence of synchrony occurred in spite of the fact that almost every ach application was still partially effective as shown in figure 3b.figure  <dig> 
synchronous activity reemerges following semi-phasic, periodic ach applications. a) sync ratio over time in one experiment , performed in an open-loop regime. ach pulses were delivered once every five minutes, starting at t = <dig> minutes. note the high values of the sync ratio in the period preceding ach applications  and the huge reduction in sync ratio values once ach applications were initiated. insets: examples of one-minute raster plots from early  and late  stages of the experiment. b) enlarged one-hour sections of the plot shown in a from early  and late  stages of the experiment. red arrows denote application times. c) changes in sync ratio over time in five separate experiments similar to the experiment shown in a. for each experiment, sync ratio values, averaged over  <dig> minutes, were normalized to the average sync ratio measured during the  <dig> hour period preceding ach application . average ± sem for five experiments. d) total firing rates measured from all electrodes, averaged over  <dig> minute intervals, normalized for each experiment to the average firing rate measured during the  <dig> hour period preceding ach application . note that the initiation of ach applications was not associated with changes in overall firing rates. average ± sem for five experiments. ach, acetylcholine; sem, standard error of the mean.



the average evolution of the sync ratio  for five fixed input rate  experiments  is shown in figure 3c. as shown here, prolonged ach applications at five-minute intervals were followed by a significant, yet incomplete, recovery of network synchrony to approximately 65% of initial sync ratio levels. although absolute sync ratio values varied slightly between experiments , all experiments showed a qualitatively similar, partial but significant recovery of network synchrony . the time to recovery in these experiments  ranged from  <dig> to  <dig> hours . no clear relationships were found between the time to recovery and baseline synchrony or burst characteristics .

the initial  periods of suppressed network synchrony were not accompanied by reductions in mean firing rates as compared to pre-ach applications levels , indicating that sync ratio values can change independently of changes in firing rates . on the other hand, synchrony reemergence was associated with some increase in firing rates . this increase was accompanied by elevated burst rates, , but burst intensity remained smaller than that observed before ach was applied , indicating that the increase in firing rates was probably not entirely attributable to excess bursting.

as mentioned above, on a time-scale of minutes, each ach application caused a rapid reduction of sync ratio values followed by a partial recovery over the next few minutes. these temporal profiles were probably dictated by a combination of network responses to changes in cholinergic input, ach mixing kinetics, ach breakdown kinetics, and, possibly, the kinetics of potential adaptive processes. we noted that in the absence of ache, practically no recovery of the sync ratio was observed for > <dig> hours following a single ach application . conversely, 10-fold increases in ache concentrations accelerated sync ratio recovery rates only by a factor of < <dig> . the first finding suggests that the short-term  recovery of the sync ratio after each application does not reflect adaptive processes . the second finding indicates that synchrony recovery rates could be accelerated  by increasing ache levels, suggesting that ach clearance rates played some role in the short term kinetics of synchrony recovery. interestingly, in some experiments  we observed that these short-term recovery kinetics were faster near the end of the experiments; this, however was not clearly evident in all experiments . in summary, fixed rates of cholinergic input drive dramatic and sustained network desynchronization, yet over time scales of many hours synchrony gradually reemerges, tending to settle at intermediate, relatively high levels.

using feedback to adjust ach application rates to those needed for sustaining low synchrony levels does not prevent the eventual reemergence of synchrony
the experiments described so far show that the initial suppression of synchrony by moderate cholinergic ‘input’ is followed by its significant recovery over time scales of approximately  <dig> hours. in these experiments, however, cholinergic ‘input’ was provided at fixed and somewhat arbitrary rates that were indifferent to network synchrony levels . in vivo, feedback plays major roles in the regulation of neuromodulatory outflow  <cit> , with the cholinergic system, as well as other neuromodulatory systems, encompassed in feedback loops connecting cortical and subcortical regions . would the experimental introduction of feedback, serving to adjust cholinergic input rates to instantaneous synchrony levels, allow cholinergic neuromodulation to maintain network synchrony at low levels for very long, perhaps indefinite periods?

to examine this possibility, we constructed a ‘synchrony clamp’ system – a closed-loop controller which estimated synchrony levels in real time and used these estimates to apply ach at rates required to maintain network synchrony at low predefined levels. in addition, and in analogy to voltage clamp experiments, in which the output current is used to measure changes in membrane conductance  <cit> , the output of this controller allowed us to gauge changes in cholinergic efficacy. put differently, the controller output, in the form of inter application intervals  provided a measure of the degree to which adaptation to cholinergic input had occurred, with increasingly shorter iais indicative of increasingly greater adaptation.

the system we used for this purpose was based on the ‘neuronal response clamp’ developed by marom and colleagues  <cit> . this system was composed of a ‘bare-bones’ personal computer running a real time application  which collected data from the  <dig> mea channels and calculated the momentary sync ratio value . a software implementation of a proportional integral  controller compared the calculated sync ratio values to predefined, desired sync ratio values and used the difference, that is, the error, to adjust the time interval to the next ach application .

experiments were set up as described above for open loop experiments . here, however, instead of applying ach at fixed intervals, instantaneous iai values were calculated online once every minute and ach applications were delivered automatically at these calculated time intervals. figure 4a,b shows one such experiment in detail, in which the sync ratio ‘clamp value’ was set to  <dig> , reflecting the fully desynchronized state observed in some open-loop experiments. activating the closed-loop controller reduced the sync ratio from  <dig>  to slightly under  <dig>  . this led to an initial undershoot of sync ratio values which was followed by a gradual adjustment  of iai values, as shown by the orange line in this figure, until a reasonable clamp of sync ratio values was attained after several hours . during this period, the iai values required to maintain this low synchrony level hovered around  <dig> to  <dig> minutes . after about  <dig> hours, however, the iais required to sustain this synchrony level started to decrease gradually, ultimately flooring at 15-second intervals . in spite of this 50-fold increase in ach application rates, synchrony reemerged, escaping the clamp, with sync ratio values partially decreasing again only after substantial ach buildup, caused by the rapid application rates. qualitatively identical results were obtained in three additional closed-loop experiments . closer examination revealed that the time from clamp initiation to eventual collapse back to synchronous activity modes varied from one experiment to the other, ranging from about  <dig> to about  <dig> hours, probably reflecting differences in the adaptation rates of different networks as well as other factors related to network to network variability. here too, no clear relationships were found between the time to collapse  and baseline network synchrony or burst characteristics . moreover, using iai values as readouts of adaptation to cholinergic input, we noted that the adaptation process, manifested as decreasing iai values, could start within a few hours of ach applications, a fact not immediately apparent in open-loop experiments. interestingly, firing rates in these experiments remained relatively stable and similar to pre-clamp values until the networks escaped the clamp, during which transient increases in spike rates, associated with volleys of synchronous bursts, were observed .figure  <dig> 
using feedback to adjust cholinergic input allows clamping of network synchrony at low levels, but not indefinitely. a) one closed-loop experiment. network activity was clamped to a desynchronized activity state . the sync ratio, calculated online, is shown as a grey line  and after smoothing with a five-point kernel . the inter application interval , calculated online is shown as an orange line . each red dot denotes a single ach application, and the actual time difference from the previous application. the sync ratio value preceding the first ach application is indicated as a dashed gray line. b) enlarged one-hour sections of the plot in a, from early  and late  stages of the experiment. red arrows denote application times. c) three additional closed-loop experiments, in which the sync ratio was clamped to  <dig> . firing rates for each of the closed-loop experiments are shown in additional file 8: figure s <dig>  ach, acetylcholine.



these experiments thus show that even when feedback is used to continually adjust cholinergic input to rates needed for sustaining low desynchronized states, synchrony ultimately reemerges.

noradrenergic-induced suppression and reemergence of network synchrony does not occlude subsequent cholinergic-induced synchrony suppression
conceptually, the capacity to suppress network synchrony in the face of gradual adaptation to neuromodulatory input might be preserved by the activation of other modulatory pathways that exert similar effects but employ different mechanisms. in vivo, na is highly instrumental in promoting brain activity patterns associated with aroused states  <cit> . does na also suppress network synchrony in a manner similar to the activities of ach? do cortical networks adapt to this neuromodulator as well? if they do, does this adaptation occlude the capacity of cholinergic neuromodulation to suppress network synchrony?

to examine these questions we exposed networks of cortical neurons growing on mea substrates to na and followed the immediate and long-term effects of this manipulation on network synchrony. as shown in figure 5a,b and additional file 10: video s <dig>  the addition of na  to the mea dish  resulted in an immediate reduction in network synchrony which was reflected in drastically reduced sync ratio values. unlike ach, however, the suppression of network synchrony was also accompanied by an immediate and significant reduction in total firing rates , in excellent agreement with a recent in vivo study concerning na, cortical synchrony and firing rates  <cit> . reduced sync ratio values did not seem to stem from the reduction in firing rates, as this measure is mostly independent of such influences . interestingly, over the next  <dig> hours, synchrony  returned to pre-na application levels. addition of a second bolus of freshly prepared na to the mea dish  <dig> hours after the first exposure had only minor effects on the sync ratio , indicating that the recovery of network synchrony was not due to na breakdown . the addition of carbachol  - a non-hydrolyzable analog of ach - to the same network  <dig> hours after the first na application resulted in a dramatic reduction in network synchrony. as before, however, synchrony reemerged over the next  <dig> to  <dig> hours .figure  <dig> 
network synchrony reemerges following prolonged exposure to na, but can be re-suppressed by cholinergic input. a) evolution of the sync ratio in one experiment . after recording baseline activity for > <dig> hours , na  was added directly into the mea dish and the perfusion media reservoir . nineteen hours later, a second bolus of freshly prepared na was added to the mea dish. twenty-four hours after the first na addition, cch  was added to the mea dish and perfusion media reservoir and recording was continued for  <dig> hours. b) examples of one-minute raster plots from four stages of the experiment as indicated in the figure . c) evolution of sync ratio  in three similar experiments . in two of these, a second bolus of freshly prepared na was added to the mea dish  <dig> hours later . note the very limited effect of this second na application. cch, carbachol; da, dopamine; mea, multielectrode array; na, noradrenaline.



the evolution of the sync ratio in three separate experiments is shown in figure 5c. the effects of na and cch in all experiments were qualitatively very similar, and collectively demonstrate that: 1) na strongly suppresses network synchrony; 2) prolonged exposure to na is associated with adaptive or homeostatic processes that restore network synchrony; 3) the capacity of cholinergic neuromodulation to suppress network synchrony is not occluded by prior adaptation to noradrenergic modulation; and 4) synchrony recovers in the presence of both na and cch.

we also examined adaptation to a third neuromodulator, dopamine . unlike ach and na, however, relationships between dopaminergic tone, network synchrony and arousal levels are less clear and even somewhat controversial  <cit> . in agreement with this ambiguity, we found, in three separate experiments, that sync ratio values were only slightly reduced by single da applications . conversely, firing rates  and burst rates  were reduced substantially , in agreement with the recent report that da reduces ‘up’ state prevalence in acute cortical preparations  <cit> . interestingly, sync ratio values, and most notably, network activity levels, gradually recovered over the course of the next approximately  <dig> and > <dig> hours, respectively. these experiments indicate that changes in firing rates induced by various neuromodulators are not necessarily associated with changes in network synchrony and highlight the specific effects of ach and na in this respect. they also indicate that prolonged exposure to a third neuromodulator – da – is also followed by adaptive or reactive processes which occur over many hours, in line with our observations for ach and na.

periodic ‘withdrawal’ periods restore the capacity of ach applications to suppress network synchrony in ensuing periods
as mentioned in the introduction, timed cholinergic withdrawal periods  might ultimately be required to preserve cholinergic efficacy over extended time scales. in the setting of our experimental system, this predicts that withdrawal periods introduced into our experimental protocols will restore the capacity of ach to suppress network synchrony in subsequent periods.

to test this prediction, we performed experiments that included three closed-loop epochs, during which network synchrony was ‘clamped’ at low sync ratio values, separated by periods during which no ach was applied . the duration of these periods was chosen to be  <dig> hours, to mirror the times at which synchrony often started to reemerge following prolonged cholinergic input . as shown in figure 6a, multiple closed-loop epochs were qualitatively similar to the closed-loop experiments described above. in particular, as in the aforementioned experiments, the demand to maintain synchrony at low predetermined levels was associated with gradual and very significant decreases in iais over time. during ‘withdrawal’ periods, synchrony returned almost immediately to the high levels typical of unperturbed networks, as manifested by sync ratio values that were similar or even exceeded initial values. notably, ach applications delivered after ‘withdrawal’ periods were highly effective in desynchronizing network activity. moreover, gauging the degree of adaptation from the iais needed to clamp network synchrony at the beginning of the second and third closed-loop epochs and comparing these to iai values at the end of the preceding epochs, indicated that cholinergic efficacy had recovered and that the degree of adaptation to cholinergic input was low.figure  <dig> 
withdrawal of cholinergic input for defined periods restores its capacity to suppress network synchrony in subsequent periods. three multiple epoch experiments are shown using the same notations as in figure  <dig>  network activity was clamped to a desynchronized activity level . following the depletion of the ach in the application syringe  or the online calculation of four consecutive iai values < <dig>  minutes , cholinergic input was removed for  <dig> hours. after these periods, new closed-loop epochs were initiated, using the same experimental parameters. in the first experiment , the syringe was refilled with freshly prepared ach as indicated in the figure, resulting in some leakage of ach from the open end of the application needle, and a transient desynchronization of network activity. in the other two experiments  the syringe was not refilled, and the same ach, prepared at the beginning of the experiment, was used for the entire duration of the experiments. firing rates for each of the multi-epoch experiments are shown in additional file 13: figure s <dig>  ach, acetylcholine.



in the experiment presented in figure 6a, the ‘withdrawal’ phase of each epoch was started when the ach application syringe was depleted. accordingly, the application syringe had to be refilled between epochs, a process that was associated with a small leak of ach into the culture media . moreover, the duration of the closed-loop epochs in this experiment became gradually shorter, reflecting a diminished capability to sustain the network in a desynchronized state. we wondered if this might stem from somewhat extreme demands for low synchrony levels and the consequential, excessive perhaps, cholinergic ‘input’. in subsequent experiments we, therefore, terminated the closed-loop epochs and started the ‘withdrawal’ periods when the iais became shorter than  <dig>  minutes. this also had the additional benefit of eliminating the need to refill the application syringe between epochs. as shown in figure 6b,c, the changes in the durations of the closed-loop periods were indeed less systematic. importantly, however, the general outcome of all experiments was the same: clamping synchrony at low levels was invariably followed by drastic reductions in cholinergic efficacy, whereas cholinergic ‘withdrawal’ was followed by the practically complete recovery of cholinergic efficacy. these experiments also clearly establish that the reduction in cholinergic efficacy was not due to ach breakdown in the application system, as the same ach solution was used for the entire duration of these experiments. interestingly, proactively removing the clamp before escape occurred also precluded the volleys of synchronous bursts such events were associated with  and resulted in much more moderate changes in firing rates over these long durations .

in summary, these experiments demonstrate that withdrawing cholinergic input can restore the capacity of ach to suppress network synchrony in subsequent periods.

discussion
here we studied adaptation to prolonged neuromodulatory input in networks of cultured cortical neurons. we found that brief ach applications strongly desynchronized spontaneous network activity, but repeated applications were followed by a gradual recovery of network synchrony. introducing feedback to adjust cholinergic input levels to waning cholinergic efficacy failed to prevent the reemergence of synchrony even when ach application rates increased fifty-fold. we then showed that the suppression of network synchrony by a second neuromodulator - na - was also followed by the gradual reemergence of synchrony. importantly, this adaptation to continual na presence did not occlude the subsequent suppression of network synchrony by a cholinergic agonist, yet synchrony ultimately reemerged in the presence of both substances. finally, we showed that the capacity of cholinergic input to suppress network synchrony could be restored by periodically withdrawing cholinergic input. these findings indicate that prolonged cholinergic  input induce slow-acting reactive processes that reduce their efficacy and ultimately negate their capacity to suppress network synchrony.

adaptation to prolonged neuromodulation: an inevitable return to network synchrony?
as mentioned in the introduction, neurons and neuronal networks tend to adapt or react homeostatically to changes in input levels or in their milieu  <cit> . our findings that networks react or adapt to prolonged neuromodulatory input are in line with this well established phenomenon. as neuromodulators affect an enormous number of processes, including attention, arousal, motor function, mood, reward, as well as numerous cellular and molecular processes, adaptive or homeostatic reactions to neuromodulation might be of interest outside the context of network synchrony. within this limited context, however, the relentless reemergence of synchrony raises interesting questions that touch on the very nature of this widespread phenomenon. it might be asked why network activity consistently falls into this pattern in the absence of neuromodulatory influences, or conversely, falls back into these patterns following prolonged neuromodulatory input.

starting with the latter, prolonged activation of a particular neuromodulatory pathway might be associated with receptor desensitization, that is, changes in the properties and/or numbers of receptors to that neuromodulator. thus, for example, it is well established that prolonged exposure to cholinergic agonists is associated with the internalization and, ultimately, down-regulation  of muscarinic receptors, which seem to be the major mediators of cholinergic-driven network desynchronization  <cit>  . where examined, however, internalization was observed to occur rapidly, with membrane receptor levels plateauing within minutes or at most one to three hours following chronic exposure to muscarinic agonists  <cit> . these kinetics seem to be too fast to explain the slow time course of adaptation observed here, a mismatch which also applies to the kinetics of nicotinic receptor desensitization  <cit> . on the other hand, the slow time course is in better agreement with agonist-driven receptor down-regulation, which has been previously reported to occur over many hours  <cit> . yet it also should be noted that this apparently simple explanation is not likely to account for the nearly complete loss of cholinergic efficacy in our experiments. it has been previously shown that even after continual exposure of cultured cortical neurons to cch for seven days, the amount of m <dig> muscarinic receptors accessible to an extracellular fluorescent probe was still approximately 50% of nominal levels  <cit> , indicating that a substantial number of receptors were still present even after this long exposure. in line with this report, we previously found that an abrupt pharmacological blockade of cholinergic receptors after nine hours of continuous cch exposure resulted in an immediate recovery of network synchrony  <cit> , indicating that even after nine hours, receptors were still present and effective.

an alternative, although not mutually exclusive, possibility is that moving networks away from synchronous activity modes is followed by additional reactive processes acting at molecular, cellular and network levels that individually or collectively result in gravitation back toward this mode. why this gravitation would occur is not entirely clear  but it does seem to occur also outside the setting of cell culture. thus, for example, it has recently been shown  <cit>  that in the intact cat brain, suppression of cortical synchrony by thalamic inactivation is followed by cortical synchrony reemergence over time scales remarkably similar to those reported here . in fact, it was concluded that any factor leading to a reduction of synchrony triggers plastic changes that reinstate it. consequently, and if synchrony represents a strong attractor as prior studies suggest  <cit> , escaping it might depend on finely tuned combinations of multiple factors, such as neuronal membrane potential, excitability, probability of neurotransmitter release and synaptic depression. all these  have been previously shown to be affected by  neuromodulation in complex and intricate manners  <cit>  which differ from one cell type to another  <cit> . consequently, the  recovery  <cit>  of one or more of these finely tuned factors, in one or more neuronal types, might move the system back into a parameter space within which synchrony naturally emerges  <cit> . in line with this possibility, we observed that recovery from prolonged neuromodulatory input was often associated with changes in global network activity levels, burst rates and burst intensities . we have previously shown that synchrony reemergence is preceded by excitatory synapse enlargement  <cit>  , and thus prolonged neuromodulation seems to drive reactive changes in both neuronal excitability and synaptic properties. interestingly, it has recently been shown  <cit>  that a neuromodulator cocktail including cch, na, serotonin, histamine, dopamine and orexin applied to cortical networks similar to those used here, both suppresses network synchrony and drives widespread changes in gene expression, which do not fully revert even when synchrony spontaneously reemerges. these experimental observations, along with the emergence of synchrony in so many different conditions , systems  and modeling studies  <cit>  support the possibility that the parameter space for synchrony emergence is quite large, and that avoiding its emergence might be something of a balancing act.

in summary, regardless of the exact nature of the adaptive processes that follow prolonged neuromodulation – changes in receptor properties, receptor abundance, neuronal excitability or network level effects – it seems that the capacity of neuromodulators to suppress synchrony indefinitely might be rather limited.

studying adaptation to neuromodulation in cultured cortical networks – confounds and advantages
the reactions to prolonged neuromodulation were studied here in networks of cultured rat cortical neurons exposed to experimental manipulations that do not fully capture many physiological aspects of  neuromodulation. while the advantages offered by this model system are substantial , it should also be acknowledged that reduced systems, including the system used here, have certain shortcomings that warrant discussion.

one concern relates to the spatiotemporal structure of cholinergic input used here. neurons in vivo experience cholinergic levels that vary according to the discharge patterns of cholinergic neurons, resulting in both phasic and tonic modes of innervation  <cit> . the phasic mode consists of fast transients of high ach concentrations, spanning a time scale of seconds and even subseconds  <cit> . recent studies suggest that responses to cholinergic innervation can be sensitive to precise  timing of cholinergic neuron activity . in contrast, the regime of cholinergic input in the experiments described here resembled a combination of phasic and tonic modes, with cholinergic concentrations varying more than a hundredfold, but over time scales of many seconds and minutes. thus, we cannot exclude the possibility that some of our findings were affected by the slow kinetics of cholinergic input and breakdown or by the spatial properties of this input which, if anything, resembled ‘volume’  transmission more than ‘wired’ innervation by cholinergic synapses  <cit> . in this respect, however, it is worth mentioning that phasic and tonic modes of innervation have been suggested to co-exist and play complementary roles, for example in fostering cue detection and general alertness  <cit> . moreover, considering that basal forebrain cholinergic neurons tend to discharge at approximately  <dig> hz rhythmic bursts  <cit> , that brief stimulation of these neurons induces cortical desynchronizations that persist for up to  <dig> seconds  <cit> , and that the kinetics of neuronal muscarinic ach receptors are rather slow  <cit> , changes in cholinergic tone occurring over many second time scales are probably of significant physiological importance.

a second issue concerns the time course of adaptation to cholinergic input and the duration of ‘withdrawal’ periods described here. we found that the general time scale of synchrony reemergence in our experiments  was comparable with the time scales of circadian synchrony modulation in vivo. however, beyond this general similarity, the actual time scales should not be taken too literally; beyond the obvious fact that these were measured in a reduced system, the level of cholinergic input the neuronal networks were exposed to here was somewhat arbitrary, and it is not clear how these relate to cumulative cholinergic exposure or its fine temporal structure in vivo. along the same line, in our experiments, cholinergic ‘withdrawal’ periods were chosen to be  <dig> hours. the introduction of these withdrawal periods was inspired by the low neuromodulatory levels occurring during nrem sleep periods. physiologically, however, nrem periods are separated by short rem periods characterized by especially high cholinergic tone and desynchronized cortical activity  <cit> . in humans, each cycle of nrem and rem sleep lasts approximately  <dig>  hours, suggesting that the restoration of efficacy, at least in the case of cholinergic innervation, might occur over shorter time scales. indeed, in three experiments in which a single ach application was administered approximately two hours after the end of a closed-loop epoch, effective desynchronization was observed . yet there were also indications that recovery from adaptation might occur over multiple time scales – for example, in the experiment shown in figure 6a, closed-loop epochs tended to become progressively shorter, which might be taken to indicate that a slow component of the adaptation process persists for longer periods .

while the reduced system used here has shortcomings, it also has important advantages in the context of the questions addressed here. specifically, the experiments described above require full control over the inputs of the preparations to rule out the possibility that the reemergence of synchrony was imposed by external sources. thus, for example, it is conceptually difficult to imagine how one could perform the same experiments in vivo, isolating the monitored networks from the influences of external excitatory and inhibitory sources, circadian systems and additional neuromodulators. even if one could selectively stimulate cholinergic  <cit>  or noradrenergic  <cit>  neurons for prolonged periods, it would be impossible to unequivocally attribute the reemergence of synchrony to adaptation to these neuromodulatory substances and rule out the possibility that these activity patterns, which typically coincide with inattentive or sleep states  <cit> , were imposed by other systems.

thus, at present, the reduced system used here provides unique opportunities to examine these questions in an isolated, well-controlled fashion, with good access to network activity properties and the possibility to use advanced closed-loop techniques to expose and record adaptation kinetics. interestingly, a very recent in vivo study further supports the utility of this reduced system to study these questions. in this study  <cit>  it was shown that whereas both the cholinergic agonist cch and na abolish synchronous slow oscillations in the intact rat barrel cortex, the effects on spontaneous firing rates differed: as in our own findings, cch had practically no effect on firing rates whereas na significantly suppressed these. it thus seems that in spite of differences in network organization, neuronal makeup and maturity, the relationships between network activity characteristics and neuromodulation are largely preserved in this reduced system.

CONCLUSIONS
what might be the general implications of our findings? limitations of the system used here notwithstanding, the findings seem to tie together four themes, namely synchrony, neuromodulation, homeostasis and sleep, in a manner that is rather unconventional yet potentially important. as mentioned in the introduction and in the discussion above, the widespread occurrence of synchrony in many conditions and systems would seem to suggest that it constitutes a ‘default’ activity mode and that some active process might be required to move networks out of it. in fact, as early as  <dig>  hebb  <cit>  postulated that this form of synchrony, which ‘appears at birth in the large slow waves of the infant’s electroencephalogram and in the sleep or coma of older subjects’ represents an ‘intrinsic organization of cortical activity’, which needs to be ‘interrupted’ as a ‘precondition of the normal adult waking behavior’ . it has been suggested that input from external sources serves in this function and, thus, hypersynchrony in reduced systems  might reflect the lack of such input  <cit> . indeed, previous studies have shown that random stimulation patterns whose intensity is continuously adjusted in a closed loop manner can transform synchronous activity into more asynchronous firing patterns  <cit>  and that this strategy can maintain such patterns for six hours  <cit> . however, in more physiological settings, sensory input per se does not always seem to be sufficient . on the other hand, the indispensable role of central neuromodulatory systems in ‘interrupting’ these forms of synchrony has been firmly established by numerous studies  <cit> , beginning with the pioneering work of morruzi and magoun  <cit> . given the findings described here, as well as the well-established tendency of neurons and neuronal networks to react or adapt to prolonged perturbations, it might be expected that the efficacy of neuromodulator-based ‘interruptions’ might diminish with time. in line with this expectation, a progressive reemergence of synchrony has been reported in sleep-deprived but behaviorally awake rats which continue to interact with their environments  <cit>  .

in spite of the many intriguing parallels between neuromodulation, cortical synchrony, sleep and arousal on the one hand, and the findings described here, on the other, the applicability of our findings to the intact organism remains speculative. yet, the many similarities with the underlying biophysics of network synchrony in vivo, as well as the similar initial reactions to the neuromodulators studied here indicate that the long-term reactions to these neuromodulators and the reemergence of synchrony these entail might also apply to the intact brain. if this parallelism is extended, our findings might also imply that even with the additional degrees of freedom provided by multiple, partially redundant neuromodulatory systems  <cit> , ‘withdrawal’ periods might ultimately be essential for restoring neuromodulator efficacy and, in particular, their ability to counter the tendencies of synchrony to emerge. we hypothesize that this withdrawal is best achieved during tightly controlled sleep periods, which are thus viewed as an unavoidable price of prolonged neuromodulator-driven arousal.

