BACKGROUND
diplomonads are common microaerophilic protists in anoxic environments, and most known diplomonads have been isolated as either commensals or parasites of the metazoan intestinal tract  <cit> . nearly a score of free-living or commensal diplomonads have been described and classified phylogenetically  <cit> . binucleate diplomonads are believed to be related to mono-nucleate anaerobic protists such as retortamonads and enteromonads  <cit> . spironucleus vortens is a putatively commensal diplomonad originally isolated from the intestinal lumen of the freshwater angelfish pterophyllum scalare. s. vortens is typically described as a pear-shaped microaerophile, measuring  <dig>  –  <dig>  μm in length and  <dig>  –  <dig>  μm in width  <cit> . like all described diplomonads, s. vortens has two nuclei and eight flagella. one pair of axonemes is enclosed by a flagellar pocket, termed a "cytostomal canal", and each of the recurrent flagella lie in a separate flagellar pocket  <cit> . as widespread human parasites, members of the genus giardia  are perhaps the most well known of the diplomonads and are unique among diplomonads due to the presence of the ventral disc, which is a novel microtubule organelle that facilitates attachment to the intestinal microvilli in vertebrate hosts  <cit> . s. vortens lacks the ventral disc structure.

in the context of host-microbe interactions, microbes are traditionally described as free-living, commensals, symbionts, or parasites/pathogens  <cit> . these historical descriptions, however, do not incorporate the contemporary understanding that there exists a continuum of symbiosis in nature ranging from truly free-living to obligately parasitic . based on currently available data, s. vortens likely lies midway along that continuum as either a commensal or an opportunistic parasite. for instance, s. vortens has been found in the intestines of healthy angelfish  <cit> , does not always cause host damage following infection  <cit> , and does not cause systemic infection independent of special conditions  <cit> . furthermore, bacteria have also been found in "hole-in-the-head" disease lesions in fish  <cit> . thus it is conceivable that s. vortens may be indirectly accumulating in lesions due to this bacterial presence rather than directly causing the lesions. lastly, other commensal diplomonads such as spironucleus torosa attach to the intestinal mucosa without causing detectable host damage  <cit> . thus in spite of its initial classification as a parasitic pathogen of angelfish, a more conservative conclusion is that s. vortens is either a commensal or, under specific conditions, an opportunistic parasite  <cit> . further investigation is required to determine if s. vortens is a non-pathogenic commensal , an opportunistic parasite , or an obligate parasite   <cit> .

to date, all molecular genetic studies of protein function in diplomonads have employed the common intestinal parasite, giardia intestinalis . consequently, there is little information available regarding molecular and cellular aspects of general diplomonad biology beyond computational inferences of function  <cit>  and/or ultrastructure in diverse diplomonads  <cit> . we describe here a method for the transformation of recombinant constructs in s. vortens, thus providing an essential tool to further investigate spironucleus' potential for parasitism in angelfish as well as for comparative cell biological, functional genomic, and evolutionary studies in other diplomonads. specifically, we designed an episomal shuttle vector to contain an enhanced green fluorescent protein  tag, an au <dig> epitope tag, and a tandem affinity purification  tag. both the egfp and au <dig> epitope tags permit visualization of protein fusions both in live and fixed cells, respectively. fusion of s. vortens proteins with the tap tag would permit the purification and identification of interacting proteins by standard proteomic approaches  <cit> .

RESULTS
as a first step in developing a molecular toolkit that can be used to study protein function, we constructed, stably transformed, and maintained episomal shuttle vectors  in s. vortens by adapting a methodology used in giardia to generate stable transformants  <cit> . these constructs also contained selectable antibiotic resistance markers for both s. vortens  and e. coli . we demonstrate here a highly stable transformation of these constructs in s. vortens, and the ability to express gfp fusion constructs and visualize them in live and fixed cells in two stable gfp-expressing strains: svh3p, which expresses gfp under the control of a s. vortens histone h <dig> promoter, and svh3g, which expresses a histone h3::gfp fusion under the control of the native promoter.

stable transformation confirmed by rt-pcr and fish of the episomal plasmids
using our protocol for transformation of s. vortens, we created three stable cell lines: svpac  gene); svh3p ; and svh3g  . the svh3p and svh3g strains were created by transfecting svh3p.pac  and svh3g.pac , respectively, into wild type s. vortens cell cultures. to verify that the putatively transformed strains expressed gfp, we performed rt-pcr of the gfp gene in both the svh3p and svh3g transformed strains . we observed strong amplification of a band corresponding to the correct size of the gfp using rna from both the svh3p and svh3g transformed strains as templates. no gfp expression was observed in untransformed cells or in negative  controls .

the number of plasmids that were transformed per nucleus per cell was estimated using fluorescence in situ hybridization  with a dna probe against a  <dig> kb amplified region of the episomal plasmid used in the transformed svh3p strain. as seen in figure 2b, we estimate that roughly 10– <dig> plasmids were present per transformed nucleus. importantly, for all cells transformed with the svh3p.pac construct, the plasmid fish probes localized to only one nucleus  . we were also able to recover the plasmids from the transformed svh3p and svh3g strains and transform them back into e. coli  at high efficiency.

gfp expression visualized using epifluorescent microscopy
in both the svh3p and svh3g strains, we observed significant gfp expression in live, highly motile s. vortens cells . to determine the subcellular localization of the gfp fusion proteins and to qualitatively assess the efficiency of our transformation protocol, both the svh3p and svh3g strains were fixed with 1% paraformaldehyde  and microtubules were immunostained with anti-α-tubulin antibody  using a protocol previously described for giardia intestinalis  <cit> . images were acquired in a three-dimensional stack using deconvolution microscopy, and 2d projections of 3d stacks were created as described . for each transformed strain, we imaged  <dig> cells and visually quantified the number of gfp-expressing cells. as shown in figure  <dig>  gfp fluorescence was observed throughout the cytoplasm of the svh3p strain, which used a s. vortens histone h <dig> promoter  to drive expression of gfp. in figure 3b–d, a high percentage of cells  express gfp at easily detectable levels as seen by either epifluorescent microscopy using direct cell counts  or as seen in live videomicroscopy .

we also localized gfp expression in the svh3g strain  and imaged the gfp localization in anti-α-tubulin immunostained cells . as seen in figure  <dig> and figure s <dig>  the gfp fluorescence in the svh3g strain was exclusively localized to both nuclei, as expected for the histone localization to euchromatin. based on the imaging of  <dig> cells, we visualized detectable levels of gfp expression in about 66% of the transformed cells .

additionally, anti-α-tubulin immunostaining of the microtubule cytoskeleton of s. vortens  shows in detail the microtubules of the lateral ridges, the microtubules surrounding the flagellar pockets, and the microtubules of the counter-crossing ridges  <cit> .

discussion
the majority of proposed eukaryotic lineages are represented by microbial eukaryotes  <cit> . most of our knowledge of eukaryotic biological processes derives, however, from studies of more recently evolved  macroscopic eukaryotic model organisms such as fungi and metazoans. furthermore, progress in protistan functional and comparative genomics is generally complicated by the fact that most free-living protists have not been maintained in pure culture, and only a handful have been developed as molecular experimental systems. in the absence of genetic manipulation, classical studies in protistan biology have generally had to rely solely upon descriptive ultrastructural or comparative genomic studies.

in spite of this, current in-progress and completed genome projects of diverse microbial eukaryotes are transforming our understanding of eukaryotic biology  <cit> . emerging genomic and est data from axenically cultivated diplomonads such as s. vortens  <cit> , s. salmonicida  <cit> , and g. intestinalis  <cit>  highlights the importance of developing functional genomic methodologies to complement prior descriptive ultrastructural or comparative genomic studies. stable transformation of recombinant genes, such as that which is presented here for spironucleus vortens, is critical toward the development of modern reverse genetic and proteomic strategies that permit a functional understanding of diplomonad biology on par with other experimental systems.

stable transformation and maintenance of an episomal shuttle vector
electroporation takes advantage of the fact that membranes in cells essentially act as electrical capacitors  <cit> . transformation of eukaryotic microbes via electroporation is generally applicable and reproducible  <cit> . we have modeled our spironucleus vortens transformation protocol after the giardia intestinalis transformation protocol developed by singer et al.  <cit> . based on both microscopic and biochemical analyses of transformants , the use of this protocol results in stable transformants of s. vortens with a minimal efficiency of 50%. additionally, we have demonstrated that the s. vortens h <dig> histone promoter is sufficient to drive transcription of gfp , and that a histone h3::gfp fusion protein is expressed  and localizes to chromatin in both nuclei . we were able to successfully passage all transformed s. vortens strains  under puromycin selection for a period of over six months, indicative of stable rather than transient transformation.

finally, we confirmed that the transformed episomal plasmid localized to only one nucleus per cell , as is the case in binucleate giardia  <cit> . for neither organism do we understand why only one nucleus is transformed, but this result is consistent with the idea that transformation is a rare stochastic event that only affects one of the two nuclei. however, the presence of multiple episomal plasmids  in only one nucleus/cell  suggests that s. vortens undergoes mitosis in a manner similar to that of giardia intestinalis  <cit> . in giardia, the two nuclei do not fuse during mitosis but instead behave autonomously so that only one copy of each parental nucleus is inherited by each daughter  <cit> . in giardia, both nuclei migrate to the line of bilateral symmetry and are stacked one above the other . during anaphase, the nuclei divide and separate such that each daughter cell obtains a nucleus from each plane   <cit> . this inferred mitotic mechanism explains the segregation of episomal plasmids to one nucleus in s. vortens and supports the theory that the two nuclei of s. vortens do not fuse during mitosis. this state of singly transformed nuclei would be perpetuated throughout the population, although there is no information regarding whether both nuclei in s. vortens are transcriptionally active or whether they contain the same genetic material.

potential for proteomic analyses in s. vortens
the spironucleus genome project was begun under the community sequence program  through a collaboration with the doe-joint genome institute  in  <dig>  currently, over  <dig>  ests have been sequenced, in conjunction with roughly 4× genome coverage of the  <dig> mb genome . we have engineered the svgat.pac shuttle vector so that a gfp fusion construct can easily be converted into one with an au <dig> fusion tag by a double restriction digest with agei/nhei; alternatively, a tandem affinity purification -tagged fusion protein can be created using an agei/avrii restriction digest. when religated, the initial gfp gene fusion will remain in frame with either the au <dig> epitope tag or tap tag.

s. vortens grows robustly in axenic culture in the laboratory to densities of roughly  <dig> ×  <dig> cells/ml, and tolerates temperatures ranging from 5–34°c  <cit> . for the experiments detailed in this paper, we have observed rapid growth of s. vortens at room temperature . hence, due to its rapid growth in laboratory culture and its nearly completed genome sequence, spironucleus seems a feasible diplomonad from which to purify proteins and protein complexes. for this reason, we included a tap tag in the plasmid constructs to permit the tagging of proteins and subsequent purification of protein complexes by affinity chromatography via a two-step purification procedure. this proteomic strategy for identifying interacting proteins has been widely used in other organisms  <cit> . the affinity-purified complexes can then be eluted with egta and analyzed by sds-page and maldi-tof, and/or directly subjected to proteolysis and analysis by liquid chromatography-coupled mass spectrometric analysis   <cit> . future proteomic-based work with s. vortens could include the purification of protein complexes followed by mass spectrometry to analyze protein components.

using protein-tagging approaches to determine the putative parasitism of s. vortens
the use of this stable transformation protocol to generate fluorescently tagged s. vortens strains could help confirm whether or not s. vortens is actually an obligate parasite in angelfish. briefly, fluorescently tagged s. vortens could be used to confirm that: 1) s. vortens is present in all cases of "hole-in-the-head"-diseased angelfish; 2) inoculation of healthy angelfish with tagged s. vortens results in disease; and, 3) isolated, tagged s. vortens strains from newly diseased angelfish are also infectious. following inoculation of these transformed s. vortens cells back into healthy angelfish, resultant "hole-in-the-head" lesions  could be imaged and/or quantified using gfp fluorescence, which  would indicate that s. vortens plays and obligately pathogenic role in angelfish. at this time, no such experimental verifications of the obligate parasitism of s. vortens have been performed.

CONCLUSIONS
with a nearly completed genome sequence and a protocol for stable transformation, spironucleus vortens represents a new experimental system with which one can study comparative cell biology in diplomonads. because it is putatively commensal and lacks the ventral disc present in giardia  <cit> , the study of the cytoskeleton in s. vortens could provide insight into giardia's adaptations to parasitism – including the evolution of the ventral disc. functional genomics in s. vortens also offers a strategy to test the hypothesis of its obligately parasitic role in angelfish. finally, ongoing comparative and functional genomic analyses of putative commensal diplomonads  as well as obligately parasitic diplomonads  are critical toward validating hypotheses regarding the basal phylogenetic position and genomic minimalism of the diplomonads  <cit> .

