BACKGROUND
amyloids are proteins capable of forming aberrant intramolecular contact sites that are characteristic of the beta zipper configuration, and can lead to fibrils instead of the functional structure of a protein  <cit> . the processes of amyloid oligomerization, which precedes fibril formation is currently regarded as responsible for serious health conditions, such as alzheimer’s disease , parkinson’s disease , type  <dig> diabetes , creutzfeldt-jakob’s disease , huntington disease , amyotrophic lateral sclerosis , and many others   <cit> . therefore, it is of great interest to develop methods for predicting mechanisms leading to this phenomenon. it has been proposed that short segments of amino acids can be responsible for the amyloidogenic properties  <cit> . those fragments are harmless only when they are buried inside a protein. the fragments responsible for amyloidogenicity of the whole protein are believed to be 4– <dig> residues long and it is often assumed that 6-residue fragments with amyloidogenic properties are sufficient “hot spots”  <cit> . recognition of amyloidogenic fragments can be obtained by computational approach, for example physico-chemical methods, e.g. tango  <cit> , zipperdb  <cit> , pasta  <cit> , aggrescan  <cit> , preamyl  <cit> , zyggregator  <cit> , camfold  <cit> , netcssp  <cit> , foldamyloid  <cit> , amyloidmutant  <cit> , betascan  <cit> , and consensus amylpred  <cit> . statistical methods have also been employed in the classification. in our previous work we used classical machine learning methods  <cit>  based on weka  <cit> . other methods include waltz  <cit>  using position specific scoring matrices , or bayessian classifier and weighted decision tree applied to long sequences of bacterial antibodies  <cit> .

no more than two hundreds of such hexapeptides have been experimentally found. new computational algorithms are trained or validated on the scarce experimental dataset. two papers published in bmc bioinformatics, presenting machine learning methods - pafig  <cit>  and another approach based on pafig  <cit> , used their own method for extending the training and testing datasets. the authors assumed that all hexapeptides that belong to an amyloid protein can be regarded as amylo-positive, while those from proteins never reported as amyloid are always amylo-negative. different machine learning methods were then applied to classify amyloid hexapeptides trained on a few thousand of full-length proteins cut into hexapeptides, which were labeled according to this scheme. the classification, validated on hexapeptides obtained in the same way, produced seemingly good results.

however, due to experimental observations, amyloid propensity of a full protein can result only from one amyloidogenic fragment in this protein, while the occurrence of amyloiodogenic part, which is well hidden inside the protein, may never lead to fibril formation. this was confirmed by results of 3d profile method  <cit> , which produced the largest computational database of potential amyloid hexapeptides – zipperdb  <cit> . in the database there are very many examples of proteins including highly amyloidogenic fragments that have never been observed to form an amyloid. it is possible that those fragments are screened inside the protein and deprived of contacts with other fragments of high amyloid propensity, hence unable to start oligomerization and fibril formation.

therefore, we decided to look closer at the datasets proposed in pafig  and validate the results of this method, which was trained on a dataset obtained contrary to these observations. for this purpose we performed statistical analysis of the dataset with regard to possible false patterns or undesirable biases. then we used other state of the art computational methods to classify amyloid hexapeptides and compare their results with pafig by means of clustering approach. the objective was to study how compatible is pafig to other classification methods.

RESULTS
dataset
the analysis of the total hexpepset shows strong bias towards stviie hexapaptide, which can be observed at the hexpepset logo , generated with weblogo  <cit> . this bias originates from the contribution of the largest up-to-date experimental amyloid hexapeptide dataset - amylhex  <cit> , which was incorporated into the hexpeptset. in the positive part of the hexpeptset,  <dig> hexapeptides  come from amylhex. additionally, hexpeptset includes  <dig> incorrect hexapeptides  that belong to amylhex. hexpeptset does not include any hexapeptide from amylhex. the influence of amylhex on hexpeptset is strong. the bias also means that the peptides are not representative of the protein world, which was the main criticism towards amylhex dataset  <cit> . we tested the hexpeptset with regard to its representativeness by comparing to uniprot statistics. table  <dig> presents the ratio of each residue contained in hexpeptset versus uniprot representation, which takes into account unequal contribution from different amino acids. numbers greater than  <dig> indicate over-represented residues; stviie is presented in bold, the most abundant residues are in red.

statistical distribution of pafig full training dataset, including all positive and negative hexapeptides, normalized versus frequencies of aminoacid occurrence in all proteins deposited in uniprot. the expected values for a well balanced training dataset should equal  <dig>  the values above  <dig> denote over-representation of a residue at the specific location of training hexapeptides, values below  <dig> show under-representation. the bias from stviie is in bold.

the positive  and negative  parts of hexpeptset exhibit patterns, which are different for positive and negative sets. this fact can be sufficient reason for the machine learning methods, trained and tested on this dataset, to be able to learn to distinguish hexapeptides from these two datasets. the question arises as to whether these patterns are related to amyloid propensity or did they appeared incidentally with strong contribution of amylhex bias to positive hexpeptset.

machine learning methods reveal two clusters
the hexpeptset dataset, containing a binary classification of  <dig> hexapeptides, was applied to three state of the art methods foldamylod  <cit> , waltz  <cit> , and amylpred  <cit> . the results of classification can be seen as a binary matrix . to identify similarity or dissimilarity between all examined methods  the clustering was applied .

the clustersim package of r programming language, applied for testing all combinations of the number of clusters, distance metrics, and clustering methods, revealed two distinctly different groups of methods, i.e. foldamyloid, waltz, and amylpred located in one cluster, and pafig in the other one. the baker and hubert index gained the highest possible value of  <dig>  the exemplary dendrograms for different linkage metrics created by unsupervised hierarchical clustering  are presented in figure  <dig>  all of them indicate two main clusters, in which pafig is always located in a separate cluster. interestingly, two distinct subgroups in the first cluster can be found: the first sub cluster consists of foldamyloid variants, whereas the second sub cluster is composed of waltz variants and amylpred. since amylpred is a consensus method incorporating several other methods, this can show greater similarity to waltz approach.

to confirm the obtained results, the stability-based clustering method was applied. the merged consensus clustering, which used resampling of data and different clustering algorithms , created the merged consensus matrix that was generated by unweighted averaging of the consensus matrices provided by each clustering algorithm. the merged matrix could be used as a distance matrix. figure  <dig> presents the heatmap of merged consensus matrix calculated for two clusters. bootstrapping of data and using a bunch of clustering algorithms reaffirmed the conclusions drawn above – all methods are divided into two branches, waltz and amylpred are recognized as sub-branch within one branch with foldamyloid, whereas pafig is clustered within the other branch.

figure  <dig> shows a box plot with the robustness values associated with two clusters. from the figure  <dig> it is clear, that the membership robustness values are noticeably lower, on average, for the pafig method. pafig results have to be treated as significantly different from the results gained by the other methods.

in the additional file  we compare the classification results of pafig and other classical computational methods used in this study. the file also includes the sheets called “non-amyloids” and “amyloids”, which compares the unanimous voting  of the classical methods over the dataset hexpepset with the pafig classification. the classical methods  are regarded as base learning algorithms in heterogeneous ensemble method with unanimous strategy. the results of this analysis show that hexapeptides regarded as non–amyloids by the unanimous voting  are identically recognized by pafig in only 57%, which is close to random. on the other hand pafig identically recognized 100% of hexapeptides classified as “amyloids”, however this set included only  <dig> instances.

CONCLUSIONS
our study on recognition of amyloid hexapeptides showed that occurrence of incidental patterns in wrongly selected datasets can produce falsely correct results of classification. in the hexpeptset dataset, used for training machine learning methods of pafig, “amyloid” part of data appeared strongly biased towards stviie hexapeptide, which comes from experimental amylhex dataset. this bias contributed to the pattern, which could be recognized by machine learning. on the other hand, “non-amyloid” part of hexpeptset lacks this bias, although it exhibits a different pattern of its hexapeptides, which is not position-dependent. the difference in patterns of these sets was sufficient for “successful” training of machine learning methods. however, this training did not allow for a correct classification of amyloid hexapeptides. comparison of classification results between pafig and other computational state of the art methods, by means of clustering methods, showed that pafig is an outlier with regard to the classification results. this means that its classification is different and not related to amyloid properties of hexapeptides.

our results of data analysis are in line with experimental observations – amyloid propensity of a full protein can result from only one amyloidogenic fragment in this protein, while the occurrence of amyliodogenic part that is well hidden inside the protein may never lead to fibril formation.

