BACKGROUND
mating between sympatric species is a regular occurrence in natural populations, and increasing anthropogenic re-distributions of organisms is driving ever greater frequencies of species contact and hybridization  <cit> . whether giving rise to new, independent hybrid lineages or to the movement of alleles between species , recent population genetics and experimental studies show that inter-specific mating can be a major force behind adaptation and speciation  <cit> . the potential for hybridization to contribute to biodiversity, however, involves the interactions of multiple processes that remain incompletely understood  <cit> . in particular, hybridization is limited by a complex interplay of pre- and post-mating reproductive barriers that can decrease mating compatibility between species or the fitness of hybrid individuals  <cit> .

especially in sympatric species, isolating mechanisms that depend on mating behaviors  play a central role in reproductive isolation. for animals and plants, it has been shown that mating  and gametic  behavior are effective mechanisms to keep species separated  <cit> . in fungi the influence of mating patterns is less transparent, partly because of the complexity and variety of fungal mating systems  <cit> . many fungi persist as haploid individuals, where compatibility is determined by molecular signals, rather than a reliance on genotypically determined anisogamy. in most fungi, mating depends on the compatibility of pheromones and pheromone receptors, and thus, those proteins and their genes might play a central role for reproductive isolation. although studies show the importance of assortative mating, and even reinforcement for reproductive isolation in fungi, evidence that these are due to the pheromone and pheromone receptor specifically is indirect  <cit> .

genetics of the mating compatibility system might also be effective in the post-mating stage and thus influence hybrid’s fitness potential. for instance, in mating systems, where homogametic and heterogametic sexes occur , hybrid inviability occurs more often in the heterogametic sex than in the homogametic sex  <cit> , which often attributed to the hemizygosity nature of the structurally divergent sex chromosomes  <cit> . in fungi, where structural heterozygosity of sex chromosomes also occurs, asymmetrical effects upon hybrid fitness depending on the particular combination of sex chromosomes has also been observed  <cit>  - in analogy to darwin's corollary to hybrid viability  <cit> .

in the present study we utilize members of the basidiomycete fungi in the genus microbotryum to analyze the effect of the mating type on reproductive isolation. microbotryum comprises many fungal species that typically specialize to a given host plant species  <cit> . the sibling species m. lychnidis-dioicae and m. silenes-dioicae  infecting silene latifolia and silene dioica, respectively, can hybridize in natural overlapping habitats, but frequency of hybrids is low  <cit> . as typical for fungi, mating in microbotryum occurs during the haploid stage and is controlled by a special region in the genome , which is responsible for the production of pheromones and pheromone receptors. in microbotryum, the mat region is located on a pair of non-recombining and size-dimorphic mating type chromosomes  <cit> . the different mating types are referred to as a <dig> and a <dig> and haploid conjugation occurs exclusively between cells of opposite form  <cit> .

the role of the mating system and mating type during reproductive isolation, and especially effects that are linked to the mat region, remain unclear in microbotryum. generally, most microbotryum species have high selfing rates  <cit> , thus limiting the probability of interspecific gene flow  <cit> . mechanisms of pre-mating barriers in the form of assortative mating have been investigated but not found  <cit> . when hybridization is achieved experimentally, it often leads to the production of unbalanced meiotic products with limited growth and reduced infection ability  <cit> . this loss of f1-hybrid’s fitness in microbotryum seems to increase with the genetic distance among crossed species  <cit> . in addition, maladaptation to the extrinsic host environment seems to be important in microbotryum, where hybrids are less successful in producing complete infection symptoms than non-hybrids on the parental host environment  <cit> .

here, we aim to analyze determinants of mating type effects on reproductive isolation between the recently-derived microbotryum species m. lychnidis-dioicae and microbotryum silenes-dioicae <cit> . this is achieved by backcrossing experiments that can manipulate the identity between paired mating partners at the mat regions and the rest of the genome. first, we test whether assortative mating occurs with regard to the mating type locus in the hybrid-produced gametes backcrossing combinations with gametes from parental species. secondly, we quantify the fitness of backcrosses of f1-hybrids on different host environments to assess the contribution of mating type effects and extrinsic factors.

RESULTS
evidence for assortative mating in f1-hybrids
conjugation rates of  <dig> haploid isolates of f1-hybrid gametes between microbotryum lychnidis-dioicae and m. silenes-dioicae backcrossed to parental, non-hybrids isolates provided evidence of assortative mating depending on the species’ specific mat region. by using meiotic products from f1-hybrids to backcross with parental  gametes, the paired alleles at the mating type locus in particular were manipulated to be from the same species  or the alternate species  for the comparison of conjugation rates. no mating type-associated or species-associated differences for conjugation proportions could be detected  = -  <dig> , p =  <dig> ; gamete origin: t  = -  <dig> , p =  <dig> ), and therefore isolates were pooled in the test for difference in homospecific versus heterospecific backcrossing rates. conjugation rates for backcrossing were significantly greater where the mating type alleles of hybrid- and parental-derived sporidia were from the same microbotryum species  than when backcrossing combined mating type alleles were derived from different microbotryum species   =  <dig> , p =  <dig> ) .

*two-tailed paired t-test; n: number of tested isolates; m: mean; se: standard error; med: median; p: significance level .

successful mating was observed for  <dig> of  <dig> combinations. the exception was isolate # <dig>  which conjugated with the parental isolate in the homospecific backcross but not in the heterospecific backcross . the control for this isolate conjugated with the haploid of opposite mating type derived from the same f1-hybrid . because the reason of failure of isolate # <dig> to conjugate in the heterospecific backcross remains unclear , isolate # <dig> has been excluded from statistical analysis. the number of cells counted per conjugation test varied from  <dig> to  <dig> among the paired crosses, and the proportion of cells involved in conjugations after  <dig> hours of incubation averaged  <dig>   with considerable variation among paired mixtures .

post-mating experiment reveals some significant differences among treatments but the patterns did not point to a single explanatory mechanism
with a backcrossing design that manipulated the host environment, the proportion of the f2-hybrid pathogen genome derived from m-sl or m-sd, and the homospecificity/heterospecity of the mating type locus, extrinsic and intrinsic factors contributing to post-mating reproductive isolation were investigated. all microbotryum genotypes produced by hybrid backcrossing caused anther-smut disease following inoculation of the natural host s. latifolia and the artificial host s. colorata <cit> , allowing assessment of the influence of native versus novel host environment  and mating type region . in total,  <dig> s. latifolia plants flowered and the mean infection rate across different gamete types were  <dig>  , while on s. colorata the flowering individuals  were diseased at the rate of  <dig>   .

*m-sla1h: haploid hybrid genotype with a <dig> mating type chromosome originating from m. lychnidis-dioicae; m-sda2h: haploid hybrid genotype with a <dig> mating type chromosome originating from m. silenes-dioicae . a: number of plants inoculated; b: number of infected plants; c: number of infected flowers genotyped; d: proportion of infection arising from homospecific backcrosses, p: binomial probability. numbers in bold: summed  and averaged  values for the four isolates of each gamete type.

on the natural host s. latifolia, hybrid isolates where the mating type chromosome originated from m. lychnidis-dioicae  that were backcrossed with parental, non-hybrid m-sl  exhibited superior competitive infection ability than m-slh heterospecific backcross to m-sd  . for hybrid isolates where the mating type chromosome originated from m. silenes-dioicae , the more frequent infection was the backcross to the mating-type heterospecific m-sl rather than to the homospecific m-sd, but the differences were not statistically significant  .

on the non-host species s. colorata, intended to serve as an environment to which neither m-sl nor m-sd were better adapted, m-slh haploid genotypes did not show a statistical bias in the backcross direction  among infected plants . however for m-sdh haploids, the m-sda1h significantly deviated from the  <dig>  ratio with most infections being from the heterospecific backcrossed type . m-sda2h did not show a statistical bias in the backcross direction  among infected plants  .

discussion
the importance of mating between species in nature is becoming more apparent as molecular studies reveal extensive evidence of hybridization events. thus, the study of hybrids and reproductive isolation is now central to our understanding of the origin and maintenance of species  <cit> . in the present study, the use of experimental hybrids between the anther smut fungi, m. lychnidis-dioicae and m. silenes-dioicae, helps to illuminate the effect of mating type during reproductive isolation in recently-diverged sister species. the results show significant support for pre-mating barriers depended on the combinations of specific mating type chromosomes and less obvious signs for post-mating isolation driven by the origins of the mating types. in contrast to previous hybrid studies in this system, the use of controlled backcross experiments further reveals effects which are likely to play important roles in both maintaining species separation and the nature of backcrossed hybrids lineages that may emerge in the presence of backcrossing potential.

assortative mating in microbotryum
pre-mating barriers between sister species, which may contribute directly to their evolutionary viability and isolation, is an issue complicated by the multiple influences upon contact and mating between individuals. in the anther smut fungi that infect the caryophyllaceae, where the pathogens are specialized to their particular hosts  <cit> , the strength of pre-mating barriers in sympatry is poorly understood. sympatric populations of m. lychnidis-dioicae and m. silenes-dioicae are common but the frequency of hybrid genotypes seems to be low  <cit> . previous studies have generally not detected causes for pre-mating isolation upon contact between species  <cit> , apart from the potential contribution of a developmentally influenced high selfing rate in combination with sibling competition  <cit> . the current study shows that assortative mating, in the form of recognizing species-specific variation at the mating type locus, might serve as pre-mating barrier that is active between sister species of microbotryum. although the signal is significant, patterns for assortative mating among the two species are weak. this might be due to the fact that the most closely related microbotryum species have been used - out of the necessity to have viable f1-hybrid meiotic products, and we may expect stronger mat- predicted assortative mating in more distant other species pairs that come into contact in nature. moreover, the large variation in conjugation rates among replicates emphasizes that mating in microbotryum might be also influenced by other factors that have not been isolated yet.

for example, in the study by le gac et al.  <cit> , assortative mating was evaluated by testing for the correlation between mating rates  and the genetic distances between several microbotryum species. wide variation in mating rates was seen across the species pairs, but it was not correlated with genetic distances. that result also suggests that species differences besides the compatible mating types may be affecting conjugation rates . in m. lychnidis-dioicae, previous studies have shown that temperature, available nutrients, and the presence of the plant exudate alpha-tocopherol can affect the propensity of haploid cells to mate  <cit> , as other organisms may respond similarly to extrinsic signals such as ph or light  <cit> . in the current study, gametes were produced from f1-hybrids, where the identity of the non-recombining mating type chromosome was controlled for and the autosomal component of the genome is generally expected to be a mixture of the two parental species, thus potentially homogenizing the influence of contrasting cellular responses to non-pheromone-based environmental cues. therefore, with this approach the influence of mating types upon behavior could probably be better resolved than in prior studies to reveal preferences in the mating compatibility signals.

with evidence that m. lychnidis-dioicae and m. silenes-dioicae originally diverged through allopatric isolation  <cit> , we see now that the pathogens show adaptation to specific hosts that could further contribute to their isolation  <cit> . neutral divergence or selection for assortative mating upon secondary contact , remain plausible explanations for the evolution of the patterns observed here.

sources of post-mating isolation
fitness reductions due to mal-adaptation to parental environments and genomic-level incompatibilities that are typical of hybrids have been experimentally demonstrated using crosses between microbotryum species. interspecific microbotryum hybrids are less successful at infecting host plants than the progeny of intraspecific crosses  <cit> . also, hybrids often show incomplete sporulation on host plants  <cit> . moreover, the study of le gac et al.  <cit>  revealed the existence of host-dependent factors that influence hybrids fitness, where identical f1-hybrid genotypes between m. lychnidis-dioicae and m. silenes-dioicae differed in infection ability on their two hosts, s. latifolia and s. dioica. our results may support the conclusion of host-dependent effects upon hybrid fitness, where backcrossing that was homospecific for the m. lychnidis-dioicae mating type was significantly favored on s. latifolia but not on s. colorata, consistent with the expectation that host adaptation to s. latifolia is an extrinsic post-mating factor  <cit> . this coincides with the meta-analysis study of giraud and gourbier  <cit>  that also emphasizes that the occurrence of post-mating barriers in microbotryum is more likely caused by extrinsic factors than genetic incompatibilities.

in our design, the second natural parental host environment could not be used, , but it would be very informative to test forces of extrinsic isolation in models that can include both parental hosts as environments. the use of a novel host environment did, however, allow our study to assess mating compatibility based upon the species-specific mating type chromosomes. in the unbiased novel host environment backcrossed pathogens with genomes with a higher percentage from a single microbotryum species  should perform better than offspring with a more mosaic genome , but this study did not provide evidence for such an effect. the lack of evidence for negative epistatic interactions in these backcrosses may be reasonable considering the very small genetic distance between m. silenes-dioicae and m. lychnidis-dioicae <cit>  even though these two fungal species show reduced hybrid fitness in the form of sterility  <cit> .

in addition, results obtained on the novel host environment suggest that greater genetic contribution from the m. lychnidis-dioicae species provided an infection advantage. the direction of backcrossing toward m. lychnidis-dioicae was higher in both of the mating-type treatments, where the most successful infection were mating type heterospecific, and significantly higher in one case than the  <dig>  neutral expectation. a greater infection potential of m. lychnidis-dioicae than other microbotryum species has been previously observed  <cit> . thus, regarding post-mating isolation in microbotryum, it is important that species-specific characteristics be considered in addition to the classification of intrinsic and extrinsic factors, and such an effect may also have contributed to higher infection rates by m. lychnidis-dioicae-backcrossed pathogens on the s. latifolia host.

potential for hybridization and backcrossing in microbotryum
while a large number of studies utilize molecular tools for the analysis of present and past hybridization, the current study takes a different approach to illuminate the potential impact of inter-specific mating through controlled backcrossing experiments. f1-hybrids and backcrosses between the two closely related microbotryum species m. lychnidis-dioicae and m. silenes-dioicae are highly viable on a natural host and a novel host, which supports the idea that hybridization and introgression have the potential to impact natural microbotryum populations. there are several examples in plants and animals where hybridization seems to facilitate new evolutionary lineages  <cit> , and in fungi hybrid speciation events also have been described  <cit> . the current study provides insights into the potentials for hybrid speciation in microbotryum and for introgression via backcrossing of alleles from one species to another, which have both been suggested by molecular analysis of natural microbotryum populations  <cit> .

reproductive isolation from the parental species is essential to the emergence of a new hybrid species. this can be achieved by changes in ecology or genetics  that favor the production of offspring between hybrid genotypes  <cit> . the preference by f <dig> microbotryum hybrids for conjugating with compatible mating type alleles from the same parental species may instead favor backcrossing over hybrid selfing, because f1-hybrid selfing is necessarily heterospecific at the mating type while backcrossing can be favored as homospecific. however, it should be noted that this would only be the potential influence of the mating type upon the process of backcrossing, which may not be strong enough to counter-programmed effects upon development that favor selfing in this organism.

CONCLUSIONS
the present study reveals information about assortative mating that may disfavor hybridization as well as the potential dynamics of mating between hybrids and their parental species. the experimental approach of combining species-specific mating type alleles with competitive backcrossing treatments is a reasonable way to study pre-mating and post-mating reproductive isolation. in particular, the microbotryum species differences that were difficult to resolve in previous studies may be revealed by the homogenizing influence of hybridization upon genome composition. moreover, infection ability of backcrossed hybrids emphasizes the potential influence of hybridization upon the evolutionary genetics of this system.

