BACKGROUND
terpenoids  are a large and diverse class of natural products derived from five-carbon building unit, isopentenyl diphosphate   <cit> . the central precursor ipp and its isomer  are converted to the 10-carbon geranyl diphosphate , the 15-carbon farnesyl diphosphate , and the 20-carbon geranylgeranyl diphosphate  by the condensation reactions of gpp, fpp, and ggpp synthase, respectively. at the entry-point of terpenoid biosynthesis, the ipp and its derivatives  are transformed to hundreds of unique hydrocarbon olefins by terpene synthases via carbocation intermediates  <cit> . these terpene backbones are then decorated by modifying enzymes such as cytochrome p <dig> monooxygenase , oxidoreductase, and other transferase enzymes that provide various functional moieties .

in primary metabolism, terpenoids are indispensable components for various physiological processes, such as respiration , photosynthesis , membrane fluidity , and intracellular signaling cascades . terpenoid metabolism is also responsible for creating a wide array of related, yet chemically distinct natural products, which play important roles in interactions among organisms and defense mechanisms against biotic stresses  <cit> . many of these terpenoid natural products have found use as pharmaceuticals , nutraceuticals , aromas and flavors , and industrial chemicals . the transformation of ipp and its related derivatives to highly complex terpenoids has been an area of active biochemical and bio-engineering studies  <cit> .

the pharmaceutical, chemical, and food industries that supply terpenoid commodities face two critical issues. first, the chemical complexities of terpenoids hinder economic chemical synthesis of terpenoids. to date, the supply of many terpenoid compounds still depends on the isolation of natural terpenoids or the pathway intermediates from plant sources. second, chemical intermediates and solvents required for the organic chemical synthesis of terpenoids are often petroleum-derived chemicals whose availability is finite. to circumvent these problems, current biotechnological efforts have been focused on devising novel biological processes to manufacture complex terpenoids using enzymes and engineered microbial platforms. one example of biological manufacturing of terpenoids is the production of the anti-malarial drug artemisinin precursor, artemisinic acid, using recombinant enzymes in microbial platforms  <cit> .

artemisinin is a sesquiterpene lactone endoperoxide extracted from the medicinal plant, sweet wormwood . artemisinin is a potent anti-malarial drug whose mode of action in curing malaria is proposed to include inhibition of the serca  activity of plasmodium falciparum  <cit> . artemisinin combination therapy  has been recommended as the first-line medication to patients living in areas where multi-drug resistant strains of plasmodium spp. are endemic  <cit> . however, the lack of sufficient raw material, artemisinin, and the cost associated with the drug's manufacture have limited the supply of act to malaria sufferers in the developing world  <cit> . at this moment, scientific effort is being directed to develop a biological method to supply sufficient and reliable quantities of artemisinic acid, a direct precursor of artemisinin. the introduction and optimization of the mevalonate pathway in e. coli increased production of fpp to  <dig>  gram l- <dig> as measured by amorphadiene production  <cit> . similar flux-enhancement in s. cerevisiae increased amorphadiene production to  <dig> mg l- <dig>  <cit> . expression of amorphadiene synthase , amorphadiene c <dig> oxidase , and its redox partner cytochrome p <dig> reductase  in the flux-enhanced e. coli or s. cerevisiae demonstrated that more than  <dig> mg artemisinic acid l- <dig> culture can be produced in both platforms at a laboratory scale  <cit> . the efficient conversion of amorphadiene to artemisinic acid by s. cerevisiae expressing the er-bound amo demonstrated it to be an ideal microbial platform to functionally express genes encoding membrane-bound enzymes.

following up from the report of artemisinic acid manufacture in the engineered yeast  <cit> , we evaluated and further improved the engineered yeast as a microbial host to produce the drug precursor artemisinic acid. we show here that the production of artemisinic acid can be increased by employing a high-copy plasmid system. we further assessed the response of the engineered yeast to artemisinic acid synthesis and accumulation by analyzing the global transcript profile and by conducting targeted gene expression analysis of multi-drug resistant genes. the data demonstrates the potential use of the engineered yeast to produce drug precursors and also suggests molecular strategies to be employed to further improve the artemisinic acid production levels.

RESULTS
low plasmid stability in yeast strain engineered to produce artemisinic acid
artemisinic acid is a key precursor for the anti-malarial drug, artemisinin. we have previously reported an engineered yeast strain harboring two plasmids that can synthesize ~ <dig> mg artemisinic acid l- <dig> culture in a bioreactor  <cit> . in the previous study, expression of the three plant genes was achieved using the prs425-leu plasmid for amorphadiene synthase  expression and using the pesc-ura plasmid for amorphadiene oxidase  and cytochrome p <dig> reductase  expressions. the plasmid stability of the engineered yeast was evaluated after culturing the yeast strain in galactose selective medium. after culturing for  <dig> hr, only  <dig> ± 10%  of the engineered yeast contained both prs425-leu::ads and pesc-ura::amo/cpr plasmids, indicating that 72% of the yeast cells lost the leucine, uracil, or both selectable markers. this result led us to systematically examine the plasmid stability of engineered yeast strains with the aim of devising methods to increase the yield of artemisinic acid production. we analyzed the production of amorphadiene and artemisinic acid separately by constructing a single vector encoding either ads or ads/amo/cpr .

improved production of amorphadiene in engineered yeast
the leu2d allele contains a deleted promoter, leaving only 29-bp of the leu <dig> promoter region in the leu <dig> expression cassette. to compensate for the weakened leu <dig> expression, s. cerevisiae selects for significantly higher plasmid copy number  <cit> . the ads gene was expressed in prs425-leu <dig>  or in the newly constructed prs425-leu2d plasmid backbone  using selective  or non-selective medium . as amorphadiene is volatile, it was collected by overlaying dodecane in the yeast culture.

amorphadiene dissolved in the dodecane layer was quantified by gas-chromatography. in the selective medium, changing expression of ads from prs425-leu <dig> to prs425-leu2d increased amorphadiene production  <dig>  fold , whereas changing the culture medium from selective to non-selective rich medium using the leu <dig> plasmid  increased amorphadiene production  <dig>  fold . expression of ads from prs425-leu2d in non-selective medium increased amorphadiene production by  <dig> -fold . specific amorphadiene production  closely followed the time-course production pattern for total amorphadiene, although the production difference in non-selective medium was marginal .

the stability of prs425-leu2::ads plasmid in either selective or non-selective medium was not significantly different, exhibiting more than 50% plasmid stability at 144-hr post-induction in all conditions . interestingly, the stability of prs425-leu2d::ads in non-selective medium was very high  even at 144-hr post-induction. the high stability of prs425-leu2d::ads implies that the leu2d selectable marker enables yeast to maintain high plasmid stability in non-selective medium.

improved production of artemisinic acid in engineered yeast
plasmids containing three plant genes  for artemisinic acid biosynthesis were constructed in pesc-leu <dig> or pesc-leu2d . these two plasmids are referred to as pesc-leu2-t  or pesc-leu2d-t. prior to testing the artemisinic acid production by these two plasmids, the expression of ads in the prs425-leu2d and pesc-leu2d backbones was compared to ensure that ads is expressed similarly in the two different plasmid backbones. the engineered yeast strain harboring either prs425-leu2d::ads  or pesc-leu2d::ads  routinely produced  <dig> μg amorphadiene ml- <dig> culture. there was no difference in their plasmid stabilities . thus, ads expression was not affected by the type of plasmid backbones used.

to evaluate artemisinic acid production, the epy <dig> strain was transformed either with pesc-leu2-t  or pesc-leu2d-t . epy <dig> produced  <dig> ±  <dig> mg l- <dig>  artemisinic acid, which is comparable to the level of artemisinic acid produced by the strain harboring the two-plasmid system  <cit> . changing the selection marker from leu <dig> to leu2d increased artemisinic acid production by  <dig> -fold in selective medium, whereas changing the medium from selective to non-selective using the leu <dig> plasmid increased artemisinic acid production by  <dig> -fold . the combination of the leu2d selection marker and non-selective, rich medium increased the production of artemisinic acid by  <dig>  fold. as a result, the final titer reached  <dig> ±  <dig> mg l-1culture . the production yield of amorphadiene and artemisinic acid  indicates that 32% of the amorphadiene was oxidized by amo and cpr in the engineered yeast.

the time course data of specific artemisinic acid production of the triple gene-expressing yeasts were clearly different from those of amorphadiene production of the ads-expressing yeasts . the yeast strain expressing the three genes from pesc-leu <dig>  in non-selective medium showed greatly decreased specific productivity . thus, without selection, the three plant genes need to be expressed from the high-copy pesc-leu2d plasmid in order to maintain high specific productivity.

plasmid stabilities of the triple-gene expression vectors were significantly different from those of ads-expressing plasmids . plasmid stability of pesc-leu2-t in selective medium  was  <dig> -fold higher than that in non-selective medium  at 120-hr post-induction. similarly, the plasmid stability of pesc-leu2d-t in selective medium  was  <dig> -fold higher than that in non-selective medium . these results showed that engineered yeasts lose the plasmids coding for the three plant genes when grown in non-selective rich medium and that the leu2d selection marker is required for yeast to retain plasmids. the low plasmid stability for yeast expressing the three plant genes from pesc-leu <dig> in non-selective medium is consistent with the significantly decreased specific productivity of the same strain .

in order to evaluate the potential use of the yeast strain for industrial fermentation purposes, the two auxotropic markers  were repaired, and the resulting yeast strain  was cultured in a fed-batch culture in a bio-reactor. without culture optimization, the yeast strain produced  <dig>  g artemisinic acid l- <dig> after culturing for  <dig> hr . these data strongly suggest the industrial potential of this yeast strain for artemisinic acid production.

restoration of high plasmid stability by point-mutation of amo
apparently, the plasmid stabilities were not affected by ads gene expression and amorphadiene production . however, a comparison of yeast strains producing amorphadiene to those producing artemisinic acid showed that plasmid stabilities were affected by amo and cpr expression. to distinguish whether the plasmid loss was due to the high expression of membrane-bound amo or due to the high level of artemisinic acid production, a point mutation  was introduced into amo at the cysteine residue that is conserved in all p <dig> enzymes. this amo knock-out of pesc-leu2d-t is referred to as pesc-leu2d-tko. gc-ms analysis confirmed that the engineered yeast strain containing the pesc-leu2d-tko  did not produce artemisinic acid but produced a high level of amorphadiene, indicating that the c439g point mutation completely abolished the catalytic activity of amo . production of the amo protein in epy <dig> was also verified by western-blot using an anti-amo polyclonal antibody . together, these data demonstrate that epy <dig> is producing an inactive amo protein. epy <dig> was transformed with either pesc-leu2d-t  or pesc-leud2-tko , and the plasmid stabilities of these two strains were measured after culturing at 96-hr in non-selective medium. the stability of pesc-leu2d-t  was comparable to the previous data, whereas the stability of pesc-leu2d-tko was  <dig> ± 20% . this plasmid stability is much closer to that of the plasmid expressing ads alone . based on these data, we concluded that artemisinic acid synthesis was the cause for the low plasmid stability.

induction of abc transporter by endogenous production of artemisinic acid
the two engineered yeast strains  have a single nucleotide difference in their plasmids, which results in the different oxidation level of the terpenoid product . considering the neutrality of the cytosol and a predicted pka of  <dig>  ±  <dig>  for artemisinic acid , it is likely that artemisinic acid is present as an ionized form in the yeast cytosol, and hence active yeast transporters might be involved in transporting the polar artemisinic acid out of the cell to lessen its potential toxicity. to examine if the cellular stresses caused by a high level of oxidized terpenoids can evoke the induction of genes involved in pleiotropic drug resistance , the transcription of five yeast atp-binding cassette  transporters  and two known transcription factors  for the pdr response were compared by semi-quantitative reverse transcriptase -pcr. a remarkable transcriptional induction of pdr <dig> was found in the yeast strain producing artemisinic acid relative to the strain expressing the inactivated amo . expression of three other abc transporters  was also significantly induced in the yeast strain producing artemisinic acid relative to the yeast strain containing the inactivated amo; induction of pdr <dig> expression was insignificant. in addition, up-regulated expression of the pdr <dig> transcription factor was noticeable after  <dig> hrs, while that of pdr <dig> was indiscernible.

in order to quantify the magnitude of induction, the transcripts of these genes were analyzed by quantitative real-time rt-pcr. at  <dig> hrs post-induction, pdr <dig> was induced by  <dig>  fold; pdr <dig>  yor <dig> and snq <dig> were induced  <dig> to  <dig> fold; and pdr <dig> was induced by  <dig>  fold . although expression induction of these genes was attenuated at  <dig> hrs, significant expression was still detectable. these data were consistent with and corroborate those obtained by semi-quantitative rt-pcr. relative transcriptional analyses of yeast abc transporters clearly demonstrated that one of the primary cellular responses caused by de novo artemisinic acid synthesis in engineered yeast is rapid transcriptional activation of various abc transporters.

global transcriptional analysis by microarray
up-regulation of pdr transporter expression suggests that in vivo production of artemisinic acid triggers a stress adaptation response in yeast. in order to further characterize the stress responses accompanying amo activity and artemisinic acid production, we compared transcript profiles of an artemisinic acid-producing strain  and that of a strain expressing the inactivated amo . expression of the triple-gene constructs in five independent transformants for each strain  were induced and harvested at  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> hours after induction.

a total of  <dig>  genes were found to be significantly differentially expressed in at least one experimental time point, of which  <dig> were up-regulated and  <dig> were down-regulated in the producer strain by more than 2-fold in at least one time point . not unexpectedly, several known or putative pdr transporters  were found among the differentially expressed genes, some of which are among the genes with the strongest up-regulation observed . these results are generally very similar to the results obtained by quantitative pcr for these genes, although pdr <dig> was found to be significantly up-regulated  by microarrays at  <dig> h post-induction. several transporters of the major facilitator superfamily  were also strongly up-regulated in the artemisinic acid-producing strain, including transporters associated with multiple drug resistance  and the hexose transporters , which have been shown to be transcriptionally controlled by pdr transcription factors pdr1p and pdr3p  <cit> . this important and widespread up-regulation of transcription of drug transporters often persisted at least  <dig> hr after induction. a number of genes in the gene ontology categories "response to drugs" or "response to toxin"  were also strongly up-regulated.

the t-profiler software  <cit>  and the yeastract database  <cit>  were used to interpret the gene expression profiles at the 24-hr time point by finding consensus motifs upstream of significantly represented groups of genes and associated transcription factors. three different upstream regulatory consensus motifs were predicted to have a significant impact in the response to artemisinic acid production: tccgyggr, which can be bound by the drugs and stress -responsive transcription factors pdr3p, pdr8p, yrr1p and hsf1p; cccct, which can be bound by the drugs and stress-responsive transcription factor msn2p/msn4p; and yyacccg, which can be bound by reb1p, a general rna polymerase factor, but also by hsf1p, a general stress response-associated transcription factor. similar results were obtained after  <dig> and  <dig> hr of induction.

other genes among the most strongly up-regulated  in the producer strain were also related to cellular responses to different stresses, including oxidative  and osmotic , as well as other general stress responses . some of the genes, such as hsp <dig> , appeared in multiple categories of stresses, and it was difficult to link the induction of some genes to a specific class of stress response. it needs to be further evaluated if those responses are the direct consequence of artemisinic acid and its synthesis or secondary effects. in summary, these data suggest that artemisinic acid production triggers a plethora of stress-related responses in yeast with the major classes of induced genes being the mfs and abc-transporters.

discussion
the necessity for biological processes utilizing renewable resources becomes critical in part due to global warming and depletion of petroleum. most biological engineering efforts have been focused on developing microbial systems that can be genetically altered to produce high-value chemicals and petroleum substitutes. although our understanding of tuning microbes into efficient workhorses for chemical production is still limited, technological developments in synthetic biology promise to make biological engineering more predictable, faster, and less expensive  <cit> . all major classes of secondary metabolites including phenylpropanoids, terpenoids, and polyketides have been produced in microbes  <cit> . yet most of the natural products are still supplied primarily through fungal fermentation and plant cultivation accompanied by subtle chemical modifications. in this respect, the yeast engineered to produce artemisinic acid is not only a step towards a potential economically viable method for producing artemisinin at a commercial scale but also a research model to study the microbial manufacture of specialty and commodity chemicals.

in this study, we demonstrated that the production titer of artemisinic acid can be increased by altering the plasmid selection marker and culture medium. without any optimization, the artemisinic acid yields from both shake-flask and bio-reactor cultivation of the engineered yeast were 10-fold higher than those yields reported previously  <cit> . further optimization of gene expression and cultivation conditions in order to take advantage of the full metabolic capacity of these microbes should improve artemisinic acid yields even more.

although all of the amorphadiene produced was not completely oxidized to artemisinic acid, the conversion rate is estimated to be at least 32% by simply comparing the yields of amorphadiene and artemisinic acid . however, this value may be underestimated because the stability of pesc-leu2d::t is two-fold lower than that of pesc-leu2d::ads. considering the lower plasmid stability in artemisinic acid-producing yeast strain, the conversion rate from amorphadiene to artemisinic acid could be as high as 64%. we attempted to measure the amorphadiene that was not oxidized in the artemisinic acid-producing yeast by overlaying dodecane in the culture; however, dodecane sequesters amorphadiene efficiently and hence the total artemisinic acid production was severely impaired by dodecane . although almost immiscible, terpenes still have a low, but measurable water solubility. for example, a range of 5– <dig> mg per liter solubility in water was reported for monoterpenes such as limonene, myrcene, and pinene  <cit> . thus, an excess of unoxidized amorphadiene is likely to remain in the medium and diffuse through the yeast membrane before being oxidized by amo/cpr or vaporized into the atmosphere. the sequestration of amorphadiene by dodecane in cultures of artemisinic acid-producing yeast suggests that amo/cpr inside the cell could not instantly oxidize endogenously produced amorphadiene. it is difficult to accurately measure the "in-cell conversion rate", but apparently the amo/cpr-oxidation capability needs to be improved to fully convert the amorphadiene to artemisinic acid. improvement of the kinetic properties of p450s is likely to be challenging, though such improvements have been demonstrated in a microbial system  <cit> . nonetheless, genes/enzymes in plant secondary metabolism are evolutionarily recent, and hence there may be room for further improvement of their catalytic efficiencies by in vitro evolution or site-directed mutagenesis.

it was unexpected that the plasmid stability of the yeast strain expressing ads in pesc-leu2d reached 84% in non-selective rich medium, which was the highest of all conditions tested . the plasmid stability in non-selective medium was even higher than that of yeast strain harboring the same plasmid in the selective medium. fpp and other mevalonate pathway intermediates have been reported to be cytotoxic in e. coli  <cit> . it is likely that yeast is also under similar stresses when fpp and other precursors accumulate inside the cells. in the yeast strain expressing ads on pesc-leu2d in rich medium, the expression level of ads per cell could be elevated by placing it on a leu2d-based high-copy plasmid and by supplying a high-level of nutrients in rich medium. hence, potentially cytotoxic fpp could be rapidly converted to amorphadiene, which is then transported or diffuses across the plasma membrane and cell wall and evaporates from the culture medium. the reduced intracellular concentration of fpp in cells harboring a high-copy ads and grown in rich medium might stabilize the plasmid harboring ads. however, it should be noted that converting too much fpp to amorphadiene could also be toxic to cells as it would deplete precursors needed for ergosterol production.

the mechanism of olefin secretion from plant cells remains unknown, but hydrophobic olefins such as amorphadiene might be diffusible through the cell membrane without involving transporters. during cultivation  at 30°c, amorphadiene is likely to diffuse through the membrane, and the volatile amorphadiene is readily vaporized. on the other hand, artemisinic acid produced endogenously should be ionized under neutral cytosolic conditions. since ionized artemisinic acid requires transporters to cross the yeast plasma membrane, engineered yeast might utilize its own non-specific transporters to secrete artemisinic acid into the medium. as artemisinic acid is likely to be produced faster than it can be transported from the cell, the engineered yeast harboring the plasmid carrying amo is at a selective disadvantage relative to the same yeast with no plasmid, which results in the low plasmid stabilities observed in non-selective medium . this suggests that artemisinic acid might have a certain level of cytotoxicity in yeast.

the cellular stresses evoked by artemisinic acid were reflected by the massive transcriptional induction of the genes coding for abc transporters as determined by rt-pcr and q-pcr. the unbiased microarray analysis further confirmed that the key abc transporter genes  were among the genes highly up-regulated in the artemisinic acid-producing yeast. nonetheless, yeast appears to tolerate the high-level of artemisinic acid by operating its efficient efflux pumps, such as the abc transporters. it is difficult at this stage to identify the specific transporters or a group of transporters responsible for the secretion of artemisinic acid from yeast. in the future, it would be feasible to identify responsible transporters by deleting transporter genes in the engineered yeast or using deletion yeast strains to evaluate their sensitivity to artemisinic acid as was previously demonstrated in the artesunate -sensitivity test in mutant yeasts  <cit> . the nature and kinetic competency of yeast efflux pumps for artemisinic acid are unknown. thus, the identification and proper expression of authentic plant artemisinic acid transporters from the plant artemisia annua might enhance the efflux of artemisinic acid from engineered yeast. it would be interesting to reconstitute plant transporters in engineered yeast to see if plants have evolved an efficient transporter for a specific class of natural product such as sesquiterpenoids.

the global microarray analysis of transcriptomes of the yeast producing artemisinic acid relative to the yeast producing amorphadiene was used to identify the stress responses associated with artemisinic acid production. the microarray analysis confirmed that expression of genes encoding abc-transporters were up-regulated in artemisinic acid-producing yeast. additionally, microarray data indicated multiple genes involved in oxidative and osmotic stresses and other general stress-responses were significantly up-regulated. despite the difficulties in distinguishing whether these responses were the direct effects of artemisinic acid-related toxicity or indirect effects from the initial stress responses, the t-profiler and yeastract analyses revealed that at least three cis-elements in multiple genes were clearly responsive to artemisinic acid and/or its biosynthesis. as predicted, the pdr3p and related transcription factors involved in multi-drug resistant signaling pathways were identified, and msn2p/msn4p- and reb1p-binding motifs were also identified. the reason for the involvement of the reb1p  in the artemisinic acid stress is not clear, but msn2p/msn4p might be related to oxidative stress associated with artemisinic acid synthesis as these zinc-finger transcription factors are known to regulate superoxide dismutase and thiol peroxidase  <cit> . in the p <dig> catalytic cycle, reactive oxygen species  are formed when activation of molecular oxygen and substrate oxygenation are uncoupled  <cit> . cytochrome p <dig> is a heme-thiolate enzyme in which the distal axial ligand of the heme-moiety is occupied by conserved cysteine residue  <cit> . the strong electron donation by anionic thiolate to the heme moiety facilitates the heterolysis of dioxygen occupying the position trans to the thiolate  <cit> . when cysteine was altered to glycine in the c439g amo mutant, the heterolytic cleavage of dioxygen cannot occur, and hence ros species are not generated.

our microarray data are in general consistent with other yeast mutant and microarray data describing the weak acid stress-responses in yeast. the screening of gene-deletion yeasts identified pdr <dig> and tpo <dig> as major resistant determinants against the anti-malarial drug artesunate  which is remarkably consistent with our data  <cit> . a comparison of yeast genes induced by treatment with  <dig> -dichlorophenoxyacetic acid  and those by artemisinic acid produced by our engineered yeast revealed that multi-drug resistance transporters belonging to abc and msf transporters families  were common genes strongly activated under both conditions  <cit> . considering all data together, it is apparent that the engineered yeast is under the cellular stress exerted by a weak acid .

finally, microarray data suggests that artemisinic acid itself may evoke osmotic stress resulting from lipophilic weak acid stress in the engineered yeast. undissociated artemisinic acid could passively diffuse into the yeast cytosol where it dissociates into a proton and an artemisinic acid anion, which can be actively exported by the cells, resulting in an accumulation of protons in the yeast cytosol and its acidification. alternatively, artemisinic acid could directly cause a destabilization  of the yeast cell wall, leading to decreased plasma membrane stability. the glycosylphosphatidylinositol -anchored cell wall proteins, such as spi <dig> and ygp <dig>  are believed to strengthen cell walls to protect yeast against stress caused by lipophilic weak acids, such as the food preservative benzoic acid  <cit> . induction of these genes during artemisinic acid production  together with several other genes inducible by osmotic stress indicates that yeast tries to compensate for the membrane destabilization effect of artemisinic acid.

the fact that yeast can tolerate multiple stresses and produce one gram of artemisinic acid per liter in a laboratory scale bio-reactor suggests that yeast may be an ideal platform to produce artemisinic acid or other related lipophilic weak acids. although the biological significance of the pleiotropic drug response and oxidative and osmotic stresses needs to be further investigated in this context and the potential resistance determinants to artemisinic acid production are still not clearly determined, this study provides a basis for endogenous artemisinic acid production-induced stresses and will be useful in selecting future potential targets for metabolic engineering.

CONCLUSIONS
development of microbial platforms for the production of pharmaceuticals and other industrial chemicals is an important area of research. an engineered yeast strain that synthesizes the drug precursor artemisinic acid was previously reported. we demonstrated here that the production of artemisinic acid can be significantly improved by modulating the selection marker of the expression plasmid and the composition of the culture medium. in addition, by combination of rt-pcr and microarray analysis, we showed that the cellular responses to artemisinic acid biosynthesis involve the induction of multiple pleiotropic drug resistance genes  as well as genes known to respond to oxidative and osmotic stresses. the studies presented here provide the basis for future strain optimization to improve artemisinic acid production.

