BACKGROUND
non-typeable haemophilus influenzae  is a gram negative microorganism that differs from the other hi serotypes for the lack of a polysaccharide capsule. nthi is a commensal in the human nasopharyngeal mucosa and may occasionally act as a pathogen initiating infections of both the upper and lower respiratory airways, causing conditions such as otitis media , chronic obstructive pulmonary disease , and invasive diseases such as meningitis and sepsis, especially in neonates and the elderly  <cit> .

a broadly protective vaccine against nthi is a current medical need. indeed, one of the major hurdles to nthi vaccine development is the high genetic diversity among strains, leading to the necessity to identify antigens carrying functional epitopes able to induce cross-protective antibodies  <cit> .

as nthi does not express a capsule, the search for alternative vaccine candidates has so far been focused on outer membrane proteins and lipo-oligosaccharide  <cit> . a protective antigen should express epitopes available for antibody binding on the surface of the intact bacterium. molecules embedded within the outer membrane or blocked by steric hindrance of adjacent structures, such as sialic acid could be unavailable for antibody binding and therefore unable to generate protective antibodies. currently, major  and minor  outer membrane proteins, lps, and adhesins  are being studied, and preclinical results including the use of animal models have been generated. in particular, protective efficacy of pd, omp <dig> and p <dig> was proved using models of otitis  and lung infection   <cit> . this approach provided important information on the impact of the host-pathogen relationship on whole tissue, and the interaction between humoral and cellular response. however, these experiments are very expensive, and consequently limit the possibility to screen for strains with different genetic background.

a well-established in vitro method to predict antigen protective ability is the serum bactericidal assay . the sba is also referred to as complement-mediated bacterial killing and quantifies bacterial cell death after incubation of bacterial cells with immune serum and a complement source. in particular for neisseria meningitidis, sba activity has been shown to highly correlate with immunity to meningococcal disease  <cit>  and more recently borrow’s group has evaluated and validated a novel sba for haemophilus influenzae type b  <cit> . however, sba was never established for nthi due to the high susceptibility of this non-encapsulated microorganism to complement-mediated killing. in this study, we modified and optimized sba to evaluate the functional activity of antibodies generated following mice immunization with a panel of recombinant nthi antigens already reported to have protective capability in animal models. this assay could constitute a rapid and low cost tool for antigen selection.

RESULTS
selection of the antigens to develop a serum bactericidal assay for nthi
the aim of this study was to set up a robust assay to screen the antigens capable of raising functional antibodies to kill nthi. first of all, we selected from the literature a panel of proteins already reported to be protective in animal models . this helped us to set the best working conditions of the assay. moreover, we used an unrelated protein  as negative control. we selected nhba from n.meningitidis as unrelated protein-it is a surface protein that is strictly specific for meningococcus.

surface accessibility of nthi antigens
since the prerequisite for the functionality of the assay is that the antigen tested should be exposed on the bacterial surface, we verified the surface exposure of the selected antigens. first of all the antigens were formulated with al <dig> as an adjuvant, and immunized in mice, after which polyclonal antibodies were obtained. as shown in figure  <dig>  all the antigens tested  were well exposed on the surface of live bacteria.figure  <dig> nthi antigens are accessible to antibodies on bacterial surface. binding of anti-pd, pe, p <dig>  omp <dig>  htra, pila and anti- <dig> to live bacteria was evaluated by flow cytometry. histograms represent a typical experiment out of two performed with similar results. rfi, relative fluorescence intensity. filled gray line, bacteria incubated with an irrelevant serum; red line, bacteria incubated with antigen specific serum.



selection of a complement source
selection of a suitable source of complement represented a crucial step in setting up a sba. several lots of sera derived from baby rabbit and guinea pigs were screened to evaluate toxicity. briefly,  <dig> strain was incubated for 60 min with different concentration  of baby rabbit or guinea pig complement. bacteria without complement and bacteria with heat-inactivated complement  were used as control. the mixture was then plated on agar chocolate plates to evaluate nthi strain survival. we discarded sera which resulted to be toxic for nthi, and identified baby rabbit serum  as good complement source for the assay . we assumed that a serum was not toxic at the dilution used in the sba , when the number of bacteria at t60min was more than double the number of targets cells present before the incubation with complement.figure  <dig> selection of complement source.  <dig> strain was tested for survival at different baby rabbit or guinea pig serum concentrations  for 60 min. bacteria without complement and bacteria with heat-inactivated complement  were used as negative control. the results are expressed as % survival at 60 min. the means and standard errors from  <dig> independent experiments are shown. error bars represent the sd.



evaluation of c <dig> complement deposition
we next assessed the ability of the specific sera to induce complement deposition on nthi surface. using flow cytometry analysis, we therefore evaluated if specific antibodies against nthi antigens were able to promote c <dig> deposition, a crucial step in complement pathway cascade. basically, bacteria in exponential phase were incubated with rabbit complement in the absence or presence of increasing amounts of sera from mice immunized with nthi antigens  or  <dig> strain heat inactivated . c <dig> deposition was detected using anti-rabbit c <dig> antibody and anti-rabbit secondary antibody, alexa fluor®  <dig> conjugate. as reported in figure  <dig>  anti- <dig> as well as anti-pila, anti-pd and anti-pe antibodies were able to promote c <dig> component deposition on bacterial surface leading to activation of complement pathway. serum form mice given alum was used as negative control.figure  <dig> sera against specific antigens promote c <dig> fragment deposition on nthi.  <dig> strain was incubated with rabbit complement in the absence or presence of increasing amounts of sera from mice immunized with nthi antigens or  <dig> strain heat inactivated. the amount of c <dig> deposited on bacteria  was measured by flow cytometry. serum form mice given alum was used as negative control. histogram tracings from one representative experiment for anti- <dig> serum are shown in addition to three of the antigens analyzed. rfi, relative fluorescence intensity.



development of a reproducible serum bactericidal assay
the functionality of the antibodies raised against  <dig> strain or against specific nthi antigens was assessed by sba. to perform the sba, bacteria in exponential phase were incubated with complement in the absence or presence of increasing amounts of sera from mice immunized with selected antigens. to validate the assay, we evaluated bactericidal activity of antibodies directed against antigens proved to be protective in in vivo models of colonization and infection, such as protein e  <cit> , protein d  <cit> , p <dig>  <cit> , omp <dig>  <cit>  and htra  <cit> . as postulated, sera raised against pd, pe, p <dig>  omp <dig>  htra and pila antigens were able to induce in vitro killing of  <dig> strain, consistently with their capacity to promote complement deposition. sba titers obtained vary from protein to protein and it is due to several factors, including antigen density and antibody affinity. notably, sba titers well correlated with surface expression of antigens . in particular, pd and htra that appeared to be more accessible to antibodies on the bacterial surface, were among the antigens giving higher sba titers . sera from a) non-immunized mice ; b) mice immunized with pbs alone; c) mice immunized with adjuvant alone 3); d) mice immunized with an adjuvanted unrelated antigen  were used as negative controls. none of these sera induced detectable sba titers .table  <dig> 
bactericidal activity against  <dig> strain



sera
sba titers








α-176


pre-immune sera

α-pbs
bactericidal titers obtained using sera against specific antigens are reported. titers are expressed as the reciprocal of the serum dilution necessary to obtain >50% bacterial killing. experiments were performed three times and average titers is reported. serum against nthi was used as positive control. sera from non-immunized mice , mice immunized with pbs alone, mice immunized with adjuvant alone 3), mice immunized with an adjuvanted unrelated antigen  were used as negative controls. data are means and standard errors of the means from  <dig> separate experiments.



furthermore, given the extensive genetic diversity exhibited by nthi we validated the bactericidal assay with genetically diverse strains belonging to different clades identified by genome-based population structure of nthi  <cit> . preliminary data show that the assay is applicable also to strains genetically different .

CONCLUSIONS
reverse vaccinology and other profile-based computational approaches  <cit>  allow the identification of a large number of open reading frame encoding for surface proteins, however the subsequent screening for bactericidal epitopes is a clear bottleneck. in vitro sba has been proved to be a rapid and cost-effective method to identify new vaccine candidates and, as in the case of the type b meningococcus vaccine, a valid correlate of protection  <cit> . a high genetic diversity not correlating with disease is an important signature of nthi species and represents a crucial issue in the development of a successful vaccine against this human pathogen. selection of protective antigens should therefore consider this aspect by supporting the prioritization of candidates carrying functional epitopes able to induce cross-protective antibodies. in this study, we propose a novel sba for nthi that would help to identify broadly-protective vaccine candidates through a rapid screening of both antigens and strains.

