BACKGROUND
the human population relies on ecosystem services for its maintenance and well-being, and these can only be produced by functioning ecosystems . it has been argued that conserving nature and thereby retaining ecosystem functions is often vastly more profitable in economic terms than converting it, for instance, to forestry or agriculture  <cit> . effective ecosystem conservation requires noticing changes both initially before active management has taken place and later to assess whether an employed conservation strategy is adequate. it is not realistic to have monitoring programmes for everything so indicator species are often used to gauge the health of a larger ecosystem  <cit> . biological properties that make a species or a taxonomic group attractive for use as indicators of ecosystem health are, for instance, clear taxonomy, existing information on basic biology, some measurable correlations to ecosystem health, limited mobility, practicality of sampling and relatively low variability of population fluctuations  <cit> .

once an indicator species has been identified, it is then necessary to know whether its population is stable, increasing or decreasing  <cit> . such assessments are often based on statistical analyses of long-term population trends  <cit> . however, a much more thorough understanding of the situation can be gained by a more detailed demographic analysis whenever the extant data allow, especially when relatively small populations are considered  <cit> . this is because they are more sensititive to demographic and environmental stochasticity than larger populations and it is therefore important to understand how changes in population structure translate to changes in population growth rate  <cit> . individual differences, such as age, sex, and condition, can greatly affect their contribution to population growth and consequently the same population size can lead to different population trajectories  <cit> . understanding the evolutionary selection pressures operating in a species also requires understanding the demography  <cit> .

it has been suggested that plethodontid salamanders, which comprise about 70% of the living urodelan species, are a suitable group to use as an indicator of ecosystem health  <cit> . however, long-term studies on them are scarce  <cit>  and demographic information for them is mainly based on life table and time series analyses of few terrestrial species from the usa and europe . in general, these studies suggest that limiting factors, such as moisture, food and retreat or nesting sites may contribute to density-dependent population regulation  <cit> . time series analysis on a population of the nw italian speleomantes strinatii showed that the population trajectory is stable and that the population was probably fluctuating near the environmental carrying capacity  <cit> .

as most of the long-term population data on salamanders are from a small number of species, mainly north american plethodon and desmognathus species , and from a single species of the european genus speleomantes  <cit> , our understanding of the population regulation and demography of terrestrial salamanders is rather limited. here we present an analysis based on a long-term data set on an underground population of speleomantes strinatii using state-space modelling. this approach allows us to take into account both the inherent stochasticity in the demographic processes, and the uncertainty in the parameter estimates while using all of the available data to inform the model fit  <cit> . we explicitly model the underlying stochastic process, using markov chain monte carlo  simulation in a bayesian framework  <cit> .

RESULTS
abundance estimates were obtained for each age class and sex group in all years . mean capture probabilities  were relatively high ranging from  <dig>  to  <dig> , and there were no significant differences among groups  or years , as noted by salvidio  <cit> . there was no relationship between mean snout vent length  and cp , but it may be noteworthy that the smallest age group  had the lowest cp. overall these results indicate that the abundance estimates were reliable and should be considered with relatively high confidence as cp ≥  <dig>  provide "...really good results in the typical removal study, having n of a few hundred and t =  <dig> to 6" .

the demographic parameter estimates are illustrated in fig.  <dig>  two examples of different possible parameterisations of the lefkovitch matrix are:   

corresponding to population growth rates, λ, of  <dig>  and  <dig>  respectively. the medians and 95% confidence intervals for the expected stable age-structure are 24% , 27% , and 49%  for juveniles, sub-adults and adults, respectively, reproductive values are  <dig>   and  <dig>   for sub-adults and adults relative to juveniles , and the matrix elasticities  are  

 <cit> . these results indicate a stable population as the λ value was very close to  <dig> . at population equilibrium, we therefore expect half of the individuals among these three stage-classes to be reproductive adults. this agrees with the observed population structure, where the overall mean proportion of the modelled stage-classes  was 20%, 27% and 53%, respectively. the adult stage appears very important to population growth, having both the highest reproductive value  and the highest elasticity of all the matrix entries .

fig.  <dig> shows the prior and posterior distributions of all the estimated population parameters, and fig. 2a shows the observed female population sizes, and the 95% confidence intervals on the population sizes when the population renewal process was simulated using parameter estimates drawn from those posteriors . the resulting distribution of population growth rates is presented in fig. 2b. age-specific survival and fertility calculated as the expected values for a newborn individual are shown in fig. 2c and 2d, and the age-within-stage distribution is shown in fig. 2e.

discussion
here we present the basic population demography of a population of the european plethodontid speleomantes strinatii using a bayesian state-space model built from long-term population data. although not obtained through individual marking, abundance estimates of the different age and sex groups were obtained calculating specific capture probabilities, that, in the study population, were relatively high. thus these basic demographic data can be considered reliable  <cit> .

we found that the population growth rate estimate based on the parameterised lefkovitch matrix model is very close to  <dig> giving us confidence that the further calculations based on this matrix assuming stable population are reliable  <cit> . this was further corroborated by the good match between the predicted and observed population stage-structure. the model also predicted the observed population reasonably well . we can therefore be reasonably confident that the other measures derived from the parameterised lefkovitch model  are also reliable.

as this sub-population is part of a relatively dense population inhabiting a larger area, there is no reason to rule out immigration and emigration between years but without data on this we simply have to combine these processes with the survival and fecundity parameters. better data on immigration and emigration would help to further narrow posterior distributions of all the parameter estimates. we also assumed 50: <dig> sex-ratio for births, and that the female fecundity is not limited by availability of mates. this is likely to be the case, as the adult population sex ratio ) studied over  <dig> years was slightly male biased, being on average  <dig>  . this is probably due to the females entering the reproductive population one year later than males  <cit> .

in terms of population growth, adult survival emerges as the most important determinant of population growth rate as indicated by the elasticity analysis. this finding is similar to an analysis on salamandra salamandra  by schmidt et al.  <cit> . this demographic feature may be common in salamander populations that possess high adult survival and lengthy reproduction, such as salamandra and many large and medium-sized plethodontid species. in the case of terrestrial salamanders, such as speleomantes, there is a considerable overlap in habitat and resource use by juveniles and adults, in contrast with the biphasic species that have aquatic larvae. this may enhance intraspecific density-dependent regulation in the terrestrial environment as suggested by bruce  <cit> . however, the notion of the importance of adult survival to population growth based on this analysis has to be treated somewhat cautiously as the technique of basic elasticity analysis has been criticised for ignoring density dependence, stochasticity and correlations between the transition matrix entries  <cit> . calculating the integrated elasticities  <cit>  would be better than the more simplistic figures presented here, but we do not have annual estimates for all the demographic parameters in order to calculate correlations between the matrix entries and their variances as our approach needs all the data for estimating the parameters. in our case, the correlation estimates between matrix entries are based on different possible parameterisations of the demography , not due to observed annual variation in those parameters. so, for instance the strong negative correlation between adult survival, a, and the transition probability from subadults to adults, p <dig> is probably more of an identifiability problem of the model  than reflecting the underlying biology of the species; it is possible to have a very similar fit to the data with a model with a relatively high a and low p <dig> as it is the other way round. addressing this directly would require mark-recapture data where the individuals are followed over their whole lifespan. unfortunately, this is not easily achieved with this species; newborns are less than  <dig> mm long including tail creating a major obstacle for marking with, for instance, elastomers  or pit tags which are suitable for adults. we would like to emphasise, however, that despite these shortcomings, we have used all the available data efficiently and parameterised a full demographic model for this species for the first time, simultaneously addressing the parameter uncertainty explicitly, and have therefore improved the current understanding of speleomantes demography significantly.

CONCLUSIONS
the modelling approach presented here is potentially very valuable in situations where following marked individuals over their whole lifetime is not feasible. for instance, the method introduced by ricklefs  calculate survival on the assumption that population growth rate is  <dig>  an assumption we do not have to make. it was also recently shown  <cit>  that state-space modelling approach produces results in close agreement with those based on mark-recapture techniques, highlighting further the potential of this approach.

