BACKGROUND
recent genome research have highlighted the role of structural variants on natural phenotypic variations with vital importance for human health  <cit> . the advent of massively parallel sequencing technologies has resulted to a drastic cost reduction per megabase of dna sequence, and is leading to unprecedented genomic resolution and large sample size applications. in a single run, these technologies are able to generate millions of dna fragments  from a target genome, which are then mapped onto a reference genome when available or undergo de novo assembly. the resulting mapped data with potentially high coverage is the core of structural variant detection, and several methods have been recently proposed depending on the type of polymorphism to be identified, as recently reviewed by medvedev et al.  <cit> .

the present work considers the detection of copy number variations , such as deletions and amplifications, using sequence coverage data when mapped onto a reference genome. in theory, deletions are detected in regions with extremely low coverage whereas amplifications are typically located in regions with exceptionally high coverage  <cit> . the common strategy to analyse sequence coverage data is to divide the reference genome into non-overlapping windows  of a given size  <cit> . since the gc content is known to influence the resulting coverage distribution  <cit> , the windows are further subdivided according to this genomic parameter and analysed separately. finally, appropriate detection limits are calculated. in this regard, there are two main approaches to determine these thresholds. one approach is to assume a poisson distribution for coverage when there is no copy number variation, as invoked by the ewt method  <cit> . in theory, this assumption entails an equality between the mean and the variance of the coverage distribution. however, there is a growing number of data sets whose variance of the coverage distribution is clearly greater than the mean coverage  <cit> . this statistical “overdispersion” implies that, at a given statistical significance level, any poisson-based method tends to detect a higher number of cnvs in comparison to a situation where overdispersion is deemed an intrinsic property of the data, thereby increasing the false positive rate. recently, the cn.mops approach has been proposed, where the analysis is performed across samples and the resulting coverage distribution of a given window  is modelled through a finite mixture of poisson distributions  <cit> . however, within a window, this modelling approach reverts to the common poisson distribution  if there is no cnv present. another approach assumes a proportionality between the underlying copy number and the median coverage after being adjusted for the underlying gc content, and smoothed by an appropriate segmentation/aggregation algorithm, as available in the freec software  <cit> . notwithstanding its high computational efficiency, this software critically relies on the analyst to parameterise the underlying segmentation algorithm. if prior information is available from the samples under analysis, one can set key parameters tentatively until obtaining results in line with previous findings. this fine-tuning exercise becomes extremely time consuming in a high throughput setting, especially as expected differences in the patterns of data between samples cannot be captured by a single parameter set. alternative methodologies are then required with the potential of being much more generalisable and applicable to a high throughput setting.

to improve current approaches for cnv detection, we propose a new methodology based on a poisson hierarchical modelling approach. our data analysis strategy is now outlined. first, we assume a poisson distribution for coverage when there is no copy number variation, as previously done in ewt  <cit>  and cn.mops  <cit> . we then extend this distribution to an overdispersion setting by allowing the respective rate parameter to vary according to a gamma or a lognormal distribution. the resulting models of this hierarchical structure are the poisson-gamma  and poisson-lognormal, respectively. in this way, different data patterns under the hypothesis of no cnvs can be captured due to the great flexibility of these second-level distributions. we adjust the results for the gc content as implemented elsewhere, i.e., we divide the reference genome into non-overlapping windows and analyse those with similar gc content separately. the formal cnv detection is based on highest posterior density  credible intervals associated with the posterior predictive distribution for coverage. hence the stringency of our method is controlled by the credibility level — hereafter denoted by the parameter γ — specified for the analysis. the final stage of the analysis encompasses merging contiguous hits and excluding putative deletions when the corresponding coverage per nucleotide position is greater than zero.

to assess the performance of our methodology, we use  <dig> publicly available plasmodium falciparum  data sets. the choice of this real-world data set shows two major advantages. first, it includes the re-sequencing data of the 3d <dig> reference genome thus allowing the direct estimation of the baseline false positive rate. we also used this reference sample to perform a simulation study where data shows different read depth. second, it encompasses data of  <dig> laboratory strains for which comparative genomic hybridization  array data is available, thus enabling ’external’ validation of the cnvs detected via sequencing data analysis. all results are compared to the freec and cn.mops softwares, two potentially promising approaches when applied to human genome data  <cit> .

RESULTS
plasmodium falciparum genome data shows distinct random patterns for the underlying coverage distribution
data under analysis comprises pf samples of  <dig> well-characterised laboratory strains from different parts of the world  and of  <dig> clinical isolates from travellers to africa . each sample consists of millions of reads mapped onto the 3d <dig> reference genome , which was divided into non-overlapping 100-bp windows and filtered for the respective exome . the resulting coverage distributions exhibit distinct shapes and summary statistics , thus the necessity of having flexible approaches for cnv detection. the percentage of windows with zero coverage or with coverage equal or greater than  <dig> reads is up to  <dig> % , suggesting the presence of few cnvs in the samples.

coverage distributions are intrinsically overdispersed, skewed, and long-tailed
a brief description of the empirical coverage distributions led to two key observations. first, every coverage distribution is characterised by extreme overdispersion as the variance is greater than the mean in each sample . this statistical property seems intrinsic to coverage data because of its observation in the 3d <dig> resequencing data, where just a few hits should be identified under the assumption of no errors in sequencing, mapping, and in the annotated genome. second, these distributions are skewed and long tailed as suggested by the skewness and kurtosis coefficients .

coverage distributions are described well by a poisson-gamma model
to analyse the data, we devised a cnv detection strategy based on poisson-gamma and poisson-lognormal, two probability distributions known for their flexibility in tackling overdispersion. to estimate these models, we divided each coverage profile according to the respective gc content and analysed the corresponding data separately. the poisson, poisson-lognormal and poisson-gamma distributions were then compared against each other being the latter the best model for the data irrespective of the criteria used . according to this model, the expected coverage distributions are almost indistinguishable from the observed ones . therefore, the poisson-gamma distribution was used to determine robust cnv detection thresholds .

the poisson-gamma approach shows a low baseline false positive rate
the baseline false positive rate of our method was first assessed through the analysis of the 3d <dig> resequencing data, where cnvs are known , and few hits should be produced. the corresponding data analysis led to a proportion of hits lower than the statistical stringency used in the analysis . specifically, we obtained  <dig> windows with too-low coverage, being sparsely distributed across the genome. conversely we found  <dig> windows with too-high coverage,  <dig> of which are true positive hits located in the gtp cyclohydrolase i locus , an amplified region already highlighted by cgh array technology  <cit> . when applied the freec software to the same data, there was a slightly lower proportion of hits  but this proportion can be increased by using alternative parameter settings. the cross-sample cn.mops approach was applied to all isolates , leading to the highest proportion of hits in 3d <dig> . unlike our approach and freec, cn.mops could only partially detect the amplification of the gtp cyclohydrolase i gene locus .

results refers to the  percentage of overall hits detected in relation to the total number of 100-bp windows  using real and simulated data from the 3d <dig> resequencing sample and the corresponding  number of 100-bp hits detected on the gtp cyclohydrolase i gene locus .

*results based on  <dig> independent simulated data sets.

+analysis performed across samples .

we extended the above analysis by studying the influence of read depth on the false positive rate in a simulation study. ten independent samples were generated for each of  <dig> read depths . the results showed that the false positive rate of our method is lower or in line with the corresponding statistical stringency adopted in the analysis . for example, using γ= <dig> %, the proportion of hits was  <dig> %,  <dig> %, and  <dig> % for 10×, 20×, and 50× read depths, respectively. moreover, our method was able to detect the amplified gtp cyclohydrolase i gene locus in every generated data set. conversely the freec software produced no cnv calls in each simulated data set, even when parameterised to target a higher number of cnvs. the freec software seems then less sensitive when using low read depth data and there are just a few hits to be detected. we applied cn.mops approach to the set of simulated samples with the same read depth and found a lower mean proportion of hits in comparison to our method running at γ=99%. however, when we increased stringency of our method , cn.mops was outcompeted. finally, likewise freec, cn.mops could not identify the amplified gtp cyclohydrolase i gene locus in any of the generated samples.

the poisson-gamma modelling approach detects known and novel cnv regions
the analysis of the remaining laboratory and clinical samples led to a total number of hits ranging from  <dig>  to  <dig>  using γ= <dig> % . the poisson-gamma approach could detect a large amplification located between the pfl1125w and pfl1160w genes , which has been previously identified using cgh technology  <cit> . another important cnv hit is the amplified region spanning the pfe1095w and pfe1160w genes in the indonesian dd <dig> sample. this locus includes the pfmdr <dig> gene  whose increased copy number is usually associated with multi-drug resistance of southeast asian pf parasites  <cit> . finally, a large deletion of the clag <dig>  gene  was also targeted in both ghanaian samples , a result in agreement with field reports from that country  <cit> . other large hits can be found in additional file  <dig> 

results refer to the number of individual hits  and loci  using the credible levels γ = 99% and  <dig> % in the analysis.

comparison with freec and cn.mops approaches
the freec and cn.mops approaches were applied to the same laboratory and clinical samples; see additional file  <dig> for a list of hits identified by these alternative methods. table  <dig> shows the number of shared and exclusive hits of freec and cn.mops in relation to our approach . for freec, the proportion of shared hits varies with the sample under analysis, ranging from  <dig> %  to  <dig> %  for deletions and from  <dig> %  to  <dig> %  for amplifications . the high proportion of shared amplifications in the indonesian dd <dig> sample is mainly due to the strong signal derived from the pfmdr <dig> locus. our method produced a higher number of exclusive hits, most of them in loci not targeted by freec, including a large amplification between pfl1125w and pfl1160c genes in hb <dig> lab strain previously validated by cgh technology  <cit> . conversely the majority of the freec-exclusive hits, except those from the ox <dig> sample, are located in genomic regions targeted by our methodology, filling ’gaps’ or increasing the size of the putative cnvs . the low frequency of freec-exclusive hits in these ’shared’ loci shows that little is missed by not including a formal merging algorithm in our method. in fact, the procedure of simply merging adjacent hits was enough to reduce significantly the number of hits produced by our method .

the frequencies  refer to the number of hits shared and exclusively detected by the pg model against freec and cn.mops, wherespg-freec andspg-cn.mops denote the hits shared between the respective pair of methods,epg,efreec andecn.mops denote the exclusive hits produced by the corresponding methodology in the respective comparison. percentages are in relation to the overall number of deletions and amplifications identified by the respective pair of methods.

in the case of cn.mops, the proportion of shared hits ranges from  <dig> %  to  <dig> %  for deletions and from  <dig> %  to  <dig> %  for amplifications . likewise in the above comparison, the high proportion of shared amplifications in dd <dig> laboratory strain also results from hits in the pfmdr <dig> locus. with respect to exclusive hits, our method tends to produce a higher number of these than cn.mops for deletions, but a lower number for amplifications. this observation suggests that our method tends to define higher thresholds than cn.mops for deletions, but lower thresholds for amplifications. however, it is difficult to generalise this result due to differences in stringency definition employed by each method.

finally, the freec software running under default settings could not detect a large amplification between pfl1125w and pfl1160c genes in hb <dig> isolate identified by our method  and validated by cgh technology  <cit> . similarly, the cn.mops approach could not detect the amplification of the gtp cyclohydrolase i gene in the 3d <dig> re-sequencing data. however, we could recover some of these false negatives, and possible others, using alternative  parameter settings . this result demonstrates the possibility of missing important cnvs by applying these approaches, specifically, when one needs to set them up ’blindly’ in the case of new isolates, large sample sizes, or when their underlying assumptions are not fully met by the data.

validation of coverage-based hits using cgh array data
the validity of coverage-based hits produced by each methodology was assessed using published cgh data . for hb <dig> and dd <dig> lab strains, where we used a previously compiled list of cgh hits  <cit> , the freec software led to the highest concordance  between coverage- and cgh-based hits. this apparent best performance of freec is mainly due to a lesser number of hits produced by this software. the use of greater stringency in our method  led to an increase in the corresponding concordance, from  <dig> % to  <dig> % in hb <dig>  and from 89% to  <dig> % in dd <dig>  for 7g <dig> and gb <dig> strains, where we re-analysed the original cgh data, our methodology outperformed freec and cn.mops overall and, in the best case scenario , we could confirm  <dig> %  and  <dig> %  of our hits. the cn.mops approach seems inferior to our method and freec, with the lowest concordance rates irrespective of the lab strain and cnv type. this result may be explained by the nature of the data under analysis  and the small sample size.

cgh hits of hb <dig> and dd <dig> lab strains were taken from samarakoon et al. <cit> , while cgh hits of 7g <dig> and gb <dig> lab strains were obtained by re-analysing the corresponding original data available from jiang et al. <cit> . the percentages in brackets are in relation to the total number of coverage hits produced by the corresponding method.

discussion
we have proposed a poisson hierarchical modelling approach for cnv detection, which is flexible and robust to the common problem of overdispersed coverage data. using simulation and resequencing data of the 3d <dig> reference genome, we have demonstrated a low baseline false positive rate of the methodology across different read depth. however, this low baseline false positive rate needs to be assessed in other genomic settings, preferably where reference resequencing data is available, or potentially using a robust simulation strategy with realistic statistical assumptions and parameter settings. in general, one can reduce the baseline false positive rate of any coverage-based method if mapping distance information is also taken into account. true positive hits are then likely to be those whose coverage and mapping distance analyses agree with each other. in particular, strong evidence for deletions is provided from genomic regions with too-low coverage and average mapping distance greater than expected, while amplified regions entail extremely high coverage and average mapping distance less than expected  <cit> . this integrated data analysis, whilst increasing robustness and accuracy, remains to be developed.

the proposed approach was also applied to non-reference strain data and identified a large number of cnvs that could be validated by cgh data. the empirical and simulation results have demonstrated that our approach may be applicable to larger genomes where read depths can be lower, or in settings where overdispersion is present  <cit> . recent deep sequencing technologies are currently generating data with high coverage  irrespective of the organism under study. thus, we do not expect that the accuracy and robustness of our methodology shown here would change in these cutting-edge data sets with similar genomic coverage. in practice, the potentially high computational burden associated with larger genomes or strong overdispersion is surmountable by implementing parallel computing techniques.

our method seemed to outperform freec and cn.mops approaches with respect to concordance of hits confirmed by cgh data for 7g <dig> and gb <dig> strains. however, a more accurate comparison was compromised by difficulties in relating stringency. the stringency of our method is controlled by the credibility level, a rigorous statistical parameter, but more difficult to be inferred in algorithms that do not consider a specific statistical model, as in the freec software. notwithstanding this difficulty, we showed that increasing the stringency of our methodology led to a high concordance with the freec-based hits. however, the freec software could only detect a known amplification at the gtp cyclohydrolase locus in hb <dig>  <cit>  using alternative parameter setting. the dependency of findings on parameter setting is mitigated in our methodology as the analyst only needs to specify the underlying stringency.

the poisson hierarchical modelling approach has the advantage of handling with different data patterns but, as it stands, cannot estimate the corresponding copy number. to overcome this limitation, one can invoke a proportionality between mean  coverage and the underlying copy number, as assumed elsewhere  <cit> . in theory, this assumption requires modelling the coverage distributions through a finite mixture of poisson-gamma  distributions where each component is associated with a given copy number, as implemented in the cn.mops approach but using a poisson mixture model. a monte carlo markov chain method with reversible jumps  <cit>  can be applied to the corresponding bayesian estimation. whilst the greater computational overhead involved in applying this more complex model is surmountable, its utility would rely on having sufficient data to estimate the additional parameters. in our setting, the very low number of hits detected suggests that data might be too scarce to fit models with increased complexity. our approach seems then the perfect balance between model complexity and data information, thus a potentially useful addition to bioinformatic toolkits used to identify cnvs from sequence coverage data.

CONCLUSIONS
we have developed a robust poisson hierarchical modelling approach for cnv detection using sequence coverage data. when applied to the pf genome, the method shows a low false positive rate in the 3d <dig> resequencing data, and is able to detect known and putative novel cnv regions. this promising result suggests the application of this approach to different settings, such as the human or other micro-organism genomes. because the approach was developed under a strong but flexible statistical framework, it brings increased statistical rigour and robustness into the problem of cnv detection. in addition, it will allow important extensions, such as the estimation of the underlying copy number.

