BACKGROUND
the roseobacter lineage, representing a group of alphaproteobacteria  <cit> , is found in various marine habitats where it is present in high abundance, comprising up to 25% of the total bacterial community  <cit> . overall, the diverse metabolic properties of the roseobacter clade and its ubiquitous occurrence in marine ecosystems suggest that members of this clade play an important role in global biogeochemical processes such as cycling of carbon or sulphur  <cit> . members of the roseobacter clade participate in dmsp demethylation  <cit> , the oxidation of carbon monoxide  <cit>  and degradation of aromatic compounds  <cit> . typically, they use external organic substrates as carbon sources  <cit> . of outstanding interest is the fact that they are able to generate energy from light   <cit>  and thus contribute significantly to phototrophic energy generation  <cit> . all these important traits are linked to the core part of central carbon metabolism involved in the breakdown of nutrients and the supply of metabolites and energy for various cellular requirements. recent efforts in genome sequencing and annotation of roseobacter members have provided a first insight into the repertoire of underlying metabolic reactions available  and have led to different suggestions for possible pathways that might be involved in important physiological functions  <cit> . as an example, a mixotrophic co <dig> assimilation pathway has been proposed for r. denitrificans, in which co <dig> is fixed either  via the combined action of pyruvate-orthophosphate dikinase and phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase or  via pyruvate carboxylase  <cit> . for glucose catabolism, up to three alternative routes are encoded in the genome: glycolysis, the pentose phosphate pathway and the entner-doudoroff pathway. at this point, it seems highly relevant to study the contribution of these potential pathways to the metabolism of bacteria in the roseobacter clade to improve our understanding of their physiology. our current knowledge of the in vivo fluxes through intracellular pathways among the roseobacter lineage is still very limited.

to address this issue, we applied metabolic flux analysis using 13c labelled isotopes to gain a first insight into the central catabolic pathways of dinoroseobacter shibae dfl <dig>  <cit>  and phaeobacter gallaeciensis dsm  <dig>  <cit> . these species represent two prominent members of the roseobacter clade. p. gallaeciensis has received strong interest due to its ability to produce the antibiotic tropodithietic acid. d. shibae was isolated as a novel species from marine dinoflagellates and lives in a symbiotic relationship with eukaryotic algae  <cit> . metabolic flux analysis using 13c labelled isotopes has proven a key technology in the unravelling of metabolic pathways and has recently been used to study different microorganisms mainly linked to biotechnological production processes  <cit> . no such study has yet been performed for members of the roseobacter clade.

RESULTS
cultivation profile
the cultivation profile of d. shibae on defined medium with glucose as the sole carbon source is displayed in figure  <dig>  after an initial adaptation phase, cells grew exponentially with a constant specific growth rate of  <dig>  h- <dig>  after  <dig> hours of cultivation the carbon source was depleted and cells entered a stationary phase. the biomass yield was  <dig>  g cell dry mass per g glucose consumed, indicating efficient utilisation of the carbon source for growth. a similar growth profile was determined for p. gallaeciensis.

pathways for glucose catabolism
the carbon core metabolism of d. shibae and p. gallaeciensis consists of three potential routes for glucose catabolism. glucose can be alternatively catabolised via glycolysis , the pentose phosphate pathway  and the entner-doudoroff pathway . the use of  glucose by each individual pathway leads to a different labelling pattern in specific fragments of alanine and serine, which can be taken as a clear differentiation of flux . for d. shibae the corresponding  fragment of serine did not show any enrichment of 13c but rather reflected the pattern resulting from the natural abundance of 13c only . any contribution of glycolysis to formation of this metabolite and its precursor 3-phosphoglycerate can therefore be excluded as this would lead to enrichment of 13c at the c <dig> position, yielding a higher fraction of m+ <dig> labelled molecules of ser. thus glycolytic flux obviously was not present. the two remaining possibilities, the ppp and the ed pathway, can be differentiated by the labelling pattern of alanine, which represents the pyruvate pool in the cell. the high enrichment of 13c label in the  fragment of alanine indicates a large contribution of the ed pathway, since formation via the ppp would lead to non-labelled alanine. the  fragment of alanine, comprising only the carbon atoms c <dig> and c <dig> of pyruvate, was not enriched in 13c, showing that pyruvate was labelled only at its c <dig> position. this perfectly matches the isotope pattern expected for the ed pathway, whereas glycolytic flux would have resulted in label enrichment at the c <dig> position, and further confirms the flux distribution.

a tert-butyldimethylsilyl; fragmentation patterns are described elsewhere  <cit> 

interestingly, p. gallaeciensis showed almost identical characteristics and obviously also uses mainly the ed pathway during growth on glucose. the quantification of relative flux  revealed that the use of the ed pathway amounts to >99%, whereas glycolysis and ppp contribute only <1% . compared to other microorganisms such as e. coli  <cit> , b. subtilis  <cit> , b. megaterium  <cit>  or c. glutamicum  <cit>  grown on glucose, this is a rather unusual flux pattern. most organisms use glycolysis and the pentose phosphate pathway concomitantly but at varying ratios . exclusive utilisation of the ed pathway, as found here, has been previously observed in selected species of pseudomonas or arthrobacter where this behaviour was attributed to a lack of phosphofructokinase  <cit> . among the two microorganisms studied, d. shibae does contain a gene encoding for this enzyme, whereas p. gallaeciensis does not. for both roseobacter species, in contrast to e. coli as positive control, phosphofructokinase activity could not be detected, clearly explaining the lack of glycolytic flux . while this matches with the genomic repertoire of p. gallaeciensis, we conclude at this stage that the phosphofructokinase in d. shibae is either not expressed, might have another function or even is a non-functional protein. the flux pattern for both organisms is supported by enzymatic assays showing high in vitro activity of 6-phosphogluconate dehydratase and 2-dehydro-3-deoxyphosphogluconate aldolase, the two key enzymes in the entner-doudoroff pathway .

athis study

n.a. = not available in the organism

pathways for pep synthesis - contribution of pyruvate-orthophosphate dikinase and phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase
based on the labelling data given above, the formation of pep from pyruvate by pyruvate-orthophosphate dikinase or via pyruvate carboxylase and phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase would result in the presence of pep with13c enrichment at position c <dig>  however, the  fragments of phe and tyr, each corresponding to the carbon atoms c <dig> and c <dig> of pep, do not show significant enrichment of 13c . the same holds for the  fragment, which corresponds to the entire carbon skeleton of phe and tyr and thus all precursors, that is, pep and e4p. flux quantification using equations  <dig> and  <dig> confirms that pep is solely synthesised by the reactions of lower glycolysis . this is an interesting finding with respect to the recently suggested mixotrophic co <dig> assimilation pathway for some members of the roseobacter clade, which also involves the potential contribution of pyruvate orthophosphate dikinase   <cit> . despite the putative gene for this protein also being annotated for the species investigated here, we could clearly demonstrate that the formation of pep from pyr is not active in vivo under the conditions studied.

pathways for oxaloacetate synthesis - contribution of co <dig> assimilation and oxidative tca cycle
oxaloacetate as a central metabolite can be formed by two major pathways, that is, carboxylation involving pyruvate carboxylase or via pyruvate dehydrogenase and the energy-generating reactions of the tca cycle. the following data clearly suggest that both pathways are active simultaneously in the two roseobacters. for the experimental setup chosen and carbon transfer in the underlying metabolic reactions, the carboxylation of pyruvate is the only reaction that leads to 13c labelled oxaloacetate . the label can be present in carbon positions c <dig> or c <dig>  whereby single- or double-labelled molecules can be formed, depending on the incorporation of 12co <dig> or 13co <dig>  in contrast, the alternative route via the cyclic respiratory mode of the tca cycle yields exclusively non-labelled oxaloacetate. in all possible cases the labelled carbon atoms from either pyruvate or oxaloacetate are released in the decarboxylation steps of the tca cycle as 13co <dig>  inspection of the labelling pattern of aspartate, corresponding to the oxaloacetate backbone, immediately shows that single- and double-labelled mass isotopomers are present in significant amounts for d. shibae and p. gallaeciensis, indicating in vivo activity of pyruvate carboxylase in both strains . however, the relative fractions of these 13c enriched mass isotopomers are relatively small, excluding sole contribution of this reaction to oxaloacetate synthesis. the dominant fraction consists of non-labelled molecules, obviously derived via the oxidative tca cycle. we thus conclude that the cyclic respiratory mode of the tca cycle is active in vivo in both strains. for d. shibae, which possesses a photosystem for energy generation, this mode might display an important strategy to derive energy under conditions where the photosystem is not active, for example, during the night or in deeper water regions.

CONCLUSIONS
being one of the first metabolic studies of members of the roseobacter clade using the 13c labelling experimental approach, a deeper insight into the activity of the important metabolic routes of d. shibae and p. gallaeciensis was achieved. interestingly, the use of intracellular pathways is highly similar in the studied species d. shibae and p. gallaeciensis. this stands in surprising contrast to the overall differences in phenotypic behaviour exhibited by these two strains, since d. shibae is an algal-associated microorganism whereas p. gallaeciensis is free-living in marine habitats. however, this may be a first indication of more general key properties among members of the roseobacter clade that explain their enormous success in the marine realm.

