BACKGROUND
b chromosomes are traditionally classified as a special class of eukaryotic chromosomes different from both autosomes and sex chromosomes  <cit> . a characteristic trait of b chromosomes is their dispensability; that is, there may be some individuals lacking them in the population  <cit> . the number of b chromosomes may vary between cells, tissues, and individuals within a population, which is due to their irregular meiotic and mitotic behavior  <cit> . b chromosomal meiotic drive has been detected in many plant and animal species  and it plays a key role in the maintaining of b chromosomes through generations. the molecular mechanisms responsible for this drive remained unknown for a long period of time, but recently a non-disjunction of b chromatids accompanied by centromere activity was demonstrated in the male gametophyte of rye  <cit> . although it is widely accepted that b chromosomes are highly heterogeneous and may have different properties in different organisms, until recently the concept of the totally heterochromatic and transcriptionally inert nature of b chromosomes has prevailed. indeed, supernumerary chromosomes of various organisms often contain tandemly arranged  <cit>  and dispersed  <cit>  repetitive elements, interstitial telomeric sequences  <cit> , ribosomal dna clusters  <cit> , histone genes  <cit>  and so on. the first protein-coding genes were found in b chromosomes of the fungus nectria haematococca <cit> . recently, a growing body of evidence has accumulated on the presence of coding genes  <cit>  and even organellar genome sequences  <cit>  on b chromosomes of different animal and plant species. this has corroborated the idea of a complex mosaic structure of supernumerary chromosomes, representing autonomous blocks of segmental duplications and heterochromatin  <cit> . transcription of ribosomal genes has been detected in some plants  <cit>  and animals  <cit> . however, no transcription of b-specific protein-coding genes has been detected in vertebrates so far.

the siberian roe deer , 2n =  <dig> + 1– <dig> bs) is a widely distributed cervid species inhabiting wide areas of asia from the volga river to the pacific coast. the siberian roe deer is closely related to the european roe deer , but these two species do have some morphological and karyological differences and are well resolved in molecular phylogenies  <cit> . the only derived karyotypic character of the siberian roe deer is the presence of b chromosomes  <cit> , the number of supernumerary elements usually varies both between individuals and between cells within the same individual albeit some individuals may possess a stable number of bs  <cit> . recently, we have studied the standard karyotype of the siberian roe deer by comparative chromosome painting and found it to be highly conserved and similar to that of the cervid ancestor  <cit> . although some authors proposed the classification of several subspecies of c. pygargus <cit> , our studies of the mitochondrial dna control region in the populations of extant and ancient roe deer failed to reveal any subspecies structure  <cit> .

here, we report on three protein-coding genes that are located within the duplicated autosomal regions on the b chromosomes of the siberian roe deer  and demonstrate the transcription of a b-specific protein-coding sequence in fibroblast culture.

RESULTS
generation of siberian roe deer b chromosome-specific cdna library 
for chromosome-specific cdna selection we used a protocol based on the previously published selection of hybrids by affinity capture   <cit>  technique with some modifications. a biotinylated library derived from degenerate oligonucleotide-primed polymerase chain reaction  amplification of flow-sorted b chromosomes was used as ‘target dna’. we confirmed the b chromosomal origin of the biotinylated library by fluorescence in situ hybridization  without cot <dig> suppression. signals were detected on all eight b chromosomes of the siberian roe deer  . in addition, the subcentromeric heterochromatic blocks on all autosomes  were painted, suggesting the presence of shared heterochromatic sequences on all autosomes and b chromosomes. no signals on autosomal arms were detected. the ‘source’ cdna was synthesized from total rna isolated from the cpy_d fibroblast culture ; the cdnas of the ‘source’ library were flanked by primers . we used an excess of cpy cot <dig> dna in hybridization experiments to reduce the presence of the repetitive dna in the final b-specific cdna library. the quality of the cbcl  was confirmed by fish . noteworthy were the absence of signals on autosomal pericentric heterochromatic blocks and a high specificity of the resulting b-specific probe.

b-specific cdna cloning and sequencing
to characterize the cbcl and estimate its content, we cloned the pcr products in plasmid vectors and sequenced  <dig> random clones. the sequences were aligned against cattle genome assemblies ) using the blat search genome alignment tool and the following results were obtained : eight clones showed similarity to dispersed repetitive elements  from the l <dig> bt family); three clones were homologous to genes from the mitochondrial genome. of the  <dig> clones that showed a high similarity to unique parts of the bovine genome ),  <dig> clones were mapped to a  <dig> -mbp region of bta <dig> ))  . the remaining four unique clones were homologous to regions on bta  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> . the cdnas homologous to the bta <dig> region were not randomly distributed across the  <dig>  mbp genomic segment;  <dig> areas of high match density were observed:  <dig>  to  <dig>  mbp  and  <dig>  to  <dig>  mbp , separated by a  <dig> mbp region lacking any matches .

the mapping of b chromosomes with bovine bacterial artificial chromosome  clones
to confirm the presence of a bta3-homologous region on b chromosomes of c. pygargus we performed fish of bovine bac clones from the respective genomic segments. based on the distribution of b chromosome-specific cdna clones we selected sequenced bovine bac clones from the chori- <dig> library for fish mapping . fish was performed on the metaphase chromosomes of c. pygargus with four bs  and with eight bs . as a control we also mapped the same bac clones via fish on bovine metaphase chromosomes.

all bacs produced specific signals on the siberian roe deer chromosome  <dig> and bovine chromosome  <dig>  these results are consistent with our data of cross-species chromosome painting that demonstrated complete homology of chromosomes bta <dig> and cpy <dig>  <cit> . six bovine bac clones  produced strong signals on b chromosomes of c. pygargus, confirming the presence of the cpy <dig> fragment . bac clones ch240-131i <dig> and ch240-385g <dig> did not give any specific signal on b chromosomes, presumably due to the absence of the respective genomic loci on these elements, although this does not exclude the presence of a short flanking fragment from these bacs.

some bac clones produced signals of varying intensity on different b chromosomes suggesting molecular heterogeneity among supernumerary elements, for example, the bac clone ch240-444i <dig> gave more intensive signals on six out of eight b chromosomes in the cpy_d, whereas all four b chromosomes were painted in equal intensity in the cpy_b. ch240-454d <dig> gave signals of different intensities on b chromosomes of cpy_b: two out of four b chromosomes consistently showed signals of two to three times stronger intensity than the remaining ones. this could reflect a different degree of regional amplification.

the localization of bac clones further confirmed the results of cdna mapping. assuming that the cdnas and bacs demonstrate the presence of a continuous segment homologous to bta <dig>  full copies and parts of some genes must be present in the proximal part of this segment , while the distal part of the segment seems to be gene sparse  and represents a large gene desert .

the mapping of b chromosomes by pcr
to refine the boundaries of the amplified regions on b chromosomes we used pcr-assisted mapping on the flow-sorted b chromosome library. we designed  <dig> primer pairs from bta <dig> based on conserved regions of the bovine genome ), taking into account the distribution of b chromosome-specific cdnas and bac mapping results . the pcr was carried out using the dop-pcr library, derived from flow-sorted b chromosomes of the siberian roe deer, as template. parallel amplification was conducted with bovine and total roe deer genomic dnas. the pcr products of appropriate size resulting from the b chromosome-specific library, and genomic dna of both cattle and siberian roe deer indicated the presence of these fragments on supernumerary chromosomes of c. pygargus. the absence of several closely located products in the b chromosome-specific library indicated deletions or segment boundaries. we confirmed the specificity of several pcr products by direct sequencing. this method allowed us to define precisely the boundaries of the b chromosome-specific segmental duplication. the pcr-assisted mapping extended the size of the segment on supernumerary chromosomes to approximately  <dig> mbp in total, with some possible deletions in the central part of the region . to determine the upstream boundary of the segment we used five primer pairs. this boundary was found to be located between positions  <dig>  kbp and  <dig>  kbp. using three primer pairs we mapped the downstream boundary of the segment to the interval between  <dig>  kbp and  <dig>  kbp.

although the homology of the roe deer b chromosomes to each other has been demonstrated by reverse painting of probes derived from single-copy microdissection experiments  and was implicated by the data on bac localization, we did not have any evidence on the general structural homogeneity of b chromosomes.

the estimation of copy number variations of the regions localized on the b chromosomes of the siberian roe deer
to estimate the copy numbers of amplified b genes we applied qualitative pcr  using conserved parts including the sequence of the fourth exon from fpgt and lrriq <dig> and a promoter region of tnni3k . as a single copy reference we used a conserved segment of ptgfr gene located on bovine chromosome  <dig> outside the region amplified on b chromosomes of the siberian roe deer . to achieve equal efficiency of amplification in both cattle and siberian roe deer we designed primers based on identical short sequences in both species. the short sequences in the siberian roe deer were obtained by targeted sequencing.

we characterized the copy number of regions present on b chromosomes  in siberian roe deer without b chromosomes , siberian roe deer with four bs  and siberian roe deer with eight bs  . the qpcr results showed that the regions of tnni3k and lrriq <dig> genes are present in two copies per diploid genome in cpy_a  whereas the region of fpgt gene is present in four copies per diploid genome in the same animal. this indicates a duplication of the region containing fpgt gene in cpy_a, although no extra chromosomes were found in the specimen.

we found that the regions of fpgt and lrriq <dig> genes are present in six copies per diploid genome in cpy_b , suggesting a direct correlation between the number of extra copies of the gene fragment and the number of b chromosomes. we showed that the region of tnni3k gene is present in four copies per diploid genome in cpy_b, suggesting that the copies of tnni3k gene segment are localized only on two out of four b chromosomes. we found the region of the tnni3k gene is present in ten copies per diploid genome in the specimen cpy_d  . the regions of fpgt and lrriq <dig> genes were found to be represented by eight copies per diploid genome in cpy_d . generally these findings correlate well with the results of cattle bac clone localization and demonstrate that not all b chromosomes contain full copies of the proposed amplified fragment. although the number of segment copies depends on the number of b chromosomes, this correlation is not necessarily direct, as some b chromosomes may lack the full fragment. our results demonstrate some variation in the composition of b chromosomes despite overall similarity and general homology.

dna sequence comparison of non-b chromosomal and b chromosome-specific fragments
we used targeted sequencing to compare some homologous regions from b chromosomes and non-b chromosomes. we sequenced several regions , comprising the promoter region of the tnni3k gene , the first three exons of fpgt  and the second exon of lrriq <dig> gene  in the library of flow-sorted b chromosomes as well as in the total genomic dna of the european roe deer and several specimens of the siberian roe deer  . in addition, we sequenced the fourth exon of fpgt gene  and the first exon of tnni3k gene  in the european roe deer and cpy_d. we found nucleotide substitutions specific to b chromosomes in two cases. the b chromosomal second exon of lrriq <dig> gene carries a transition  ; the comparison was based on both the roe deer without b chromosomes and cattle, in the dop-library of b chromosomes , in b chromosome-specific cdna and in a fragment from total cdna derived from cpy_d .

the b chromosomal second exon of fpgt carries a transition a > g  . the same b-specific mutation was found in the second exon of fpgt in a cdna clone .

it is intriguing that the first triplet of fpgt encodes for valine both in b chromosomes and in the genomic dna of the siberian roe deer with four and eight b chromosomes  . a heterozygous condition  was revealed in the genomes of two individuals of the european roe deer, while we found only methionine in the fpgt first position in the siberian roe deer without b chromosomes  . additional experiments are needed to test if this a <dig> > g <dig> transition might be characteristic for a pseudogene in the european roe deer, while the valine triplet  is associated with the segmental duplication of fpgt located on b chromosomes, since the gtg is known to be a less effective starting codon and may result in the loss of expression or n-terminally truncated proteins  <cit> . however, it is possible that an alternative upstream exon with a conserved atg codon may be used. interestingly the same a/g single nucleotide variation at the first position has been described in human fpgt <cit> .

evidence of fpgt transcription from b chromosomes
the finding of a b chromosome-specific mutation  in the processed fpgt-tnni3k cdna  prompted us to study this case in detail. first, we sequenced the second exon of fpgt in cpy_a , in red deer , gray brocket deer , and eurasian elk , and found the ‘wild type a’ condition to be conserved . comparison with many other sequenced vertebrates including opossum, platypus, rooster and anole lizard further corroborated the high conservation of the position in various phylogenetic lineages. to exclude the possibility that the mutation occurred on the autosomal copies of cpy with b chromosomes, we conducted comparative sequencing of autosomal and b chromosomal segments from the same animal. to achieve this, we microdissected separately chromosomes cpy <dig> and bs  in separate tubes and sequenced the region of interest. four sequences derived from non-b chromosomes gave ‘a wild-type a’ condition, while three b chromosomal sequences gave ‘a derived g’ condition. to exclude a possible polymorphism among b chromosomes we sequenced ten fpgt exon  <dig> carrying clones derived from two different flow sorting fractions. all these clones carried the ‘g’ mutation. based on our discovery of a processed transcript carrying the derived state  we concluded that this region is transcribed not from autosomes but from b chromosomes.

discussion
siberian roe deer belong to the cetartiodactyl family cervidae, where b chromosomes have also been described in five mazama species  <cit> . it is interesting that both capreolus and mazama genera likely possess identical standard karyotypes  and have gc-rich small b chromosomes, which may suggest a common ancestry of supernumerary elements. however, our studies on the brown brocket deer  did not reveal any homologous unique segments between b chromosomes of these species , suggesting a fairly recent and independent origin of bs in capreolus and mazama. however, there could be a particular predisposition in the genome organization that underlies the higher frequency of b chromosomes appearance in capreolinae.

concerning the general polymorphism of b chromosomes, we should emphasize that a siberian roe deer specimen carrying no b chromosomes  was described here for the first time. the finding of this animal was quite unexpected, considering the many previous karyotyping studies of siberian roe deer, describing from  <dig> to  <dig> copies of b chromosomes per diploid genome  <cit> . the presence of an animal lacking bs raised the question of whether this could be a misidentified c. capreolus individual. the analysis of the mitochondrial dna control region allowed us to unambiguously describe the species as c. pygargus . this finding indicates that the amount of b chromosomes in the siberian roe deer is highly variable between individuals  and that the presence of b chromosomes is not essential for animal physiology and cannot be used as a species discriminating character. it is of interest that some animals were reported as lacking the intraindividual mosaicism of bs  <cit> . in this study, we have chosen animals with stable karyotypes from altai.

the same method of cdna-selection-based mapping of b chromosomes described here has also been applied to the red fox . in this species we mapped cdnas to seven different autosomal regions, and these results were further confirmed by subsequent canine bac mapping  <cit> . it seems that the roe deer b chromosomes contain a large segment from a single genomic locus, while canid b chromosomes have a complex structure comprising segments from multiple regions. b chromosomes of the red fox and the raccoon dog share some segments  while most other segmental duplications  are species specific.

it is worth mentioning that the fragment identified on siberian roe deer b chromosomes is located near the evolutionary breakpoint on cattle chromosome  <dig> and contains a large gene desert conserved in both human and cattle. moreover, we found several large segmental duplications in the cattle genomic region. this might have led to a general genomic instability of the locus and its involvement in b chromosome formation.

the finding of coding genes on b chromosomes of the siberian roe deer further emphasizes the importance of studying regions previously believed to be non-coding. representing a variation in number of coding and non-coding sequences these elements may influence many aspects of genome activity. finding a significant amount of segmental duplications in many vertebrate species suggests that b chromosomes act as autonomously segregating karyotypic elements, carrying some genomic regions that could potentially influence overall genome plasticity and contribute to novel adaptations.

the genes that were identified on the siberian roe deer b chromosomes, tnni3k , fpgt and lrriq <dig>  may be expressing and influencing metabolism of the cells. partial sequencing of these genes on b chromosomes and in the siberian roe deer without any bs has demonstrated a high sequence conservation and very low number of b-specific substitutions, which might reflect a relatively recent origin of b chromosomes in the siberian roe deer from a large segment derived from cpy <dig>  the b-specific transcript  described here represents an alternatively spliced variant, consisting of two exons of fpgt  and a large part of the second exon of tnni3k. multiple transcripts composed of different exons due to alternative splicing of fpgt-tnni3k readthrough transcript have been described in human  <cit> . however, the combination of exons in the roe deer transcript is different from previously published. tnni3k seems to be very important in cardiomyogenesis, since its expression promotes the differentiation of cardiomyocytes and enhances cardiac performance  <cit> , while fpgt  participates in reutilization of l-fucose arising from cellular metabolism of glycoproteins and glycolipids  <cit> . the locus including both tnni3k and fpgt genes was found to be responsible for susceptibility to viral myocarditis in mice  <cit> . transcription of truncated copies might generally affect the expression of autosomal copies, but more detailed research is needed here. however, these genes maybe partly or completely epigenetically inactivated. thus, the finding of the b-derived transcript corroborates the hypothesis of transcriptional activity of segmental duplications. further studies will determine if transcription of b chromosomal copies of the gene lrriq <dig> also takes place. at least we found a putative b chromosome-specific mutation that might be used as a marker of b-derived transcripts, but have not yet excluded a possible case of autosomal heterozygosity of this mutation. it should be emphasized that the transcription of the b chromosomal gene was demonstrated only in fibroblasts and additional experiments are required to test the expression of this gene in other cells and tissues of the organism. it is also possible that cultured fibroblasts might manifest different properties and have different activity of some genes.

CONCLUSIONS
application of novel molecular technologies has allowed the localization of unique sequences, comprising protein-coding genes, on b chromosomes of several vertebrate species  <cit> . use of high-throughput sequencing methods to obtain a large amount of information about the structure of whole genomes looks very promising for studying species with supernumerary chromosomes. however, our study shows that it should be supplemented by individual chromosome copy isolation and analysis to differentiate the non-b chromosomal and b-specific components. new data on supernumerary elements of the genome clearly indicate that the role of b chromosomes in evolution and their influence on the host are largely underestimated.

considering that mammalian b chromosomes carrying additional copies of expressed genes do not have any pronounced adverse effect , their use for the future development of artificial mammalian chromosomes seems promising: our studies demonstrate that they can be isolated easily from the rest of the genome by chromosome sorting, and studies of other authors show that flow-sorted chromosomes can be inserted into oocytes  <cit> . employing newly developed methods of zinc finger nuclease technology  <cit>  it would be of interest to use animals carrying b chromosomes as models for transgenic studies.

