BACKGROUND
the small rna-binding protein hfq was first identified in escherichia coli as a required factor for replication of phage qβ rna  <cit> . in e. coli, hfq is a global regulator that modulates the stability, translation and polyadenylation of numerous mrnas . it is proposed that hfq acts as a rna chaperone protein by mediating interactions between many regulatory small rnas  and their mrnas targets . inactivation of the hfq gene in e. coli results in lower growth and sensitivity to various environmental stresses  <cit> . genome analyses show that hfq-like proteins are conserved in many  gram-negative and -positive bacteria  <cit> . hfq is involved in stress response and/or virulence of several gram-negative pathogens , septicemia, or toxin-associated syndromes   <cit> . s. aureus is also a leading cause of hospital and community-acquired infections whose treatment is becoming increasingly difficult due to the emergence of multiple antibiotic resistance determinants  <cit> . the type of infection caused by s. aureus depends on virulence factors and stress response pathways present in infectious strains, and reflects the coordinated action of numerous regulators . the best-characterized regulator of virulence gene expression is the agr  quorum sensing system , which comprises two divergent transcripts, rnaii and rnaiii. the small rnaiii transcript  is a key regulator that modulates production of s. aureus extracellular proteins at the transcriptional and post-transcriptional level .

s. aureus encodes one hfq-like protein , whose structure has been described  <cit> . under in vitro conditions, it specifically binds rnaiii and spa mrna  <cit> . more recent studies revealed the expression of other regulatory srnas among s. aureus infectious strains  <cit> , which may be involved in the regulation of virulence. these observations suggest that rna-rna interactions are decisive for virulence regulation in s. aureus, while the role of hfq in these interactions remains to be elucidated.

in this study, we constructed hfq derivatives in three s. aureus backgrounds that differ in their virulence capacities , and compared them to their respective wt strains, in order to determine the hfq function. in the experimental conditions and the genetic backgrounds tested, hfq does not display any detectable role in stress tolerance, rna stability or exoprotein expression. to provide a more complete analysis of the hfq associated phenotypes, we also compared the rn <dig> wt and hfq mutant strains using the phenotype microarray  technology, which tests ~  <dig> phenotypes simultaneously . based on our results, we can postulate that in s. aureus, rna-rna interactions do probably not require the involvement of rna chaperone proteins, or that at least a protein other than hfq, as yet unidentified, is responsible for the modulation of rna interactions.

RESULTS
inactivation and expression of hfq in s. aureus
we first constructed an hfq mutant in the s. aureus avirulent strain rn <dig>  in which the region corresponding to the hfq orf was replaced by a cassette conferring cm resistance . gene inactivation was verified by southern blot  and the hfq mutation was then transferred by phage transduction into three virulent strains that differ in their virulence regulation pathways, rn <dig>  newman and col. gene transfer was confirmed by pcr and rt-pcr .

in e. coli, hfq is one of the most abundant intracellular proteins, whose level in exponential growth phase is reportedly around  <dig>  to  <dig>  molecules per cell  <cit> . hfq levels further increase during the transition to stationary phase  <cit> . these data suggest that hfq likely plays a crucial role in controlling expression of numerous growth-related genes. in view of the described properties of hfq, we asked whether hfq expression levels in s. aureus were as high as in e. coli. we first followed hfq expression during bacterial growth in bhi medium, by northern blot experiments, using an hfq-specific fragment as probe. no transcript corresponding to hfq mrna was detected in rn <dig>  newman or col wt backgrounds . in these experiments, an e. coli hfq strain containing a plasmid carrying the s. aureus hfq gene under control of a tetracycline inducible promoter system was used as positive control of hfq mrna expression. we then compared hfq expression using rt-pcr, which is a more sensitive detection method than northern blotting. steady state levels obtained from rn <dig> wt and hfq post-exponential rna extracts are represented on figure 1b. a band corresponding in size to the hfq amplicon  was detected in the wt profile, suggesting that hfq is expressed in s. aureus. as expected, no amplification from both hfq mutant strain chromosomal dna  and cdnas  was observed, which confirms the hfq orf deletion. positive amplification from cdnas of the rn <dig> hfq strain was visualized with pcr using spa specific primers, confirming the quality of these extracts . similar results were obtained with rt-pcr experiments realized with newman strain.

these results indicate that hfq gene is expressed in s. aureus in the experimental conditions tested but at a very low level, as no transcript could be visualized by northern blot experiments. in view of these data, we speculate that hfq protein is probably less abundant in s. aureus than in e. coli.

hfq inactivation has no effects on growth and stress resistance
we first compared growth of hfq mutants of rn <dig>  col and newman, with their respective wt strains in aerated bhi rich medium or in aerated rpmi synthetic medium at 37°c. no growth differences were noticed in any of the genetic backgrounds tested  in either media. as hfq is reportedly involved in stress tolerance in many pathogens  <cit> , we also tested the ability of staphylococcal hfq mutants to resist to several environmental stresses: under osmotic , oxidative stress  or heat-shock  conditions, the hfq mutant grew as well as the wt strain in all genetic backgrounds . in l. monocytogenes, the contribution of hfq in stress response depends on the alternative sigma factor σb pathway, as σb controls hfq stress-inducible transcription  <cit> . in s. aureus, hfq does not seem to be implicated in stress resistance, regardless of the presence or absence of the σb pathway, as the same results were obtained in both σb pathway functional  and defective  strains.

hfq does not affect rnaiii or spa mrna quantity in vivo
in vitro studies showed that hfq specifically binds the spa mrna regulatory region, and more tightly, rnaiii  <cit> . spa encodes the staphylococcal protein a , a major surface protein. its expression is known to be repressed by rnaiii at the transcriptional level by an undetermined mechanism, but additional studies have shown that rnaiii also inhibits spa expression by affecting its translation and stability  <cit> . to elucidate the involvement of hfq in the stability of rnaiii and spa mrna in vivo, we compared their steady state levels in wt and hfq mutant strains. no significant differences were observed in rnaiii expression in the hfq mutant, compared to the wt strain, whether in the rn <dig> or newman context . when we compared spa rna transcript profiles in rn <dig>  newman and col backgrounds, no differences between Δhfq and wt were detected . variation of spa mrna expression visualized between strain backgrounds reflects differences in virulence regulatory pathways, as previously described  <cit> . amounts of protein a were also analysed in staphylococcal strains by western blot experiments  <cit>  using a monoclonal anti-protein a antibody ; again no differences were observed . the results described above show that hfq does not affect the quantities of rnaiii or of spa mrna in vivo. in view of these observations, we speculate that in the natural context of the bacterium, hfq does not contribute to the quantities of rnaiii and spa mrna and likely has no effect on the formation of the rnaiii-spa mrna complex. this is relevant to previous in vitro results showing that increasing concentrations of hfq have no effect on the formation of rnaiii-spa mrna complex  <cit> .

hfq does not affect exoprotein expression profiles
s. aureus secretes numerous virulence factors, which are mainly produced during the post-exponential phase, and whose expression involves the coordination of many regulators, including agr rnaiii . to test the possible role of hfq in the production of secreted virulence factors, we compared exoprotein profiles in rn <dig>  newman, and col wt strains and their Δhfq derivatives. no differences were observed in the various genetic backgrounds tested . hemolysins and proteases are major secreted virulence factors in some s. aureus virulent strains, such as rn <dig>  to test the effect of hfq on production of those secreted enzymes, we compared hemolytic and proteolytic activities in rn <dig> and newman wt and hfq mutant strains. stationary cultures were streaked onto bhi medium containing rabbit blood , sheep blood  and horse blood , or onto nb medium containing skimmed milk . no differences were observed in halos corresponding to the different enzymatic activities in the two genetic backgrounds tested , which suggests that the lack of hfq does not affect production of either hemolysins or secreted proteases.

altogether, these results suggest that deletion of hfq does not affect exoprotein expression profiles. it is thus likely that hfq is not decisive for the production of secreted virulence factors.

pm analysis of rn <dig> hfq mutant
pm assay is a relatively new technology in which ~  <dig> phenotypes are tested simultaneously, and has already been used for comparative analysis between strains in several bacterial species  <cit> . strains are grown in microtiter plate, each well containing different media. this technology may help to determine gene functions. respiration is used in pm as an indication of bacterial growth, and was compared between strains in media containing different sources of carbon , nitrogen , phosphorus and sulfur , nutrients or cofactors , or in the presence of different stresses or chemical agents . consensus pm results of comparative analysis of rn <dig> wt and hfq mutant strains are shown on figure  <dig>  additional file  <dig> indicates values of phenotypes gained or lost. briefly, slight or no differences between strains were observed under any metabolic conditions, and differences in sensitivity to chemical agents observed could not be reproduced by independent experimentation.

metabolism tests , performed in a synthetic medium, showed negative differences for utilization of several amino acids or dipeptides as nitrogen source ; although the signal decreases were very weak. these data seemed to suggest that the hfq mutant strain could be defective for nitrogen metabolism. to test this hypothesis, we compared growth of rn <dig> wt and hfq mutant strains in a synthetic complete medium or in a synthetic minimal medium  with or without several nitrogen sources, including different combinations of amino acids  as used in the pm assay. no differences in growth were observed between the two strains , suggesting that the hfq mutant uses different nitrogen sources as well as the wt strain. the weak differences detected by pm analysis  may reflect the use in pm of a standard chemically minimal medium that lacks the essential amino acids, where only residual growth of both strains occurred. in this case, it is likely that phenotypes observed result from residual respiration of surviving bacteria in the medium and not from real bacterial growth.

stress or chemical agent sensitivity pm tests  were performed in rich medium, similar to lb. essentially no differences were observed in osmotic  and ph  stress panels between the rn <dig> wt and hfq mutant strains , which confirmed some results obtained by conventional stress tests . positive or negative differences were observed for some chemical agents or antibiotics  but signals were weak . the only real signal concerned cm resistance of the hfq mutant, a consequence of the strain construction . we compared sensitivity of some chemical agents or antibiotics that gave negative responses , or positive signals  on mh broth by measuring the mic or on agar plates using disk-specific antibiotics. again, no significant differences were observed between wt and hfq mutant strains .

this comparative analysis showed that among ~  <dig> phenotypes, essentially no reproducible phenotypic differences between s. aureus rn <dig> wt and its hfq derivative mutant were detected. for metabolic tests, the few phenotypes that were noted likely have no physiological significance, and may result from the poor growth of both strains. we thus conclude that hfq has no role on stress response and on chemical agent sensitivity and probably no impact on metabolic pathways in s. aureus.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study, we tried to elucidate the roles of the rna-binding protein hfq in s. aureus cell physiology and regulation. our results indicate that hfq does not seem to contribute to the adaptation to stress responses, rnaiii or spa mrna levels, or to general exoprotein production in s. aureus. some of these data have been recently suggested  <cit> . a more general approach, which tests ~  <dig> phenotypes simultaneously confirmed our observations  and also showed that hfq has likely no impact on metabolic pathways or on resistance to different chemical agents or antibiotics. nevertheless, it remains possible that hfq has a role in environmental conditions that differ from those tested; for example, those encountered to proliferate inside the host during the infection process. we compared growth in rabbit serum between a wild type and its hfq derivative mutant, in the three different genetic contexts; no differences were observed . this result suggests that hfq may not be crucial for survival inside the host.

in e. coli, hfq contributes to interactions between regulatory srnas and their mrna targets . it also forms a ribonucleoprotein complex with rnase e that affects mrnas turnover  <cit> . staphylococcal genome analyses indicate the lack of an rnase e-like protein. in bacillus subtilis, rnases j <dig> and j <dig> have functional homologies with rnase e but no sequence similarity  <cit> ; homolog of these rnases are present in s. aureus. however, it has never been demonstrated that rnases j <dig> and j <dig> functions are dependant of hfq. although rna-rna interactions appear to be decisive for regulatory pathways in s. aureus, regulation mechanisms are likely to occur independently of hfq and rnase e.

searches for hfq conservation through bacterial species have shown that hfq homologs are absent in several low gc gram-positive bacteria, such as lactococcus lactis, streptococcus pneumoniae, and streptococcus pyogenes  <cit> . in borrelia burgdoferi, genome analyses reveal the lack of both hfq and rnase e proteins  <cit> . we propose that in s. aureus, under conditions known to involve hfq in other bacteria, rna-rna interactions do not require hfq. an as yet uncharacterized rna-chaperone protein might be responsible for the modulation of rna interactions in this bacterium. database searches in s. aureus genomes for sm-like domains, which are characteristic of rna-binding protein like hfq, reveal no other candidates than hfq. if s. aureus srnas are important for mrna turnover, we suggest the existence of alternative mechanism that substitute for hfq and rnase e that remains to be discovered.

