BACKGROUND
large amounts of wood can be formed throughout the life of a tree through a complex process of cell differentiation called xylogenesis. in this process, cambium-derived cells undergo cell division followed by thickening of the secondary cell wall by modification of the synthesis and deposition of cellulose, hemicelluloses, cell wall proteins and lignin, and finally programmed cell death to develop tracheary elements  <cit> . genes involved in these cellular processes are under strict transcriptional regulation during different stages of differentiation  <cit> . nevertheless, inputs from external cues are also integrated in this developmental program to adapt secondary xylem properties to growth requirements in a continuously changing environment  <cit> . as a result of this interaction, natural variations are found in wood properties not only among different species and genotypes, but also within the same tree  <cit> .

transcriptome analysis of differentiating secondary xylem has allowed us to draw a general picture of the genes, metabolic pathways and potential regulators involved in wood formation  <cit> . however, our knowledge is limited as to how the transcriptomes, proteomes and metabolomes involved in wood development are modulated by developmental and environmental signals to cause within-tree variation in wood properties. considerable effort has been focused on studying the main pathways that lead to monolignol biosynthesis  <cit>  and carbohydrate partitioning to cellulose  <cit> , as well as understanding how changes in gene expression in those pathways may affect cellular wall characteristics and, consequently, wood quality  <cit> . however, less attention has been paid to the pathways that provide s-adenosylmethionine  for methylation reactions during biosynthesis of coniferyl and sinapyl alcohols, even though transcripts and proteins for enzymes of these pathways are abundant in the developing xylem  <cit> . consumption of methyl units during lignification also implies the existence of an important carbon sink, and modifications in the availability of sam may affect wood quality through alterations in lignin content and composition  <cit> . furthermore, it has been proposed that glycine decarboxylase activity associated with sam metabolism could be an important source of released ammonium, which must be efficiently re-assimilated to prevent significant imbalances in the strict nitrogen economy of the plant  <cit> .

molecular determinants of intra-genotype variation can be identified by comparing transcriptomes from cambial derivatives undergoing differentiation in the same tree that produce wood that differs in composition and structure  <cit> . however, the plasticity of the molecular machinery involved in wood formation  <cit>  may result in some difficulties in terms of defining candidate genes when expression patterns are compared over different annual growth periods. therefore, the definition of a consistent set of candidate genes for wood property variations requires analysis that mitigates sources of variation from genotypes and local environmental changes.

reaction wood illustrates how the integration of environmental signals into the secondary xylem developmental program leads to intra-genotype variation in wood. when the stem of a woody plant grows in a non-vertical orientation it forms reaction wood, a specialized secondary xylem that helps the stem maintain a certain orientation and re-orients growth  <cit> . in gymnosperms, reaction wood is called compression wood and it develops on the underside of branches and inclined stems  <cit> . cell walls in compression wood tracheids are thicker than in normal wood and lack the innermost s <dig> layer. it also contains more lignin, less cellulose and altered levels of hemicelluloses than normal wood. moreover, in compression wood cellulose microfibrils are deposited with increased angle relative to the cell axis  <cit> , and the lignin is enriched in p-hydroxyphenylpropane units  <cit> . in contrast, opposite wood develops on the opposite side of the inclined stem and it is more similar to normal wood  <cit> . differential expression of a few genes during compression wood differentiation compared to normal or opposite wood has been reported  <cit> . however, the clear anatomical, structural and compositional differences that characterize compression wood suggest that the expression of more genes would be modified during its differentiation  <cit> .

we are interested in how biosynthetic pathways that provide substrates for xylogenesis are coordinated and regulated according to the different demands during development of wood with distinct composition. in particular, comparison of samples from differentiating compression wood and opposite wood from the same tree allows us to analyze the transcriptome changes accompanying to different levels of lignin deposition during xylogenesis. in this work, we present the results of a comparative transcriptomic analysis that comprehensively uses a range of cdna libraries and microarray analyses, combining samples from different pinus pinaster provenances collected in different years and geographic locations, to identify changes in the transcriptome associated with compression wood development.

RESULTS
identification of genes differentially expressed during compression and opposite wood formation in pinus pinaster
to identify genes that are differentially expressed between compression  and opposite  developing xylem we followed the strategy depicted in figure  <dig>  samples from different provenances collected in different years at two latitudes were integrated into the analyses to mitigate the effects of multiple sources of variability. two microarrays were manufactured with cdna libraries constructed with rna isolated from adult maritime pine trees of corsican and aquitaine provenances grown in aquitaine, france. the first microarray  was constructed using a set of  <dig> cdnas from samples of cx, ox, early  and late  developing xylem collected in  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig>  the second microarray  was constructed with  <dig> cdna clones from four subtractive libraries obtained by reciprocally subtracting cdna populations obtained from cx and ox samples that were collected in  <dig> and from juvenile  and mature  developing xylem collected in  <dig>  both microarrays were hybridized with labeled arna targets synthesized from cx and ox collected from four maritime pine trees of the sierra bermeja provenance, spain  <cit> , sampled in  <dig>  to validate the expression patterns of selected genes, northern blot and qrt-pcr analyses were carried out with samples of adult trees from sierra bermeja provenance collected in  <dig> and  <dig>  respectively.

microscopic examination and lignin quantification were performed for phenotypic validation of the samples . consistent with the typical morphology of compression wood tracheids  <cit> , transversal sections of developing tracheids showed a rounded shape and many intercellular spaces, whereas ox developing tracheids had straight sides and few intercellular spaces . lignin content was determined in samples from the four trees used in microarray analyses and the four trees used in qrt-pcr . cx samples contained significantly more lignin than ox samples. however, variability in lignin content between both types of developing xylem was evident among trees. in particular, the difference in lignin content between cx and ox samples from tree t4- <dig> was lower compared to the other trees and not statistically significant according to a t-test.

results of hybridization analyses of both microarrays are summarized as volcano plots in figure  <dig>  after eliminating spots flagged as bad, not found or absent and those with a signal intensity that did not surpass twofold their background signal, only  <dig> and  <dig> spots were kept for further analysis in microarray  <dig> and  <dig> respectively. relative expression values , p-values and adjusted p-values for all the spots represented in figure  <dig> are available in additional files  <dig> and  <dig>  a clear bias is observed in both cases, with a higher number of spots showing up-regulation in cx compared to ox. the analysis of microarray  <dig> shows  <dig> spots containing probes for genes that were significantly up-regulated  by at least  <dig> -fold during compression wood formation, and only  <dig> spots showing up-regulation during opposite wood formation . since these cdnas were previously sequenced to construct an est database of pinus pinaster developing xylem the sequences were already available  <cit> . the analysis of microarray  <dig> identified  <dig> spots showing up-regulation in cx and  <dig> spots showing up-regulation in ox . only these  <dig> cdna clones were sequenced from the probe set of microarray  <dig> 

sequences with an average phred score > <dig> per nucleotide in a sliding window of  <dig> nucleotides and a minimal length of  <dig> nucleotides were kept for further analysis . those with lower quality scores or shorter than  <dig> nucleotides were re-sequenced. the complete set of sequences corresponding to differentially expressed genes from microarray  <dig> and  <dig> were used to define a set of unigenes, and a total number of  <dig> unigenes up-regulated in cx and  <dig> unigenes up-regulated in ox were obtained. moderate values of sequence redundancy were obtained .

to validate the transcriptomic analysis, a group of genes was selected and their cdnas were used as probes for northern blot analysis of rna extracted from cx and ox . the differential expression patterns in cx and ox observed in microarrays analyses were validated for all selected genes. in particular, northern blot analysis suggested that our strategy allowed us to identify some genes that may be specifically induced at high levels in cx whereas are not expressed or expressed at very low levels in ox . as a control, the expression pattern was also confirmed for a gene that is expressed at similar levels in both types of differentiating xylem according to microarray analysis .

trancriptome changes in functional categories related to cell wall during compression wood formation in pine
the complete set of unigenes was functionally annotated using blastx analysis  <cit>  against genbank and blastn using the pine gene index database . sequences that matched with the same entry in the database were assumed to represent the same gene. therefore, the final numbers of unigenes were reduced to  <dig> for cx and  <dig> for ox. most of these genes showed significant similarities to sequences in databases , although some of them were similar to sequences with unknown function . the number of unigenes with no significant similarity was low in both cases .

the genes with assigned function were grouped into functional categories using the arabidopsis thaliana munich information centre for protein sequences  database, and suppression of redundancy in mips funcat assignations by decision according to their most probable role in xylem development . in keeping with the greater number of genes identified as up-regulated in cx, most of the functional categories included more genes in this tissue . the most represented categories were “c-compound and carbohydrate metabolism” , “cellular transport” , “protein synthesis” , “amino acid metabolism” , “secondary metabolism” , “cell rescue, defense and virulence”  “protein fate” , “biogenesis of cell wall components” , “energy” , “biogenesis of cytoskeleton” , and “cellular communication/signal transduction mechanism” .

the functional categories with larger numbers of up-regulated genes in cx compared to ox are consistent with structural and chemical modifications of the cell wall, and as shown in additional file  <dig>  include genes encoding cellulose synthase subunits , sucrose synthase , cellulose synthase-like a , glycosyltransferases , xyloglucan galactosyltransferase , α- and β-tubulins  and a putative microtubule-associated protein . in particular, the gene encoding xyloglucan galactosyltransferase  showed a high level of expression in cx, whereas transcripts were undetectable in ox .

transcripts for enzymes involved in lignin biosynthesis were also up-regulated in cx , including those encoding enzymes in the monolignol biosynthetic pathway, such as phenylalanine ammonia lyase , p-coumarate 3-hydroxylase , 4-coumarate:coa ligase , cinnamyl alcohol dehydrogenase , hydroxycinnamoyl-coa:shikimate hydroxycinnamoyl transferase , caffeoyl-coa-o-methyltransferase  and caffeate o-methyltransferase .

several genes up-regulated in cx and classified in the functional category “amino acid metabolism” encode enzymes involved in the synthesis of precursors for monolignol biosynthesis, such as the enzymes of the main trunk of the shikimate pathway chorismate synthase , 3-dehydroquinate dehydratase/shikimate 5-dehydrogenase , shikimate kinase  and 5-enolpyruvylshikimate 3-phosphate synthase . in particular, the expression pattern was confirmed by northern blot for the genes encoding chorismate synthase, and 3-dehydroquinate dehydratase/shikimate 5-dehydrogenase .

expression of genes encoding enzymes related to sam biosynthesis in cells undergoing xylogenesis
genes related to s-adenosylmethionine  metabolism were also widely represented among those up-regulated in cx and classified in the functional category “amino acid metabolism” . sam is a universal methyl donor for many different cellular metabolic reactions, including those catalyzed by ccoaomt and comt. both enzymes are essential for the biosynthesis of coniferyl and sinapyl alcohols, precursors of lignin, lignans and other phenylpropanoids  <cit> . therefore, the higher lignin content of compression wood may require a larger supply of sam during development compared to opposite wood.

to unambiguously validate the differential expression patterns observed in the microarray analyses for genes related to sam metabolism, relative transcript levels were analyzed by qrt-pcr in cx and ox of four independent trees from sierra bermeja that were sampled in  <dig> . these genes encode the enzymes of the activated methyl cycle and included methionine synthase , s-adenosylmethionine synthase  and s-adenosylhomocysteine hydrolase . the expression of genes encoding enzymes of the monolignol pathway branch that utilizes methyl groups provided by sam to produce methoxylated monolignols were also analyzed, including hydroxycinnamoyl-coa:shikimate hydroxycinnamoyl transferase , caffeoyl-coa-o-methyltransferase  and caffeate o-methyltransferase . other genes included in the analysis encode enzymes involved in the supply of methyl units into the activated methyl cycle from the amino acid serine, such as cytosolic methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase  and serine hydroxymethyltransferase , mitochondrial glycine decarboxylase complex h-protein  and serine hydroxymethyltransferase , and the plastid enzymes 3-phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase  and phosphoserine aminotransferase . finally, we also considered a gene encoding glutamine synthetase  up-regulated in cx according to microarray analysis , which has been proposed to play a key role in re-assimilation of ammonium released from different process in developing xylem  <cit> . to unambiguously verify the identity of the encoded proteins, we cloned by rlm-race the full-length cdnas for those genes that were not available in databases . all these genes were indeed up-regulated in cx compared to ox in the four trees according to fold change values of relative transcript abundance . however, it is interesting to note that smaller differences in transcript levels between the two types of xylem were observed in tree t4- <dig>  as a control, the relative transcript levels for two reference genes used in the normalization of qrt-pcr data are shown in additional file  <dig> 

to further demonstrate the relationship between lignin accumulation and enhanced expression of genes related to sam metabolism, we quantified by qrt-pcr the relative levels of transcripts in cells from pinus pinaster calli that were stimulated to differentiate tracheids in vitro. we tested the occurrence of tracheids after  <dig>   <dig> and 15 days of transfer to the induction medium  by phloroglucinol staining and microscopy inspection . differentiated tracheids were present even in the control medium , but the number of differentiated tracheids was higher in induction medium . consequently lignin levels were higher in samples from induction medium . transcript levels of genes encoding enzymes involved in sam metabolism were higher in cells transferred to induction medium compared to those transferred to control medium, in parallel with the observed increase in lignin . in most of the genes the level of transcripts in cells after 15 days in induction medium was at least twice the level in cells that were cultured in control medium.

expression of genes encoding enzymes related to lignan-biosynthesis in cells undergoing xylogenesis
in addition to being a lignin precursor, coniferyl alcohol is also a precursor of different lignans  <cit> . three genes encoding enzymes involved in biosynthesis of coniferyl alcohol-derived lignans were also found among the up-regulated genes in cx, according to microarray analyses . pinoresinol-lariciresinol reductase  is an enzyme involved in the 8-8’ linked lignans pathway, and phenylcoumaran benzylic ether reductase  and phenylpropenal double-bond reductase  are involved in the 8-5’ linked lignans pathway  <cit> . the differential expression of genes encoding these enzymes was also validated in four trees by qrt-pcr, with higher transcript levels in cx compared to ox . notably, this difference was also lower in tree t4- <dig>  transcript levels were also increased in cells of pinus pinaster calli that were induced to differentiate into tracheids compared to non-induced cells .

discussion
comparative transcriptome analysis shows reprogramming of cell wall related genes during compression wood formation in pine
in this work, we carried out a comparative transcriptome analysis between developing compression and opposite wood using a combination of differently constructed cdna libraries and microarray analyses . samples from three unrelated provenances, different geographic location or collected in different years  were integrated in the analysis to mitigate the potential effects of variability triggered by genotypic or environmental differences in order to identify a consistent set of candidate genes for wood properties.

the external stimulus that leads to the formation of compression wood caused significant changes of gene expression, as revealed by the large number of genes that were up-regulated or down-regulated in cx compared to ox  and the specific expression of some genes in cx . an important component of this gene reprogramming is clearly related to the chemical and structural modifications of the thick secondary cell wall characteristic of conifer reaction wood, as suggested by the over-represented functional categories among the up-regulated genes in cx, such as biogenesis of cytoskeleton, biogenesis of cell wall components, secondary metabolism, cellular transport and c-compound and carbohydrate metabolism .

a parallel up-regulation of genes encoding cellulose synthase subunits and sucrose synthase in cx compared to ox was observed, suggesting a higher rate of cellulose biosynthesis during compression wood formation. it has been well documented that the relative content of cellulose in compression wood is lower than in normal wood and opposite wood  <cit> . however, the s <dig> layer of secondary cell walls in compression wood is thicker than in normal and opposite wood, which contributes to the final thickness of the tracheid cell wall  <cit> . therefore, in terms of absolute quantity, the development of compression tracheids may require higher rates of cellulose synthesis.

different genes encoding α- and β-tubulins were also up-regulated during compression wood formation. up-regulation of α-tubulin during compression wood formation in pinus taeda has been reported previously  <cit> , which supports our findings. different lines of experimental evidence suggest that cortical microtubules of the cytoskeleton are involved in secondary cell wall pattern deposition and cellulose microfibril orientation  <cit> . we also identified a gene up-regulated in cx that encodes a putative microtubule-associated protein . several maps have been investigated  <cit>  and their involvement in regulating cellulose microfibril angle  has been revealed in arabidopsis map mutants, which show altered mfa in fiber walls  <cit> . more recently, it has been demonstrated that microtubule-associated protein atmap70- <dig> regulates secondary cell wall patterning in arabidopsis <cit> . differential expression of these genes may contribute to the remarkable variation of mfa in the s <dig> cell wall layer between compression and opposite or normal wood, which plays a key role in the different mechanical properties of both types of wood  <cit> .

another group of genes that are up-regulated during compression wood differentiation encode enzymes that could be involved in the biosynthesis of hemicellulose, including a cellulose synthase-like, two glycosyltransferases and a xyloglucan galactosyltransferase. although xyloglucan is a hemicellulose characteristic of primary cell walls, it has been suggested that modifications in xyloglucan may be related to the reinforcement of connections between primary and secondary wall layers  <cit> . in particular, the gene encoding a putative xyloglucan galactosyltransferase seems to be specifically induced during cx formation . in contrast, two genes encoding a putative xyloglucan endotransglucosylase/hydrolase are downregulated in cx compared to ox . therefore, our comparative transcriptome analysis suggests specific modifications of hemicellulose biosynthesis during compression wood development.

consistent with the enrichment of lignin in compression wood  <cit> , we found that genes encoding enzymes of the monolignol biosynthetic pathway were up-regulated in cx , such as phenylalanine ammonia-lyase , 4-coumarate:coa ligase , p-coumarate-3-hydroxylase , cinnamyl-alcohol dehydrogenase  hydroxycinnamoyl-coa:shikimate hydroxycinnamoyl transferase , caffeoyl-coa-o-methyltransferase  and caffeate o-methyltransferase . in addition, the biosynthesis of monolignols demands substrates such as phenylalanine, shikimate and s-adenosylmethionine , which are provided by different metabolic reactions  <cit> . the quantitative importance of the shikimate and sam metabolic pathways in the context of a highly lignified tissue, such as compression xylem, is supported by the fact that  <dig> of the  <dig> genes up-regulated in cx that were classified in the “amino acid metabolism” functional category encode enzymes in these pathways .

in agreement with the elevated levels of shikimate in compression wood compared to normal wood that has been reported  <cit>  and the higher demand of this substrate for monolignol biosynthesis, our microarray analyses showed that four genes encoding enzymes in the main trunk of the shikimate pathway were up-regulated in cx .

transcriptional adaptation of sam biosynthetic pathway to the metabolic demand of coniferyl alcohol during xylogenesis
sam is a methyl-group donor for coniferyl alcohol biosynthesis in conifers, and for both coniferyl and sinapyl alcohol in angiosperms  <cit> . genes involved in lignin biosynthesis and those encoding enzymes of the activated methyl cycle were shown to be more highly expressed in the woody core tissue of hemp  <cit> . according to this functional relationship, genes encoding the enzymes of the activated methyl cycle  were also up-regulated in cx . moreover, six additional genes were also up-regulated in cx that encode enzymes located in three different cellular compartments, which are involved in providing a continuous supply of methyl groups from serine into the cycle .

two of these genes encode cytosolic serine hydroxymethyltransferase  and methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase , which catalyse the conversion of serine to glycine with the concomitant transfer of a methyl group to the tetrahydrofolate to produce  <dig>  methylenetetrahydrofolate and the reduction of  <dig> -methylenetetrahydrofolate  to 5-methyltetrahydrofolate  respectively . genes encoding h-protein subunit of the mitochondrial glycine decarboxylase complex  and the mitochondrial serine hydroxymethyltransferase  are also included in this functional group. the essential function of the mitochondrial glycine decarboxylase/serine hydroxyl methyltransferase complex in c <dig> metabolism has been previously described  <cit> . glycine catabolism and recycling to serine by gdc/shmt complex prevents the accumulation of glycine under high rates of sam synthesis. the accumulation of glycine would push the cshmt reaction toward the formation of serine and inhibit sam synthesis  <cit> . h-protein is a critical element in the sequence of reactions in the gdc complex, acting as a mobile substrate for the other enzymatic components, and changes in the levels of h-protein may modulate the activity of the complex  <cit> . different genes encoding h-protein have been found in populus, and transcripts encoding individual isoforms were specifically abundant in developing xylem, suggesting the association of distinct isoforms with photorespiration and c <dig> metabolism  <cit> . finally, genes encoding plastid enzymes 3-phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase  and phosphoserine aminotransferase  are involved in serine biosynthesis from 3-phophoglycerate  <cit> , which would supply the high demand of this amino acid that is required for sam synthesis during lignification.

the coordinated modulation of sam and monolignol biosynthetic genes with lignin accumulation was also supported by two additional observations. first, the smallest differences in transcript abundances between cx and ox were observed for tree t4- <dig> , which also showed the smallest differences in lignin content . second, the relative transcript abundance of these genes during in vitro tracheid differentiation was parallel to lignin content . the increase in the levels of all enzymes involved in sam synthesis may allow an increased flux through the pathway to supply the massive demand of methyl groups during lignification, with the minimal impact on metabolite levels  <cit> . in conclusion, these data strongly suggest that up-regulation of sam metabolism genes during compression wood formation is due to an increased demand for methyl groups in coniferyl alcohol biosynthesis. however, sam also acts as the precursor in the biosynthesis of the polyamines spermidine and spermine, the metal ion chelating compounds nicotianamine and the plant hormone ethylene. when acting as a precursor of these molecules, sam is recycled from released 5´-methylthioadenosine through the yang cycle  <cit> , but genes encoding enzymes of this pathway were not found among those up-regulated in cx.

as a result of the activity of mitochondrial gdc during lignification the release of significant amounts of ammonium should be expected , in addition to the ammonium released in the reaction catalysed by pal. the massive ammonium release could compromise nitrogen economy in a woody perennial during secondary growth if it is not efficiently recycled  <cit> . it appears that in order to cope with the high amounts of ammonia released by pal and gdc activities during lignification a glutamine synthetase gene  was up-regulated in cx and during in vitro tracheid differentiation . this gene has been functionally associated with ammonia assimilation in vascular tissues of seedlings  <cit> .

in conifers, lignin lacks sinapyl alcohol, and coniferyl alcohol is the most abundant monolignol  <cit>  in the polymer. compression wood is relatively enriched in h subunits, and an increase in p-glucocoumaryl alcohol is associated with development of this reaction wood  <cit> . nevertheless, the increased level of transcripts for enzymes involved in sam synthesis in cx indicates a higher demand for coniferyl alcohol to respond to an overall increase in lignin production, which is consistent with the reported higher abundance of coniferin residues in compression wood relative to normal wood in pinus taeda <cit> . however, an additional fate for coniferyl alcohol is the synthesis of lignans  <cit> . three genes encoding enzymes involved in coniferyl alcohol-derived lignan metabolism were also up-regulated in cx compared with ox and in cells that were induced to differentiate into tracheids in vitro compared to non-induced cells : pinoresinol-lariciresinol reductase , phenylcoumaran benzylic ether reductase  and phenylpropenal double-bond reductase . these results suggest that during compression wood formation an increased demand for coniferyl alcohol residues may also be related to an increase in the biosynthesis of lignans. lignans have been related to defense and heartwood formation  <cit> . moreover, pcber is a prominent poplar xylem protein that is strongly associated with lignifying cells  <cit> , and a general function for pcber has been proposed in lignifying tissues and wood development. lignans may be infused in the secondary cell wall during lignification to cope with the oxidative stress accompanying lignin polymerization  <cit> , which may explain the enhanced expression of lignan biosynthesis genes during compression wood formation and in vitro tracheid differentiation.

CONCLUSIONS
our strategy for comparative transcriptomic analysis in pine cx and ox has revealed a broad spectrum of changes in the transcriptome of differentiating xylem cells, consistent with the formation of wood with different structures and compositions. this work provides a resource for further characterization of molecular components that determine variation in softwood properties. in particular, the coordinated modulation of expression that was observed for genes involved in serine, sam, monolignol and lignan biosynthesis, and the central role of glutamine synthetase to avoid n deficiency are important for understanding plant metabolic requirements and regulation during intensive lignification, and should thus be considered in strategies for lignin bioengineering.

