BACKGROUND
identification of transcription regulatory elements in the genome is an important problem of molecular systems biology and statistical genomic studies. among those elements, transcription factor binding sites , short and specific dna loci targeted by transcription factors , are considered as basic regulatory elements of gene functional activity and reflect the corresponding protein-dna interactions in a cell. tfs are the largest set of regulatory proteins in mammalian cells. according to ncbi refseq database, about 10% of all known proteins of mammals, including humans, are tfs.

a tfbs serves as a target for a transcription factor which binds to this specific binding site  directly or via other proteins and regulates gene transcription. in a mammalian genome the number of direct and indirect bss for a given tf could be ranged from several hundreds to hundred thousand  <cit> . however, these values have not been directly measured and the theoretical estimates provide lowly confident values.

the interactions between the molecules of a given tf and corresponding tfbss in the genome could be considered in the terms of tf-dna binding events  which reflect the events of binding in the assay. any of such events might be specific and non-specific in the context of a direct physical binding of the tf to a tfbs. the intensity  of an occurrence of a given be in a given genome locus can be characterized by the level of relative avidity  of the tf-dna binding- an integrative quantitative characteristic of availability of a dna locus  for a given protein  binding  <cit> .

the population distribution function of ra  of be) for a given tf can reveal functional attributes of the tfbss and the mechanisms of the tf-dna interaction on the genomic scale. however, at the level of single cells or cell samples the distribution function of ra for any tf is unknown, since many technical problems of direct counting of specific protein molecules bound dna have not been solved yet. instead, the relative avidity of tf-dna binding in an average genome within a given cell sample can be quantified by an estimate of the number of tf molecules bound to a given locus averaging across the given cell sample. however, quantitative detection of tfs bound to specific loci is a great challenge. a simpler task is a pull-down of short dna fragments directly or indirectly bound with the molecules of a given tf. such tf-dna complexes can be detected in chromatin immuno-precipitation  chip-based genome-wide sequencing experiments  <cit> .

in a typical genome-scale chip experiment ~ <dig> cells are used and the transcription factors are cross-linked to their dna using chemical cross linkers. after the genomic dna is isolated and fragmented by ultrasound sonication, an antibody specific to the tf of interest is used to isolate each tf molecule and the dna fragment which it is bound to. cloning the whole pool of such fragments and sequencing them   <cit> , chip-paired end tag   <cit> , sequence tag analysis of genome enrichment   <cit> ) provides the data for a large-scale identification of tfbss.

however, the experimental information, obtained from saco, chip-pet and stage experiments, about statistical properties of tf binding at specific physical bss  in a given cell type, at a given environment is highly noisy and essentially incomplete. only pulled-down tf-dna complexes containing dna fragments with maximal relative binding avidity could be reliably detected.

recently, a new generation of sequencing technology, massively parallel sequencing , has been established  <cit>  mps can sequence many millions of fragments in a single experiment. combining chip and mps  provides a genome wide view on tfbss. in particular, chip-seq method can accurately detect moderate/high avidity tfbss at a resolution  higher than for any previous chip method  <cit> . in detail, during a chip-seq experiment, tf-immuno-precipitated dna fragments  are directly sequenced in series of 25- <dig> bp reads, and dozen millions of such short reads are then mapped to the reference genome. after mapping of unique dna fragments  onto the genome, the dna fragment sequences, extended further up to ~ <dig> bp, are clustered by their overlapping sub-sequences and mapped onto the genome. the number of dna fragment sequence overlaps is further represented in the analysis as overlap signal with peaks. each dna fragment cluster is usually quantified by its highest overlap peak, i.e. by the cluster's internal region with the largest number of overlapping extended chip-seq dna fragment sequences.  the number of overlapping dna fragments in a given cluster can be observed as the ra value of the given tf-dna bs. technically, tf binding avidity in specific dna loci could be measured on the genome scale using peak search procedure on the mapped overlap signal. a number of software tools have been proposed to perform this search in the genome, and thus to find genomic regions containing the tf-abundant dna loci and to identify in each locus specific tf-bound dna sequences.

one of the crucial problems with chip-based genome-wide assays, including chip-seq, is a statistically reliable identification of biologically meaningful phenomena  from the large amounts of generated experimental data. in this context reliable, specific and sensitive mapping of protein-dna interactions is still essentially dependent on subjective rules of pre-processing and filtration of the dna fragment sequences, the statistical criteria used to identify specific binding loci and the real tfbss. as a result, some  basic definitions, datasets, statistical models  and estimates have been revised after  original publications  <cit> .

a large unexplained "technical" noise component in the experimental measurements and its non-uniform location in the genome are serious limitations for the specificity of the current chip-based methods  <cit> . comparison of chip-seq data sets analysing the same tf, under similar conditions and the same cell type but using different experimental platforms  revealed a reasonable consistency between the mapped datasets only for high and moderate avidity chip-defined binding loci. these loci, however, represent only a small fraction of all binding loci observed in the course of the entire chip-seq experiment. therefore genomic localization and biological roles of other reliable but less reactive tf-binding loci  cannot be identified from the assays  <cit> . to analyse statistical properties of the low-, moderate- and high-avidity binding loci for a given chip-seq data set we need to develop a probabilistic model which would allow us to answer three important open questions.

how many 'hidden' tf-specific bss with moderate and low avidity are present in the noise-rich subset of chip-seq data?

how many "true negative" specific bss which should be included in consideration are not present in the given chip-seq dataset?

how many specific bss of a given tf exist in the genome?

to answer these questions an analytical model of chip-seq tf-dna binding experiments should be focused on analysis of specificity and sensitivity of protein-dna binding.

to do this a simple exploratory probabilistic model of tf-dna binding events was developed and implemented. it allowed us to facilitate noise filtering of chip-seq datasets and predicting, for a given tf, the number of specific tf-dna binding loci in the entire genome. we applied the proposed analytical approach to the distributions of binding avidity of the tfbs of eleven tfs which are essential for maintaining and differentiation mouse embryonic stem cells.

RESULTS
natural variation of binding availability of the tfbs for tfs and critical threshold of tf binding specificity
tfs bind to short high affinity dna response elements  mostly in putative promoter region of a gene and modify gene activity. however this model of tf-dna binding is too simple and the phenomenon remains poorly understood, although many models of tf-dna binding have been reported  <cit> . for example, well-known tf c-myc exhibits very diverse and complex patterns of dna binding activity  <cit> . c-myc binding region in gene promoter region could often contain multiple copies of a few c-myc e-box sequences. such tfbs clusters could be found in low-, moderate- and high- avidity chip-seq binding loci of the mouse embryonic stem cell  -related genes .

the e-box is a high affinity response/binding element of dna which able to discriminate c-myc among other different tfs. c-myc forming heterodimers with its binding partners  and other dna-specific proteins  using "canonical" e box 5'-cacgtg-3', which represents the consensus or other at least five "non-canonical" e-boxes , and additional one  which we report in this work . the e-box motifs are present in putative promoter regions of at least  <dig> genes  <cit> ; however, how a given response element can discriminate among all these different transcription factors is currently unclear. moreover, several types of non-canonical e-boxes could bind c-myc-max complex strongly than canonical  <cit> . in this respect, several mechanisms of variability of c-myc-max-dna binding avidity have been proposed   <cit> . for instance, flanking sequences, chromatin structure, methylation status, and relative position within the promoter or interaction with adjacent regulatory elements might contribute to selection of a particular complex  <cit> .

we assume here that transcription factor -dna binding avidity in a given tfbs defined in chip-seq experiment could be considered as useful integrative characteristic of availability of the tfbs for a given tf. naturally, tf-dna binding avidity could be quantified by the number of tf molecules binding a given specific locus including specific binding element and its flanking regions. however, the number of tf molecules bound dna cannot be directly inferred from chip-seq experiment. chip-seq detects the amount of specific dna fragments directly and indirectly bound by the protein-antibody complexes. mapping the extended dna fragments on the genome, an appropriate clustering of overlapping fragments and filtering of the clusters result in an identification of putative tfbss. thus the integrative relative avidity of tfbs in chip-seq experiment could be quantified by the number of overlapping dna fragments in the cluster loci. when this number is equal to or larger then a specificity threshold, t, such significant dna loci  could be used to construct and analyze of statistically reliable part of the empirical frequency distribution representing relatively high-avidity binding loci of specific tf-dna binding. in particular, we used this part of the distribution for estimation of the number of reliably detected specific tfbss .

in the datasets  <cit> , which we used in our study, the specificity threshold was calculated using three different methods. the first method implements a model of normalization of observed binding peak height values in a chip-seq experiment against peak height values in the corresponding negative control experiment . however, the control data provided many strong peaks which are often found in specific genomic regions like satellite repeats creating an unpredictable bias in identification of specificity threshold. we found also a fraction of loci in which negative control and experimental set binding signals  are highly correlated and the fraction of locus in which the peaks in control dataset were higher than in the experimental set.

after removing non-random false peaks, a relatively small reduction of the number of the nonspecific dna fragments even among the smallest peaks  about 15-25% of total sequence read could be excluded. however, many millions dna fragments within low- and moderate- abundant peaks of are present in the data sets . these findings suggest that the number and the variation of dna fragments of the negative control experiment do not allow us to explain the source of the major fraction of non-specific dna sequences and their clusters occurred in a specific chip-seq experiment.

the second method implements a model of random occurrence of dna fragment clusters in the genome. the model assumes that each genomic position has the same probability of producing a chip-seq dna fragment  and the probability of finding by chance m dna fragments in a chip-seq experiment within the same genomic region taken from a genome of size g. the probability calculations were made, using a monte-carlo simulation, by randomly extracting  <dig> bp dna fragments from reference mouse genome  and estimating the expected numbers of non-specific overlap peaks with various height values. then the frequency distribution of the number of random chip-seq dna fragments in a cluster overlap  was constructed and the threshold value at the given specificity level for the original empirical frequency distribution of the peak height value was defined. the binding loci reported in  <cit>  has been limited to the locis with specificity threshold value defined by the model described above, which was considered as the random background noise mode  <cit> .

the third approach based on qpcr validation data with correction of threshold value for a limited number of chip-seq dna loci has been used  <cit> . chip-seq data analyses showed that in all cases the simple model  produces too optimistic specificity threshold values in comparison with the values defined by q-pcr method  <cit> . for example, for tf nanog the model overlap peak value  <dig> is predicted as a cutoff at fdr< <dig>   <cit> . at this cut-off value  <dig> putative chip-seq bss were predicted as "true"  tfbs. however, the analysis of  <dig> chip-seq defined bss using chip-qpcr suggested the specificity threshold value equal to  <dig> . at this specificity threshold value, only ~30%  of dna fragment clusters could belong to "true" bss. additionally, the numbers of singletons  generated in the computational simulation were systematically larger than observed ones . inversely, predicted numbers of random clusters with low- and moderate- avidity loci  might be systematically underrepresented in chip-qpcr data.

chip-qpcr is often used to determine in vitro whether a given chip-seq dna fragment cluster belongs to a specific tfbs and, subsequently, to estimate the specificity threshold for the original chip-seq dataset by extrapolation. however, due to the limited number of loci which could be used in chip-qpcr, a sub-optimal design of chip-qpcr experiment might contain a bias in estimating the chip-seq be specificity threshold. in this section we shall give an answer to the question: how to optimize a design of chip-qpcr experiments to minimize the sample size bias?

on figure  <dig> we present the results of our analysis of  <dig> chip-seq loci containing  <dig> distinct dna fragments from esrrb tf chip-seq library selected by the authors of  <cit>  for their validation of computational model estimate . figure  <dig> shows that chip-qpcr experiment was designed on the studied affinity value range based on a uniform distribution function of the number of tf-dna bes per locus. to search for a more realistic frequency distribution representing chip-seq data,  <dig> random samples of the  <dig> chip-seq loci were chosen without replacement from the same chip-seq library. on figure  <dig> the mean values and standard deviations  of the number of bes  over these  <dig> samples are plotted. this figure shows that the observed frequency distribution of mean peak height is a skewed pareto-like function. in comparison to the uniform distribution, our frequency distribution is significantly overrepresented by the bs with overlap peak values less than  <dig> and is significantly underrepresented by the with overlap peak values greater than  <dig>  this result suggests that a sub-optimal design of a qpcr validation study can provide a false positive increment in the estimation of the number of q-pcr-confirmed specific chip-seq loci and thus it can erroneously predict a larger specificity value than it can be deduced from the whole chip-seq dataset. if so, the actual specificity threshold values of chip-seq experiments might be larger than it was reported in  <cit> . respectively, the real number of specific tfbss at the threshold value given by qpcr test could be smaller than it is expected from results of the test. in the next sections we will present an alternative computational method which uses all available chip-seq data and estimates the specificity of chip-seq assay without  assumptions regarding physical distribution non-specific chip-seq dna clusters  and  the need for a validation of the results in chip-q-pcr assay.

a mixed model of the sample-size dependent frequency distributions of binding events could be used to estimate the number of low/moderate- and large- avidity binding loci
a simple visual inspection of the available empirical frequency distributions of tf-dna binding plot in log-log scale  allows us to suggest that a mixture of at least two distinct skewed sample-size - dependent frequency distributions of binding avidity is present in the data. statistical analysis of chip-based  <cit>  has showed that the left part of the empirical distribution is reach with the noise resulted from relatively low avidity be and the right side of the distribution is represented by relatively high-avidity tf- dna binding . also we found that the tails of the empirical distributions of tf-dna binding avidity exhibit monotonically-skewed shape with a greater abundance of low avidity and more gaps among the high-avidity loci. low- and moderate- avidity tfbss are highly-abundant in the mouse and other mammalian genomes and could play biologically meaningful functional roles.

the specificity threshold of the distribution of the number of tf-bound dna loci, t, is the parameter which separates lowly reliable and highly reliable-binding loci at a given specificity level .

for quantitative analysis of chip-seq data based on the model  it should be important to estimate the specificity threshold, t, as well as the number of high-avidity specific loci , at avidity m ≥ t, and the number of specific loci  having low/moderate avidity less than t . to do that, we use the fitting and back-extrapolation method . we illustrate our method with the analysis of the chip-seq nanog tf-dna binding data as an example .

we demonstrated that the exponential distribution function fits well to the background noise of the empirical distribution of tf-dna binding, while the truncated gdp function  fits well to long tail of the empirical distribution . specifically, this noise-like part of the distribution can be fitted well with an exponential function with exponent parameter d =  <dig>  ±  <dig>   . table  <dig> and additional file  <dig>  provide the estimated parameter values and detailed characteristics of statistical tests.

the most noise-affected data points are located at the left side of the empirical histogram , where the data was accurately fitted by the exponential function using sigma-plot software . the values of the exponential function at data points from  <dig> to  <dig> were fitted  and for larger values were estimated by the best-fit exponential function . at the specificity threshold  identified from the analysis of chip-q-pcr data, the admixture of non-specific bs  consists of ~2% of the reliable subset . importantly, at the predicted specificity level  our best-fit mixture model predicts the same specificity threshold .

subtraction of the exponential function values from the observed frequency distribution values allowed us to restore the "noise-free" frequency distribution function for overlap peak value  <dig> and larger . this reconstructed double-truncated frequency distribution could be considered as a reliable segment of the empirical specific binding avidity distribution. after parameterisation of the gdp function we can extrapolate the best-fit gdp to smaller overlap peak values . figure 2a shows that the truncated gdp function fits well to the right-tail of the empirical frequency distribution of tf specific binding in the interval of peak values larger than  <dig>  this part of the empirical distribution characterises the more reliable fraction of tf-dna binding loci corresponding to high-avidity level bss and represented in chip-seq experiment by number of overlapping dna fragments  up to the maximal observed number of overlaps.

the gdp function, after parameterization in this interval, can be used to predict the values of the function for smaller number of peak values:  <dig> , <dig> ..., <dig>  at the threshold  <dig> sp= 97%, and the number of gdp-estimated specific bss equals  <dig> versus  <dig> bss observed in nanog chip-seq assay . the number of observed unique chip-seq dna fragments, m <dig>  representing these bss , equals 299830; gdp estimates  <dig> chip-seq dna fragments. interestingly, the last number represents only  <dig> % of the total number of the unique dna fragments of the chip-seq nanog library. similar results we obtained for other tf libraries . these results suggest that the major fraction of chip-seq dna fragments maps to moderate and low avidity loci specific tfbss and to background non-specific dna loci.

only part of original chip-seq sequence datasets is available  <cit> . the analyzed bes were limited in the dataset to the loci conforming to the specificity threshold value defined by the random model of uniform distribution of background signals reported in  <cit> . using these data sets, the smallest threshold of the most reliable and the most specific bes , was used to calculate the gdp-defined specificity cut-off value. in these cases, the right tail of the available truncated empirical distribution was used to estimate the parameters of the truncated gdp function.

we calculated the specificity threshold values  starting from chip-qpcr-defined specificity threshold followed by minimizing the distance between the truncated gdp probability function and the observed frequency distribution. figure  <dig> and additional files  <dig>   <dig> show that the truncated gdp function fits well the right-tail gdp function corresponding to the fraction of reliable and highly specific bes. moreover, due to the high accuracy of parameterization of the mixture gdp function and the exponential function, our curve-fitting of chip-seq data allows us to predict the gdp function for the noise-enriched bes, located on the histogram in the left part in the empirical avidity distribution function. figure 2c and additional file  <dig> show the truncated frequency distribution of esrrb tf-dna binding  and the best-fit gdp function extrapolated to the noise-enriched part of the distribution are presented. the best fit gdp function with parameters k =  <dig>  ±  <dig> , b =  <dig>  ±  <dig>  allows us to extrapolate the best-fit curve and to predict the number of esrrb tfbss the in the noise-enriched binding sites.

estimation of the number of chip-seq dna fragments in predicted specific low- and moderate- avidity binding loci
parameter a of our mixture model  was estimated as the fraction of specific dna fragments in the specific tf-dna binding loci in the chip-seq experiment. the value of this parameter we calculated by extrapolation of the best-fit gdp function or the best fit k-w function to low- and moderate- values of peak heights on the empirical histogram of binding avidity. . . the estimated values of parameter a show that estimated specific dna fragments is much smaller than a fraction of non specific background dna fragments. this parameter varies significantly across the libraries. . we suggest that parameter α can be considered as an important parameter characterising an enrichment of the library with sdna fragments bound to the specific locibes. these parameters can serve as targets for further optimization of chip-based tf-dna biding assays.

                              θ
                              a
                              b
                              α
                              p
                              
                                 o
                              
                              n
                              2
fitting-extrapolation method for k-w function and estimation of parameters p <dig> and ntot
in this section we will answer the question: how many physically specific bss of a given tf exist in the mammalian genome? we used the theoretical result obtained in the previous section to estimate the parameters a, b and θ of k-w function and thus, to estimate p <dig>  practically, for all chip-seq datasets we could fit the k-w probability function to the gdp function values after fitting the truncated gdp to a high-confidence segment of the empirical frequency distribution of tf-dna binding. this segment of the empirical distribution is assigned by the number of chip-seq dna fragments, called m <dig>  which form n <dig> clusters. the number of these clusters was counted for the peak height values ranged between specificity threshold level t and maximum value of peak height j, where the specificity sp is defined by the formula .

the detailed description of the algorithm of estimation of the parameters of skewed distribution function functions like gdp and k-w was reported in  <cit> . using this algorithm, we found that for chip-seq data the gdp function exhibits a fairly accurate approximation of k-w function throughout the entire range of bes , we used the properties for fitting k-w function based on the extrapolated data estimated from the best-fit truncated gdp function values. the estimated parameters of k-w function, we used to estimate the probability of non-detected bes  by the formula  and ntot, as follows:  

and estimate the number non-observed tfbss  

using p <dig> , we could estimate tf-dna binding sensitivity  

kolmogorov-waring function predicts a large number of tfbss with low- and moderate- binding avidity
gdp can be considered as a good empirical approximation of the k-w function . granted this property, we used fitting and back-extrapolation method to get an accurate estimate of three parameters of k-w function. figure 2c-d table  <dig> shows that all empirical distributions of binding avidity are fitted well by the k-w function. using the estimated parameters of k-w function , we can predict the fraction of specific bss which have not been detected in the chip-seq experiments  . for example, the parameters of the probabilistic model for nanog tf data were estimated as θ =  <dig> ; α =  <dig> ; β =  <dig> , and thus, from , we have p <dig> =  <dig> . for oct <dig> data: θ =  <dig> ; α =  <dig> ; β =  <dig> , thus by  we have po =  <dig> . interestingly, for all tf binding data the parameter  of the k-w function equals to or slightly smaller than  <dig>  this result suggests that for tf-dna binding-dissociation processes the rate of preferential dissociation equals to or little bit larger than the rate of preferential binding.

using our parameterization algorithm we can estimate the total number of specific bss in the mouse genome for a given tf. this estimate equals ~ <dig>   <dig> bss for nanog and ~ <dig>   <dig> bss for oct <dig>  table  <dig> shows the estimates for other tfs.

reliable data points in the right-tail region of the empirical frequency distribution  and the best-fit predicted gdp data points of the noise-rich  region of the distribution  were combined together. k-w function fitting was used to estimate the fraction of non-detected bes, p <dig>  and the total number of tfbss, ntot . for example, for the nanog dataset, at threshold  <dig>   <dig> * <dig> reliable bss were predicted by the gdp and k-w. additionally, k-w function predicts in total  <dig> nanog bss in the genome of e <dig> cells, where  <dig>  were non-observed bss  in the library;  <dig>  specific bss where predicted in the noise-rich be set  and  <dig>  were predicted in the reliable specific be set , respectively . the estimates of the parameters of gdp and k-w functions and ntot for c-myc, esrrb and other tf data are given in table  <dig> and, partially, in figure  <dig> 

significant number of putative low- and moderate- avidity tf binding loci are admixed to the noise-rich binding loci and might be functionally important
according to the prediction of the gdp and k-w models, the number of low- and moderate- avidity tfbss should monotonously increase when the number of unique overlapping chip-seq dna fragments in a binding locus becomes smaller. to validate this prediction, we used motif-discovery program nminfer  to identify c-myc binding motifs/e-boxes in the chip-seq binding loci. as a training set we used the loci with c-myc-dna binding specificity cut-off values defined by gdp model at ≥ <dig> sequences per locus representing high avidity loci. we found position weight matrix  which contains 'canonical' e-box cacgtg 'non-canonical' e-boxes including cacgcg, cgcgag and cacatg  <cit>  and a novel non-canonical e-box cgcgag which is found in our study . all four non-canonical motifs were scanned for exact matches in the mouse genome  using seqmap software  <cit> . the total numbers of matches of cacgtg, cacgcg, cgcgag and cacatg in the mouse genome were  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig> , <dig>  respectively. e-box cacatg sequence is highly frequently occurred in non-genic low-complexity regions of the mouse genome associated with repeats elements or promiscuous genome regions. to minimize false-positive or bias in the results, we excluded the e-box cacatg from our validation and prediction analyses. then we studied the localization of the e-boxes cacgtg, cacgcg, cgcgag within chip-seq binding loci. to do that we construct the frequency distribution of the e-box sequences around the central nucleotide of chip-seq-defined c-myc biding loci . to identify the region of the e-box localization within binding loci, we narrowed the scan region with ±  <dig> bp  and ±  <dig> bp  around the center of c-myc binding locus .

in total,  <dig> chip-seq c-myc binding loci with the peak values  <dig> and higher were found. we found that the number of chip-seq loci containing the e-boxes in ±  <dig> bp region is  <dig>  and in ±  <dig> bp region is  <dig> , respectively. these results suggest that c-myc binding loci are strongly enriched with e-box sequences: we found that 55%  loci of the ±  <dig> bp region  and 61%  loci of ±  <dig> bp region  are e-box-positive. each of these regions exhibits at least one copy of the three specific c-myc e-boxes or .

each frequency distribution on figure 5c shows a similar trend to increase number of binding loci when the peak height decreases. for example in ±  <dig> bp regions , the number of the binding loci containing e-boxes with overlap peak values  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> were  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig>  respectively. the low- and moderate- avidity bss with peak values from  <dig> to  <dig> include the major fraction ) of the binding loci containing e-boxes found in the chip-seq library. we also observed that the number of binding loci containing only one of three e-box sequences increases when the binding avidity decreases . these trends are in agreement with predictions of our model of tfbs binding .

it has been shown that relatively high avidity tfbss could be preferentially located nearby transcription start site  of the target genes and overlap with cpg island  <cit> . it is also true for a large number of low- and moderate- avidity c-myc bss in the genome of human b-cells  <cit> . we observed that for mouse ec c-myc chip-seq data  <cit> , e-box-positive chip-seq binding loci are also often localized in the putative promoter regions of target genes. we found that  <dig> %  c-myc binding loci with peak height  <dig> and larger are localized within ±  <dig> kb tss region of  <dig> refseq genes  . we count also the number of c-myc binding loci containing e-boxes and being around ±  <dig> kb of tss. 68%  of c-myc binding loci around ±  <dig> kb of tss contain at least one e-box in ±  <dig> bp around the centre of c-myc binding loci while 32%  of c-myc binding loci have no e-boxes . when we extend the region from ±  <dig> bp to be ±  <dig> bp around the centre of c-myc binding loci, percent of c-myc binding loci around ±  <dig> kb of tss contain at least one e-box increase to 76%  and percent of c-myc binding loci without e-boxes leave 24%. these results easily demonstrate strong association of the e-box-positive binding loci with gene target promoter regions. perhaps, the most of c-myc target genes in mouse ec cell genome should be considered as direct gene targets, because alternative e-boxes  also found in the c-myc binding loci with high frequency.

interestingly, 28-30% of c-myc binding loci containing at least one e-box sequence exhibit low- or moderate- avidity  c-myc binding . these results support the prediction of our probabilistic model  that, in low- or moderate- avidity binding could be considered as true c-myc binding sites. however information about conserved motifs and other regulatory regions are required for indentifying putative true binding sites in low- or moderate- avidity of binding. by our analysis, e-boxes positive binding loci often overlapped with cpg island region which are co-occurred with c-myc bss  <cit> . the loci with peak height > <dig> are overlapped with cpg island in 82%  cases ; e-box-positive relatively low- and moderate- binding avidity  loci are also overlapped with cpg islands of the putative gene targets in 75%  cases. the genes having this moderate avidity bs might be considered as strong candidates for further bioinformatics analysis and experimental validation.

c-myc binding loci could be represented by multiple copies of e-box sequences
we found that binding loci could be represented by multiple copies of e-box sequences:  <dig> binding loci of ±  <dig> bp regions are represented by  <dig> e-box sequences  e-boxes per locus) , and  <dig> binding loci of ±  <dig> bp regions are represented by  <dig> e-box sequences  e-boxes per locus) .

a case-study of multiple occurrence of c-myc e-boxes in chip-seq –defined promoter regions of embryonic sc-related genes
it was shown that the tfbs found in chip-seq and chip-pet study of c-myc have a potential to stimulate embryonic sc-specific gene expression  <cit> . in this section, we shall consider the examples of association between binding avidity level and potential relation of nearby genes with stem-cell specific activity. 

fk <dig> binding protein  <dig>  belongs to the family of immuneglobulins named for their ability to bind immunosuppressive drugs, also known as peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerases, and also with chaperones   <cit> . fk <dig> also plays an important role in cancer tumors growth and chemoresistance through regulating signal transduction of the nf-kappab pathway  <cit> . the expression and activity of nf-kappab is comparatively low in undifferentiated embryonic cells es cells, but increases during differentiation of the es cells  <cit> . due to this finding we could suggest that c-myc binds to the low avidity bss in the promoter region of fkbp <dig> and, through a modification of expression level of this gene, can provide a regulation of nf-kappab pathway in mouse es cell. interestingly, high, moderate, and relatively low avidity c-myc bss in the promoter regions of wee <dig>  npm <dig>  and fkbp <dig> genes have their binding association scores correlating with chip-seq c-myc binding avidity. binding association score estimates the genomic distance between a bs and a gene tss  <cit> . additional file  <dig> contains the data demonstrating that wee <dig> could be under promoter regulating activity of oct <dig>  c-myc, and n-myc, while npm <dig> could be under promoter activity of c-myc only. however, although fkbp <dig> shows a moderate binding association score with c-myc and stat <dig>  fkbp <dig> expression is strongly associated with nanog and n-myc promoter activity. these results suggest that all three genes could be under the transcriptional control of c-myc and, additionally, that wee <dig> and fkbp <dig> could be associated with es-cell specific expression.

discussion
in this work, we studied statistical characteristics of protein-dna binding events for the eleven stem cell- related transcription factors bound in the genome of mouse embryonic stem cells e <dig> and detected by chip-seq assay  <cit> . several methods for chip-seq data analysis have been recently developed  <cit> . however, an appropriate mathematical model of tf-dna binding in chip-seq binding assay and statistical evaluation of the sensitivity of the methods has been not developed. several approaches to quantitative identification of individual tf-bound loci have been recently developed, however overall binding events for specific dna loci including low- and moderate- avidity tfbs at the genome scale have been out of systematic consideration.

our previous analysis of different chip-base tf-dna binding datasets  <cit>  suggested that the mixture probability distribution model  could reflect a common property of tf-dna binding events in different cells in different experimental conditions. this model allowed us to estimate the specificity of chip-based tf-dna binding events for several tfs. in the present study, we develop a mathematical model of tf-dna binding-dissociation events in both tf-specific and tf-in specific genomic loci and use this model to estimate a number of essential parameters of statistical distributions observed in chip-seq assays. we include in our consideration the binding events of tfs in the entire range of their avidity to their binding loci from very high to very low. we focused on several practically important parameters closely related to analysis of the empirical tf-dna binding distributions: t, se, sp, p <dig>  and ntot . interestingly, for all tf binding data, the parameter  of the k-w function equals to or slightly smaller than  <dig>  it suggests that the waring probability function could be used as good approximation of k-w function for analysis of empirical frequency distributions of chip-seq binding. another interesting finding: for tf-dna binding-dissociation process in the mouse genome the rate of preferential dissociation equals to or little bit larger than the rate of preferential binding.

we found that the parameters of the mixture distribution are sensitive to 1) the sample size  m, 2) the proportion of nonspecific sequence reads in the sample, 3) the sampling model and 4) the analytical models and the computational algorithm used for the parameterization of the distribution of tf-dna bes. we have demonstrated that skewed shape and sample size-dependence is a common property of a specific tf-dna binding distributions  <cit> . similar results we obtain here for  <dig> chip-seq samples derive from mouse embryonic scs. strongly positive values of parameter β in the gdp model describing tf-dna binding in specific loci were found in all tf libraries ). parameter j of the truncated gdp function reflects the maximal observed number of bes of the gdp model. this parameter positively correlates with the sample size m  <cit> . these results agree with previous findings in chip-pet tf-dna binding assay  <cit> .

the values of observed and computationally predicted parameters of the statistical distribution k are found very close to each other for all chip-seq tf libraries . using  <dig> available chip-seq tf-dna binding datasets, we revisited and improved the estimates of the levels of sensitivity and specificity of the tf-dna bes.

our mixture probabilistic model allows us to estimate the specificity cut-off value for chip-seq library and also estimates the fraction of specific tf-dna binding loci for tfs in a chip-seq data. our probabilistic model estimates also the specificity threshold, which value often is close or more stronger than estimates by chip-qpcr assay. table  <dig> shows that for all  <dig> library our model  models provides >94% specificity. thus, we conclude that the basic concept of mixture skewed scale-dependent distribution, originally developed for chip-pet data analysis  <cit> , can be applicable to chip-seq data.

we conclude that a model of random occurrence of dna fragment clusters in the genome is not appropriate for quantitative determination of critical threshold of binding specificity in chip-based genome-wide binding analyses, including chip-seq. this conclusion is in agreement with recent computational simulations of the frequency distributions of tf-dna bes in chip-seq data  <cit> , where local background noise for stat <dig> tf chip-seq data  <cit>  was modelled.

we developed a simulation model of unbiased identification of specificity of 'problematic' chip-seq loci. the method could be used to optimize the experimental design of chip-q-pcr experiments.

experimental data, as it is demonstrated in this work, has noise- enriched bes accumulated mainly below the specificity threshold values .

our probabilistic model shows that at the conventional specificity threshold % , the fraction of high-avidity specific sequences and tf binding loci containing these sequences are surprisingly low in all studied libraries. these results suggest that the major fraction of true binding sites could not be detected by the chip-seq method without additional experimental validation and rigorous bioinformatics and extensive statistical analysis of data.

according to our model prediction, the number of low- and moderate- avidity tfbss should monotonously increase when the number of unique overlapping chip-seq dna fragments in a binding locus becomes smaller. to validate these predictions, we used motif-discovery program nminfer to identify a position weighted matrix  of c-myc motifs in the chip-seq binding loci. our bioinformatics and statistical analyses revealed that the moderate avidity bss with peak values  <dig> to  <dig> include the major fraction ) of the e-box-containing tfbss found in the chip-seq library. we also observed that the number of bss, containing each of the three major c-myc e-box sequences and their combinations, monotonously increases when the binding avidity decreases . all these trends are in agreement with predictions of our model of tfbs binding . thus, in combination with motif-finding techniques  our modelling approach allowed us to identify the loci of many thousands of novel bss with characterized with low- and moderate- avidity of tf. moreover, the number of undetected low- and moderate- avidity specific tfbss was estimated, which addresses common problem of sensitivity of a given chip-seq assay for a given tf in cells under given experimental conditions. we show that although chip-seq is a powerful technique still it produces essentially incomplete information about the low- and moderate- avidity tf- dna binding events in the complex  genomes.

our mathematical modelling of the mixture strong and weak tf-dna binding and sequence analysis of genome-wide binding data suggests that integration of these approaches could help to reveal many new target genes for c-myc and for other studied tfs. for instance, best-fit k-w function predicts in total  <dig> nanog bss in the genome of e <dig> cells: 20% of these  <dig> nanog bss were non-observed in the chip-seq library and 60% of the bss were predicted by the model in the noise-rich be set. these model-based and data-driven predictions of nanog bss could be validated in case study experiments. a functional significance of such low- and moderate- avidity bss for putative target genes might be investigated in a near future.  

the most important thing that our results suggest that low- and moderate- affinity bss could have biologically meaningful functional roles. however, biological role of the enormous number of the moderate- and low- avidity bss for tf is unknown. we speculate that these bindings could be used in the nucleus to storage large number diverse tfs and their cofactors at quasi-stationary and thermodynamically-defined states at vicinity of double-stranded dna. such weak, unstable and multiple protein-dna bindings might be use by a cell for recruitment and redistribution of specific tf molecules along the double strand dna depending from external and internal regulatory signals. we also speculate that the strength of tf-dna binding-dissociation could be significantly modulated by cooperative interactions among tfs and dna-binding signals.

for all studied tf library a relatively large fraction of low to moderate binding loci was not detected at all . so the estimation of p <dig>  by k-w model, is an informative measure of the incompleteness of experimental data. chip-seq- derived frequency of dna-tf bes can be fitted well with truncated k-w probability function and thus, allows us to estimate all specific tfbss  which could be found in the library and also to estimate the total number of tfbss  entire genome.

however, father analysis of sensitivity and robustness of estimates and extrapolations of the probabilistic model of tf-dna binding model and analysis more complete and large chip-seq datasets might be important for robust and accurate parameterization of our models and its applications.

CONCLUSIONS
we proposed a probabilistic model of tf-dna binding process at the genome level and based on the model we developed a computational method which allows us to 'de-noise' chip-seq datasets and to estimate the specificity and the sensitivity of chip-seq assays.

goodness-of fit analysis of gdp and k-w functions suggests that the sensitivity problem has not yet been technically resolved by the chip-based methods, including chip-seq. tfbs motif finding analysis supports our results. due to the proposed improvements in the sensitivity and the specificity of chip-seq assay, functional roles of an extremely large number of low/moderate avidity tf binding loci in the mammalian genomes can now be investigated. after these studies the models of transcriptional regulatory network in embryonic cells and other cell types should be carefully revised.

the numbers of the low/moderate- and high- avidity specific tf bss are estimated here for all the studied data sets. we suggest that many low- and moderate- avidity bss have biologically meaningful functional roles. since in the previous studies only high avidity tf bss could be reliably detected by chip-seq assays, identification of other binding sites and elucidation their functional role in genome is a great imperative goal for biotechnology, computational biology and functional genomics.

it is likely that our approach could also be applied to the analysis of high-resolution chip-based generated profiles of chromatin chemical modifications  <cit>  in mammalian genomes. our work provides a theoretical framework for a comprehensive computational prediction and a robust experimental identification of tfbss  when low- and moderate- avidity sequences are over-represented in chip-derived sequence samples.

