BACKGROUND
developing a new drug is an expensive and time-consuming process that is subject to a variety of regulations such as drug toxicity monitoring and therapeutic efficacy. meanwhile, there are thousands of fda-approved drugs in the market and drugs in later phases of clinical trials. finding the potential application in other therapeutic categories of those fda-approved drugs by predicting their targets, known as drug repositioning, is an efficient and time-saving method in drug discovery  <cit> . additionally, predicting interactions between drugs and target proteins can help decipher the underlying biological mechanisms. therefore, there is a strong incentive to develop powerful statistical methods that are capable of detecting these potential drug-protein interactions effectively.

various methods have been proposed to address the drug-target prediction problems in silico. one common method is to predict the drugs interacting with a single given protein based on the chemical structure similarity in a classic classification framework. keiser et al.  <cit>  proposed a method to predict targets of proteins based on the chemical similarity of their ligands. this kind of approach, however, does not take advantage of the information in the protein domain. another widely-used method is molecular docking  <cit>  which requires the non-trivial modeling of 3d structure of the target protein. unfortunately the 3d structures of many proteins are not available  <cit> , e.g., very few gpcrs have been crystallized.

recently, some new approaches are proposed to perform drug-target prediction using both the chemical  and genomic  spaces information  <cit> . in  <cit>  the two spaces are encoded together by defining a pair wise kernel which is then fed to the support vector machine  for classification. the drawback of this kernel framework is that there will be a huge number of samples to be classified  which poses significant computational complexity. another problem is that the negative drug-protein pairs are selected randomly without experimental confirmation. yamanishi et al.  <cit>  developed a bipartite graph model where the chemical and genomic spaces as well as the drug-protein interaction network are integrated into a pharmacological space. in the bipartite model, the known interactions in the training data are labeled as + <dig> while all other unknown drug-protein pairs in the training data are assumed as non-interactions with label  <dig>  then three different classifiers are available: new drug candidate versus known target protein, known drugs versus new target protein and new drug candidate versus new target protein candidate. more recently, bleakley and yamanishi  <cit>  proposed a state-of-the-art bipartite local model  by transforming edge-prediction problems into well-known binary classification problems. nevertheless, the first flaw of the bipartite model, like the kernel svm method  <cit> , is that the unknown interactions of the drugs and proteins in the training data are all assumed non-interaction and cannot be inferred. we also prefer only one classifier to predict whether one drug-protein pair interacts or not. lastly, all the methods did not utilize a wealth of unlabeled information to assist prediction.

in this paper, a semi-supervised learning method - laplacian regularized least square   <cit>  is employed to utilize both the small amount of available labeled data and the abundant unlabeled data together in order to give the maximum generalization ability from the chemical and genomic spaces.

further, the standard laprls is improved by incorporating a new kernel established from the known drug-protein interaction network . in our framework, the known interactions are labeled as + <dig> and all other unknown pairs are labeled as  <dig> to indicate they are going to be predicted. two classifiers are trained on the drug and protein domains respectively and then are combined together to give the final prediction. compared with a naive weighted profiled method, the proposed drug-protein interaction methods based on laprls and netlaprls obtain better results than using the labeled data alone. and the proposed netlaprls which incorporates drug-protein network information provides superior performance than standard laprls.

RESULTS
cross validation results analysis
the weighted profile method, standard laprls and netlaprls were evaluated on the four classes of target proteins including enzymes, ion channels, gpcrs and nuclear receptors. we carried out a ten-fold cross-validation by splitting the golden standard interaction dataset into  <dig> subsets. each fold was then taken in turn as a test set and the remaining nine folds are used as training set. for example, there are  <dig> drugs and  <dig> proteins in the nuclear receptor data set with  <dig> known interactions. in each cross-validation, the  <dig> drug-protein pairs are used as the training data while the remaining  <dig>  drug-protein pairs including the  <dig> positive interactions are designated as the testing data set. thus the training sample is very small compared with the testing data set. this motivates us to employ the semi-supervised method that can utilize the information from the unlabeled samples to predict drug-protein interaction. the performance is evaluated using receiver operating curve  analysis  <cit> . for simplicity, we set βd = βp =  <dig> , γd <dig> = γp <dig> =  <dig>  and γd <dig> = γp <dig> =  <dig>  for netlaprls. these parameters can be better selected by a further cross validation. if γd <dig> and γp <dig> are set to be  <dig>  netlaprls becomes the standard laprls method. table  <dig> shows the auc , sensitivity and specificity. the sensitivity and specificity are defined as tp/ and tn/, respectively. the cutoff for calculation of sensitivity and specificity is set to select the top pairs with the same number of the test set.

the auc is the area under the roc curve, normalized to  <dig>  the cutoff for sensitivity and specificity is set to select the number of the interactions in the test data.

from table  <dig> and figure  <dig>  we can see that laprls and netlaprls methods, which use unlabeled information, provided better performance with respect to auc score and sensitivity. among the four data sets, the two semi-supervised learning methods provided the highest sensitivity scores in enzyme data set because there are most known interactions. the known interaction number is a key factor of our semi-supervised methods since the testing data set is much larger than training data set in our cross-validation setup. the proposed netlaprls which incorporates the drug-protein interaction network information obtained better result than the standard laprls, especially with respective to the sensitivity which is dramatically improved. on the four data sets, the sensitivity from netlaprls performed better than laprls by 42%, 100%, 108% and 31% respectively and, demonstrated the importance of network information. the improvement in sensitivity of netlaprls over laprls is most significant in ion channel data set because the inner-connection in the ion channel drug-protein interaction network is most complete according to the proportion of unreachable paths between drugs and proteins  <cit> . yildirim et al.  <cit>  concluded that there are an overabundance of 'follow-on' drugs from the topological analyses of current drug-protein network, that is, drugs that target already known proteins, i.e., me-too drugs. with the drug-protein network being completed fastly by high-throughput experimental and computational approaches, this network information is becoming critical in drug discovery.

comparison with bipartite local model  <cit> 
recently, bleakley and yamanishi  <cit>  extended yamanishi's bipartite method  <cit>  to bipartite local model which is considered as state-of-the-art. the predictions from the drug domain and protein domain using svm are combined together to form a final prediction by a maximum operation. we also employed this kind of integration by a mean operation. however, we used a semi-supervised learning method to handle the classification with small samples labeled which is difficult for traditional supervised classifiers. for instance, in the above cross-validation experiment of the nuclear receptor data set, the semi-supervised classifier is trained on  <dig> positive samples in order to make predictions on  <dig>  unlabeled samples. in the blm, the ten-fold cross-validation is performed on the drug and protein domains separately. the known interactions between the selected drugs and proteins are labeled as interaction while interactions between the drugs and proteins for training are regarded as non-interaction. though we consider the undetermined relationship between drug-protein pair should not be labeled as non-interaction, we adopt the cross validation method in the blm for the sake of comparison in the same condition. the comparison is performed in terms of auc, area under precision-recall , sensitivity, specificity and ppv as shown in table  <dig>  sensitivity, specificity and ppv are calculated when the top one percentile in the prediction score is chosen as a cutoff because high-confidence prediction results are more useful in practical applications. we observed that blm method outperformed our netlaprls in auc and aupr scores, but the performances of our netlaprls are comparable with blm in sensitivity, specificity and ppv.

the auc and aupr scores are normalized to  <dig>  the cutoff for sensitivity, specificity and ppv is set to choose the top one percentile in the predictoin score as positive.

semi-supervised learning method is superior to the traditional supervised learning method when labeled samples are small along with large unlabeled samples available. in this cross validation setup, the unknown interactions are labeled as non-interaction in the training data set. so our netlaprls did not get good results in auc and aupr scores compared with blm because most of samples are labeled. however, netlaprls still gave good prediction results in sensitivity, specificity and ppv. this indicated that netlaprls can provide a list of drug-protein interaction candidates with high confidence.

enzyme
ion channel
gpcrs
nuclear receptor
CONCLUSIONS
in this work, we presented a semi-supervised learning method netlaprls for drug-protein interaction prediction by integrating information from chemical space, genomic space and drug-protein interaction network space. our method has no use of the negative samples and predicts the interaction of each drug-protein pair. the results we obtained when predicting human drug-target interaction networks involving enzymes, ion channels, gpcrs, and nuclear receptors demonstrated the superior performance of netlaprls. furthermore, recently added drug-target interactions to the kegg immediately allowed us to confirm some strongly-predicted drug-target interactions on the four data sets obtained using our method. this enhances the strength of our proposed method for realistic drug-target prediction application.

the ideal way to use semi-supervised learning for predicting compound-protein interactions is to incorporate information from different biological spaces by a multi-task kernel and is fed to classical semi-supervised learning. however, the implementation of such a large scale semi-supervised learning method will be computationaly costly. our future work, will incorporate more sophisticated and biologically relevant information into the kernel similarity, such as side effect  <cit> , to improve the prediction accuracy.

