BACKGROUND
the advent of sequencing technology has brought about the unprecedented ability to sequence individual single cells. now, the distinct gene expression profiles of seemingly similar yet genetically heterogeneous subpopulations of cells within different tissue types can be elucidated with the use of single-cell sequencing technology. the study of such subpopulations within tumours is especially important in the study of differential reactivity of patients to drug treatments and that of acquired drug resistance within cancer patients  <cit> . the complex underlying transcriptomic dynamics elucidated will enhance our understanding of the distinct gene expression signatures of different carcinomas or subpopulations within disparate tumour tissues which will ultimately aid in the optimization of cancer treatments.

a major challenge, however remains, is that of a suitable computational analytic pipeline for the analysis of single-cell rna-seq transcriptomic data. to address this problem, this paper proposes the identification of the unique gene expression profile within each subpopulation through traditional statistical methodology, geneset enrichment analysis , machine learning algorithms where genes identified are subsequently used to build predictive classifiers for cell type prediction. computational analysis of rna-seq transcriptomic data using machine learning algorithms, particularly that of supervised learning algorithms, like rule-based machine learning techniques  <cit> , support vector machine -based  <cit>  and network-based approaches  <cit> , is not new. however, this paper is the first to utilize a combination of two different machine learning algorithms ) on single-cell rna-seq transcriptomic data to identify the key signatures of different cell types for cell type prediction. using single-cell rna-seq expression data from neocortical cells and those of neural progenitor cells as inputs, we have identified a set of  <dig> key genes which optimally differentiates developing neocortical cells and those of neural progenitor cells.

further, relevance of the differentially expressed genes in neuronal cell differentiation were also investigated using network-based approaches where the gene regulatory networks  inferred elucidated the potential underlying interactions/functions of the key hub genes  which could be further validated in wet-lab experimentation  <cit> . in summary, this paper described a novel computational pipeline for the study of single-cell rna-seq transcriptomic data where key genes identified were used, with high accuracy, to predict distinct neuronal cell subtypes where such a system could be used to uncover the different subpopulations within a newly sequenced brain tissue. in addition, downstream network studies lend a systems-level relevance where potential underlying relationships are unravelled and potentially be used for targeted for treatment in neuronal developmental diseases.

RESULTS
prefiltering of genes
the summary of the methodology employed in this paper is summarized in fig.  <dig> fig.  <dig> workflow for data analysis carried out in this paper. *all genes refers to the set of genes filtered by expression values and ^ selected genes refers to the optimal set of genes identified by geneset enrichment analysis , statistical and machine-learning approaches 




raw data, downloaded from the ncbi databased, was filtered  to obtain a total  <dig>  genes which represents the dataset denoted by “all genes”. a total of  <dig> samples  were used as training data to svm and rf algorithms. significance of the cell types assignment is further validated using pvclust  <cit> , which employs a multiple bootstrap  resampling algorithm to calculate the approximately unbiased  probability values for cluster distinctions which is shown in red in fig.  <dig> fig.  <dig> clustering of  <dig> neuronal cells. the approximately unbiased  probability value at each node is shown in red font. there are four distinct clusters  with an au higher than  <dig>  box <dig> comprises of mainly npcs while boxes 2– <dig> primarily consists of neuronal cells only




svm and rf-based classification of neuronal cell types on all expressed genes
each set of gene expression data, extracted from different feature selection methods, was used to train two different machine learning  models, namely a svm and a rf classifier. the classification was reduced to a two-class problem where the predictor was designed to identify potential neocortical neuronal cells from npcs.

due to the limited number of samples,  <dig>  used in this study, the data was not separated into training and testing set for the construction of svm-based classifiers. instead, leave-one-out  cross validation was carried out. however, this was deemed unnecessary for rf as classifiers were built by aggregating a large number of different decision trees, predictors built with the random forests algorithm is expected to have low variance and low bias.

svm and rf classifiers built with the filtered high dimensional single-cell rna-seq expression dataset, consisting of more than  <dig> transcripts , yields an accuracy of  <dig>  and  <dig> % respectively . it seems like classifiers built with all transcripts, sans those of low expression, are able produce classifiers of a reasonably high accuracy, however, the quality of such classifiers needs to be co-ordinately investigated. to this end, the matthews correlation coefficient  was used to validate the quality of the classifiers constructed. a coefficient of  <dig> represents a prefect prediction while that of  <dig> indicates a classifier producing predictions similar to random prediction. the svm classifiers were far superior to the cognate rf classifiers having a mcc of  <dig>  and  <dig>  respectively. thus, there is a need for additional feature transcript selection process to enhance both the accuracy and the quality of the constructed classifiers. additionally, the construction of classifiers based on all transcripts are computational inefficient and the inclusion of large number of “noisy genes” will obscure important underlying signatures of each phenotypic class due to data overfitting and this will greatly limit the accuracy and quality of the classifiers  <cit> . on a more biological note, such a method fails to identify a subset of key genes which might have important biological applications in novel biomarker discovery.table  <dig> genes/features selected by disparate feature selection techniques

feature selection techniquesa


afeature selection is based on five different methodologies based on machine learning algorithms  and also that of traditional differentially expressed genes , t-test based analysis  and genes in deregulated pathways 


all genesb

the accuracy of the svm predictors were obtained from loo cross validation. svm and rf classifiers were constructed with each set of data listed in table 2



aall percentages are rounded off to three significant figures


btranscripts with a total expression of zero and/or having more than six samples with expression levels less than one were excluded


^matthews correlation coefficient  rounded to  <dig> decimal places




svm and rf-based classification of neuronal cell types with enhanced feature selection
in this study, a total of five different feature selection techniques were employed in for dimensionality reduction and they are pathway-based selection by gsva, statistical-based selection by srap and t-test approaches and ml-based selection by svm-rfe and rf-based positive mda approaches. the number of transcripts selected by each feature elimination method can be found in table  <dig>  additionally, the corresponding accuracies and mcc of each classifier are listed in table  <dig> 

the feature selection process decreased the number of transcripts analysed by ~60% to more than 95%. the best classifier constructed was that with features selected by svm-rfe. this selection gave the best prediction accuracies and mcc, 100% and  <dig> respectively, for both the svm and rf classifiers. gsea has enabled scientists to identify sets or group of deregulated genes where preliminary insights to alternation of cellular mechanisms under different biological conditions can be studied  <cit> . given the usefulness of such a methodology, in this paper, we explore the impact on gsea gene selection and prediction accuracy. classifiers built with on gsva-enriched genes did not considerably increase the prediction accuracy of the classifiers as a mere  <dig> % increase in accuracy of the svm predictor was obtained.

nevertheless, it is interesting to note that rf classifiers generally have a lowered level of accuracy and a poor mcc value as compared to the cognate svm models. for example, the rf classifier constructed using rf-based positive mda gene selection approach have an accuracy of  <dig> , ~23% lower than that of the svm classifier built with the same data. also, the svm classifier produces a perfect predictor  while that of the rf classifier performs no better than random prediction . this observation could be an indication of the short-coming of tree-based ml methods to build high quality classifiers with single-cell rna-seq expression data.

network-level differences between npcs and neuronal cells and their biological relevance in neuronal development
gene regulatory networks  among these transcripts inferred from rna-seq expression profiles of svm-rfe genes are useful in the investigation of system-level differences between the two cell types. hub-genes  identified in grns might play potentially key roles in the maintenance of a particular cellular state. thus, “differential hub genes ” that are hub-genes/transcripts in neuronal cells  but not hub-genes in npcs  could have important roles to differentiate the two cell types.

in order to investigate network-level difference  between the two cell types, grns were inferred  in neuronal cells , npcs  from rna-seq expression profiles and the structure of the two grns were subsequently compared . as observed, a large number of regulatory interactions are activated in one cell type but are not activated in the other cell type . for example, several interactions of the homeobox protein orthopedia  gene  are activated in neuronal cells but not in npcs and this is indicative that otp gene is a potentially important gene which is possibly regulated in neuronal cells but not in npcs.fig.  <dig> grn in npcs  neuronal cells  and differential grn between the two cell types. a grn in npcs. nodes represent transcripts, while links between two nodes represent regulatory interactions between two transcripts in npcs. gene regulatory interactions with high confidence score  in npcs are shown in the diagram. b grn in neuronal cells. nodes represent transcripts, while links between two nodes represent regulatory interactions between two transcripts in neuronal cells. gene regulatory interactions with high confidence score  in neuronal cells are shown in the diagram. c differential grn between two cell lines. nodes are transcripts. red links represent gene regulatory interactions that are activated in neuronal cells but not activated in npcs, while blue links represents those activated in npcs but not in neuronal cells. in this diagram, we assumed that a regulatory interaction is activated in neuronal cells  but is not activated in npcs , if difference in confidence score between the two cell types is greater than  <dig> , eg, an interaction whose confidence scores are  <dig>  and  <dig>  in neuronal cells and npcs, respectively. note that otp is a representative dhg  and thus the gene is highlighted in red




in order to identify dhgs between the two cell types, we used a representative network metric, “degree”, which is defined as the number of links to the transcript. for weighted network, d
i, degree of a gene i is defined as, d
j = ∑j = 1n
w
i,j, where n is number of transcripts in a grn and w
i,j is weight  for a regulatory interaction between two genes i and j. if a transcript have high-degree in a cell type, such transcript is defined as hub genes/transcripts in the cell type. in order to identify dhgs, for each of genes, we calculated difference in degrees between two cell types. for example, degree of mrps <dig> in neuronal cells and that in npcs are  <dig>  and  <dig>  respectively, and the degree difference of mps is  <dig>  . then, we ranked the transcripts according to their degree difference . in table  <dig>  highly ranked transcripts  are dhgs and may play an important role in differentiating neuronal cells from npcs.table  <dig> degree of difference between neuronal cells and npcs in different genes


adegree of difference is corrected to three significant figures




among the top ranked dhgs, we identified two potential key transcripts  and otp) which could be responsible for the differentiation of npcs from neuronal cells. mrps <dig> is reported to be important in the maintenance of an undifferentiated state as overexpression of mrps <dig> retards cell proliferation and delays cell cycle, helping cells maintain their undifferentiated state  <cit> . similarly, the protein otp is reportedly expressed in the hypothalamus during mammalian embryonic brain development and is a key determinant underlying fezi and pac1-mediated of hypothalamic neural differentiation  <cit> . these results indicate that the putative transcripts present within the top ranked dhgs could act as candidate targets for further experimental validation of their role in neuronal development. it is pertinent to note that as shown in table  <dig>  several of the svm-rfe genes did not have significant difference in network property  between the two cell types. this can signify that at the network level, all the svm-rfe genes  may not play biologically relevant role in differentiating the two cell types.

discussion
the advancement of high throughput sequencing technologies has brought about an unprecedented ability for scientists to analyze the highly complex eukaryotic transcriptome by rna-seq. as compared to its predecessors, rna-seq has a very high signal-to-noise ratio and very large dynamic range. reproducibility of rna-seq sequencing is also high and is able to provide high correlation across biological and technical replicates . further, single-cell rna-seq techniques were developed, allowing finer insights to be elucidated with respect to the dynamics of disparate cellular differentiation, responses to stimulation and the stochastic nature of transcription within individual cells within a tissue or a tumour. though it is still expensive to carry out rna-seq sequencing in the current paradigm, it is expected that the sequencing cost will significantly decrease within the next few years  <cit> .

in view of the impending information overflow, there is a concurrent need to develop more efficient techniques for the analysis such big data, especially for the construction of predictive models which can aid the identification and classification of different cell types as described in this paper. this work is one of the first to analyse single-cell rna-seq profiles for the construction of predictive classifiers for neuronal cells and npc. also, classification accuracy of different models, built with features selected by different methods , have also been critically assessed. further, we integrated the classification results with a network inference pipeline to infer potential regulatory network amongst genes/transcripts  and identify network signatures for specific cell types.

four key insights were obtained from this piece of work. first, transcripts selected by ml algorithm build better classifiers with enhanced accuracy, up to 100%, as compared to de genes selected by traditional methods . second, models built with differentially expressed transcripts selected from biological pathway-based methods  proved to be inferior to that of models built with highly deregulated genes identified by traditional statistical means . while pathway-based techniques are able to lend biological relevance to selected genes, genes selected by such methodology might not be able to capture gene expression signature of the disparate cell types studied. thirdly, accuracy differs between classifiers built by different ml algorithms where rf, as compared to svm, is unable to produce high accuracy for the high dimensional data analysed in this paper. finally, the system-level analysis of the set optimal transcripts, using grn inference analysis, is useful in the identification of hub transcripts which defines the different cell types investigated. candidate transcripts identified by grns have potential biological correlates which are important in providing biological insights to cellular development. it is believed that such a workflow is extensible and applicable to other single-cell rna-seq expression profiles like that of the study of the cancer progression within the highly heterogeneous cancer cells within a tumour  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
the advancement in sequencing technologies have always brought along immense computational challenges to accurately and rapidly analyse the large amount of data generated from such experiments. single-cell sequencing will inevitably become the gold standard for the study of genetic/transcriptomic aberrations, thus, concurrent efforts need to be placed in parallel to devise computational pipelines which can effectively analyse such big data. in addition to the use of legacy algorithms passed down for the era of microarray data analysis, there is a need to inject novelty and creativity in the analysis of single-cell rna-seq data. this can be achieved using the combination of machine learning algorithms like svm and rf and network reconstruction algorithms as reported in this paper. we have demonstrated that predictors built from transcripts selected using machine-learning based feature selection techniques which outperforms the commonly used statistical techniques or geneset-based approaches. also, the novel incorporation of network reconstruction techniques have led to the identification of existing interactions and also potentially new interaction networks are identified which can be further validated in a smaller number of wet lab experiments as candidate biomarker genes. we believe that such a pipeline is extensible to other single-cell rna-seq datasets, including those of tumor samples where the intricate transcriptomic complexity of the highly heterogeneous tumor can be unravelled for the design of personalized treatment for individual patient.

