BACKGROUND
vampire bats are the only mammals that feed exclusively on blood. the common vampire bat, desmodus rotundus, is one of three vampire species . typically, d. rotundus only feeds on a single prey animal on any one night. the blood meal lasts from  <dig> min up to  <dig> hour during which time the vampire bat drinks between  <dig>  times and  <dig>  times its body weight in blood. despite the abundance of prey animals since the start of livestock farming, vampire bats repetitively feed on the same individual whereas other individuals are ignored  <cit> . the perceptual features that guide the vampire bats' selection of prey animals and enable them to recognize an animal that they have fed on the night before remain elusive.

earlier studies revealed sensory specializations that support the extraordinary food and feeding strategies of d. rotundus: kurten and schmidt  <cit>  found pit organs in the nose of d. rotundus that are sensitive to the infrared radiation emitted by the blood-rich skin surfaces of homeothermic vertebrates. however, the detection range for this infrared emission is only  <dig> to  <dig> cm  <cit> . thus, infrared sensitivity cannot help to locate or select the prey animal but will identify a promising place to bite it. d. rotundus has a very well developed olfactory system. both anatomical  <cit>  and behavioral  <cit>  studies indicate that olfaction may play an important role in both the long-distance orientation towards potential prey and possibly the selection of individual prey animals.

the importance of passive hearing, as opposed to echolocation, for the common vampire is supported by the very low thresholds of midbrain neurons in the frequency range between  <dig> and  <dig> khz, i.e. considerably below the echolocation frequency range . moreover, these recordings have revealed neurons that are stimulated exclusively by breathing sounds  <cit> .

this study was designed to investigate the passive-hearing capabilities of the common vampire bat behaviorally; specifically, the extent to which auditory sensitivity to breathing sounds may support prey selection. vampire bats were trained to discriminate three sequences of breathing sounds recorded from three different subjects. a spectrogram of a recorded breathing sound is shown in fig.  <dig>  once the vampire bats had learned this task, additional breathing sounds, recorded under different experimental conditions from the same three subjects, were randomly interspersed. the spontaneous association of these test sounds with the learned training sounds was assessed. these psychophysical data from the vampire bats were compared to the performances of human listeners using the same experimental paradigm and stimuli. the experimental data, together with simulations of the breathing-sound task based on different sound parameters, allow the relevance of these parameters to the perceptual association of breathing sounds in both vampire bats and humans to be evaluated.

RESULTS
vampire behavior
the percentage spontaneous associations of nine unknown test sounds with the correct subject are shown in the two panels of fig.  <dig> for the two vampire bats, respectively. the data show that the vampire bats reliably associated these test sounds with the correct subject . the vampire bats were even able to recognize the recordings under physical strain, although performance dropped markedly for this test-sound condition. the importance of passive hearing  is reflected in the very low auditory thresholds in the frequency range of breathing sounds. the absolute thresholds for long-duration narrow-band noise stimuli are shown as a function of the band-pass center frequency by the fine lines and circles in fig.  <dig>  data are averaged across three vampire bats; error bars represent standard errors. the bold line in fig.  <dig> shows the averaged breathing-sound spectra. the gray lines represent standard errors. these data show that the high auditory sensitivity of the vampire bat in the frequency range between  <dig> and  <dig> khz is well suited to the detection and analysis of the breathing sounds we recorded. owing to the noisy, broadband nature of breathing sounds, it is not to be expected that breathing sounds from other mammals of comparable size differ markedly from human breathing sounds in their magnitude spectra.

human behavior
breathing-sound classification by human listeners is shown in fig.  <dig> in the same format as fig.  <dig>  the human listeners were well capable of correctly associating the test sounds, recorded either in the same recording session or in another session under a similar degree of physical strain of the subjects. however, unlike the vampire bats, the naïve listeners  completely failed to classify the breathing sounds recorded under physical strain correctly. instead, all sounds recorded under physical strain were consistently associated with subject # <dig>  this subject used the highest breathing frequency in the training set. breathing frequency is simply defined as the number of breathing cycles per second. note that the human listeners went through the same training procedure as the vampire bats and scored at least as well as the vampire bats in the training condition and in the first two test conditions.

after completion of this data set, listeners were instructed to ignore breathing-frequency information but to try instead to exploit all other information. this was done because both the listeners' reports and the numerical simulations  suggested that the listeners had been trying to use breathing-frequency information to classify the breathing sounds. this instruction had obviously not been given to the vampire bats. the results obtained under this experimental condition are shown in the right panel of fig.  <dig>  while the pattern of results changed in comparison to the naïve condition, listeners still failed to associate breathing sounds recorded under physical strain correctly.

simulations
the numerical simulations of the breathing-sound association were implemented to assess whether the vampire bats' or humans' performances can be linked to a physical sound parameter. simulation results for the four extracted sound parameters are shown in the four panels of fig.  <dig>  overall, the simulation based on breathing frequency provides the best results while the power-spectrum simulation provides the worst. however, none of the simulations can correctly classify all test sounds recorded under physical strain. note the high similarity between the breathing-frequency simulation  and the performance of the naïve human listeners . this similarity supports the hypothesis that human listeners relied on breathing-frequency analysis.

these analyses were performed on the sounds as they were recorded. the audiogram of a vampire bat, however, is quite different from that of humans. to capture the possible effects of the different frequency ranges in which the bats and the humans processed the sounds, the simulations were repeated with the sounds filtered to match either the human or the vampire-bat audiogram. these simulations were only carried out for the three parameters that are potentially influenced by the filtering, namely sound-pressure level, differences in the magnitude spectrum and stimulus roughness. however, none of these parameters alone yielded significantly better predictions with the filtered sounds .

it is conceivable that the bats did not rely on a single sound parameter but on different parameters depending on which parameter yielded the strongest predictions for a given comparison of a test sound with the three training sounds. although the magnitude spectrum did not provide strong predictions for a given test sound , the stimulus roughness provided strong predictions e.g. in favour of the training-sound of subject one.

consequently, a simulation was implemented in which the model was free to choose the parameter for a given test sound that provided the strongest predictions. again, test sounds were either filtered to match the human or the vampire-bat audiogram. simulation results are shown in fig.  <dig>  while the predictions of this model are still poor when the sounds were filtered to match the human audiogram , they were quite good in predicting the bats' performance when the sounds were filtered to match the vampire-bat audiogram.

in summary, the current functional simulations suggest that the vampire bats spontaneously recruited a rather sophisticated analysis of the sounds based on multiple parameters; and they appeared to base decisions for each test sound on the sound parameter that provided the strongest discriminative capacity for comparing this test sound with the three training sounds. it appears that this analysis is more reliable when based on ultrasonic components of the sounds.

discussion
the current data show that for vampire bats, prey-generated breathing sounds could provide a reliable cue for recognizing prey individuals: during the relatively long time a vampire feeds on a prey animal, it can memorize the prey's breathing sounds and use this information to find the same prey on the following night.

breathing sounds are typically faint. the sounds we recorded from human subjects ranged between  <dig> and  <dig> db spl. this gives rise to the question: over what distance could breathing sounds be perceived and analyzed by vampire bats? considering the absolute thresholds , the frequency region most likely to be used is around  <dig> khz, where thresholds are as low as  <dig> db spl. in this frequency region, atmospheric attenuation is around  <dig>  db/m. thus, in the  absence of any masking sounds, detection of breathing sounds could work over several tens of meters. in the presence of natural masking sounds, however, the effective detection distance will depend on the level and spatial distribution of the masking sound sources.

while it is unlikely that prey recognition relies exclusively on breathing sounds  <cit> , these sounds potentially have high individual significance: vocalizations are generated by the vocal cords and filtered through the vocal tract. both the pattern of vocal-cord vibrations and the filtering are highly individual and this supports our recognition of individual voices. while breathing sounds are unvoiced, and thus do not excite the vocal cords, they will also pass the same vocal and nasal tract and may thus also mediate individually specific information. however, the sounds used in this study were emitted through the nose. it remains to be investigated to what extent the nasal acoustic tract filters breathing sounds in a similarly characteristic way. an early study confirmed that, at least for partially voiced sounds such as consonant-vowel combinations, speaker recognition is feasible on the basis of nasal co-articulation  <cit> . however, the current simulations based on the breathing-sound power spectra, and the human-psychophysical experiments, suggest that speaker recognition is difficult with purely unvoiced sounds. if nasal-tract filtering were individually specific, the resulting spectral features would result in a correct breathing-sound association in the power-spectrum simulation. the simulation results in fig. 6c show that this is not the case. also, the failure of the instructed human listeners to associate the breathing sounds recorded under physical strain argues against the use of power-spectrum information for breathing-sound recognition, at least in the audio frequency range below  <dig> khz. note that human listeners are very sensitive to changes in the spectral composition of broadband stimuli  <cit> .

qualitatively correct predictions of the vampire-bats' performance, even under the most difficult experimental condition where the test sounds had been recorded under physical strain, could be obtained with a refined simulation approach: first, the sounds were filtered to match the vampire-bat audiogram; and second, a simulation paradigm was designed that allows whichever sound parameter yields the strongest predictions to be exploited.

CONCLUSIONS
the current behavioral study shows that the common vampire bat, desmodus rotundus, is very sensitive to breathing sounds. in the three-alternative, forced-choice setup, it spontaneously associates unknown breathing sounds with the subject who emitted them. this exceptional performance is underlined by the inability of human listeners to match the vampire bats' accomplishment under the most difficult experimental condition where the sounds had been recorded under physical strain. numerical simulations show that while the human listeners relied on breathing-frequency information, the vampire bats appeared to recruit different acoustic parameters and to choose amongst these parameters depending on which provided the highest discriminative power.

on the basis of these findings, it is suggested that vampire bats can memorize and classify complex acoustic features of prey-generated breathing sounds to facilitate the identification of prey animals that they have successfully fed on before.

