BACKGROUND
defenses against pathogens and diseases have been remarkably well conserved across species, from invertebrates to vertebrates  <cit> . in particular, the innate immune system, which responds to bacteria, fungi, viruses and other parasites, is very similar even at the molecular level in such diverse phyla as mammals, insects, and even plants  <cit> . however, while molecular responses to pathogens have been the main focus of research, it has been demonstrated that behavioral responses could also serve a critical role in supporting the immune response to infection  <cit> . research in mammals suggests that immune-stimulated individuals withdraw from their healthy social mates  <cit> , which would represent an adaptive strategy to protect non-infected conspecifics  <cit> . however, it is still unclear whether alterations in social interactions represent a general and conserved mechanism implicated in the control of disease transmission within social groups.

social insects, such as honey bees, ants and termites, are ideal models for studying mechanisms regulating disease transmission in social groups. social insects provide an ideal environment for transmission of pathogens, since nests are typically environmentally controlled and there are hundreds if not thousands of potential hosts with frequent interactions, allowing for relatively easy dissemination  <cit> . furthermore, based on modeling  <cit>  and experimental studies  <cit> , the spread of disease within a colony is strongly dependent on social interactions between workers. interestingly, though honey bees are the target of a large number of pathogens  <cit> , they have substantially fewer genes associated with the innate immune response pathways compared with solitary insect species  <cit> . this suggests that honey bees may have developed alternative strategies to deal with pathogens.

social insects have evolved multiple behavioral adaptations to avoid or combat parasites and pathogen infections. one suite of behaviors involves removing infected nestmates, or avoiding the source of infection. zootermes angusticollis termites in experimentally controlled contact with spores  emit a vibratory signal that repels nestmates from the source of infection  <cit> . coptotermes termites wall off nestmates infected by nematodes . honey bees reduce the impact of pathogenic bacteria, fungi and parasitic mites through hygienic behaviors, where workers identify and remove infected larvae from the healthy brood  <cit> . honey bees also can produce a 'social fever' where workers increase temperature in the brood patch to kill larval pathogens  <cit> . a second suite of behavioral responses to infection involves altering the behavior of the infected individual to reduce the transmission of the disease. parasitized bumblebee workers stay outside overnight rather than returning to the nest and actively seek out colder temperatures  <cit> , which delays the development of the parasite. nosema-infected honey bee workers become foragers, no longer engage in in-hive tasks and brood care, and have less contact with the queen  <cit> . however, although these behavioral modifications may reduce the chances and/or speed of parasitic dissemination within the colony, they could also reflect some parasite manipulation of the host favoring its horizontal transmission to other colonies . a third behavioral modification involves altering social interactions between healthy and diseased nestmates. increased contact between healthy and infected individuals can results in 'social' vaccination of the healthy individual, increasing its immunity  <cit> . termites and ants in groups have decreased mortality from fungal infection compared with isolated individuals , suggesting that social interactions such as grooming could have some important function. virus-infected honey bee workers are the target of increased grooming  <cit> . however, increase social interactions could cause increase transmission as well  <cit> . in formica polyctena ants there is increased social contact and allogrooming from untreated ants toward their immune-challenged conspecifics, resulting in reduced locomotion of the immune-challenged individual in cage studies  <cit> . decreased locomotion of an infected individual could decrease the spread of pathogens in a colony  <cit> . these studies suggest that nestmates can distinguish healthy from unhealthy nestmates, although in many cases, colony level studies need to be performed to determine if the behavioral modifications truly decrease disease spread. furthermore mechanisms by which nestmates distinguish diseased and healthy workers are unknown.

chemical communication plays a key role in regulating social interactions in social insects. recent data confirm that cuticular hydrocarbons are involved in worker interactions and discrimination  <cit> , and are generally implicated in the inter- and intra-specific recognition in many different species, including ants  <cit> , termites  <cit> , wasps  <cit> , and bees  <cit> . social insects use cuticular hydrocarbons to distinguish between nestmates and non-nestmates, and to reject non-nestmate individuals  <cit> . hydrocarbon profiles are highly sensitive to genotype  <cit> , environment  <cit> , physiological state  <cit>  and age in social insects , suggesting that they could also be altered by immune processes. indeed, there is some evidence for chemical communication of immunological status to nestmates. parasitization by an ectoparasitic mite  significantly alters the cuticular hydrocarbon profile of emerging adult bees  <cit> , but it is still unknown whether or not such changes in chemical profiles are correlated with altered nestmate responses to parasitized bees, and if these chemical changes are caused by the host's immune responses or factors produced by the mite.

here we experimentally stimulated the immune system of honey bees, apis mellifera, by injecting bees with a solution of bacterial coat proteins, that is, lipopolysaccharides , which has the advantage of stimulating an immune response in the host without spreading any infectious agent to the healthy nestmates. lps is commonly used to stimulate immune responses in insects, and activates the jnk pathway of the innate immune system . here, we confirmed immune system activation after lps administration by measuring expression levels of an immune response gene  in the fat bodies of honey bee workers. we monitored social interactions between healthy honey bee workers and immune-challenged conspecifics. we analyzed the cuticular chemical profiles of immune-challenged and healthy individuals to determine if chemical communication can be modified by infection. finally, we treated healthy worker bees with the cuticular extracts of control or lps-injected workers and examined their interactions with untreated nestmates, to determine if the changes in the chemical profiles could indeed be responsible for the altered social interactions.

RESULTS
effects of lps treatment on expression of defensin2
we used quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction  to measure def <dig> expression levels in the workers' fat bodies to determine if lps injection activated expression of immune response genes. def <dig> expression was significantly affected by treatment  =  <dig> ; p <  <dig> ; figure 1). there were also significant differences between colonies  =  <dig> ; p =  <dig> ) but no significant colony*treatment interaction  =  <dig> ; p =  <dig> ). although saline-injection causes a significant increase in def levels compared with the sham bees, lps-injected bees had significantly higher levels of def <dig> than both sham and saline-injected bees  post-hoc tests, p <  <dig> ). thus, while rupturing the cuticle by injection still stimulates the immune system, the effect of lps is significantly larger.

effects of lps treatment on locomotion and mortality
lethality of our treatments was assessed  <dig> hours after treatment. after treatment, two out of  <dig> of the sham individuals, three out of  <dig> of the saline-injected individuals, and three out of  <dig> of the lps-injected bees died. there was no significant difference between the three treatment groups . no additional mortality was found  <dig> hours after treatment.

the behavioral effects of treatments  were individually assessed on isolated bees placed in circular arenas for  <dig> minutes. statistical analyses revealed no significant effects of treatments on general activity  or locomotion  < <dig> ; p >  <dig> ).

effects of lps treatment on nestmates' social interactions
to monitor social interactions, we used a modified nestmate recognition assay in which a treated animal is placed back in a cage with its nestmates and social interactions are monitored. this assay has been used regularly in bees to examine nestmate recognition, and reliably reflects similar interactions in field colonies  <cit> . as above, there was no effect on locomotion of treated individuals during the social interaction assay  =  <dig> ; p =  <dig> ; data not shown). concerning social interactions, agonistic and non-agonistic contacts were analyzed separately. indeed, the calculation of a global 'aggression index' as it is commonly used in behavioral studies in insects would have been statistically irrelevant since agonistic behaviors  were virtually absent from our observations. indeed, none of the  <dig> sham-treated, and only one out of  <dig> saline-injected and two out of  <dig> lps-injected bees were attacked. moreover, these attacks included only opening of mandibles and biting. thus, although there was a slight trend for increased agonistic behavior toward lps-injected bees, there was no overall significant difference in the proportion of agonistic interactions between the three groups . however, there were significant differences in the frequency of non-agonistic contacts  of the healthy nestmates with individuals between our three experimental groups  =  <dig> ; p <  <dig> , figure 2). post-hoc comparisons revealed that lps-injected subjects received significantly more non-agonistic social contacts than sham or saline-injected workers .

overall, these results show that lps increased general social activities in healthy nestmates towards the immune-challenged insects, but did not induce a specific agonistic outcome.

effects of lps treatment on cuticular hydrocarbon profiles
non-polar compounds were extracted from insects' whole bodies using pentane, and chemical profiles of cuticular extracts were analyzed using gas chromatography . in our experimental conditions, all the chemical compounds we identified by mass spectrometry  analysis were hydrocarbons: alkanes, alkenes, alkynes, and methyl-alkanes. the comparison of the cuticular profiles of sham, saline or lps-injected workers  <dig> hours after injection revealed significant statistical differences in the overall chemical profiles of samples collected from colony sdi <dig>  =  <dig> , p < 10- <dig>  figure 3a and table 1). mahalanobis chemical distances between both the sham/saline-injected and sham/lps-injected bees were significantly different . moreover, mahalanobis chemical distance between lps-injected bees and saline-injected bees was also significantly different . table  <dig> summarizes the relative proportion of each chemical compound on the workers' cuticles; out of  <dig> compounds analyzed, significant changes in relative proportion were only found for seven compounds. furthermore, no new compounds were found in the lps-treated sample. thus immunostimulation is associated with variation in the relative proportion of existing compounds.

data for this figure were obtained from gas chromatography analysis of cuticular washes of worker bees from colony sdi <dig> . these data represent the relative proportions of each compound found across all three treatment groups. for the discriminant analysis, the  <dig> compounds in italics were not used for analyses, due to their very low proportion .

similar results for the comparison of the cuticular profiles of sham, saline and lps-injected bees were obtained with bees from a second colony  =  <dig> ; p =  <dig> , figure 3b and additional file  <dig>  mahalanobis chemical distances between both the sham/saline-injected and sham/lps-injected bees were significantly different . moreover, mahalanobis chemical distance between lps-injected bees and saline-injected bees was also significantly different . however, different chemicals were found to show significant variations in relative proportion compared with colony sdi <dig> . thus, immunostimulation causes colony-specific variation in hydrocarbon cuticular proportions.

since alkenes seem to play an important role in nestmate recognition in bees  <cit> , we assessed the effect of treatments on the relative proportions of alkenes. treatment had a significant effect on the relative proportion of the different alkenes between workers from colony sdi <dig>  =  <dig> ; p =  <dig> ). mahalanobis chemical distances between sham/saline-injected, sham/lps-injected, and saline-injected/lps-injected bees were significantly different . similar results were obtained with colony sdi <dig>  =  <dig> ; p =  <dig> ). however, mahalanobis chemical distances between sham/saline-injected, sham/lps-injected bees were not significantly different  but saline-injected/lps-injected were significantly different .

effect of immunostimulated nestmate cuticular extract on nestmate interactions
the following study was performed to determine if the changes in chemical profiles associated with immunostimulation are indeed sufficient to alter nestmate social interactions. bees from a single colony were reared in cages as before. sham or lps-injected individuals were kept in isolation for  <dig> hours  and then collected. cuticular extracts were collected from these individuals and pooled according to treatment. a naïve bee from a new cage was then coated with  <dig> μl of extract  from the cuticles of sham or lps-injected workers. coated bees were then placed back in their original cages, and social interactions were monitored as before. an 'aggression index'  <cit>  was then calculated from the frequency of social behaviors observed. indeed, the changes induced by coating generated a suitable amount of agonistic behaviors to allow a valid calculation of this behavioral index. analyses revealed that coatings significantly altered social interactions in worker bees. the presence of a bee coated with cuticular extracts from lps-injected workers induced significantly more agonistic behaviors  in nestmates, compared with a bee coated with cuticular extracts from sham bees .

discussion
using bacterial endotoxins , we activated the innate immune system of individual insects, and monitored the responses of healthy nestmates. although both lps- and saline-injection caused an increase in expression of an immune response gene , this increase was substantially and significantly higher for the lps-injected individuals, and only lps-injection induced significant changes in social interactions between treated animals and their healthy conspecifics. the evaluation of the lethality and behavioral effects of lps on treated honey bees confirm that the social changes observed were not the result of behavioral alterations in treated individuals. furthermore, these differences in social interactions correlated with changes in cuticular hydrocarbon profiles induced by injection; again, these changes were greater for the lps- versus saline-treated bees. finally, we found that the coating of naïve bees with cuticular extracts from lps-injected bees induced significant changes in social behaviors of healthy nestmates compared with controls. in sum, these results suggest that immune system activation can have significant effects on honey bee cuticular chemical profiles, which in turn results in changes in social interactions with nestmates.

both injection with lps and coating with extracts of an lps-injected individual stimulated changes in social responses of healthy nestmates towards the treated individual. however, treatment with lps elicited only increases in non-agonistic interactions  while coating with extract from lps-injected individuals stimulated agonistic interactions . indeed, the coating of a social insect with exogenous chemicals is known to induce aggression in nestmates since this induces global changes in the chemical profile of the coated individual, although coating ants with the cuticular hydrocarbons of their nestmates does not elicit an aggressive response  <cit> . these results suggest that if the proportions of chemicals are changed, social interactions are modified. it is possible in our experiments that coating individuals with extracts caused additional changes to the chemical profiles that elicited a stronger behavioral response from the healthy nestmates. regardless, both experiments confirm that lps  alters social responses of healthy nestmates compared with controls.

the altered social interactions could benefit the individual, the nestmates or the pathogen. grooming appears to play some crucial role in individual resistance to pathogens in social insects. for both termites and ants, individuals infected with a pathogenic fungus that were placed in groups are less likely to die than those reared in isolation  <cit> . grooming was not specifically observed in either of these studies, although hughes et al  <cit>  found a decreased amount of fungus on the cuticle over time. however, this physical removal was observed in both isolated and group-reared termites. virus-infected bees were found to be subjected to increased grooming  <cit> . thus, ants, termites, and honey bees may all increase grooming of nestmates in response to a variety of pathogens. furthermore, while grooming is clearly beneficial to the infected individual, it may also benefit the group by resulting in a 'social vaccination' of the naïve nestmate. indeed, rearing naïve termites with termites previously exposed to pathogens can improve the subsequent resistance of the naïve termites to a challenge with a fungal pathogen  <cit> . this anticipatory immuno-activation could be induced by grooming, either through contact with small amounts of pathogen fragments, or with immuno-active molecules produced by the infected host and thus stimulating immune defenses of naïve conspecifics . however, social interactions can obviously also increase the spread of pathogen. further studies using full colonies and active pathogens will be necessary to determine the effects of behavioral modifications towards unhealthy nestmates on pathogen transmission.

our studies suggest that immunostimulation causes changes in cuticular hydrocarbon patterns that result in altered social interactions. upon immune stimulation, fat bodies and hematocytes secrete antimicrobial peptides and enzymes into the hemolymph  <cit> . as noted by schal et al  <cit> , an active association exists between hemolymph and the cuticle since compounds from the hemolymph are readily transported to the outer epicuticular surface. indeed, hydrocarbons are produced by oenocytes and are transported through a hemolymph pathway to both external and internal tissues, including the epicuticle, fat bodies, and ovaries  <cit> . our studies also suggest that the effects of immunostimulation do not cause addition of novel cuticular hydrocarbon compounds, and variation in these compounds appear colony specific. thus, immunostimulation may alter existing biosynthesis or transport pathways, and thereby shift cuticular chemical profiles. previous studies demonstrated that alkenes are important for nestmate recognition  <cit> , and in our studies there were significant differences in the relative proportion of alkenes between saline-injected and lps-injected bees from two different colonies. however, different specific alkenes were modulated by treatment in the two colonies, suggesting that immune stimulation does not produce a specific 'disease' signal pattern, but rather alters overall cuticular hydrocarbon patterns in a non-specific way that may differ for bees derived from different genotypic or environmental backgrounds. alterations of cuticular hydrocarbons and pheromones by pathogens remain largely unexplored phenomena, but it could be relatively general. indeed, parasitization by an ectoparasite mite  during larvae development significantly affects the relative proportion of cuticular hydrocarbons of emerging adult bees  <cit> , while in mealworm beetles, male immunocompetence and parasite load appears to be communicated to females via changes in sex pheromones  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
here, we provide clear evidence of altered behaviors in healthy individuals toward immuno-stimulated conspecifics in honey bees. previous studies on mammalian species such as mice or rats demonstrated a social disinterest or withdrawal of immune-stimulated individuals  <cit> , and this has been argued to represent an adaptive strategy to protect healthy conspecifics  <cit> . in our studies, immune stimulation leads to the increased tendency of healthy individuals to enter into contact with their infected nestmate. this could lead to an increase in transmission of the pathogen, decreased transmission by slowing the movement of infected individuals, physically reduce the pathogen or parasite load on the infected individual, or allow 'social vaccination' of the healthy nestmates. further studies will be necessary to determine the effect of the observed behavioral modification on pathogen transmission. our study also suggests that immunostimulated individuals signal their status to healthy nestmates via changes in cuticular hydrocarbon profiles. since chemical communication regulates social interactions in a wide variety of species, including insects and vertebrates, modulation of chemical cues by the immune system may play an important and general role in the regulation of social behaviors.

