BACKGROUND
mites of the genus demodex live in the hair follicles and sebaceous glands of mammalian skin  <cit> . they are extremely widespread among mammalian lineages, with species having been described from hosts in three of the seven marsupial orders, and in  <dig> of the  <dig> eutherian orders  <cit> . their bodies exhibit specializations that make them well adapted to inhabiting the constricted spaces of the pilosebaceous complex—they are typically just 100–300 μm long and cylindrical in shape, with extremely reduced legs and setation . together, these observations suggest an ancient, coevolutionary relationship between mammals and the demodex species that inhabit their skin; yet surprisingly little is known about the evolutionary history or dynamics of this association.figure  <dig> 
organization of the mitochondrial genome of
demodex folliculorum
. protein-coding, ribosomal rna, and transfer rna genes are depicted as green, blue, and red arrows, respectively. the arrows represent the direction of transcription. the at-rich, putative control region is depicted as a gray box . inside the circle is a scanning electron micrograph of an individual d. folliculorum . the identical gene arrangement was observed in the d. brevis mitochondrial genome. this is a novel gene arrangement among the acariform mitochondrial genomes sequenced to date. like other members of the acariformes, demodex proved to have a compact and at-rich mitochondrial genome.



demodex are ubiquitous in humans and thought to contribute to medically important skin disorders. both recent molecular studies  <cit> , and studies in which the skin of cadavers was sampled extensively , suggest that the incidence of infestation approaches 100%. despite the high incidence of demodex itself, the frequency with which demodex causes pathogenicity appears to be very low, which has led to their characterization as human commensals by many authors. nevertheless, there are reports of high demodex densities associated with two medically important disorders of the skin—marginal blepharitis  <cit>  and acne rosacea  <cit> . furthermore, mite densities are known to increase and cause skin diseases when the immune system is compromised  <cit> . treatment with acaricides, such as ivermectin, can be curative for some of these diseases  <cit> . these results suggest that demodex should be considered parasitic in some host individuals. future studies examining the potential roles of demodex in skin disorders, as well as interactions between demodex and the host immune system, would be aided by an increase in the genetic markers available for distinguishing mite populations.

more generally, greater genetic information would facilitate the study of demodex variation within and between host species. for example, mite genetic variation could be investigated within a host species in order to better understand the dynamics of movement among host individuals  <cit> , or even to provide information about the migration patterns of the hosts themselves  <cit> . similarly, the question of how often these mites migrate across host species boundaries could be addressed by making comparisons of host and mite molecular phylogenies  <cit> .

two species of demodex inhabit the skin of humans, with histological studies suggesting that each occupies a different niche: demodex folliculorum typically resides in the hair follicle nearer the skin surface, whereas d. brevis is generally found deeper in the sebaceous glands  <cit> . although distinguished initially based on morphological differences, recent molecular work using both mitochondrial and nuclear gene markers has verified that these are distinct species  <cit> . indeed, the observed levels of sequence divergence suggest that they are not closely related species, although no estimate of divergence time is currently available.

complete mitochondrial genomes have been determined for  <dig> arthropods; just  <dig> of these sequences are from the acariformes, however, despite the more than  <dig>  described species, and perhaps many times more undescribed species, within this division of the acari  <cit> . the paucity of mitochondrial genomes available from among the acariformes is especially unfortunate given their tendency to evolve unusual gene arrangements and truncated examples of trna genes . to improve our understanding of the evolution of these features, additional examples of mitochondrial genomes from this important group of organisms are needed.

here we report the complete mitochondrial genomes of both d. brevis and d. folliculorum, the first available for any species within the genus demodex. both species shared a novel mitochondrial gene order that has diverged extensively from the ancestral chelicerate pattern, with trna genes apparently having moved much more often than other genes. furthermore, the mitochondrial genomes of both demodex species possessed extremely truncated trna genes, with several of these lacking the sequence necessary to code for both d- and t-arms. finally, we estimated the divergence time between the two human-associated demodex species by using the sequences of mitochondrial proteins to conduct relaxed molecular clock analyses among acariformes.

RESULTS
mitochondrial genome content and organization
like other members of the acariformes, both species of demodex had compact and at-rich mitochondrial genomes. the d. brevis genome  length was  <dig>  bp and at-percentage was  <dig> %; the d. folliculorum genome  length was  <dig>  bp and at-percentage was  <dig> %. for comparison, the  <dig> other species of acariformes with complete mitochondrial genomes available in genbank exhibited an average genome size of  <dig>  bp  and an average at-percentage of  <dig> % . these values agree closely with those that we observed for both demodex species, suggesting that the same combinations of mutation pressures and selective forces that determine these parameters for other acariformes are also operating in the demodex lineage.

most metazoans have mitochondrial genomes that are at least several hundred base pairs larger than those of the acariformes  <cit> . having a small mitochondrial genome would seem to have the obvious benefit of being less costly and time-consuming to replicate. nevertheless, it remains unclear why selection for reduced genome size would be especially effective in the acariformes. one of the contributing factors, however, is the extreme truncation of mitochondrial trna genes that is widespread in these organisms .

high at content is a common feature of metazoan mitochondrial genomes  <cit> . it has been hypothesized that this bias results from being housed where there are high concentrations of reactive oxygen species that promote gc to at mutations  <cit> . alternatively, at-richness could be an adaptation for metabolic efficiency, with the higher energy cost and more limited availability of g and c nucleotides driving this pattern  <cit> .

mitochondrial genomes of both demodex species possessed the standard collection of  <dig> protein-coding, two ribosomal rna , and  <dig> trna genes  present in the mitochondrial genomes of most metazoans  <cit> . the arrangement of these genes was identical in the two demodex species, but novel among acariformes. the tendency to accumulate rearrangements of the mitochondrial genome appears to be a common feature among the acariformes . whether the accumulation of rearrangements in this taxonomic group is due to a higher structural mutation rate, or to relaxed natural selection on gene order, remains an open question.

the ancestral chelicerate gene arrangement, one shared by members of at least five orders, is exemplified by limulus polyphemus
 <cit> . if we consider just the protein-coding and rrna genes, the gene arrangement shared by both demodex species can be derived from the ancestral chelicerate gene arrangement via a single block interchange , requiring three breakpoints . mechanistically, this block interchange could have resulted from a tandem duplication of the entire interval, followed by differential loss of functional genes in the two tandem copies. alternatively, it could have resulted from direct translocation, either of the 12s gene or of the interval that stretches from nd <dig> to the 16s gene.figure  <dig> 
evolution of the
demodex
gene arrangement from the ancestral chelicerate. circular mitochondrial genomes are depicted as linearized, starting at the 5′ end of the cox <dig> gene. the one letter amino acid code is used to designate the trna genes, with the exceptions that l1 = cun; l2 = uur; s1 = agn; and s2 = ucn. the putative control region is designated as a + t to indicate that this has a higher at% than the rest of the genome. genes above the medial line are encoded on one strand, while those below the line are encoded on the other strand. as shown, the arrangement of protein-coding plus rrna genes can be derived via one block interchange, with a minimum of three breakpoints. this could have occurred via a tandem duplication followed by differential loss of genes between the two tandem copies. alternatively, it could have resulted from direct translocation, either of the 12s gene or of the interval that stretches from nd <dig> to the 16s gene. the trna genes seem to have moved independently of the other genes, since it would require a minimum of  <dig> breakpoints to explain the evolution of the demodex arrangement if trna genes are included in the analysis.



if trna genes are also considered in the analysis, however, the extent of rearrangement necessary to derive the demodex mitochondrial gene order from the chelicerate ancestral pattern increases dramatically, requiring a minimum of  <dig> breakpoints. if trna genes usually move together with the other genes, then the estimated number of breakpoints should have been similar in both analyses. hence, this increase in the minimum number of breakpoints necessary suggests that mitochondrial trna genes have a tendency to move more readily than protein-coding and rrna genes. evidence that trna genes tend to be more mobile than other genes within the mitochondria of some metazoan groups has been reported previously  <cit> . one plausible hypothesis is that this rapid movement is simply a consequence of their smaller size—structural rearrangements involving smaller elements may just happen to be more likely. for example, all other things being equal, the probability of a mitochondrial gene rearrangement causing a selective disadvantage may be greater for a larger gene than it is for a smaller gene, simply because the chances are greater that the rearrangement will encompass the entire gene. alternatively, trna genes may be more mobile because they tend to move via a different, and unknown, mechanism.

to compare the degree of rearrangement among acariformes, and to determine whether a similar trend towards greater movement of trna genes holds throughout this group, we determined the minimum number of breakpoints necessary to derive each available species’ gene sequence from that of every other species. the results can be depicted as a breakpoint distance tree, in which the number of breakpoints that separates two genome sequences is represented as a distance. we conducted this analysis separately for just the protein-coding and rrna genes , and for all of the mitochondrial genes together, including the trna genes . for all lineages, the number of breakpoints necessary to derive the gene order from the ancestral arrangement went up substantially when trna genes were included. this result indicates that the more rapid movement of trna genes is a general feature of mitochondrial genomes in the acariformes.figure  <dig> 
tree showing the breakpoint distances between gene arrangements. distances on this tree represent the minimum numbers of breakpoints necessary to transform one gene arrangement into another for all pairwise species comparisons. limulus polyphemus  is considered to represent the ancestral gene arrangement, since it has a gene order that is shared broadly across the chelicerates. in panel , only the arrangements of protein-coding and rrna genes were considered. in panel , all mitochondrial genes were considered, including trna genes. both trees are drawn to the same scale. all of the acariformes have gene arrangements that have diverged substantially from that of l. polyphemus, and the trna genes have experienced substantially more rearrangements than the protein-coding or rrna genes in all lineages. both demodex species shared an arrangement that is closer to the chelicerate ancestral arrangement than any other acariform species sequenced to date.



regardless of whether trna genes are included in the analysis, demodex exhibited a lower degree of rearrangement than has been observed in any other member of the acariformes to date . in other words, the demodex arrangement was more similar to the ancestral chelicerate gene arrangement, whereas taxa such as leptotrombidium or tetranychus have apparently experienced many more rearrangements. it remains unclear whether different lineages within the acariformes actually differ in the likelihood that they will experience rearrangements within a given period of time, or if this is simply the amount of variation among lineages that we should expect to see when considering the accumulation of low-frequency events. in support of the latter hypothesis, some taxa in different genera , or even different families , share identical gene arrangements, which suggests that the observed changes in gene order must happen rarely.

the putative control regions were identified in both species based on the following features:  they were by far the largest stretches of apparently noncoding dna ;  they had higher than average at% ;  they were in a conserved position in both species; and  the sequences of these regions have apparently been evolving more quickly than the rest of the mitochondrial genome, since they are so divergent that most of the segment could not even be aligned between the two species. all of these features are common observations of the control region in metazoan mitochondrial genomes  <cit> . furthermore, the almost complete lack of similarity observed between control region sequences suggests that these lineages split a long time ago.

trna gene structures
we identified models for the standard suite of  <dig> trna genes within the mitochondrial genomes of each demodex species . importantly, each of these putative trna genes was located in the same relative position and orientation within the mitochondrial genome in both species. furthermore, orthologous trna sequences could be aligned reasonably well between the two demodex species. finally, for all of the putative genes, the inferred trna secondary structures looked similar in both species; this can be seen by comparing the inferred structures from d. brevis  and d. folliculorum  for each orthologous pair of trna genes. taken together, these observations provide substantial support for these gene models. if these were not trna genes, then it would seem extremely unlikely that the same relative stretch of dna in both species would happen to have the potential to serve as the template for the same type of trna molecule, to exhibit substantial sequence similarity, and to have similar inferred secondary structures. we concluded that these gene models represent a plausible set of trna genes for both species, despite the fact that most of them possessed unusual structures.figure  <dig> 
inferred structures of the mitochondrial trnas in both
demodex
species. structures are arranged in alphabetical order. each trna gene is named according to the one-letter amino acid abbreviation, except that l1 = cun; l2 = uur; s1 = agn; and s2 = ucn. a solid line indicates a watson-crick bond, whereas a circle indicates a bond between g and uracil. all  <dig> of these trna genes were located in the same relative position and orientation within the mitochondrial genomes of both demodex species. furthermore, orthologous trna structures all looked similar between demodex species; to see this, compare each trna in panel  versus panel . most of the trna molecules lacked at least one of the side arms, and some lacked both, suggesting that demodex must have the molecular machinery necessary for these extremely truncated trnas to function.



interestingly, most of the demodex trna genes were truncated, lacking the sequence necessary to encode arms of the canonical cloverleaf-shaped trna . eight pairs of orthologous trnas had just d-arms; three had just t-arms; and five had neither d- nor t-arms. in contrast, just six pairs of orthologous trnas retained both d- and t-arms and could fold into the canonical cloverleaf-shaped trna. because the same basic structure could be inferred for each gene in both demodex species, we concluded that these trna structures were probably present in the common ancestor of these lineages. the average sizes of trna genes in d. brevis and d. folliculorum agreed closely with each other:  <dig>  bp  and  <dig>  bp , respectively. these collections of trna genes were about the same size as the average value of  <dig>  bp  reported previously for the trnas within mitochondrial genomes of acariformes  <cit> . it appears that truncated mitochondrial trna genes were already widespread in the common ancestor of the acariformes.

among metazoans, more than 90% of mitochondrial trnas are inferred to share the common cloverleaf-shaped secondary structure of nuclear-encoded trna sequences  <cit> . nevertheless, trnas that have lost one arm—either a d-arm or a t-arm—are extremely common among acariformes . indeed, numerous examples of mitochondrial trnas that have lost one arm or the other can be found in several additional lineages of the chelicerates  <cit> . furthermore, it is common for metazoan mitochondrial genomes generally to possess one to a few trna genes that lack either d-arm or t-arm sequence  <cit> . these noncanonical trnas are thought to remain functional due to coevolution of interacting factors. for example, seryl-trna synthetase has evolved to be able to recognize the noncanonical trna-ser in mammalian mitochondria  <cit> . in nematodes, one paralog of ef-tu has evolved to bind trnas that lack the t-arm  <cit> . presumably, similar forms of coevolution have occurred in order for the many truncated mitochondrial trnas of acariformes, including demodex, to remain functional.

mitochondrial trna genes that have lost both d- and t-arms—resulting in minimal trnas with only acceptor and anticodon arms—are extremely unusual; nevertheless, these “armless” trnas have been inferred in some mitochondrial genomes previously  <cit> . indeed, another member of the tetranychidae  apparently has at least one such armless trna  <cit> . the trend towards the loss of these trna arms appears to have continued in demodex, resulting in several examples of trnas that lack both d- and t-arms. interestingly, a recent study used rt-pcr and 5′- and 3′-race to show that several of these miniaturized, armless trnas are indeed transcribed and correctly processed by cca addition, at least in one species of nematode  <cit> . if these are actually not functional trna genes, then the functional copies must have been imported into the nuclear genome, and we are left with the puzzle of what could be maintaining these sequences.

the similar sequences and conservation of apparent structures for these putative trna genes, despite the fact that these are not closely related species, suggests that selection is maintaining these structures. if the truncated trna genes are actually no longer functional, then one hypothesis is that these sequences actually function as promoters, and just happen to fold into a remnant of a trna gene in both species. this seems implausible, however, given the high levels of divergence often seen in mitochondrial promoter sequences , which would lead us to expect the loss of anything resembling a folded trna.

many of the inferred trna structures in both species had acceptor arms with fewer than seven paired bases . indeed, the number of inferred structures with the full complement of seven paired bases in the acceptor arm was only six in d. brevis and  <dig> in d. folliculorum. to be functional, these molecules with truncated acceptor arms would presumably require either coevolved interacting molecules or rna editing. post-transcriptional editing of minimal trna molecules, including extensive modification of the acceptor arm, has been demonstrated in velvet worms  <cit> .

the parallel evolution of truncated mitochondrial trna genes among chelicerates suggests that this group has evolved a novel mechanism that either permits these trnas to function in a truncated state and/or allows post-transcriptional editing to repair them. determining the mechanisms responsible for keeping such minimal trna genes functional in demodex will be an interesting subject of future research. these results could have implications for developing treatments that affect demodex without harming the human host, since it has the potential to provide an avenue for the development of new acaricides that target the molecular machinery necessary for the function of such highly unusual trna genes.

phylogenetic position and species divergence
our phylogenetic analysis recovered traditional groupings within the acari . for example, the maximum clade credibility tree recovered the acariformes as monophyletic, with the expected deep split into trombidiformes and sarcoptiformes. within the trombidiformes, the eleutherengona and parasitengona were recovered as monophyletic groups. the posterior probabilities for most of the clades were high. when the solifugae were included in the analysis, the unionicola actually fell outside of a clade that included the eleutherengona plus five members of the trombiculidae . otherwise, tree topologies were completely stable across analyses, regardless of whether the solifugae were included or not. demodex always clustered with the tetranychidae—the spider mites—as expected, since both are considered members of the eleutherengona . this result agrees with both traditional taxonomy  <cit>  and a recent phylogenetic analysis based on nuclear rrna sequences  <cit> .figure  <dig> 
phylogenetic analysis using a relaxed molecular clock based on mitochondrial protein sequences to estimate the age of divergence between
demodex
species. traditional groupings within the acari were recovered in all phylogenies constructed. this phylogeny represents the results for one particular fossil calibration density, which is based on the minimum age of  <dig> mya for the time to the most recent common ancestor of the acariformes ; the particular fossil calibration density used in this analysis is depicted at the bottom of the tree, along with dashed arrow pointing to the common ancestor of the acariformes. amino acid sequences were used for all age-estimation analyses to minimize the effects of mutation saturation. for the particular analysis depicted in this phylogeny, the resulting estimated mean time to the most recent common ancestor of the two demodex lineages was  <dig> mya, with a 95% highest probability density interval of  <dig> –  <dig> mya. similar age estimates were obtained for two other fossil calibration densities, one that placed greater probability density near  <dig> mya, and one with a uniform distribution between 410– <dig> mya . furthermore, these estimates were not altered substantially when two species of solifugae were included in the analysis . finally, these results are broadly overlapping with the results obtained based on an alignment of 18s sequences. overall, these results suggest that demodex have probably been coevolving with their mammalian hosts since before the placental radiation.



in the absence of either a fossil record or estimates of molecular divergence, it is unclear how long demodex have inhabited the mammalian skin. for example, it is possible that demodex were present on the mammalian common ancestor, and have been speciating with their hosts ever since. since we do not have estimates of how often these mites can move between host lineages, however, it is also possible that demodex evolved to parasitize mammals much more recently and are widespread across mammalian lineages simply because they have repeatedly colonized new host species.

interestingly, the results of the relaxed molecular clock analysis based on the amino acid sequences of mitochondrial proteins suggest that the split between d. brevis and d. folliculorum happened a very long time ago . for example, the youngest average estimated time of divergence between these two demodex lineages was  <dig> mya, with a 95% highest posterior density  interval of  <dig> –  <dig> mya. across six different relaxed molecular clock analyses, the average lower bound of the 95% hpd interval was  <dig> mya for the time of the most recent common ancestor of the two demodex lineages. assuming that the transition to living on mammals happened once, these results suggest that the genus demodex has been evolving and diversifying with their mammalian hosts for at least this long.table  <dig> 
summary statistics of relaxed molecular clock estimates of the divergence time between
demodex
species based on amino acid sequence alignments of mitochondrial proteins


mya = millions of years ago; tmrca = time to most recent common ancestor. tmrca represents the estimated divergence time between acariformes and parasitiformes. tmrca represents the estimated divergence time between d. brevis and d. folliculorum. shown for the tmrca estimates are the mean and 95% highest probability density intervals for each analysis.



the average age estimate across analyses for the d. brevis – d. folliculorum split was  <dig> mya . for comparison, these same analyses resulted in average estimated times to the most recent common ancestor of the acari of  <dig> –  <dig> mya. it is remarkable that the split between d. brevis and d. folliculorum appears to have happened about  <dig> – 28% as long ago as the original divergence between acariformes and parasitiformes within the acari, especially given that these demodex species are so similar morphologically  <cit> .

to calibrate our relaxed molecular clock analyses, we used a date of ~ <dig> mya as the minimum age of the acariformes, based on the four oldest acariform fossils so far identified  <cit> . these fossils include three that are considered members of the endeostigmata, and one that is considered a member of the trombidiformes. molecular phylogenies support the hypothesis that the endeostigmata represent a basal lineage of the sarcoptiformes  <cit> . if, however, the endeostigmatan fossils actually turn out to represent a basal lineage of the acariformes , then our fossil calibration date of  <dig> mya would not accurately represent the common ancestor of the sarcoptiformes and trombidiformes, which would bias the estimated age of the d. brevis – d. folliculorum split, making this split appear older than it is in reality.

to test the impact of different fossil calibration densities on our age estimates, we used three different distribution densities for the priors on age of the acariformes , all based on the ~ <dig> mya time of appearance of members of this group in the fossil record  <cit> . prior distributions used to represent the age of the acariformes varied from highly restrictive , to much less informative . altering the prior distributions had no substantial effect on the estimated age of the demodex divergence.

to test the impact of different taxon combinations on our age estimates, we varied the relaxed molecular clock analysis to either include or exclude two members of the solifugae . these taxa were chosen because two recent studies place them as the sister group to the acariformes, which would make the acari a paraphyletic grouping  <cit> . we did not observe any sensitivity of the demodex age estimates to whether solifugae were included in the analysis. furthermore, we did not see any evidence that the solifugae are the sister taxon to acariformes; in other words, when the solifugae were included in the analyses, we always recovered a monophyletic acari, with the posterior probability of the node uniting the parasitiformes and acariformes into the acari always equal to one, providing strong support for the traditional grouping . although this was by no means a comprehensive test of the higher order relationships among the chelicerata, these results should nevertheless be added into the growing debate as to the correct topology of these relationships.

the common ancestor of the placental mammals has been estimated to have lived  <dig> –  <dig> mya, with the radiation of placental ordinal level crown groups occurring later  <cit> . hence, our molecular clock results indicate that the two species found on humans may have last shared a common ancestor prior to the ordinal level radiation of the placental mammals, which is consistent with an ancient colonization of mammals by the demodex lineage. such an ancient colonization event would help to explain the wide distribution of demodex across mammalian orders, as well as the clear morphological adaptations to living in the pilosebaceous complex. furthermore, since jurassic mammals had fur, these data are in agreement with the fossil record of mammals  <cit> .

one potential shortcoming of our dating analyses is that mutation saturation could be influencing the results. in particular, if there is substantial saturation of the substitutions among the oldest splits in the phylogeny, then this will tend to cause the over-estimation of split ages near the tips of the tree, which could make our estimation of the d. brevis – d. folliculorum split look older than it actually is. for this reason, we used amino acid sequences rather than dna sequences for our molecular dating analyses. owing to their reduced state space , nucleotide sequences will saturate much more rapidly than protein sequences . furthermore, to assess whether there was substantial saturation among the amino acid substitutions, we also used the software asatura  <cit>  to visualize the accumulation of amino acid substitutions with genetic distance, which showed that there was only very slight saturation of even the most frequent types of amino acid substitutions in these data. this suggests that our estimate of an ancient split between d. brevis and d. folliculorum was not being caused artificially by mutation saturation.

a second potential shortcoming of our dating analyses is that they are based on a single fossil calibration point. if there have been substantial changes over time in the rates of molecular evolution of the mitochondrial protein-coding genes used in the analysis, then this will tend to reduce the accuracy of our estimated d. brevis – d. folliculorum divergence time. on the other hand, the analysis method modeled evolution in each branch of the phylogeny with a relaxed molecular clock, meaning that rates of change were allowed to vary, which should have helped to ameliorate problems associated with slowdown or speedup of the rates. furthermore, the age estimate is based on aligned sequences of four different proteins, each of which was allowed to slow down or speed up independently in the analysis. finally, inspection of the rates estimated for each gene along different branches of the phylogeny did not indicate that there was a systematic change in evolutionary rates in the lineage leading to the demodex species within the acariformes. nevertheless, because we based our divergence time estimates on a single fossil calibration date, the possibility remains that undetected changes in molecular evolutionary rates influenced the results.

one way to address these possible shortcomings is to ask whether the divergence estimate based on another gene is consistent with those based on the mitochondrial protein sequences. to this end, we conducted a relaxed molecular clock analysis based on a collection of 18s rdna sequences for the acariformes, with l. polyphemus as an outgroup. based on the 18s alignment, the mean time to most recent common ancestor of d. brevis and d. folliculorum was  <dig> mya, with a 95% hpd interval of  <dig> –  <dig> mya. unfortunately, this is a large time interval, which does not provide a strong test of our original age estimates. nevertheless, this interval is broadly overlapping with the results of our analyses based on the mitochondrial protein sequences , so our original estimates based on mitochondrial proteins are not contradicted by this estimate using 18s rdna sequences. furthermore, the average estimate of  <dig> mya based on the 18s genes would still make this an ancient split between d. brevis and d. folliculorum . if the area of overlap between the 95% hpd intervals based on both 18s genes and mitochondrial proteins is considered, then we would estimate that these taxa split somewhere between about  <dig> –  <dig> mya.

d. brevis and d. folliculorum live in distinct habitats within the skin: the former inhabits the sebaceous glands whereas the latter resides in the hair follicles nearer the skin surface, alongside the hair shaft. the ancient divergence observed between these lineages is consistent with the hypothesis that there was an early separation into mite lineages that specialize in either the hair follicle or the sebaceous gland. this hypothesis has been suggested previously  <cit> , based on the observation that there are consistent morphological differences among mites from different skin microhabitats—mite species from different hosts but found in the same microhabitat tend to display more similarities than those living on the same host but in different microhabitats. these similarities are not restricted to overall shape, as might be expected to result from natural selection for squeezing into particular skin structures, but have also been observed in morphological characters that are regarded as diagnostic in taxonomy of demodicidae. this hypothesis could be tested by comparing sequence divergence among additional demodex species that reside either deep in glands within the skin versus near the surface of the follicle in other mammalian species. if correct, this hypothesis predicts that gland-dwelling versus follicle-dwelling species will tend to group into distinct clades. although a small amount of sequence information is presently available for several other members of the genus, the classification of these species into primarily follicle- versus gland-dwelling taxa is unfortunately not clear, unlike the case for d. brevis versus d. folliculorum. a further test of this hypothesis will need to await further information about the primary habitats for taxa with available sequence information.

CONCLUSIONS
these represent the first determinations of the complete mitochondrial genome sequences from any member of the genus demodex. the availability of this additional genetic information promises to open the way for studies of variation within and between demodex species. this is important because there has apparently been an ancient radiation of these mites on their mammalian hosts. furthermore, demodex are known to be ubiquitous in humans, and to cause medically important skin disorders.

we found that demodex mitochondrial genomes share the following features with other members of the acariformes:  they are compact in size and at-rich;  they have experienced multiple gene rearrangements, especially among the trna genes; and  they have many truncated trna genes.

it remains unclear what is driving the evolution of truncated trna genes. perhaps these are favored simply because of their reduced size, resulting in less rna needing to be transcribed in order for translation to occur, and also less mitochondrial genome to be replicated. this hypothesis does not explain why selection for smaller trna genes has been so much more effective in certain lineages, such as the acariformes. to be functional, the many truncated trna genes found in the mitochondrial genome would seem to require some combination of coevolved interacting factors and/or extensive trna editing. the molecular machinery necessary for dealing with truncated trnas might provide avenues to treat the apparently harmful demodex found in some patients.

based on the four most slowly evolving protein-coding genes within the mitochondrial genomes of the acari, we examined the phylogenetics of the acariformes, and supported the traditional hypothesis that the demodex are members of the eleutherengona. interestingly, we found that the two demodex species found on humans apparently diverged more than  <dig> mya, which is prior to the estimated time of the radiation of the placental mammals. assuming a single transition to living in mammalian skin, this estimate places a lower bound on how long demodex have been living on their mammalian hosts. furthermore, the deep divergence time estimated between these two species is consistent with the hypothesis that there was an early split into distinct forms that either live deep in the sebaceous glands or near the surface alongside the hair shaft. this niche-separation hypothesis can be tested by examining the phylogenetics of additional demodex species that have been shown to live in different skin microhabitats.

