BACKGROUND
proteins are organized in discrete functional modules called domains  <cit> . domains are considered independent evolutionary units that have specific functions, fold independently and can combine with other domains in different modular arrangements  <cit> . they have an average length of approximately  <dig> amino acids  <cit>  and, while short proteins typically contain only one domain, long proteins are usually composed of several domains  <cit> . even though most domains have an ancient origin  <cit> , few domain combinations are shared between the three domains of life  <cit> . this indicates extensive reuse of domains during evolution. proteins can acquire additional domains over time through several mechanisms, including gene fusion, exon extension, exon recombination, intron recombination and retrotransposition  <cit> . of these, gene fusion has been proposed to be the most important mechanisms in metazoan proteins  <cit> .

domains that originated in particular lineages are of special interest in helping understand the molecular basis of lineage-specific adaptations  <cit> . the age of domains can be dated with more precision than that of individual sequences. we can take advantage of the specific patterns of amino acid conservation displayed by each domain type and use sequence profiles or hidden markov models  to identify homologues in distant species  <cit> . using domain-specific hmms, pal and guda estimated about 40% of human domains had originated in the metazoan or a more recent phylogenetic node  <cit> . they also found that about 3% of domains corresponded to primate- or human-specific sequences, illustrating the fact that novel domains are continuously formed. the phylogenetic distribution of pfam domains has also been recently used to date the age of complete proteins from a given species in proteinhistorian, a dedicated server for the analysis of protein origin  <cit> .

one well-characterized example of lineage-specific domain is the kruppel-associated box , found in several vertebrate species but greatly expanded in mammals. this domain combines with the zn-finger motif, which is an older domain, and confers strong transcriptional repressor activity to the protein  <cit> . there is evidence that recently evolved domains are enriched in low-complexity sequences  <cit> , and tend to be more structurally disordered  <cit> , than older domains. an example of a recently formed low-complexity domain is the cornifin domain in the mammalian-specific small proline rich protein  family. the repeats in this domain mediate the formation of a thick layer of cross-linked proteins in keratinocytes and thus play a fundamental role in the formation of the skin  <cit> .

in spite of the fact that recently emerged domains are likely to play key roles in the evolution of new protein functions, we still know very little about them. for example it is not known which fraction of young domains is located in newly evolved genes, or which fraction is formed in the context of older - previously existing - genes. recently originated genes have special characteristics: they are poorly annotated  <cit> , they tend to be shorter than average  <cit>  and they evolve particularly rapidly  <cit> . however, there has been no study to date that compares the evolutionary properties of domains of different age. to address these questions we use domain genome-wide data from human and mouse, and to a lesser extent from drosophila.

RESULTS
identification of recently evolved domains
we obtained from ensembl a set of  <dig>  human genes with 1: <dig> orthologs in mouse  <cit> . we used a pfam collection of domain-specific hidden markov models   <cit>  to identify the domains present in those proteins. we identified  <dig>  different protein domains , corresponding to a total of  <dig>  domain occurrences. we classified the domains in three phylogenetic age groups according to their distribution in  <dig> eukaryotic species : ‘mammalian’ , ‘vertebrate’  and ‘old’ . the average number of domain occurrences per domain type increased in older domains, probably reflecting the accumulation of gene duplicates over time. the length of the domains was very similar for domains of different age .

n domains: number of domain occurrences, in brackets different domain types . domain length: mean and median  values.

about  <dig> % of the domain types only had homologues in species separated from human in the approximately past  <dig> million years , suggesting that they had originated relatively recently . we obtained a similar number of domains classified in different age groups with varying stringencies in the domain-specific hmm searches , indicating that the results are robust to different hmm search conditions.

considering the number of proteins containing at least one occurrence of a given domain, the most abundant old domains were  <dig> transmembrane receptor, protein kinase and zn-finger c2h <dig> . each of these domains was present in about 3- <dig> % of the proteins containing old domains. when we considered the number of domain occurrences zn-finger c2h <dig> was by far the most abundant domain , with a total of  <dig>  domain occurrences . the most abundant vertebrate domains were the kruppel-associated box  and the scan domain, present in  <dig> % and  <dig> % of the proteins containing vertebrate domains, respectively. similar to krab, the scan domain combines with zn-finger motifs and exerts regulatory functions  <cit> . in contrast to zn-fingers, krab and scan typically exist as single copy domains. it has been proposed that krab domains were recruited into zn-finger containing proteins in the early vertebrates, whereas scan domains appeared later on, just before the split of reptiles and birds  <cit> . the abundance of these domains in human proteins can be explained by the frequent duplication of genes containing them  <cit> .

note that if the domain appeared more than once in the same protein we counted it as one occurrence.

domains classified as mammalian were generally found in a single human protein . however, some domains were present in paralogues. one example is the transcription elongation factor a domain , present in a family of transcription factor genes located on chromosome x and which include tceal <dig>  a putative tumour suppressor gene, which negatively regulates nf-kappab mediated pathways  <cit> .

gain of recently evolved domains
recently evolved domains may be parts of new proteins or, alternatively, arise in proteins with an older origin. in order to know which proportion of young domains fall into each of these two categories we dated the age of all proteins in the dataset. we defined the age of each protein by the oldest domain it contained or, if it did not have any known domain , by blastp sequence similarity searches against the  <dig> species proteomes. the majority of young proteins contained no annotated domains , in contrast to older proteins . we found that the number of domains per protein, as well as the complete protein length, increased with the age of the protein . this suggests that, as proteins become older, their length tends to increase through the gain of new domains.

mean and median  are shown. anon-synonymous to synonymous substitution rate  was calculated for  <dig>  old,  <dig> vertebrate and  <dig> mammalian proteins with domains, and for  <dig>  old,  <dig> vertebrate and  <dig> mammalian proteins without domains. *kolmogorov-smirnov test p < 10- <dig> in all pairwise comparisons.

analysis of the domain content of proteins of different age showed that the majority of young domains have formed in the context of a newly evolved gene. this was true for  <dig> of the  <dig> different mammalian domain types  and  <dig> of the  <dig> vertebrate domain types . in the remaining cases the younger domain could be found combined with one or more older domains , reflecting either domain fusion events or the emergence of novel domains in existing older proteins.

in order to investigate the possible importance of domain fusion versus de novo domain emergence we examined all possible domain arrangements involving vertebrate and old domains present in the  <dig> human proteins that contained both classes of domain. for each different old-vertebrate domain type pair we examined the individual domain occurrences. the largest group was composed of pairs in which the vertebrate domain only combined with a particular old domain, whereas the old domain was found in other domain configurations as well. these cases were compatible with the gain of a novel domain in an existing protein . the second most common scenario, albeit much less frequent than the first one, was when we found both the vertebrate and the old domain in other domain arrangements, which was compatible with domain fusion . for comparison, the number of proteins containing only vertebrate domains , probably representing novel vertebrate-specific genes, was about  <dig>  times larger than the number of proteins containing both vertebrate and old domains .

we next investigated if there was any bias in the localization of vertebrate domains in proteins also containing older domains. we found a strong bias favouring the incorporation of the vertebrate domain at the n-terminus both in old proteins with two domains and in old proteins with more than two domains . thus, vertebrate proteins tend to increase in length over time by the gain of recently evolved domains, mainly through the gain or extension of sequences at the 5’end of genes.

rapid evolution of young domains independently of protein context
we calculated the non-synonymous to synonymous substitution rate ratio  for all domain regions in human and mouse orthologous proteins. we found that younger domains had significantly higher dn/ds values than older ones  , indicating that they are evolving more rapidly. the results did not vary significantly when we used the median dn/ds for each domain type as the representative domain dn/ds value, which eliminated possible biases caused by very abundant domains . the results were essentially identical when we employed less stringent e-value cut-offs to classify the domains in different age groups, stressing the robustness of the relationship between domain age and dn/ds .

in the previous section, we have shown that domains of different age are sometimes found in the same protein. in this situation, do they maintain their characteristic age-related evolutionary rates? to answer this question we focused on the  <dig> proteins containing both old and vertebrate domains. interestingly, we found that the difference between old and vertebrate domains was maintained  . out of  <dig> domain pairwise comparisons,  <dig> showed higher dn/ds values for the vertebrate domain, compared with only  <dig> for the old domain . furthermore, the relative difference in dn/ds values tended to be much larger in pairs in which the vertebrate domain was evolving faster than when the old domain was evolving faster .

one example of a protein containing domains of different age is the human progesterone receptor. this protein contains three pfam domains, an intracellular domain named ‘progesterone receptor’, which is activated by the steroid hormone progesterone, a zn finger domain, and an extracellular ligand-binding domain. the first domain is vertebrate-specific, and has a dn/ds of  <dig> , whereas the other two domains, which are older, have dn/ds values of  <dig>  and  <dig> , respectively. this illustrates the patterns observed in many proteins, in which the younger parts are evolving much more rapidly. this and other examples are shown in additional file 1: figure s <dig>  a complete list of annotated proteins with old and vertebrate domains is provided in additional file  <dig> 

discussion
domains typically cover the majority of a protein sequence and play a crucial role in protein evolution. the way different domains combine, and the mechanisms of domain gain in proteins, have been thoroughly studied  <cit> . other works have described the existence of domains of different age and the relationship of recently evolved domains with lineage-specific innovations  <cit> . here we have focused on the evolutionary properties of young domains to better understand which is their impact on the evolution of the complete proteome. we have found that about two thirds of the young  domains are located in newly evolved genes and the rest arose in already existing proteins. young domains are preferentially found at the proteins ends, more often at the n-terminus than at the c-terminus, although the reasons for this latter bias are yet unclear. the addition of young domains to already existing proteins is likely to contribute to an increase in protein sequence length over time. we have also discovered that younger domains tend to evolve significantly faster than older domains, even when located in the same protein.

among young domains, we have been able to identify many less mammalian-specific  domains than vertebrate-specific  domains . this is not surprising given that the number of mammalian proteins is about one third the number of vertebrate proteins. in addition, the percentage of mammalian proteins with annotated domains is less than half the corresponding percentage of vertebrate proteins. as the length of the two periods considered is not very different, this very likely reflects strong under-annotation of mammalian-specific sequences in the databases, both in relation to the number of expressed genes and to the number of functional domains in the encoded proteins. in line with this, capra and colleagues found that younger proteins in yeast were less well covered by pfam domains than average  <cit> .

proteins lacking annotated domains show a slight tendency to be longer and evolve more rapidly than proteins containing annotated domains . the same characteristics have been previously attributed to proteins with low-complexity regions , which undergo continuous repeat expansions and are associated with high mutational dynamics  <cit> . therefore, one possible explanation of the data in table  <dig> is differences in lcr content  <cit> . we confirm such differences: the average fraction of the protein covered by lcrs is  <dig>  for proteins without domains and  <dig>  for proteins with domains . in addition, the underrepresentation of domains in younger proteins is consistent with the previous finding that younger proteins are enriched in lcrs  <cit> . in conclusion, a large part of the variation in length and evolutionary rate is probably related to differences in lcr content. however, we cannot completely rule out the possibility that some proteins lacking annotated domains have escaped domain detection due to very fast sequence divergence.

we identify  <dig> proteins in which vertebrate and old domains combine. the fraction of vertebrate domains that belong to pfam clans  is much smaller for vertebrate domains than for old domains , emphasizing the recent origin of most vertebrate domains. in general, novel domains in proteins can be gained by several mechanisms, such as gene fusion, exon extension, recombination and retro-transposition  <cit> . it has been hypothesised that domain architecture in all branches of life tends to gain in complexity over time, with a preponderance of fusion events over other types of rearrangements  <cit> . we have observed that vertebrate domains tend to exist in a single configuration, showing a strong dependence for a given old domain . in contrast, old domains from these proteins can also be found in proteins that lack any vertebrate domain. this provides strong evidence for protein extension as the main mechanism of gain of newly evolved domains in existing proteins . this may be mediated by different mechanisms such as the cooption of adjacent non-coding sequences , expansion of repetitive sequences by slippage  <cit>  or insertion of sequences derived from retrotransposons  <cit> . the gain of new domains in existing proteins, together with the finding that old proteins contain more domains than younger ones , is consistent with a scenario in which proteins tend to become more complex over time with regards to the number of different functional domains they contain.

newly evolved domains are predominantly gained at the n-terminus and, to a lesser extent, at the c-terminus. diverse authors have found that both domain gain and loss are more frequent at the protein termini than at the protein central region  <cit> . this may be expected given that the protein ends tend to be more flexible, charged and located at the protein surface than other regions  <cit> . however, a strong bias towards the n-terminus has not been documented previously, perhaps because it is a special feature of recently evolved domains.

younger proteins have been found to evolve more rapidly than older proteins in a variety of organisms, including bacteria  <cit> , drosophila <cit> , mammals  <cit> , yeast  <cit>  and primates  <cit> . here we have demonstrated that this age-related effect also applies to protein domains, with younger domains showing higher non-synonymous to synonymous substitution rate ratios  than older ones . in addition, we observe a similar relationship in drosophila domains of different age , indicating that the observed property is likely to be universal. therefore younger domains can diverge much more rapidly than older ones, probably mainly due to relaxed selective constraints, as shown to be the case for recently arisen complete coding sequences  <cit> . it is remarkable that young domains found in otherwise highly conserved proteins  also evolve very rapidly, further stressing the importance that the time elapsed since a protein sequence originated has on its evolutionary rate.

this work highlights the importance of recently evolved domains in the ongoing evolution of proteins. it shows that proteins should be considered heterogeneous entities in which sequences formed at different times maintain their characteristic evolutionary signatures. the expected future characterization of a larger number of lineage-specific proteins and their functional domains will help shed more light on the early stages of domain evolution.

CONCLUSIONS
the identification of protein domains of recent evolutionary origin is crucial to understand species and lineage-specific adaptations, but these domains are still poorly characterized. in order to fill this gap we have compared the evolutionary properties of human protein domains of different age: mammalian-specific, vertebrate-specific and older. we have found that when domains of different age combine in the same protein the younger domain tends to evolve much faster than the older domain, reinforcing the idea that the time elapsed since a sequence originated largely determines its current evolutionary rate.

