BACKGROUND
in eukaryotic cells, the nucleolus is the site of ribosome biogenesis, which includes transcription of ribosomal dna, processing of precursor rrna and pre-ribosome assembly  <cit> . the rate of synthesis of ribosomal rna varies depending upon the proliferative status of the cell and hence is accentuated in cancer cells  <cit> . the ribosomal dna  is transcribed by rna polymerase i and 5s rrna is transcribed by rna polymerase iii in the nucleolus. the ribosomal protein genes are transcribed by rna polymerase ii in the nucleoplasm and after synthesis in the cytoplasm are transported into the nucleolus for pre-ribosome assembly. several proteins and small nucleolar rnas are involved in various steps of ribosome biogenesis. among these, nucleophosmin  and nucleolin  are the two most abundant non- ribosomal proteins whose critical functions are still being elucidated  <cit> . both these proteins, especially nucleolin, also undergo several modifications like phosphorylation  <cit>  methylation  <cit>  and adp-ribosylation  <cit>  for regulating their functions.

the mammalian nucleolin is of 75– <dig> kda showing an apparent molecular mass of 100– <dig> kda because of its aberrant mobility in an sds-polyacrylamide gel. the nucleolin protein is made up of three structural domains. the first n-terminal one third of the protein contains a contiguous stretch of highly acidic amino acids interspersed with basic amino acids. this domain also contains several phosphorylation sites for casein kinase ii  <cit> , p34cdc <dig>  <cit>  and protein kinase c  <cit> . the central domain consists of four rna binding domains called rrm. it is generally believed that these four rrms have arisen by a duplication of the  <dig> rrm domains. the c-terminal domain is rich in glycine, arginine and phenylalanine residues, which is known as the gar domain. the function of this gar domain is still not clear and it is believed that this domain facilitates the interaction of nucleolin with several other rna binding proteins including ribosomal proteins in addition to rrna itself  <cit> . nucleolin is predominantly localized to fibrillar component around the fibrillar centers with a small proportion also being present in the granular compartment of the nucleolus  <cit> . recently nucleolin has also been detected on cell membranes  <cit> . nucleolin can be classified under multifunctional proteins having a variety of functions at different steps of ribosome biogenesis. for example it has been shown to have both stimulatory and repressive role in rdna transcription  <cit> . the n-terminal acidic domain has been shown to be involved in pre-rrna processing  <cit>  and histone chaperone activity  <cit> . nucleolin is conserved in several species including plants  <cit> , xenopus  <cit>  and yeast  <cit>  with a little variation in the n terminal domain, rrm motifs and in the length of the rgg stretch at the c-terminus and they have been termed as nucleolin like proteins  <cit> .

mammalian spermatogenesis is a fascinating model of cellular differentiation process encompassing several rounds of mitotic division of spermatogonia, meiotic division and maturation of haploid spermatids during the spermiogenesis process. the rate of ribosomal rna synthesis dramatically changes during this long process of one round of germ cell differentiation. very early autoradiographic studies have shown that spermatogonia are very active in rrna synthesis, which peaks at the mid-pachytene level  <cit> . using several cytological and immunochemical techniques it has been shown that there is also extensive morphological change in the nucleolar structure during different stages of spermatogenesis  <cit> . recently, a spermatogenesis specific variant of drosophila nucleolin, modulo, has been described whose expression preceeds the spermatid differentiation process  <cit> . modulo also acts as a transcription factor regulating both the meiotic arrest genes and the spermatid differentiation genes. while analyzing the detailed expression pattern of nucleolin during different stages of rat spermatogenesis, we discovered a new germ cell specific nucleolin gene, which is encoded in rat chromosome  <dig>  the detailed characteristics of this nucleolin related protein  and its role in rdna transcription is reported in this communication.

RESULTS
nucleolin is down regulated in meiotic spermatocytes and haploids
in one of our preliminary studies on the genome wide gene expression pattern among gametic diploid, meiotic spermatocytes and spermatid cells using uhn microarray slides we observed that nucleolin is highly down regulated in meiotic spermatocytes and haploid spermatogenic cells . nucleolin is a major non-ribosomal phosphoprotein present in the nucleolus of a eukaryotic cell  <cit> . its expression pattern is well correlated with the pol i mediated transcription of ribosomal rna gene  <cit> . as nucleolin plays a significant role in ribosomal rna transcription we were interested in examining in detail the expression of nucleolin across different stages of spermatogenesis and correlate with the transcription status of ribosomal dna in germ cells.

to begin with we carried out real time pcr analysis for nucleolin messenger rna in spermatogonial cells , meiotic spermatocytes , and haploid spermatids . the meiotic spermatocytes and spermatid cells were isolated using centrifugal elutriation technique and the relative purity of these cells as monitored by facs analysis were found to be 75% and 95% respectively as shown in figure 1a. it was evident that nucleolin was drastically down regulated at rna level both in meiotic spermatocytes as well as haploid germ cells . the nucleolin transcript was however detected in actively dividing gametic diploid spermatogonial cells. the absence of nucleolin expression in meiotic spermatocytes and spermatid cells was further corroborated at the protein level by carrying out western blotting analysis of total nuclear proteins probed with monoclonal anti-nucleolin antibodies . as can be seen from figure 1c, a band around  <dig> kda was detected in diploid germ cells but not in meiotic spermatocytes and haploid spermatid cells. we further confirmed the absence of nucleolin by indirect immunoflourescence method using the monoclonal anti-nucleolin antibody. we used hela cells as one of the control where we observed nucleolin to be localized in the dark nucleolar region  as expected. we could also localize nucleolin in nucleolar structures in nuclei of spermatogenic diploid cells . however, we could not see any nucleolin staining in both the meiotic spermatocytes  and haploid germ cells . thus it was quite clear from the above observation that nucleolin, one of the major non-ribosomal proteins involved in ribosome biogenesis, was strongly down regulated at both rna and protein level in meiotic as well as post meiotic germ cells.

fibrillarin and ubf are expressed throughout spermatogenesis
in addition to nucleolin two other proteins that are intimately involved in rdna transcription and processing are ubf and fibrillarin. fibrillarin is a  <dig> kda protein that is involved in rrna maturation and assembly  <cit> . ubf is an upstream binding factor of  <dig> kda and is a major transcription factor essential for the polymerase i dependent transcription  <cit> . we were curious to examine the expression of these two proteins in the meiotic spermatocytes and spermatids cells. for this purpose we carried out immunoflourescence assay using anti-fibrillarin and anti-ubf antibodies  and the results are shown in figure  <dig>  it was interesting to see that both fibrillarin  and ubf  were detectable in meiotic spermatocytes  as well as haploid germ cells . panels  and  show the localization pattern of these proteins in hela and gametic diploid cells respectively. in order to get a more quantitative picture of the expression of these two proteins, we carried out real time pcr analysis of fibrillarin, ubf and also that of nucleolin in these germ cells. the expression level of fibrillarin and ubf were reduced by approximately less than one fold in meiotic spermatocytes and by two fold in haploid cells as compared to gametic diploid cells while nucleolin was strongly down regulated . above results showed that unlike nucleolin other nucleolar proteins essential for rna polymerase i transcription and processing are present in the testicular germ cells irrespective of the stages of differentiation. however, a search of the rat genome data base for fibrillarin identified a variant of fibrillarin gene on rat chromosome  <dig>  the expression of this gene in testis or other somatic tissues is not known and has to be investigated.

transcription of rdna in haploid spermatids
as mentioned in the introduction, nucleolin plays a major role in plethora of rrna processing activities including rdna transcription,  <cit> , we were interested to study the rdna transcription status in different germ cells. for this purpose we initially carried out in vitro nuclear run-on transcription in meiotic spermatocytes and haploid cells using gametic diploid germ cells from 10-day-old rat as control. a run-on transcription assay was carried out by labeling the nascent rrna transcripts with α32p utp both in the presence as well as in the absence of α-amanitin  to score specifically for pol i mediated transcription. the results of such an experiment are shown in figure 3a. the presence of run on transcripts for ribosomal rna  were detected in both α-amanitin treated as well as untreated cells of 2n, 4n and n whereas transcripts of pol ii products such as β actin and nucleolin were detected only in the absence of α-amanitin. in conformity with our observation made above, nucleolin nascent transcript was observed only in diploid cells but was absent in meiotic spermatocytes and spermatid cells even in this run-on transcription assay. we also examined the rate of transcription of ribosomal rna as calculated from the amount of radioactivity incorporated as a function of time which is graphically represented in figure 3b. it is clear from the figure that rdna genes are indeed transcribed, showing a linear increase as a function of time in all the three type of germ cells. however, it can be noticed that both the rate and the extent of rdna transcription in meiotic spermatocytes and spermatid cells are much lower than in gametic diploid cells.

in order to extend this observation further, an in situ run-on transcription was carried out in meiotic spermatocytes and spermatid cells by the incorporation of brutp in the presence of α-amanitin followed by staining with monoclonal anti brdu antibodies. interestingly, fluorescent signal representing nascent rrna transcripts were detected in both meiotic spermatocytes  as well as in spermatid cells  confirming the results of in vitro nuclear run-on transcription. as mentioned earlier ubf is a polymerase i specific transcription factor and hence we examined the colocalisation pattern of ubf with these rdna transcripts. as can be seen in figure 3d, we did observe the colocalisation of ubf protein with brutp signal, proving the authenticity of rdna transcription that we were detecting in the meiotic spermatocytes and spermatid cells. thus both the in vitro and in vivo run-on experiments proved unambiguously that rdna transcription does take place in the meiotic spermatocytes and spermatid cells where nucleolin was not detected.

a nucleolin related protein  is expressed in meiotic and post meiotic germ cells
in the backdrop of the essentiality of nucleolin in rdna transcription  <cit> , we were surprised to observe rdna transcription in both the meiotic spermatocytes and spermatid cells although at much reduced level. in all of our experiments, described above, we had used monoclonal antibodies against nucleolin . for curiosity we then used polyclonal antibodies against nucleolin  and repeated the immunoflourescence analysis. to our surprise we did observe foci lighted by polyclonal nucleolin antibody in both meiotic spermatocytes and spermatid cells . subsequently we went ahead with western blot analysis of the nuclear proteins with these polyclonal anti-nucleolin antibodies. as can be seen in figure 4b these antibodies lighted up two polypeptide bands in gametic diploid cells  while only the bottom band was observed in meiotic spermatocytes  and spermatid  cells. the upper band in the gametic diploid cells corresponds to  <dig> kda region and represents nucleolin, which is absent in meiotic spermatocytes and spermatid cells. the presence of a lower band suggested to us the possible existence of a nucleolin variant in the germ cells. to further verify this possibility we amplified nucleolin mrna from diploid germ cells by using the orf specific forward and reverse primers . the analysis of pcr products shown in figure 4c clearly show that two amplicons were observed in gametic diploid cells while only one amplicon of lower size of around  <dig>  kb was observed in meiotic spermatocytes and spermatid cells. each of these two bands was eluted and the dna sequence was determined. the sequence of the upper  <dig> kb band exactly corresponded to nucleolin sequence and the lower band of  <dig>  kb corresponded to a new variant with a sequence very similar to nucleolin which we refer here as nucleolin related protein . the amino acid sequence alignment of rat nucleolin and the nrp is shown in figure  <dig>  the sequences are almost identical  except that the amino acid stretches  76pakkaavtpgkkaaat <dig>  107gkkgaaqakalvptpgkkgavtp <dig>   156dsdededeedefeppvvkgvkpakaapaapaseded eeddddeddddddeeeeeeddseeevmeitpakgkktpakvvpvkaksvaeeeeddeddede <dig>  261eedde <dig>   319pn <dig> from that of nucleolin were missing in nrp. a blast search of the nrp sequence in the rat genome database ensemble identified the nrp as a predicted gene on chromosome  <dig>  this nucleolin related protein gene in chromosome  <dig> has been reported as a ncl-ps <dig> referring to nucleolin pseudogene in the rat genome database . since we observe the expression at protein level this gene is now interpreted as expressed gene and has now been named as nucleolin related protein  with entrez accession number: fj <dig> 

for further validation, nrp gene of  <dig> kb and nucleolin gene  was amplified, gel eluted and sequenced  and  respectively as given in the additional file 1). both the genes were amplified from the same genomic dna template, thus experimentally proving the authenticity of their gene sequence present in the database. a detailed analysis of the gene structure of this new nrp gene resident on chromosome  <dig> revealed that it consists of three exons and two introns as shown in figure 6a as against the presence of  <dig> exons and  <dig> introns of the nucleolin gene resident on chromosome  <dig>  the important features of the nrp gene in comparison with the nucleolin gene are a) a small region of exon  <dig> and complete exon  <dig> of nucleolin forms the exon  <dig> of nrp. b) a region of exon  <dig> of nucleolin,  <dig> bp long, forms the exon  <dig> of nrp. c) a portion of exon  <dig> of nucleolin and complete exon  <dig> through  <dig> of nucleolin are fused in nrp as one large 3rd exon. but the sequence spanning the 3'utr of both the genes are identical. all together nrp has acquired all the exons of nucleolin except the missing sequences mentioned but no introns. the splice signal  is found to be present in the exon/intron boundary of the nrp variant as predicted in the database except for one intron. it is predicted that the nrp has  <dig> introns and the 3rd intron, is supposed to be a single nucleotide c, but we have found that c is a part of the exon and it is present in the mrna transcript of the variant. we have seen all the sequence characteristics of nucleolin in the variant nrp except the acidic stretch, we are still unsure of the exact mrna 5' and 3' nucleotide. however, the northern blot shows only a band of  <dig>  kb in length thus eliminating the possibility of the presence of additional exons. the domain structure of nucleolin encompasses an n-terminal domain , four rrm  domains and c-terminal gar domain rich in glycine and arginine as depicted in . the exon  <dig> of nrp together constitutes both the gar domain and the rna binding domains which are actually encoded by exons  <dig> through  <dig> in nucleolin. it is interesting to note that the monoclonal antibodies that we procured from santa cruz was raised against the long acidic stretch region which is absent in the nrp and hence explains the inability of detection of the nrp in our experiments using these monoclonal antibodies. in addition to the coding sequence, we also looked into the 5' proximal promoter region of rat nucleolin and nrp gene for possible conserved and also divergent sequence elements by using the tf search and promoter inspector programmes. apart from the common transcription factors that bind to the promoter region of both nrp and nucleolin like hfh, sry, cdxa, nfkb, ap <dig>  oct- <dig>  hnf- <dig> etc, a unique binding site for sox  <dig> adjacent to tandem repeats of sry binding site is present in the nrp promoter region, which is absent in the promoter region of nucleolin. sox  <dig> is reported to be a testis specific transcription factor that acts cooperatively with sry  <cit>  and therefore possibly explains the up regulation of nrp in meiotic and post meiotic germ cells. we would also like to point here that nrp gene is also expressed in gametic diploid cells but is highly up regulated in meiotic spermatocytes and spermatid cells .

evolutionary relationship among mammalian nucleolin and nrp
we then analyzed the published sequence database of other mammalian species to see whether nrps are also encoded in their genome and also constructed a phylogenetic tree to understand the evolutionary relationship among these nucleolin family members . we detected one novel nrp in the mouse genome, which is identical to the rat nrp in addition to the regular nucleolin gene on mouse chromosome  <dig>  this nrp is reported as pseudogene in the mouse genome database on chromosome  <dig> and chromosome  <dig>  sequencing of the nucleolin and nrp amplified from rna of mouse gc1-spg cells showed that the mouse nrp is almost 90% identical to rat nrp sequence. however the nucleotide sequence did not exactly correspond to the either of the pseudogenes of mouse but was found to be identical to a predicted splice variant of nucleolin mrna itself present on chromosome  <dig>  there is a complete absence of 3rd exon of nucleolin mrna in the case of mouse leading to the lack of the acidic stretches, showing that the predicted nucleolin spice variant in mouse is actually expressed in mouse spermatogonial germ cells . when we compared the amino acid sequences of human nrp <dig>  and nrp <dig>  on chromosome  <dig> with that of human nucleolin on the same chromosome, we observed that nrp <dig> lacks a portion of n-terminal domain, complete rrm <dig> domain and a portion of rrm <dig> while nrp <dig> lacks a portion of n-terminal domain but retains the rrm domains. the canis familaris genome also encodes  <dig> nrp genes. the human nucleolin/nrp genes have separately evolved compared to the rodent nucleolin/nrp gene while the canis familaris nrps segregate separately. from above observations it is obvious that nrps do exist in different mammalian species. the domain wise alignment of the nucleolin and nrp from different species indicates that except for the acidic stretch that is absent in the nrps other major domains such as rrm1– <dig> and the gar domains are very well conserved 

nrp is over expressed in germ cells and localizes to nucleolus
we were then interested to study the expression pattern of the rat nrp gene across many other tissues. a northern blot analysis of nucleolin and nrp was carried out in major tissues of the rat using a multiple tissue northern blot obtained from clonetech. nucleolin was specifically probed using the probe that spans the 4th exon using primer pairs  , which is missing in nrp. as seen from figure 6d top panel, the nucleolin specific signal of  <dig> kb was present in all the tissues including testis. a faint signal in the testis  is due to the presence of rna from diploid cells. since the sequence of nrp is very much similar to nucleolin it was difficult to design specific primers for nrp. therefore, a common probe  was used that can detect both nucleolin and nrp using primer pairs   which showed the presence of two bands in testis and  <dig> kb corresponding to the size of nucleolin in other tissues . however, a very faint signal in other tissues was also detected. the functional significance of low level of expression of nrp in somatic tissues and its up regulation in meiotic and post meiotic germ cells remains to be explored. it is quite likely that the presence of sox  <dig> binding element in the promoter sequence determines the higher level of nrp expression in testis in the absence of nucleolin. we were curious to know whether nrp also gets localized specifically to nucleolus. for this purpose we cloned the rat nrp cdna sequence in a pcmv vector with a c-myc epitope at its n-terminal end. after transfection in gc1-spg cell line , the localization was detected by indirect immunoflourescence assay using the monoclonal anti-myc antibodies. as can be seen in figure 6e the nrp also specifically colocalises to nucleolus along with endogenous nucleolin probed with polyclonal anti-nucleolin antibodies. thus all these observations suggest that nrp is over expressed in testis in the absence of nucleolin and it is found to be localized in the nucleolus.

nrp supports rdna transcription in the absence of nucleolin
the experiment described above showed that rdna is transcribed in meiotic spermatocytes and spermatid cells in the absence of nucleolin. one can argue that some other proteins other than nrp may be responsible for the rdna transcription that we are detecting in meiotic spermatocytes and spermatid cells. in order to demonstrate that nrp can support the rdna transcription, we carried out knock down experiment in gc1-spg cell line . we had to use these cell lines but not the meiotic spermatocytes and spermatid cells because the transfection technique for mammalian germ cells is not available at present. we performed sirna mediated down regulation of nucleolin and nrp  in mouse gc1-spg and rag- <dig>  cell lines. as seen from the western blot image , a down regulation of nucleolin is seen in a time dependent manner in rag- <dig> cells which is a somatic cell line that does not express nrp. in gc1-spg cells sirna mediated down regulation resulted in down regulation of both nucleolin as well as nrp as probed by a western blot analysis . further, we specifically knocked down the expression of the nucleolin by using antisense lna oligos  that were designed against the fourth exon region which is unique to nucleolin and absent in nrp. interestingly this down regulation resulted in decreased intensity of nucleolin band in the western analysis whereas the intensity of the nrp band remained unaffected. this also confirms to our early observations that the two proteins differ only in their 4th exon region. β actin was used a loading control whose protein level remained unchanged.

we then looked into the nucleolar morphology in sirna and antisense rna transfected gc1-spg cells. immunoflouresence was performed using fibrillarin antibody after  <dig> hours of post transfection followed by alexa conjugated secondary antibody . as can be seen from the figure 7b multiple micro nucleoli were observed in sirna silenced cells where both nucleolin and nrp levels are down regulated. these observations are similar to those reported by ugrinova et al  <cit> . on the other hand in antisense oligonucleotide treated cells  the nucleolar architecture remained more or less similar to the control sets .

we next tried to address the status of rdna transcription under these silenced conditions. nuclear run-on transcription assays were carried out in both sirna treated cells  and antisense oligonucleotide treated gc1-spg cells . in sirna treated cells where both nucleolin and nrp levels are down regulated, the rdna transcription was also greatly reduced when compared to lipofectamine transfected control cells. β actin remained constant both in control as well as sirna transfected run-on experiments. similar experiment carried out in antisense oligonucleotide treated cells  showed that the rdna transcription was similar to lipofectamine transfected control cells. the experiment above thus suggests a possible role of the variant nucleolin in rdna transcription even in the absence of nucleolin.

discussion
the spermiogenesis process in mammals involves extensive reorganization of nuclear morphology of haploid spermatids generating highly condensed and transcriptionally inactive testicular spermatozoa. transcriptional activity of haploid spermatids is now fairly documented. some of the early observation based on ultra structural studies and in situ labeling techniques have shown that although ribosomal rna can be detected in round spermatids  <cit>  there is a continuous nucleolar inactivation during the spermiogenesis process  <cit> . many protein coding genes transcribed by rna pol ii are stored as ribonucleoprotein particles which are subsequently activated for translation during late stages of spermiogenesis  <cit> . based on the circumstantial evidence it is generally believed that preformed ribosomes which are passed on from one meiotic prophase spermatocytes to haploid round spermatids support protein synthesis of the newly transcribed protein coding genes. however, there has been no systematic molecular study on the status of ribosomal rna synthesis and processing in the haploid germ cells. the present study was initiated based on our preliminary observation that nucleolin is strongly down regulated in both meiotic spermatocytes and haploid round spermatids. nucleolin is a major nucleolar phosphoprotein which is involved in various steps of ribosome biogenesis in the nucleolus .

a detailed study on the expression pattern of nucleolin gene by real time pcr, immunofluoroscence and western blot analysis has clearly demonstrated that nucleolin expression is strongly reduced both in meiotic spermatocytes and spermatid cells. interestingly we have discovered the presence of a nucleolin related protein gene encoded on rat chromosome  <dig> which is expressed only in testicular germ cells and is highly up regulated in meiotic spermatocytes and spermatid cells. the germ cell specific up regulation of the nrp gene is probably determined by the presence of sox  <dig> binding element only in the 5' upstream sequence of the nrp gene. sox  <dig> is an important transcription factor determining the testis expression of a particular gene  <cit> .

our experiment described here clearly demonstrated that rdna is transcribed both in meiotic spermatocytes and spermatid cells although at 50% less compared to gametic diploid spermatogonial cells. based on our present understanding of the functional role of the different domains of nucleolin we would like to interpret the findings reported in the present communication as follows. the nucleolin related protein  which is present in the meiotic spermatocytes and spermatid cells supports rdna transcription in these cells. we confirmed this role of nrp by carrying out knock down experiments as demonstrated in . but the persistence of transcriptional activity of rdna in haploid spermatids although at lower level, raises an important question on the role of this rdna transcriptional activity. it is quite plausible that this transcriptional activity may prevent any epigenetic modification at the rdna locus of the germ cells during differentiation and maturation in the testis.

another major interesting observation we have made in the present investigation is the genomic organization of the nrp gene. in contrast to the nucleolin gene which has  <dig> exons and  <dig> introns, the nrp gene has only  <dig> exons and  <dig> introns. there is a fusion of exons  <dig> through  <dig> of nucleolin gene generating a long exon  <dig> in the nrp gene. it is also interesting to note that the 3' utr of both the nucleolin and nrp gene is identical. a detailed bioinformatics analysis of other mammalian genomes revealed that there are  <dig> additional nrp genes in addition to regular nucleolin gene in humans and  <dig> nrp genes in canis familiaris . the existence of these nrps in other mammalian species as well, suggests that they might have evolved to attain new functions that needs to be explored further. the loss of n terminal acidic stretch the rat nrp might have a unique function in terms of its interacting partners compared to somatic nucleolin. the roles of these additional nrp genes present in these other mammalian species in the rdna transcription needs to be investigated further to understand the functional significance of nrps.

in addition to possible role of the nrps in ribosome biogenesis, it is quite likely that they may have completely different biological roles which need to be discovered. thus our observations suggest that, other than supporting some functions of nucleolin, this variant may have a more specific role in meiotic prophase spermatocytes and haploid germ cells like modulo, a drosophila homologue of nucleolin  <cit> . they have shown that a testis specific variant of modulo regulates the expression of meiotic arrest genes and is essential for transcription of spermatid differentiation genes. surprisingly, we do find that the nrp gene is upregulated by several fold both in the meiotic spermatocytes and spermatid cells as compared to gametic diploid cells. therefore it remains to be seen whether the mammalian nucleolin variant, nrp which is dramatically up regulated post meiosis, in the absence of nucleolin has a similar role as that of testis specific modulo of drosophila regulating expression of a set of genes during spermatogenesis. further experiments are underway in this direction.

CONCLUSIONS
in this report we identified a new variant of nucleolin  in testicular germ cells. we found that nucleolin is down regulated during spermatogenesis and this new variant has the potential to support rdna transcription. we expect that these findings will be useful to better understand not only the existing variants of nucleolin in different cell types but also for exploring the functional significance of this new variant during spermatogenesis other than rdna transcription.

