BACKGROUND
micrornas  are a class of non-coding rnas that can regulate many protein coding genes by base-paring to messenger rna  targets  <cit> . their roles in gene regulation have been identified in numerous biological processes, such as developmental timing, apoptosis, and cell proliferation  <cit> . the precise mechanism of mirna targeting is unknown, but animal mirnas have a small region called "seed" site , which is located at positions 2- <dig> of the 5' end of mirnas and is known to contribute to target recognition significantly  <cit> . most target sites are found in the mrna 3' untranslated region   <cit>  and are well conserved among closely related species  <cit> . a high number of coding genes, except for those with short 3' utrs such as house keeping genes, are likely regulated by one or multiple mirnas  <cit> .

because of the important genome-wide regulatory roles of mirnas, many computational approaches have been developed to obtain high-throughput genome-wide mirna target predictions in animals  <cit> . most existing algorithms first perform sequence search on 3' utrs to find regions that have complementarity to mirnas preferably at their seed sites. as this initial step usually results in thousands of potential target sites and many false positives, most algorithms take additional features into consideration; for example, evolutionary conservation filters can decrease the false positive rate, but such filters are effective only for conserved mirnas with sites of conserved function. several other features have been experimentally and computationally identified, and we have categorized them into two groups:  individual target site level features and  global mrna level features. the six target site level features currently known are  site conservation,  additional base paring in 3' portion of mirna, especially at positions 13- <dig> of mirna  <cit> ,  au-rich context within  <dig> nucleotides upstream and downstream from the seed site  <cit> ,  avoidance of the region from the stop codon to  <dig> nt downstream in 3' utr  <cit> ,  tendency of targeting near both ends of 3' utr when the length of the 3' utr is >  <dig>  <cit> , and  site accessibility  <cit> . furthermore, there are three known mrna level features:  high cooperativity of two mirna target sites when the distance between them is 17- <dig> nt  <cit> ,  length of 3' utr  <cit> , and  the number of potential target sites per 3' utr  <cit> .

although some algorithms base their predictions on only one of these additional features, such as conservation  <cit>  or accessibility  <cit> , the algorithms commonly use different combinations of features  <cit> . most existing algorithms focus on identifying individual target sites, however; few model mirna targeting at the level of the mrna and only pictar tries to explicitly model the contribution of multiple target sites to mirna regulation  <cit> .

here, we describe a novel two-step classification model that recognizes the individual characteristics of functional binding sites and the global properties of mrnas regulated by candidate mirnas. we base the model on support vector machines   <cit> , use large-scale microarray datasets to train and test the model, and benchmark the model against five popular algorithms - targetscan  <cit> , miranda   <cit> , pictar, pita  <cit> , and mirtarget <dig>  <cit> . as these five algorithms represent different prediction strategies and can have different strengths and weaknesses, we have used six different benchmarks that account for overall predictions, highly specific predictions, predictions of conserved sites, and method-specific data variations. our method performs better than or equivalent to the other existing algorithms in the six benchmarks when tested on different cross-validation experiments or on an independent test set.

RESULTS
our goal was to create and test a mirna target prediction approach that modeled both the characteristics of individual target sites and the global properties of mrnas regulated by candidate mirnas. although there are few experimentally validated mirna targets, several datasets from microarray experiments where mirnas were ectopically expressed are available for public use  <cit> . high-throughput proteomics experiments have shown that most mirna targets are regulated at both the mrna and protein level  <cit> , which means that these microarray data are relevant and useful for developing mirna targeting models. in addition, there are several microarray experiments for small interfering rna  off-target effects  <cit> . transfected sirnas are known to act like mirnas  <cit>  and degrade numerous unintended  mrnas. consequently, microarray datasets for sirna off-targets can be used to reveal aspects of mirna regulation. unlike mirna target sites, however, off-target sites for such artificial and exogenous sirnas are not evolutionary conserved.

we collected four such microarray datasets - two mirna and two sirna datasets - to use as training data to develop our method. based on an analysis of how different seed types covered the positive and negative target candidates within these datasets , we chose to develop a target-site model that included both stringent and non-stringent seed sites. our hypothesis was that by including non-stringent seed sites and training two separate svms on target site and mrna-level features, we would create an accurate mirna target prediction method with high sensitivity and overall prediction performance.

svm prediction performs well with target site features
the first step of our two-step svm classification approach was to construct a target site level classifier that can separate positive target sites from negative target sites. to construct this target site level classifier, we included several features known or presumed predictive of mirna targeting . four sub-steps were applied and then iterated until the most effective classifier was found. first, 10-fold cross-validation was performed to evaluate the prediction ability. second, a receiver operating characteristic  curve was plotted to visualize the result of the 10-fold cross-validation and the area under the roc curve  was used as a performance measure. the roc curve and its auc value, or "roc score", is a simple but powerful measure of overall classification performance as the curve shows a classifier's sensitivity and specificity across all thresholds. third, as an svm can take both linear and non-linear kernels with different parameters, models with different kernels were assessed. fourth, to check the classifier's robustness across different experimental settings, classifiers were constructed from only three microarray experiments instead of four and tested on the remaining microarray set.

these iterative tests found that a classifier with non-linear, homogeneous polynomial kernel  showed the best performance with the roc score  <dig>  . the small standard errors in the roc plot indicated that all classifiers from this 10-fold cross-validation had similar prediction power and that the models gave robust classifications. this conclusion was supported by similar results for models trained on three of the four microarray experiments . moreover, all the four classifiers from different combinations of three microarray datasets could classify the remaining one dataset with good roc scores . these results indicated that our target site level classifiers were stable and accurate across experimental conditions, irrespective of whether the sequences were mirnas or sirnas.

seed type shows the strongest influence on target site level training
it is important to identify the influence of the features on the svm's prediction accuracy, as this can reveal new information about mirna target recognition. to evaluate the influence of all the target site level features used in our model, 10-fold cross-validation was performed repeatedly with eliminating only one feature at a time, and then roc scores were compared. these experiments showed that the "seed type" was the strongest feature with a reduced roc score of  <dig>  . reduced roc scores indicate that the feature is important, as the svm would have more prediction power with the feature included. other features showed little or no decline of roc scores, but none had substantial negative effects.

genes with long 3' utrs tend to have few positive target sites in microarray experiments
while constructing and analyzing the mrna level training data, we noticed that genes with more than  <dig> potential target sites appeared to be underrepresented among the positives. this was contrary to our expectations, as experimental data indicate that additional target sites give increased target repression  <cit> . additional analyses revealed two trends. first, genes with long 3' utrs  did generally not appear to be mirna targets - irrespective of the genes' number of potential mirna target sites . second, positive targets generally had a higher density of potential target sites  - that is, number of sites divided by the 3' utr length - than negative target candidates had .

one possible explanation for this result is competition between transfected rnas and endogenous mirnas  <cit> . genes with long 3' utrs tend to be targeted by several endogenous mirnas, therefore the transfected rnas may have less effect on these genes. another possible explanation for this result is that genes with long 3' utrs have fewer target sites within these active regions because active sites are preferentially located close to the stop codon or poly-a site within long 3' utrs  <cit> . however, we found that the positive targets and negative target candidates had a similar number of target sites within the regions close to the stop codon and poly-a site . thus, a high density of target sites within the middle region of long 3' utrs appeared to be important for target regulation.

we used two approaches to take this unexpected distribution of true positive targets into consideration. first, a new binary feature was introduced to distinguish the genes with less than  <dig> potential target sites from the others. second,  <dig> randomly selected non-target genes with more than  <dig> target sites were explicitly added to the training data. because of a practical limitation on the maximum number of training data, most of these none-target genes with long 3' utrs would otherwise have been excluded if we had constructed the training data by random sampling. these two approaches had a positive effect on target predictions for genes with many target site candidates .

mrna features improve svm predictions
the second step of our two-step svm classification approach was to construct an mrna level classifier that can separate down-regulated genes from non down-regulated genes. this subdivision enabled us to incorporate features related to the predicted strength of individual target sites and the distance between these sites that had not been used in other algorithms before . we used the same four steps as for the target site level to find the most effective mrna level classifier.

the classifier showed the best performance when a linear kernel with default parameters was used . as for the target site level, the roc curve for the classifier had small standard errors, indicating robust classifications . target predictions also retained good performance with classifiers trained with only three microarray datasets . these classifiers could also predict the remaining data set with good accuracy , but the classifiers showed increased variation between the datasets compared with the corresponding target site level classifiers. whereas the mrna level classifiers greatly improved upon the target site level classifiers' performance on the mirna data , the mrna level classifiers gave smaller improvements on the sirna data . thus, the targets for exogenous sirnas were more difficult to predict than the targets for endogenous mirnas were - at least in the datasets used in these experiments. this could not be explained by different preferences for strand loading between the mirnas and sirnas, as removing the sirnas where the intended guide strand was not clearly preferred for risc incorporation did not improve the svm's performance . despite these differences, the mrna level classifier showed good improvement compared with the target site level classifier and could predict target genes with high accuracy.

number and strength of putative mirna target sites strongly predict mirna regulation
as for the target site level features, we wanted to determine to what extent the different mrna level features influenced target predictions. we therefore performed a similar evaluation of feature influence for the mrna level. the result showed that the "distribution of discriminant values" was the strongest feature with a reduced roc score of  <dig>  . eliminating other features had little effect on the roc scores, but additional analyses showed that at least the target-site distance features contributed to separate the down-regulated from the unaffected genes . as the "distribution" feature essentially counted the number of high-scoring putative target sites within the mrna, these results showed that strong target sites are important for mirna regulation.

the target site level feature analyses indicated that target site accessibility and conservation had little or no effect on the svm's predictive performance and additional analyses at the mrna level confirmed these results . as computing site accessibility and conservation require substantial computational resources, we excluded these features from the final model. recently, a tool based on support vector regression  reported improved target prediction performance  <cit> . we also tested whether using svr instead of classification would further improve the results, but instead found that svr gave reduced performance .

two-step svm shows strong prediction ability and outperforms other algorithms when tested on independent dataset
both the 10-fold cross-validation and single dataset hold-out experiments showed that the two-step svm classifiers could predict mirna target sites in unseen data with high accuracy. nevertheless, to further test the svm classifiers, we evaluated the classifiers on an independent test set and compared their performance with those of other existing target prediction algorithms. we included seven popular mirna target prediction algorithms - pita all, pita top, targetscan, targetscan with conserved genes, miranda , mirtarget <dig>  and pictar - in the comparisons, and used the linsley dataset because only mirtarget <dig> had used this microarray dataset as a training set. the predictions of three algorithms - our svm approach, pita all, and targetscan - were generated without conservation information, but the predictions of the other algorithms were generated with conservation information as features or filters. we included mirtarget <dig> as a reference - despite mirtarget <dig> using the linsley dataset for training - because the algorithm, similar to our two-step svm, adopted a machine learning approach.

the algorithms' predictions had little overlap because all algorithms used different definitions of potential target sites. hence, it was important to use different datasets to assess and compare the algorithms' prediction performance precisely. we used six types of datasets as benchmarks; these were, roc with all genes, roc10*n, roc with 7mer + conservation, and roc with targetscan, miranda, and pictar datasets .

the "roc with all genes" dataset was comprised of all the records from the microarray dataset. down regulated  and unaffected  genes were decided solely by the microarray results regardless of seed matching or any other definitions set by different algorithms. the purpose of using this dataset was to evaluate the algorithms' overall performance on the entire microarray experiment. the resulting roc curves showed that our svm approach outperformed the other seven algorithms in terms of sensitivity and overall target recognition . the number of positive genes found by our svm approach was  <dig>  which was the largest among all the algorithms . in comparison, pita all found a similar number of positive genes, but its predictions were less specific than our svm's predictions were. at similar true positive rates, pita all returned more false positives, which resulted in a difference in roc score of  <dig>  between svm and pita all. similar to pita, miranda returned less specific predictions than the other algorithms did, although miranda's predictions were more specific than pita all's at similar true positive rates. miranda also had the lowest sensitivity of the different algorithms. apart from differences in sensitivity, the remaining algorithms had similar prediction specificities; mirtarget <dig> appeared to give slightly more specific predictions than the other algorithms did, but our svm appeared to have the highest specificity of the methods for which the linsley set truly was an independent test set. these differences were small, however, and only apparent for the algorithms' most sensitive predictions.

to elucidate the algorithms' performance at highly specific target predictions, we turned to the "roc10*n" benchmark , which is a modified version of roc <dig>  <cit>  that shows the algorithms' performance up to  <dig> * n false positive predictions . although the svm's roc10*n score is slightly lower than those of the two targetscan versions and mirtarget <dig>  the svm again has the highest sensitivity of the algorithms . similarly, pita all again shows very low sensitivity, whereas pictar and miranda have similar performance. thus, the results from the roc10*n benchmark indicate that our svm approach has very good performance with top scored genes .

as many of the algorithms only considered stringent seed types and filtered predictions based on conservation, we constructed the "roc with 7mer + conservation" benchmark. the benchmark only consisted of the genes with stringent seeds found in conserved regions. consequently, the benchmark essentially only considered the most likely candidate mirna target genes and showed how good the different algorithms are at finding the real targets among genes that all are likely targets. despite that our approach was not optimized for this type of dataset, the svm delivered more sensitive and specific predictions than the other methods . interestingly, the algorithms optimized for recognizing conserved stringent seed targets - targetscan with conserved genes, pita top and pictar - all had markedly lower performance than the svm. one likely explanation for this result is that other non-conserved seeds within the genes are important for mirna targeting as well. supporting this hypothesis, targetscan - which also considers non-conserved seeds - had a markedly better performance than targetscan with conserved genes. miranda showed especially poor performance on the conservation benchmark, but this was likely because the miranda predictions had very few overlaps with the benchmark dataset due to different conservation filtering. indeed, miranda had better performance on its method-specific benchmarks . the three method-specific benchmarks that use different definitions of sequence conservation and separate benchmark tests on the four training datasets also showed similar results as the 7mer + conservation benchmark . thus, lack of conservation does not guarantee lack of function, and effectively incorporating all seed types in a common prediction framework, such as our svm, appears to be essential for correctly prioritizing lists of candidate mirna targets.

two-step svm's improved performance holds when detecting protein level targets
although several recent studies have suggested the possibility of mrna repression as mirna's major regulatory mode  <cit> , it is still interesting to verify the prediction power at both mrna and protein levels. we therefore used two publically available proteomics datasets of mirna targeting, baek  <cit>  and selbach  <cit> , as training sets to create a new proteomics-based two-step svm classifier and as independent datasets to test the mrna-based two-step svm classifier. the proteomics-based svm showed comparable performance to the mrna-based svm , which indicated that features important for predicting mrna-level mirna targets are also relevant for predicting protein-level targets. indeed, when we benchmarked the mrna-based classifiers against the selbach and baek datasets, the svm outperformed the other seven algorithms in most cases and especially on the roc10*n benchmarks . note that on these two sets, which were true independent test sets for mirtarget <dig> and therefore should be more representative of the method's performance than the linsley set, mirtarget <dig> had similar or slightly lower performance than the two targetscan versions. these results as well as additional benchmark results  suggest that our two-step svm approach is also effective at detecting target genes at protein level.

three benchmarks, all, roc10*n, 7m+c , were performed on one transcripomics  and two proteomics  datasets. the roc scores were calculated for eight algorithms, svm, pita, tscan , miran , pitat , ts_c , mirt <dig>  and picta 

different criteria of dataset selection do not affect svm performance
we trained and tested our model with alternative data selection criteria to analyze the influence of data selection on the target prediction power. we verified two data selection criteria,  inclusion and exclusion of up regulated targets in the negative record sets, and  different log ratio threshold values to create positive record sets. the results suggest that our svm approach is very flexible and robust, and it can retain its performance even when trained and tested on datasets created by different parameter settings .

CONCLUSIONS
we have presented and evaluated a novel two-step svm-based mirna target prediction model that recognizes the individual characteristics of functional binding sites and the global characteristics of mirna-targeted mrnas. when tested on several different benchmarks, the model generally outperformed other well-known mirna target prediction algorithms. in particular, the two-step svm showed a much stronger ability to identify true mirna targets among genes that all are likely targets with conserved stringent seed sites.

the model relies on several target site and mrna characteristics and its design is flexible so that it is easy to integrate new characteristics when such are reported. our current model does not include target site accessibility and conservation information, however, as our tests showed that these were not important features in our model. this result is very important for genome-wide analysis because assessing target site conservation and especially target site accessibility have high computational costs. consequently, the model can for example be used online for identifying sirna off-targets.

by modeling mirna targeting in two steps - recognition of individual target sites and regulation of mrna - we have incorporated several new characteristics neglected by other tools, such as mirnas' distance dependence for synergistic regulation. moreover, through this two-step modeling, we have introduced several features that effectively capture the number and relative strength of individual target sites within target candidates. our results show that these features are the most important characteristics for identifying mirna-regulated genes.

a potential limitation is that our model is trained on data from over-expression experiments, which to some extent are affected by interactions with endogenous mirnas  <cit> . including data from argonaute  pull-down  <cit>  or mirna knock-down  <cit>  experiments could reduce potential bias from such interactions, but may also introduce additional bias. most of the current ago pull-down experiments were, for example, done with ectopically expressed and tagged ago-fusion proteins  <cit> . as for mirna knock-down, there are currently few datasets available.

another potential limitation is that our model was trained on data from human cell lines. although the mirna regulatory mechanisms appear to be shared in animals, we cannot discount species-specific variation, which may result in the current human-optimized model having sub-optimal performance in, for example, invertebrates. testing and optimizing the model on high-throughput data from additional species - especially species that are remotely related to humans - would therefore be interesting future work.

even though our new model represents a significant step towards accurate mirna target prediction, it is still challenging to achieve very precise target predictions because many mirnas have spatial, temporal, or cell-type-specific expression. integrating target predictions with expression profiles of mirnas and putative targets can be one way to improve predictions; for example, by taking into account mirna saturation  <cit> , target concentration  <cit> , or expression of rna binding proteins  <cit> . our two-step svm should be ideal for such analyses, as it has a high sensitivity and better overall performance compared with existing target prediction methods.

