BACKGROUND
the process of speciation generates barriers to reproduction that prevent gene flow between diverging populations  <cit> . these isolating mechanisms are distinguished based on the stage of sexual reproduction at which they act. prezygotic isolating barriers prevent the initial generation of a hybrid zygote. one of the most important prezygotic barriers to reproduction in sexually reproducing animal species is behavioral isolation, which includes factors that reduce the attraction between heterospecific individuals, thus preventing mating  <cit> . if mating does occur, postmating prezygotic barriers can limit the generation of hybrid offspring  <cit> . these barriers include the precedence of conspecific sperm over heterospecific sperm in female reproductive tracts , incompatibilities between sperm and egg surface proteins that prevent fertilization , and reduced female survival due to exposure to heterospecific sperm toxins . postzygotic barriers to reproduction occur after hybrid offspring are produced, and typically involve genetic incompatibilities within the hybrid genome that result in a loss of viability or fertility of the hybrid offspring .

multiple isolating mechanisms that promote reproductive isolation can exist between even incipient species . thus, in order to understand how divergence is maintained between two species one must quantify both prezygotic and postzygotic barriers to reproduction. by dissecting these barriers it is possible to determine the relative strength of each, which can establish how gene flow between populations is prevented as well as indicate which barriers arose first. emerging patterns across species may also shed light on the importance of natural selection during the speciation process. for instance, across species of drosophila levels of both behavioral isolation and postzygotic isolation increase as the genetic divergence increases  <cit> . when taxa are allopatric, premating and postmating barriers tend to accumulate at similar rates. however, when taxa are sympatric, behavioral isolation generally increases faster than postzygotic isolation, which is thought to be due to natural selection reinforcing species boundaries to strengthen premating isolation  <cit> .

in this study, we focus on two closely related species of drosophila, d. suboccidentalis and d. occidentalis. these species are members of the quinaria group, which contains around  <dig> species and is about 10– <dig> million years old  <cit> . d. suboccidentalis is abundant and broadly distributed in northwestern north america, including washington, oregon, colorado, north and south dakota, idaho, utah, british columbia, and alberta. there are also collecting records of this species from the mountains of central mexico  <cit> ; its range may be contiguous south to this region, though it has not been collected recently in arizona or new mexico . in contrast, d. occidentalis’ range is very restricted, as it is found only in certain regions of southern and baja california  <cit> . there are no recorded instances of sympatric populations of these species . both of these species consume mushrooms as both larvae and adults, and they also use mushrooms as a mating substrate. the primary phenotypic difference between them is in abdominal pigmentation, as both male and female d. suboccidentalis harbor lighter abdominal pigmentation than d. occidentalis  <cit>  . furthermore, these species also differ slightly in their metaphase chromosomes  <cit> . very little genetic work has been completed on these species, but phylogenetic analyses show that they are more closely related to each other than to any other known drosophila species  <cit>  . based on  <dig> autosomal protein-coding loci, synonymous divergence between d. suboccidentalis and d. occidentalis is about  <dig>  substitutions/site , which is similar to the genetic divergence seen among the species in the d. simulans - d. sechellia - d. mauritiana clade  <cit> . we estimate that d. suboccidentalis and d. occidentalis shared a common ancestor roughly  <dig>  years ago, assuming  <dig> generations/year and a mutation rate of  <dig>  × 10− <dig> subs/site/year per  <cit> .

in this study, we examine individual components of reproductive isolation between d. suboccidentalis and d. occidentalis, including both premating and postmating barriers. previous work suggested that hybrids produced by either reciprocal cross are viable and fertile  <cit> . we first use no-choice mating trials to quantify the prezygotic barriers to hybridization. we then use f <dig> hybrids to ask whether female discrimination is inherited in a recessive or dominant manner, and whether f <dig> hybrid males are able to attract pure species mates at a rate similar to pure species individuals. second, we determine if any postmating, prezygotic barriers exist between these species by measuring egg production of females that mated with heterospecific males compared to those mated with conspecific males. finally, we test for postzygotic isolation by quantifying hybrid female fecundity and hybrid male fertility.

RESULTS
premating barriers
first, we find that the strength of premating isolating barriers is asymmetric between species . we performed no-choice mate trials in which a single female from either species was presented with a heterospecific or conspecific male. we found that male species  and the female x male species interaction  had significant effects on mating rate, whereas female species  and block  did not. this interaction is likely due to the females of both species mating at a lower rate with heterospecific males relative to conspecifics, indicating the presence of premating isolation. this pattern is especially striking for d. suboccidentalis females, which mate with d. occidentalis males 10-fold less often than with conspecific males . in contrast, d. occidentalis females mate with heterospecific males about half as often as with conspecifics, which is still a significant decrease . among heterospecific crosses only, d. occidentalis females mated more often with d. suboccidentalis males than d. suboccidentalis females mated with d. occidentalis males . among all successful matings, there was no difference in the copulation latency if the pair was of the same or different species .figure  <dig> 
pure species mating rates. mating rates within and between species in no-choice trials. error bars indicate the binomial 95% confidence intervals. “subo” refers to d. suboccidentalis and “occ” refers to d. occidentalis. ninety-fine trials were completed for each type.



next, we find that f <dig> hybrid females will mate with males of either species . hybrids from either reciprocal cross mate with d. suboccidentalis males at a similar rate , and this is similar to the mating rate observed between pure species d. suboccidentalis females and males . the hybrid females from the two reciprocal crosses also mate with d. occidentalis males at a similar rate , and these hybrids mate at a slightly higher rate with these males than do conspecific females . these results suggest that the female premating discrimination has a recessive genetic basis, and is not due to a factor in the cytoplasm. combining females from the two reciprocal crosses, we find that hybrid females mate at a similar rate with d. suboccidentalis and d. occidentalis males . finally, among the pairs that mated, the latency to copulation is similar in conspecific crosses and crosses involving hybrid females .figure  <dig> 
mating rates of crosses involving hybrids. mating rates of hybrids relative to pure species crosses in no-choice mate trials. error bars are the 95% binomial confidence intervals, and the sample size is indicated within each bar. “subo” refers to d. suboccidentalis, “occ” refers to d. occidentalis, “f1” are f <dig> hybrids from a d. occidentalis female, and “f1” are f <dig> hybrids from a d. suboccidentalis female.



finally, we find that pure species females accept f <dig> hybrid males at a rate similar to conspecific controls. females of both species will mate with hybrid males from both reciprocal crosses , suggesting the male signal trait is probably not located on the x-chromosome. furthermore, both d. occidentalis and d. suboccidentalis females will mate with hybrid males at a rate that is similar to pure species males , which suggests the male signal trait has a dominant genetic basis. among pairs that successfully mated, there was no significant difference in the latency to copulation of pure species pairs compared to pairs with hybrid males .

postmating barriers
we do not find evidence for decreased reproductive output upon interspecific mating. females mated with a conspecific male do not produce significantly more eggs than females mated with a heterospecific male . when we counted the offspring produced by pure species females that mated with conspecific or heterospecific males, we did not find a significant difference between conspecific and heterospecific crosses . for both d. suboccidentalis and d. occidentalis females, heterospecific crosses produced slightly more offspring than conspecific crosses, though none of the pairs of mating types were significantly different .figure  <dig> 
female egg production. female egg production after mating with conspecific or heterospecific males. error bars represent standard errors, and the sample size of each type is shown within bar. “subo” refers to d. suboccidentalis, “occ” refers to d. occidentalis, and f <dig> hybrids combine the results from both reciprocal crosses.
female progeny production. number of progeny produced by pure species females after conspecific or heterospecific matings. bars indicate standard errors, and numbers within the bars are sample sizes. “subo” refers to a d. suboccidentalis and “occ” refers to d. occidentalis.



we find that hybrid females have a similar or higher fecundity as pure species females. combining hybrid females from the two reciprocal crosses, these females produced about the same number of eggs as pure d. suboccidentalis females when mated to d. suboccidentalis males , but more eggs than pure species d. occidentalis females when mated to d. occidentalis males .

even though effects on male fertility are often the first type of postzygotic isolation to arise  <cit> , we identified no postzygotic effects on male fertility in heterospecific crosses between d. suboccidentalis and d. occidentalis. first, using assays of sperm motility, we found that every assayed pure species as well as f <dig> hybrid male from both reciprocal crosses produced fully motile sperm . second, f <dig> hybrid males from either reciprocal cross sired a similar number of offspring as either type of pure species male .figure  <dig> 
male progeny production. offspring production of hybrid males relative to pure species and heterospecific crosses. error bars indicate standard errors, and the numbers within the bars are the sample sizes. “subo” refers to d. suboccidentalis, “occ” refers to d. occidentalis, “f1” are f <dig> hybrids from a d. suboccidentalis female, and “f1” are f <dig> hybrids from a d. occidentalis female.



discussion
d. suboccidentalis and d. occidentalis were determined to be different species based on their geographic locations, chromosomal patterns, and slight morphological differences  <cit> . here, we find substantial premating isolation but no postmating isolation between these closely related species. first, females of both d. suboccidentalis and d. occidentalis discriminate against mating with males of the opposite species, though this pattern is much stronger for d. suboccidentalis females. during our no-choice mate trials, males of both species vigorously court females of either species . when heterospecific matings do occur, we do not see a decrease in the production of eggs or viable offspring relative to conspecific males, indicating a lack of postmating prezygotic isolating barriers. finally, the hybrid offspring appear to be vigorous and both sexes are fully fertile, suggesting a lack of intrinsic postzygotic isolating mechanisms between these species, and confirming qualitative results of a previous study  <cit> . we note that our experiments used flies from one population of each species, and thus our study does not capture the variation that may occur in reproductive isolation between d. suboccidentalis and d. occidentalis. further studies are necessary to ask if the patterns we observe are found from flies collected from other geographic locations. furthermore, our experiments used several isofemale lines of d. occidentalis but a single yet genetically diverse stock of d. suboccidentalis, and there may be additional genetic variation present within populations that we have not identified here.

it is perhaps surprising that allopatric populations of such closely related species have evolved prezygotic isolating barriers in the absence of intrinsic postzygotic isolation. to compare the level of premating isolation between d. suboccidentalis and d. occidentalis with other species pairs, we calculated the strength of sexual isolation using the same metric used by coyne and orr  <cit> . the index is calculated as 1-/, where a value of  <dig> indicates pure assortative mating and a value of  <dig> indicates random mating between species. using data from our no-choice experiments, we obtained a sexual isolation index value of  <dig>  between d. suboccidentalis and d. occidentalis. the synonymous divergence between these species is ~  <dig>  substitutions/site , which is similar to other drosophila species pairs with a nei’s d of ~  <dig>  . thus we can ask how sexual isolation in this species pair compares to others with similar divergence. considering only species pairs with nei’s d of  <dig> - <dig>  in the coyne and orr data as updated by yukilevich  <cit> , the sexual isolation between d. suboccidentalis and d. occidentalis is stronger than most other allopatric pairs . in contrast, the sexual isolation between d. suboccidentalis and d. occidentalis is relatively low compared to sympatric pairs . thus, d. suboccidentalis and d. occidentalis appear to be somewhat more sexually isolated than expected based on their current geographic distributions.

asymmetry in sexual isolation between drosophila species has been observed in many previous studies  <cit> . a common explanation for asymmetric premating isolation is that hybrid fitness is lower in one cross direction than the other, which is expected to result in a stronger selective pressure on the females from the species with lower hybrid fitness to avoid heterospecific matings. in our studies of d. suboccidentalis and d. occidentalis we do not identify any intrinsic postmating isolation in either cross direction, but we have not tested the ecological fitness of the hybrids, which if low could select for premating discrimination. the patterns of mate discrimination we observe may also be caused by differences in premating conditions. for instance, females from the species with the smaller population size may encounter heterospecific males at a high rate and thus have a relatively greater cost of hybridization  <cit> . this would predict that d. occidentalis, the species with the more restricted range, should be more choosy. however, we find that d. suboccidentalis, which has a broader range, to be the more choosy of these species.

we speculate that d. suboccidentalis females may have evolved stronger mate discrimination due to interactions with species other than d. occidentalis  <cit> . while d. occidentalis has a limited range and may interact with few other species, d. suboccidentalis co-occurs with many other quinaria group species. for instance, in the northern part of the range this includes d. recens, d. subquinaria, d. rellima, and d. falleni. character displacement with other closely related sympatric species in such traits as courtship songs and cuticular hydrocarbon profiles could explain how premating isolation with d. occidentalis can be strong even though postzygotic isolation is absent. in this scenario, discrimination against d. occidentalis would result as a byproduct of selection rather than a direct result of it. we note that in the laboratory d. suboccidentalis can hybridize with other quinaria group species in addition to d. occidentalis, and in our assays the hybrid males of these other crosses are sterile  <cit>  . while d. suboccidentalis has not been found recently in the southwestern part of north america, if it does occur there it would be interesting to not only test females from this part of the range for discrimination against d. occidentalis, but also against males from northern conspecific populations, and vice versa.

the sexual isolation that occurs between pure species individuals is lost when hybrids are used. our results suggest female premating discrimination has a recessive genetic basis, which has also been observed in other drosophila species . one may expect that recessive female preference alleles could be more likely to spread in allopatry than in sympatry, as in sympatry the hybrid offspring could mate with males from either pure species and ultimately prevent the evolution of assortative mating  <cit> . furthermore, if female mate preferences evolve as a pleiotropic byproduct of an ecological adaptation rather than as a result of direct selection, when these preference alleles are recessive they may be driven to a higher frequency faster than when they are dominant  <cit> . ultimately, careful genetic dissection is necessary to understand the selective forces, if any, that drove the changes in female preferences we observe here.

further work is also necessary to determine the male traits that are used as mating signals in this system, and whether the same signals are used by females of each species. the acceptance of hybrid males from either reciprocal cross by females of either species suggests that the male signal trait has a dominant autosomal genetic basis. hybrid males have intermediate pigmentation phenotypes relative to pure species males , thus species-specific pigmentation cues may not be essential for females to mate. other male signal traits that often differ between closely related species include epicuticular pheromones and songs .

in summary, we expect that if matings do occur between these species, there would be few intrinsic barriers to gene flow between them. the hybrids do not appear to suffer any intrinsic postzygotic effects, and they also benefit from being accepted by either species. thus, introgression of genetic material could occur through backcrossing in either direction. a thorough examination of genetic differentiation between these species has not been completed, but we expect that if the effective population sizes are high, as we have found in other quinaria group species , the lineages have probably not become reciprocally monophyletic in the short time since they diverged.

CONCLUSIONS
it is important to quantify both pre and postmating reproductive barriers to determine the mechanisms that promote and maintain reproductive isolation between species. we find that the recently diverged species d. suboccidentalis and d. occidentalis show substantial sexual isolation. furthermore, this strength of this isolation is asymmetric, as d. suboccidentalis females discriminate strongly against d. occidentalis males whereas d. occidentalis discriminate only moderately against d. suboccidentalis males. these premating barriers have formed in spite of a lack of intrinsic postzygotic barriers and even though these species are thought to be allopatric in geographic range. we propose that differences in the encounter rate with other closely related species might underlie this pattern. alternatively, ecological fitness of the hybrids may also be lower in one direction, which could also select for increased premating barriers. these results lay the groundwork for future studies to dissect the geographic variation in reproductive isolation as well as the phenotypic and genetic mechanisms that underlie the reproductive barriers between these species. these can be combined with population genetic studies that inform the extent of gene flow and the consequences of geographic isolation. ultimately, these mechanistic studies will inform the roles of natural and sexual selection and how they interact to drive divergence between these lineages.

