BACKGROUND
nasonia vitripennis   is a parasitoid wasp that utilises species of cyclorrhaphous diptera, such as house flies and blow flies, as hosts to support the growth and development of their offspring. envenomation of the host increases the overall nutritional value of the food source available to the feeding wasp larvae. some of these venom induced changes include developmental arrest, immune suppression and changes to the overall metabolite profile of the host . the diverse and potent bioactivities of nasonia venom peptides indicate that they may be useful in the development of novel pharmaceuticals . the venom peptides themselves are synthesised in the venom gland  before being secreted into the venom reservoir ready for injection into the host via the ovipositor  <cit> . a recent proteomic study on these venom reservoir extracts was able to identify  <dig> peptides  <cit> . although several of the peptides had similarity to sequences found in the venom of other animals, a majority had either not been associated with venom before or had no homology to sequences in the national centre for bioinformatic information  databases. bioinformatic based annotation categories that could be applied to the venom peptides included immunity, metabolism, esterases, proteases, and recognition proteins  <cit> . the most prevalent functional annotation was serine proteases, which is one of the largest gene families found in insect genomes  <cit> .

the response to nasonia envenomation by the common laboratory host sarcophaga bullata  has been extensively studied at both the molecular and physiological level. experiments show that the respiration rate of s. bullata remains stable for up to 2 weeks following envenomation  indicating that the venom is not immediately lethal to this host  <cit> . other physiological changes to the host associated with envenomation include an increase in lipids and free amino acids, as well as the initiation of developmental arrest through an as yet an unknown mechanism. s. bullata immune processes are also affected, with the abundance and potency of circulating plasmatocytes declining dramatically  60 min following envenomation by nasonia  <cit> . importantly, nasonia venom has been shown to be able to interfere with mammalian immunity pathways. for example, experiments using mouse cell lines demonstrated that nasonia venom has both antimicrobial and anti-inflammatory properties  <cit> . reporter assays provided evidence that the observed immune responses were mediated through venom specific modifications to the steroid and toll pathways  <cit> . the activity of nasonia venom in mammalian systems may indicate that venom peptides have evolved to target highly conserved core pathway components in order to limit the ability of the host to escape envenomation. in this situation evolution has already done much of the work in designing highly specialised peptides that target cellular pathways involved in diseases such as hypertension, diabetes, and cancer. thus given the incredible species richness of the parasitoid wasps their venoms may represent a diverse untapped reservoir of molecules ready for incorporation into drug development pipelines.

in contrast to the extensive body of work exploring the host response to envenomation, relatively little is known about the individual venom peptides responsible for inducing these changes. based on sequence homology a nasonia venom metalloproteinase has been proposed to initiate developmental arrest by interfering with notch signalling  <cit> . supporting this proposal is the observation that several notch pathway genes are differentially expressed in the s. bullata hosts following envenomation. however, currently there is no direct evidence showing that this venom metalloprotease is specifically responsible for the observed expression changes in the notch pathway  <cit> . several other venom peptides are thought to be involved in modifying host metabolic pathways based on homology to sequences from model systems. for example, a venom lipase could be responsible for the increase in phospholipid degradation observed in envenomated hosts  <cit> . a venom trehalase has been proposed to convert the abundant host trehalose sugars into glucose  <cit> . additionally, several proteases found in nasonia venom are homologous to peptides used by the ectoparasitoid euplectrus separatae and the tick haemaphysalis longicornis for blood meal digestion  <cit> .

the most direct functional characterisation of a venom encoding gene comes from a recent rna interference  study by siebert et al. . knockdown of nasonia venom calreticulin  resulted in an increase in melanisation occurring at the oviposition wound on the host following envenomation  <cit> . this observation suggested that venom calreticulin functions to interfere with normal wound healing in the host, perhaps by competing with the endogenous calreticulin in the host for binding of cofactors  <cit> .

several endoparasitoids from the braconidae and ichneumonidae wasp families inject viruses or virus like particles along with their venom in order to prevent the host immune system from attacking eggs deposited in the haemolymph. the virus like particles appear to provide protection to the developing parasitoid by induction apoptosis in host hemocytes . as yet viral-like particles have not been implicated in nasonia venom function and viral transcripts could not be identified in cdna libraries synthesised from envenomated hosts  <cit> . the intracellular symbiont wolbachia is also present in high concentrations in the ovaries and host envenomation has been proposed as a possible mechanism for horizontal transfer of strains between parasitoid species  <cit> .

currently there is little direct experimental evidence supporting the proposed functions of the  <dig> nasonia venom proteins and many of the bioinformatic annotations are based on homology to sequences from non-venomous model organisms. the rnai knockdown system of nasonia clearly provides an opportunity to begin to functionally characterise the venom protein encoding genes  <cit> . however, given the number of genes involved, an important first step would be the identification of high value candidates. for this reason we carried out deep sequencing of the nasonia vg and ovary in order to use the relative gene expression as a proxy for protein abundance in the venom reservoir. the rna-seq information generated in this study also provides a valuable dataset for future studies into the reproductive system of this important developing model system.

RESULTS
rna-seq analysis of the nasonia vg and ovary transcriptomes
we used rna-seq to measure the expression of venom protein encoding genes in the vg and ovary. we chose the ovary as the comparative tissue because although it is connected to the venom apparatus, it clearly performs a distinct function in nasonia reproduction. high throughput sequencing of vg and ovary rna-seq libraries  generated a total of  <dig>  million and  <dig>  million of high quality reads , respectively. on average  <dig>  % of the sequenced reads successfully mapped to the published nasonia genome  <cit>  . the lower mapping percentages observed for vg sample three  was due to a higher proportion of rrna reads in this sample. we predict that this resulted from less effective rrna removal during library preparation for this replicate. apart from the higher proportion of nasonia rrna reads other quality control parameters for this replicate were consistent with those obtained from the other samples .table  <dig> rna-seq statistics of nasonia vitripennis ovary and vg tissue


aproportion of reads which could be aligned to a gene model


bproportion of reads assigned to multiple gene models


cproportion of aligned reads that did not overlap a gene model

fig.  <dig> rna-seq highlights expression differences between ovary and vg tissue. a principal component analysis of expression profiles for ovary  and vg  replicates showing the samples clustering by treatment group. the percentage on the axis labels represents the total variance explained by that component  volcano plot of the rna-seq data with positive fold change representing up regulated genes in the vg and vice versa for ovary. genes coloured as red were differentially expressed at an adjusted p-value <  <dig> . c pie chart summarising the proportion of genes that were part of each expression category . d semi-quantitative rt-pcr targeting the highest expressed annotated venom encoding gene nasvi2eg <dig>  amplification of nasvi2eg <dig> cdna could be detected at 24 cycles in the venom gland cdna replicates, whilst only a faint band could be detected at 30 cycles for the ovary samples. the house-keeping gene rp <dig> was used as a loading control. vg1- <dig> and o1- <dig> represent independent replicates for venom gland and ovary samples, respectively



overlap between the mapped reads and annotated features in the nasonia official gene set version  <dig>  is high, with an average of 81 % of mapped reads aligning to at least one gene body . of the  <dig>  annotated genes in ogs <dig>  54 %  had detectable expression in either the vg or ovary. based on normalised read counts, tissue specific expression  was observed for  <dig> genes in the ovary and  <dig> genes in the vg. next we utilised the r-package deseq to identify differentially expressed genes between the vg and ovary rna-seq datasets  <cit> . significantly different expression was observed for  <dig>  genes at an adjusted p-value threshold of  <dig>   . of the differentially expressed genes,  <dig> were up and  <dig> were down regulated in the vg relative to the ovary. overall the fold changes of upregulated genes were significantly larger in the vg versus the ovary  .

using blast2go we then looked for go term enrichment amongst the genes either significantly upregulated in the ovary or vg tissues. the reproductive function of the ovary is characterised by several go terms related to cell division and transcription . in contrast, genes significantly upregulated in the vg showed go enrichment in terms related to translation and protein processing functions . the relatively narrow go functional categorisations of genes upregulated in the vg are likely to reflect that the major model systems are non-venomous.fig.  <dig> go terms related to ribosomal function, translation, and protein processing are enriched in the vg. enriched go terms amongst the subset of genes significantly upregulated in the ovary  and vg . the bar graph represents the proportion  of sequences in the differentially expressed subset  with the indicated functional annotation, compared to the proportion of these annotations assigned to the entire gene set 



the highly expressed venom protein encoding genes
previous proteomic studies on nasonia venom reservoir extracts identified  <dig> venom peptides. based on our vg rna-seq data we were able to detect expression from all but one of these venom protein encoding genes . nasonia venom genes were significantly more likely to be expressed at higher levels in the vg relative to the ovary . the deseq analysis showed that six of the venom protein encoding genes were expressed at equal levels in the vg and ovary . two venom protein encoding genes expressed at higher levels in the ovary than the vg were a aspartylglucosaminidase  and trehalase . the highest expressed venom encoding gene based on normalised venom gland read counts was the novel gene venom protein y . a trypsin-like serine protease  was the highest expressed annotated gene in the vg . the rna-seq data and semi-quantitative pcr showed that expression of nasvi2eg <dig> was highly tissue specific . only five of the top  <dig> highest expressed venom protein encoding genes had functional annotations, highlighting the unique functional properties of nasonia venom . next we used sequence homology based clustering to identify any relationships amongst the highly expressed unannotated genes. using this approach only two small clusters of unannotated venom encoding genes were identified , suggesting that most of these novel loci have evolved independently, rather than through an expansion of a single gene cluster . calreticulin  was the highest ovary expressed venom encoding gene, which is not surprising given it also functions as a core immune response gene . the single venom encoding gene that was not expressed in our venom dataset, a trypsin- <dig> serine protease , also had very little expression in the ovary .table  <dig> summary of vg and ovary rna-seq data for the  <dig> nasonia venom protein encoding genes

higha
mediuma
lowa

aexpression category, see methods for details


blibrary size normalised read counts from deseq divided by transcript length  and sorted in descending order based on the venom gland values


cfold changes calculated directly from library size normalised read counts by deseq

nasvi2eg013868a
nasvi2eg009648a
nasvi2eg009662a
nasvi2eg009647a
nasvi2eg014072a
nasvi2eg007167a
nasvi2eg003930a
nasvi2eg014069a
nasvi2eg006243a
nasvi2eg012348a
nasvi2eg009035a
nasvi2eg036525a

aindicates venom protein encoding gene


blibrary size normalised read counts from deseq, divided by transcript length  and sorted in descending order based on the venom gland values


cfold changes calculated from library size normalised read counts by deseq

fig.  <dig> venom genes were highly expressed in the vg. log <dig> normalised gene counts for the  <dig> highest expressed , and  <dig> lowest expressed , venom protein encoding genes . vg counts are shown in blue and ovary counts in orange



rna-seq identifies  <dig> novel genes
the generation of the official gene set for nasonia did not include evidential sequencing data specifically obtained from vg samples, so we predicted that genes expressed in this relatively small organ might be underrepresented in the current gene models. therefore, we used the cufflinks software package to identify novel genes based on mapped reads that did not overlap with any current annotations in ogs <dig>  <cit>  . this approach identified  <dig> putative genes from both vg and ovary datasets . we merged these new gene models into the official gene set and repeated the deseq differential expression analysis . this showed that  <dig>  of the novel genes were significantly upregulated and  <dig>  were significantly down regulated in the vg tissue; the remaining  <dig> genes  were not differentially expressed between the tissues . the highest expressed novel genes in both the vg and ovary were shown to be highly tissue specific. the most differentially expressed novel vg gene  xloc_ <dig> was also predicted to have an alternate splice form that truncated exon  <dig> . unfortunately, the putative proteins encoded by xloc_ <dig> splice forms have no homology to any domains in the database so we are not able to predict possible functional consequences of this splicing event. as a result of low homology to sequences in the ncbi database only ten of the  <dig> novel genes identified here could be annotated with gene ontology terms using blast2go . extending the cufflinks splice form prediction methodology to the currently annotated venom protein encoding genes failed to identify any significant alternative splice forms between the vg and ovary transcriptomes.fig.  <dig> heatmap of normalised counts for the  <dig> highest expressed novel genes identified by cufflinks in the ovary and vg expression data. the top  <dig> novel genes identified by cufflinks based on mean expression in the vg and ovary colour coded by expression level. vg1- <dig> and o1- <dig> represent data from the three vg and ovary replicates, respectively. the dendrogram shows the clustering of samples based on euclidian distance

fig.  <dig> differential splicing of vg specific novel gene xloc_ <dig>  the coverage of mapped reads over the two predicted gene models for xloc_ <dig> the highest expressed novel gene in the vg. the coverage range is displayed in the square brackets in the top left corner of the figure. the blue bar represents the gene model as predicted by cufflinks. the thick sections represent exons and the thin lines represent introns. the rightward pointing arrows represent the orientation of the gene and the numbers above are for reference to the base pair position on scaffold 29



expression of venom protein encoding genes previously identified as high value candidates
using our data we were then able to examine the expression pattern of genes previously identified as high value venom candidates based on bioinformatic annotations or results from studies in other venomous species  <cit> . to differentiate the genes based broadly on their expression level we placed the  <dig> venom protein encoding genes into high, medium or low expression categories based on three equal divisions of normalised counts across our entire dataset . these categories were defined by normalised read count ranges of < <dig>  181701- <dig> > <dig> for low, medium and high, respectively.

the highly expressed category was dominated by novel venom genes , with the single annotated loci being the trypsin-like serine protease nasvi2eg <dig> . serine proteases play broad functional roles across insect physiology, including apoptosis, immunity, and development  <cit> . the medium expression category includes the gamma-glutamyltranspeptidase and endonuclease-like venom genes, which have been previously implicated in initiating venom induced apoptosis by interfering with normal metabolism of glutathione and by degrading nuclear dna, respectively  <cit> . similarly, the aminotransferase-like venom gene encodes an enzyme predicted to produce kynurenic acid from kynurenine and this may also be involved in apoptosis  <cit> . other medium expression category genes of note include impl-l <dig>  enzymes involved in carbohydrate metabolism, and several serine proteases/proteinase inhibitor genes. insulin binding protein  is possibly involved in initiating the developmental arrest by blocking insulin signalling  <cit> .

the majority of venom protein encoding genes fit into the low expressed category based on our designations. notable venom protein encoding genes in the low expression group include apyrase, beta-1-3-glucan recognition protein, dipeptidyl peptidase, metalloprotease, trehalase, chitinase, and all five of the venom cystein-rich/pacifastin protease inhibitors . the first three of these aforementioned genes have been proposed to be involved in modifying the host immune response  <cit> . the metalloprotease has been suggested to be involved in venom induced developmental arrest by interfering with normal notch signalling  <cit> . the trehalase gene important for metabolising carbohydrates is also one of the few such genes expressed at higher levels in the ovary in our dataset. as noted by  <cit>  the observation of proteins normally associated with breakdown of the chitin rich cuticle is somewhat puzzling given nasonia larvae are able to mechanically access the host hemolymph using their mandibles  <cit> . antigen 5-like protein and the cystein-rich/pacifastin protease inhibitors have been identified in the venom of the apis mellifera and pimpla hypochondriaca  <cit> .

metatranscriptomic analysis of nasonia vg and ovary tissue
finally, although the library preparation method included an mrna enrichment step, we were interested in looking for any evidence for the involvement of bacteria  or viruses in nasonia venom function. therefore, we performed a metatranscriptomic analyses of reads that did not align to the nasonia genome  <cit> . at the phylum level reads from both tissues could be assigned to viruses , nematoda , chordata  and proteobacteria . a large proportion of the unmapped reads were assigned to viruses, with most of these being identified as an uncharacterised ‘nasonia vitripennis virus’  . the nematode reads were assigned to brugia malayi and trichuris trichiura, thus we initially suspected that this result may represent hits to the wolbachia symbionts that are associated with both of these species  <cit> . however, subsequent megablast searches against the ncbi nr/nt database with these reads revealed both the nematoda and chordata groupings were based on low diversity rrna sequences that were taxonomically uninformative.fig.  <dig> differences in metatranscriptomic composition of the vg and ovary. distribution of reads that did not map to the nasonia genome assigned to the phylum level from the vg a and ovary b rna-seq data by the program megan



as expected a large proportion  of the proteobacteria reads from the ovary were assigned to wolbachia species . in contrast relatively few reads could be assigned to wolbachia species in the proteobacteria grouping from the vg. clostridium cellulosi and streptococcus anginosus were the most common species assignments in the vg, however, relative to the abundance of wolbachia assigned reads in the ovary, very few reads could be assigned at this narrow taxonomic level in the vg data . thus based on this data there is little evidence supporting a role for microorganisms in nasonia venom function.fig.  <dig> proteobacteria species identified in the venom gland and ovary. distribution of reads that did not map to the nasonia genome, which can be assigned to proteobacteria species in the ovary and vg data by megan



discussion
the expression levels of venom protein encoding genes obtained in this study provides additional information that can be used to select candidates for further functional analysis using either rnai or recombinant techniques. the ovary rna-seq also provides a proxy for the tissue specificity of the venom encoding gene expression that can be used to further refine candidate selection. it should be noted that high venom gene expression does not automatically imply that the encoded peptide is responsible for important envenomation phenotypes. other biological features, such as translational regulators, post-translational modifications and mrna/protein stability could also be critical to the function of gene products in the venom context. indeed, it has been argued that as a result of extensive posttranslational modifications, final venom protein composition is largely independent of transcriptional control  <cit> . the legitimacy of this view has been challenged by a more recent study showing strong correlations between the venom transcriptomes and proteomes of several snake species  <cit> . ultimately, additional high quality quantitative proteomic and transcriptomic data will be required to more fully appreciate the general importance of posttranslational mechanisms on venom composition. finally, it is also worth considering that highly expressed venom genes may perform accessory functions, such as protecting the venom reservoir of the wasp from being attacked by its own venom, as has been observed in snakes  <cit> .

the highest expressed annotated venom encoding gene was a trypsin-like serine protease. unfortunately, serine proteases are a very common functional category in insect genomes making it difficult to propose a role for this highly expressed gene . previous studies using sf <dig> cells have shown that the apoptotic activity of nasonia venom could be reduced by the addition of serine protease inhibitors  <cit> . interestingly, amongst the ten most highly expressed venom protein encoding genes with annotations, all three point to roles in apoptosis  <cit> . this may highlight the importance of apoptosis for the early envenomation effects, perhaps by assisting with the distribution of venom throughout the host or by suppressing the immune system by destroying circulating hemocytes  <cit> . nasonia venom has also been shown to induce apoptosis in s. bullata neural tissue and this has been suggested as a possible explanation for developmental arrest in envenomated this host  <cit> .

perhaps the most dramatic finding from this study was that over half of the top  <dig> expressed venom protein encoding genes have no functional annotation, including the highest expressed gene ‘venom protein y’. in retrospect maybe this should not be surprising given the complex evolutionary processes that drive specialisation of venom peptides  <cit> . however, this observation does highlight the value of candidate selection methods  that are not biased towards genes with existing annotation information. even for those genes that are bioinformatically annotated, it should be recognised that most of the functional data comes from experiments in model systems that are non-venomous.

another interesting finding from this study is that several venom peptides that have been previously implicated in venom function were shown to be only lowly expressed in our data  <cit> . perhaps the best example is the metalloprotease  predicted to be involved in initiating developmental arrest, was one of the lowest expressed of the venom protein encoding genes in our dataset  <cit> . we also observed that all five cysteine rich protease inhibitors suggested to be involved in disrupting host immunity by inactivating the pro-phenol oxidase cascade were also expressed at low levels  <cit> . the low expression of chitinase-type venom genes also suggests they may not be directly involved in venom function, especially given nasonia larvae are able to mechanically disrupt the host integument during feeding.

cufflink based transcript assembly of the vg and ovary rna-seq data allowed us to identify  <dig> previously undescribed transcribed regions in the nasonia genome. the low expression and lack of homology to other known genes might explain why they have not been previously described. alternatively these observations may indicate they represent artefacts of the cufflinks methodology. re-evaluation of the raw venom proteomic data may enable the identification of additional peptide fragments based on these new gene models. it is worth noting that the ogs <dig> models were developed based on rna-seq data from the wolbachia free asymcx strain of nasonia. as some of the new gene models identified here could be induced by wolbachia infection they represent candidates for being involved in the cytoplasmic incompatibility phenotypes induced by this protobacteria.

finally, the metatranscriptomic study revealed that viruses represented a large proportion of non-nasonia reads in the vg and ovary transcripts. particularly ‘nasonia vitripennis virus’, which has a positive strand ssrna genome and is part of the picornavirales order and the iflaviridae family but remains unassigned to lower taxonomic ranks  <cit> . ‘nasonia vitripennis virus’ has a ssrna genome so reads may be derived from either messenger rna or the ssrna genome. the latter, opens up the possibility of performing a de novo assembly of the viral genome from our transcriptome data. studies have shown that this virus causes no observed detrimental effect on nasonia and it remains an open question as to whether these transcripts end up in the venom itself  <cit> . as expected the ovary metatranscriptome was dominated by wolbachia transcripts. in contrast, we identified relatively few wolbachia sequences in the vg, suggesting this bacteria is unlikely to play an important role in venom function. however, it is important to note that the rna-seq library preparation methods used in our study enriched for poly a+ reads and thus many bacterial sequences would not have been sequenced in this experiment. follow up experiments using total rna library preparation methods are required to conclusively rule out a possible role for wolbachia in nasonia venom function.

animal venoms represent an important source of natural products with pharmaceutical value; as demonstrated by the development of important drugs, such as exenatide from the gila monster lizard, and captopril isolated from the venom of the lancehead viper  <cit> . more recently molecules isolated from reptile and arthropod venom have been shown to have therapeutic value in the treatment of cancer  <cit> . with this in mind the venom of parasitoid hymenoptera holds particular promise, given the incredible species richness of this group of animals, a potentially vast and unique source of molecules awaits discovery. we also predict that venoms target highly conserved core cellular pathways, as a mechanism to limit the ability of the host to evolve detoxification strategies. indeed, nasonia venom has been shown to have bioactivity against mammalian immune pathways, further highlighting the pharmaceutical value of these molecules  <cit> . the results reported here point to an important role for novel genes in venom function, and this information should assist with the selection of candidates in future functional studies.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study we used rna-seq to generate a comprehensive dataset of expression information for vg and ovary in the developing model system nasonia. information on the expression level of the  <dig> venom protein encoding genes provides an unbiased approach for selecting rnai candidates, especially as bioinformatic annotations are likely to be unreliable. as our knowledge of venom gene function increases our ability to understand the fundamental molecular mechanisms underlying envenomation will also be improved. this latter knowledge will be important in future efforts to use nasonia venom in drug development pipelines.

