BACKGROUND
the neotropical leaf-cutting ants owe their impressive ecological footprint to an obligate symbiotic relationship with the basidiomycete fungus leucocoprinus gongylophorus that they culture for food in subterranean nest cavities—so-called fungus gardens  <cit> . the ants in return provide the fungus with protection and a continuous supply of freshly-cut leaves as substrate for fungal growth, material that they normally deposit on the uppermost edges of the garden  <cit> . to accelerate the subsequent decomposition process, the ants chew the leaf fragments into small pieces and mix the leaf-pulp with fecal droplets  <cit> . this fluid contains substantial quantities of enzymes that the ants ingested with fungal material but without digesting them  <cit> , so that new hyphal growth can quickly access the most valuable resources inside the plant cells  <cit> . studies by schiøtt et al.  <cit>  and de fine licht et al.  <cit>  have shown that expression of these enzymes tends to be upregulated in the fungal gongylidia, the unique inflated hyphal tips that are harvested by the ants  <cit> . most notable among these ant-vectored enzymes are proteases, cellulases acting on amorphous cellulose, laccases, and pectinases  <cit> .

leaf-cutting ant fungus-farming is reminiscent of a conveyor belt procedure where the ants always add new substrate at the top of the garden, the gongylidia are primarily produced in the middle section, and the ants discard old fungal biomass and substrate residue from the bottom  <cit> . under laboratory conditions, it takes ca. six weeks for top section substrate to have reached the bottom from where the ants will move it to a dump outside the nest. three distinct garden sections can normally be identified: a top section , which is grey-green because intact fresh leaf fragments are more abundant than fungal hyphae; a middle section , which is white because leaf fragments are no longer visible and fungal growth is abundant; and a bottom section , which is grey-brown as only fungal hyphae and plant substrate residue remain .

there is little doubt that cell proteins and starch are the initial targets when decomposition starts  <cit> , but the extent to which the fungal symbiont also decomposes significant quantities of plant cell wall polymers is controversial: cellulose is both the most abundant and the most challenging of these polymers, but studies disagree on the extent to which cellulose is degraded by the fungus-garden symbiont. schiøtt et al.  <cit>  have shown that cellulases are primarily present in the top and bottom sections of acromyrmex echinatior fungus gardens and that cellulases are present also in a range of other ant fungus gardens  <cit> . in contrast, erthal et al.  <cit>  only detected very low cellulase activity in the top section of a. subterraneus fungus gardens and abril and bucher  <cit>  inferred that cellulose is not converted in fungus gardens at all. in contrast, suen et al.  <cit>  showed that a significant fraction of crystalline cellulose is converted in gardens of atta colombica, but that the unknown bacterial community of these gardens is instrumental in at least part of this conversion process. however, this latter result was challenged in a recent study by moller et al.  <cit> , using a carbohydrate polymer profiling technique to study the sequential changes in plant cell wall polysaccharides along the vertical decomposition gradient in a. echinatior fungus gardens, which led to the inference that cellulose and some types of xylan are not degraded to any significant degree while xyloglucan and, especially, pectin are. however, the enzyme activity data presented in that study confirmed that cellulases are active in the garden. microscopic images published by nagamoto et al.  <cit>  further showed that non-lignified cell walls are absent in the material dumped by the ants, so these findings do not preclude that the fungal symbiont does express enzyme genes for degrading at least some cellulose.

basidiomycetous fungi have evolved both enzymatic and oxidative strategies for degrading highly recalcitrant crystalline cellulose  <cit> . the typical cellulolytic enzyme repertoire of white-rot wood- and leaf-litter decomposing fungi first includes a number of lytic polysaccharide monooxygenases of the auxiliary activity family  <dig>   <cit> ) that randomly cleave cellulose chains at the surface of the microfibrils. this facilitates access by hydrolytic endocellulases  and at least one reducing end-acting gh <dig>  and one non-reducing-end-acting gh <dig>  cellobiohydrolase . as a result, cellobiose or cello-oligosaccharides from the chain-ends are released, so that extracellular or intracellular β-glucosidases  can finally cleave the cello-oligomers into glucose monomers  <cit> . many of the cellulases and hemicellulases involved in decomposing lignocellulosic biomass contain a family  <dig> carbohydrate binding module  that attaches the enzymes to the cellulose microfibrils  <cit> .

gene-expression studies of ant fungus garden material have to date remained limited to a few studies on a single fungal gene  <cit> , a subset of fungal genes  <cit> , or the entire bacterial microbiome  <cit> . in the current study, we used the deepsage  technique to target gene expression patterns of the fungal symbiont in samples taken from a laboratory fungus garden of acromyrmex echinatior, after meticulously removing ants, eggs, pupae, and larvae. deepsage is a global, digital transcript-profiling technology, which particularly facilitates the identification of rare transcripts  <cit>  by producing unique 21 bp cdna tags  from virtually all mrna molecules in a sample before high-throughput sequencing. because identical mrna molecules produce identical tags, the frequencies of these specific sequences are proportional to the expression levels of the corresponding genes. we thus identified the genes that were expressed in the top, middle, and bottom section of the fungus garden, quantified their specific levels of expression, and obtained the differences in expression level between these garden sections. the results obtained allow us to discuss the biomass conversion potential of the fungal symbiont and to interpret this potential in an evolutionary perspective.

RESULTS
generation of deepsage libraries and annotation of mono-tags
after removing low-abundance ones,  <dig>  unique mono-tags remained in the dataset across all libraries . for annotation, the 21 bp sequences were first extended by matching to the l. gongylophorus est library  and a low coverage genome sequence  <cit> , after which the matching gene fragments  were used in blastx searches  <cit>  against the genbank non-redundant protein sequences database. hits to proteins in the database were obtained for  <dig> mono-tags , among which we selected genes for further analysis based on their predicted involvement in plant polymer degradation and their differential expression among the three garden-sections. some full-length coding sequences were obtained from the est library, but all selected genes were subsequently retrieved from the low coverage genome, which also confirmed the selected est library hits to be of l. gongylophorus origin. the full-length sequences of the selected genes were deposited in the european nucleotide archive . to validate the normalization of libraries the mean frequencies of mono-tags representing “housekeeping” genes were compared between the top, middle, and bottom sections of the fungus garden, which showed that there were no significant differences .

cellulase genes are upregulated in the bottom section of the fungus garden
generally, genes encoding cell wall degrading enzymes and glucoamylase, cutinases, and lipases reached their highest expression level in the bottom section of the fungus garden , so we explicitly tested the extent to which cellulose degrading enzyme genes were upregulated compared to the top section . this showed that two different gh <dig> family members, two different reducing-end-acting cellobiohydrolases , one intracellular β-glucosidase , and a member of family aa <dig>  were upregulated  <dig> - <dig> fold.

a
p
acarbohydrate-active enzymes family  <cit> : gh, glycoside hydrolase; aa, auxiliary activity; cbm, carbohydrate-binding module; ce, carbohydrate esterase; pl, polysaccharide lyase.

bidentified by schiøtt et al.  <cit>  .

deepsage analysis did not give direct evidence for the presence of non-reducing-end-acting cellobiohydrolases  in any of the garden sections. however, to establish whether the fungus did have a functional gh <dig> gene, we screened the est library for gh <dig> homologs and identified one complete transcript that was 72% identical at the amino acid level to agaricus bisporus cel3ac  and predicted to include a cbm <dig> and thus to specifically bind to cellulose microfibrils  <cit> . using the peptide pattern recognition  program  <cit> , the two gh5s could be assigned to ec  <dig> . <dig>  , but only one of these was predicted to contain a cbm <dig>  the tag count for this gene  was low in the top section and more than  <dig> times higher in the bottom section , whereas the tag count for the other gh <dig> gene  was not significantly different between top and bottom sections, but significantly lower in the middle section . the same pattern was observed for the two gh7s: expression of the gene containing a cbm <dig>  was more than  <dig> times higher in the bottom section than in the top of the garden , while the gene with no cbm <dig>  was only moderately upregulated in the bottom section compared to a high level in the top, but markedly upregulated compared to expression in the middle section . also the tag count for the gh <dig> gene  was significantly higher in the bottom section although expression was much lower than for the gh5s and the gh7s. the mono-tag representing the aa <dig>  gene  was not detected in the top section, but encountered almost a  <dig> times in the bottom section .

transcript levels of non-cellulolytic biomass conversion genes
in addition to genes encoding cellulose-active enzymes, a number of other polysaccharide-active enzyme genes were upregulated in the bottom section compared to the top and/or middle sections. these included hemicellulase genes, such as a xylanase , an acetyl xylan esterase , two xyloglucanases  , and an endo- <dig> -β-mannanase  , and genes encoding pectinolytic enzymes, such as a pectinesterase , two pectate lyases , a rhamnogalacturonan lyase , and an endo- <dig> -α-l-arabinanase  . the assignment of gh family members to function was confirmed by ppr  <cit> .

all hemicellulases except the gh <dig> xyloglucanase  were predicted to contain a cbm <dig> and thus to be anchored to the cellulose microfibrils while performing their activity . the identified gh <dig> xylanase was different from the gh <dig> xylanase lgxyn <dig> identified by schiøtt et al.  <cit>  for another fungus garden from the same population of a. echinatior. genes encoding a lipase and esterases  were also upregulated in the bottom section compared to the top, although lipase expression in the middle section and cutinase expression in both the top and middle sections was also substantial . finally, we detected increased expression of a glucoamylase gene  and an α-galactosidase gene  in the bottom section , which are known to be involved in the mobilization of starch and the degradation of galactomannans  and other galactosides, respectively.

in addition to genes predicted to be involved in biomass conversion, we also established a list of the most highly expressed genes overall  . at the top of this list appeared a gene encoding a cerato-platanin-related secreted protein  that reached its maximal expression in the middle section. cerato-platanin proteins self-assemble into a surface coating layer that enables hyphae to grow into the air and adhere to surfaces  <cit> . also a gene encoding a hydrophobic surface binding protein  was among the most highly expressed genes across the three garden sections. a nadh-quinone oxidoreductase gene  peaked in the top and middle sections, but was also highly expressed in the bottom section. these genes catalyze the reduction of quinones to hydroquinones and may be involved in fenton chemistry-mediated degradation of cellulose  <cit> . a phosphate transporter gene  was highly expressed throughout the garden and doubled its expression level in the middle and bottom sections relative to the top. the two most highly expressed carbohydrate degrading enzyme genes, the non-cbm <dig> gh <dig>  and acetyl xylan esterase , both peaked in the bottom section of the fungus garden and were among the genes with the highest expression in that section. the most prominent secreted enzyme genes that peaked in the top section were two laccases  , confirming a recent study showing that laccase activity is of crucial importance for phenol detoxification in the top section of the a. echinatior fungus gardens  <cit> . additional highly expressed genes that were retrieved encoded ubiquitous cytoplasmic proteins such as cyclophilin, ubiquitin conjugating enzyme, and glutathione s-transferase.

p
the table includes genes peaking at more than  <dig> tag counts, but excludes ribosomal rna and ribosomal protein genes.

alglcc <dig> identified by de fine licht et al.  <cit>  .

discussion
there has been considerable controversy about the extent to which the symbiosis between leaf-cutting ants and their l. gongylophorus symbiont utilizes the recalcitrant polymers of plant cell walls as a source of nutrients  <cit> . our present results show that the fungal symbiont of a. echinatior leaf-cutting ants produces a range of green-biomass conversion enzymes. similar, but not identical, results were obtained in a parallel, recently published study by aylward et al.  <cit> . the two studies complement each other, as aylward et al. used genomics and metaproteomics tools to investigate fungus gardens whereas we used transcript profiling. however, we also present specific new evidence that the fungal symbiont produces a number of transcripts that encode enzymes for degrading crystalline cellulose. this should in principle enable the fungus to fully deconstruct plant cell walls consisting of crystalline cellulose microfibrils, hemicellulose, and pectins and to use mostly the released glucose and xylose as a source of energy. yet, our transcript profiling data show that these cellulolytic abilities were expressed primarily towards the end of the decomposition process, at a stage where the ants are known to discard old garden material containing substantial amounts of cellulose, as well as significant amounts of older fungal hyphae.

the fungal symbiont can degrade all plant cell wall and cuticle polymers
the cellulase genes showing the most marked upregulation in the bottom section were the cbm <dig> encoding genes and the lytic polysaccharide monooxygenase of family aa <dig>  . the highly conserved cbm <dig> module is commonly found in fungal cellulases, attacking the crystalline microfibrils  <cit> . family aa <dig> enzymes have recently been shown to act directly on crystalline cellulose, partially degrading and loosening the structure of the microfibrils while increasing substrate accessibility for the other types of cellulases  <cit> , although some aa9s may be active on other carbohydrates than cellulose  <cit> . the high expression of a fungal nadh-quinone oxidoreductase suggests that oxidative biomass conversion processes in the garden may not only rely on enzymatic catalysis but also on fenton reactions, as implicated for other basidiomycetes  <cit> . the high expression level of a gene coding for a secreted cerato-platanin-related protein—the highest expression level of a protein-encoding gene found in our entire study—combined with the high expression of a hydrophobic surface binding protein gene  suggests that producing molecules that enable hyphae to grow in the air without losing water is important in all sections of the garden.

we did not directly quantify enzyme abundance and the ants are known to transfer some cellulases from the middle to the top section of gardens via their fecal droplets  <cit> . this may explain higher activity levels in samples taken from the top of the garden relative to the middle section  <cit> , but does not affect that our results consistently indicate that crystalline cellulose is increasingly exposed to enzyme break down towards the bottom section where the low glucose concentration may act to induce cellulase activity  <cit> . this conclusion is supported by proteomics data from the aylward et al. study  <cit> , showing high gh <dig> and gh <dig> enzyme production in the bottom section of an a. echinatior fungus garden. particularly the non-cbm <dig> cellulases showed a dual expression profile, with a peak in the top section where the ants chew fresh leaves into pulp and a more pronounced peak in the bottom section . we suspect, however, that these enzymes have different roles when targeting fresh leaf pulp in the top of gardens and residues in the bottom because microscopic imaging has shown that complete degradation of all non-lignified cell walls is achieved only in the refuse dump after the ants have discarded bottom material from their gardens  <cit> .

similar to the cellulolytic genes, also the expression of genes that encode enzymes for degrading the major leaf hemicelluloses, xylan and xyloglucan, increased substantially in the bottom section of the garden . this is consistent with the proteomics data of aylward et al.  <cit> , which indicates a similar regulatory profile of predicted leaf hemicellulases although this is not directly evident from their presented bar charts. however, we only identified few β-xylosidase transcripts  indicating that the xylose oligomers produced by xylanase activity are not metabolized to xylobiose or xylose monomers to any significant degree. xylan therefore seems to be of marginal nutritional value to the fungal symbiont, confirming the conclusion by moller et al.  <cit>  that cell wall hemicellulose is only partially degraded to facilitate hyphal access to intracellular proteins and starch grains. the fact that l. gongylophorus grows very well in pure culture with xylan as the only carbon source, at a rate similar to growing on starch  <cit> , indicates that ample starch must be available in the fresh leaf cells to make decomposition proceed at high speed. starch may be preferentially targeted relative to xylan because glucose is the preferred carbon source of the ants  <cit> , but the fresh leaves may also provide the symbiosis with so much starch that there is no need to break-down xylan because overall symbiotic performance is ultimately protein-limited rather than sugar-limited .

also pectinolytic activity in the fungus garden was bimodally distributed across the three garden sections. previous results of moller et al.  <cit>  on fungus gardens of the same species showed that a substantial part of the pectin is degraded in the top section immediately after fresh leaf pulp is deposited, but our present results show that there is even more pectinolytic transcription in the bottom section . also this result is consistent with aylward et al.  <cit> , showing the same general regulatory trend in the products of pectinolytic genes, although this is not clearly stated. also for these enzymes upregulation in the gongylidia and vectoring via ant fecal droplets may change the final distribution between the middle section  and the top section  , but this does not affect the high expression of pectinolytic genes in the bottom section of fungus gardens. this can only be explained by many pectins remaining to be degraded, and that process having been postponed until a relatively late phase. it is consistent with a number of other studies that have suggested that pectin, like hemicellulose, is primarily degraded not as a source of nutrients, but merely to gain access to the intracellular nutrient stores as soon as possible after leaf pulp is deposited at the top of gardens, possibly also by unmasking hemicellulose for enzymatic attack  <cit> . the later peak activity in the bottom of gardens suggests that this decomposition activity is reinstated, but our general knowledge of the biology of this symbiosis makes it unlikely that these two activities serve the same purpose.

finally, we find a similar pattern for cutinase activity  <cit> , with transcripts being present throughout the garden, but this time with only a small but significant increase in the bottom compared to the top and middle sections . this indicates that leaf cuticular material  in the chewed-up leaf fragments is also targeted by the fungus, and increasingly so towards the bottom section of the garden. however, these cells seem to be a lower decomposition priority, consistent with microscopic observations by nagamoto et al.  <cit>  that epidermis cells are only partially degraded in the material that the ants discard from the bottom section of their gardens.

the symbiosis is nitrogen rather than carbon limited
the glucose level in the bottom section of the fungus garden is low  <cit> , presumably because all the easily accessible nutrients have been utilized by the fungus. still, we find a high level of fungal phosphate transporter transcripts in the bottom section—similar to the level in the highly active middle section—indicating high metabolic activity. we hypothesize that the increased level of cell wall degrading enzymes in the bottom section enables the fungus to access the interior of cells that were not opened earlier in the decomposition process, but that nutrients obtained in this phase serve fungal maintenance and perhaps some final growth. this idea is supported by the observed upregulation of genes encoding enzymes such as lipase  and glucoamylase   <cit>  in the bottom section of the garden, indicating that the fungus obtains access to additional intracellular nutrients. at this stage, the fungal symbiont may also utilize cell wall polymers, but this is unlikely to benefit the nutritional symbiosis as the ants are known to discard old garden material from the bottom section containing substantial residues of cellulose and hemicellulose  <cit> . this interpretation is consistent with the fungal symbiont being able to grow on artificial cellulose media  <cit>  and with our identification of some expression of an intracellular β-glucosidase, suggesting the use of some cellobiose as energy source at this late decomposition stage.

in a previous study on laboratory fungus gardens of the same ant, a. echinatior, clear evidence was found that the fungal gongylidia that feed the ants are not present towards the bottom of gardens  <cit> . this implies that the ants are unlikely to retrieve significant nutritional resources from the bottom of their gardens, consistent with them discarding this material, containing both cellulose and intact fungal hyphae. as the rapidly growing larvae of leafcutter ants only consume gongylidia  <cit>  and atta gardens harbor nitrogen-fixing bacteria  <cit>  it seems likely that the attine fungus-farming symbiosis is nitrogen-limited rather than carbon -limited. any glucose released in the bottom section of a garden may thus primarily serve the need of the fungal symbiont when care by the farming ants is about to be terminated, provided sufficient fresh leaf substrate is brought in at the top of the garden. the fungal symbiont may have retained enzymes for cell wall degradation from its free-living saprophytic ancestors because the optimal time for discarding old mycelium by the ants may depend on the availability and quality of fresh substrate. bottom-garden-fungus may thus be discarded later in the dry season when plant parts have low starch content  <cit>  than in the wet season, an idea that should be easily testable.

to understand how natural selection has shaped enzymatic functions in l. gongylophorus, it is important to realize that the fungus has no fitness interests that are independent of the ants, as it completely relies on vertical transmission across generations by winged virgin queens when they leave for their mating flight. this implies that the fungal symbiont has only been under selection to maintain its old mycelium in the bottom of gardens when that benefits the farming ants. we believe that these benefits have too readily been assumed to be generally related to glucose production for the ants, as the putative substrate buffering function may only be important in stressful periods. however, if the symbiosis is not glucose-limited most of the time, and glucose produced in the bottom of gardens cannot be offered to the ants via gongylidia, it would seem more logical to look for indirect benefits. the abundant transcripts that may mediate the maintenance of an optimal water balance in old mycelium  suggest that a more generally important buffering mechanism may be at work. maintaining active growth almost certainly reduces disease pressure in the bottom of fungus gardens, and when that benefit can be achieved without using limiting resources glucose production may represent the ultimate terminal service of the fungus to symbiotic health before it is discarded.

finally, it is important to realize that some bacterial garden symbionts may also contribute to the conversion processes, whereas others may provide antimicrobial products for keeping the garden free of antagonistic microbes  <cit> . a comprehensive understanding of how the fungal and the bacterial roles are combined is still in its infancy, and new data may thus continue to change our understanding of functional complementarity in fungus garden substrate conversion.

CONCLUSIONS
after analyzing genes expressed specifically by the fungus-garden symbiont in situ, we conclude that l. gongylophorus is producing all enzymes necessary for degrading the major plant-cell-wall polysaccharides: cellulose, hemicellulose, and pectin. by further comparing the expression level of these carbohydrate-active enzyme genes in the top, middle, and bottom sections of the garden, representing consecutive stages in the decomposition of biomass, we show that—except for part of the pectin that is already converted in the top section—the degradation of the cell wall polysaccharides occurs primarily towards the end of the decomposition process. the monosaccharides  released in these processes, either from hitherto unexploited intracellular nutrient stores or from the polymers themselves, appear to mostly serve the needs of the fungus itself because the nutrient-rich fungal gongylidia that the ants ingest and feed to their rapidly growing larvae are mainly present in the middle section of the garden. the low likelihood of excess glucose being transferred from the bottom section of the garden to the ants is consistent with the symbiosis being limited by the availability of protein-nitrogen in the gongylidia rather than by glucose-carbon. the results of our deepsage analyses of gene expression suggest that the fungal symbiont has retained the ability to degrade recalcitrant plant cell wall polysaccharides in order to maintain active growth even when no longer producing ant food. this may be of use when leaves with higher starch content are unavailable during the dry season, but will also help protect old fungus from disease until it is discarded by the ants. both possible functions would have stabilized the symbiosis over evolutionary time.

