BACKGROUND
the genetic mechanisms underlying organismal radiations are of great interest to biologists. whereas genetic redundancy, differential regulation of gene transcription, and alternative rna splicing to produce protein variants have each been implicated as fundamental means by which evolution has tinkered with morphology, less importance has been demonstrated for specific amino acid  substitutions in coding regions  <cit> . a prominent reason for this difference is that the first three mechanisms can better escape deleterious effects caused by pleiotropy   <cit> . still, aa motifs of varying lengths in pleiotropic proteins  <cit>  have been correlated with morphological radiations, but only at the level of entire subphyla   <cit>  or among artificially selected dog breeds   <cit> .

here we present a case in which shifting length of a polyglutamine  tract in a highly pleiotropic protein may contribute to morphological radiation and incipient speciation along a natural geological gradient of pliocene to modern age. the hawaiian islands are an isolated volcanic archipelago formed by plate movement over a mantle plume, with the consequence that islands evolve and subside in a linear geographic manner  <cit> . the three genera and ca.  <dig> species of endemic mints  represent one of the largest hawaiian plant radiations. they originated from polyploid  north american ancestors and diversified from a single introduction to the hawaiian islands  <cit> . their morphological and ecological variation is extensive; plants range from subalpine vines to rainforest shrubs, flowers may have either bird or insect pollinated anatomies, and seed dispersal patterns may depend on either dry or fleshy fruits  <cit> . in contrast to this extensive diversity, however, genetic variation in nuclear and chloroplast dna sequence markers has been found to be remarkably low, resulting in a lack of phylogenetic resolution among representatives of the two largest genera, phyllostegia and stenogyne  <cit> .

we isolated a fca homolog from an expressed sequence tag  library for the hawaiian endemic mint stenogyne rugosa   <cit> . the fca protein of arabidopsis, originally isolated as a flowering time gene  <cit> , is a receptor for the plant hormone abscisic acid   <cit> . although highly pleiotropic  <cit> , fca is nonetheless finely autoregulated  <cit>  such that flowering time is modulated in different mutant alleles  <cit> . phenotypic features of fca mutant plants, likely linked to late flowering, include increased leaf number, leaf area, and size of petals, stamens, carpels and fruits  <cit> . an additional phenotype is reduction of the secondary root system  <cit> .

in the rice fca homolog a 9-residue polyq tract occurs directly c-terminal to its ww protein-protein interaction domain  <cit> , which in arabidopsis is crucial for proper self-processing of fca pre-mrna  <cit> . we document that the hawaiian endemic mints show considerable length variation at the same glutamine repeat and that this variation is temporally coincident with the emergence and subsidence of islands in the hawaiian chain. since polymorphic polyq tracts in mammalian proteins are known to be responsible for a number of human neurological disorders at critical lengths  <cit> , we considered the possibility that the mint fca-like repeat motif could also have phenotypic consequences. here, we describe how fca-like polyq variation and its island-wise distribution may have contributed to the rapid morphological diversification of the hawaiian mints.

RESULTS
the polyglutamine tract in fca-like proteins varies in length
before extensive experimentation with the mints, we investigated the organismic distribution of the polyq tract by surveying databases for fca homologs. we found fca-like proteins only in land plants, but these extended in phylogenetic depth to mosses, which diverged from seed plants over  <dig> my  ago  <cit> . substantial variation in the polyq repeat was obvious among species, and multiple triticum fca-like proteins in the database demonstrated polyq polymorphism .

extensive polyglutamine polymorphism among the hawaiian mints
we genotyped  <dig> different hawaiian mint individuals  for polyq variation . a total number of  <dig> different alleles were discovered, with multiple alleles in some individuals , and an allele size range of 81– <dig> base pairs  . direct sequencing of selected individuals  confirmed the repeat pattern, with an allele size of  <dig> bp corresponding to one cag repeat, and therefore a range of 0– <dig> q residues and one aa deletion at  <dig> bp .

for further analysis of the observed variation, we pooled alleles across the current taxonomy  <cit>  since  sequence-based evidence for intergeneric hybridization,  amplified fragment length polymorphism  data indicating interspecific gene flow  <cit> , and  considerable non-hierarchical est-ssr diversity  <cit>  together suggest that the hawaiian mints may best be considered a metapopulation expressing only emergent macroevolutionary patterns, with demes identified as morphospecies by taxonomists  <cit> .

selection occurs along a geological gradient
the overall distribution of fca-like allele frequencies resembles a normal distribution around an optimum of 99– <dig> bp , but in particular, its right tail where polyq repeats are longest renders the distribution non-normal . when our data are grouped by island into  hawai'i,  the maui nui complex ,  o'ahu and  kaua'i, the allele frequency distributions shift to the left with increasing island age . this pattern is further demonstrated by repeat length variation being significantly different  on an island-to-island basis, with shorter repeats found on older islands, and longer ones on younger islands . post hoc tamhane's t <dig> tests revealed stepwise significant differences that reflect island age .

cag repeats are known to be prone to elongation via replication slippage  <cit> . theoretical and empirical work on non-cag ssrs has suggested that expansion rates for particular repeat loci are basically constant, whereas contraction rates appear to be exponential  <cit> . under this model, at a certain critical repeat length the two rates should be equal and repeat allele frequencies should be normal at equilibrium. however, this critical value, and the allele equilibrium, can of course shift under selection. since mint populations on younger islands  likely descend from those present already on older ones   <cit> , under a constant rate of cag expansion our data are consistent with critical allele lengths decreasing with island age as islands form and subside and selection pressures increase.

to bolster the case that the observed allelic distributions are specific to fca-like genes, we genotyped equally large sets of hawaiian mint individuals for several other est-ssr loci  <cit> , and the fca homolog was the only locus that displayed a clear geographic repeat progression   <cit> . to investigate further, we also genotyped a large number of individuals  of the hawaiian mints' parent lineage within the genus stachys, which have stable, continental distributions  <cit> . this group followed the expected pattern, with an average inferred repeat length  slightly lower than that for kaua'i .

morphological variables correlate with glutamine repeat lengths
to examine the possible involvement of the polyq repeat in the pleiotropic function of the fca-like protein, we analyzed correlations between repeat length and measures for selected morphological variables  <cit> . we used average repeat lengths as placeholders for genotypes. we found significant positive associations  of fca-like allele length with several features related to reproductive investment . although r <dig> values were relatively low, as might be expected from subtle developmental influence, slopes were similar: allele length always increased with values of quantitative morphological variables . importantly, none of these traits showed significant island-wise partitioning , which suggests genotype-phenotype correlation independent from geography. furthermore, none of the reproductive features showed significant correlation with allele lengths of the other loci figured in figure  <dig> <cit> . taken together, these results support the hypothesis that the observed phenotypes may be linked to fca-like genotypes rather than to underlying population structuring. it follows from this hypothesis that longer and longer fca-like alleles may be equivalent to arabidopsis fca mutants of increasing severity  <cit> , for which later flowering times would be expected to increase reproductive investment  <cit> . however, hawaiian mints are perennials, unlike annual arabidopsis, so vegetative-reproductive intervals will require detailed study to assess correlation with fca polyq length variation.

afor some corolla tube length regressions, data points for s. kamehamehae were excluded since they were extreme outliers. likewise, some curve estimations for pedicel length also excluded outlier data points for p. warshaueri.

we also investigated the possible influence of taxonomic effects using partitioned regression analyses. these experiments were meant to control for any lineage-based effects that could reflect underlying  population structuring. indeed, for six of seven morphological variables, data based on phyllostegia alone showed significance, but for one of these seven traits, both stenogyne and phyllostegia data points produced significant regression lines. in every case, r <dig> increased in each taxonomically partitioned analysis . clearly then, morphospecies assigned to phyllostegia provide most of the allelic correlation in our pooled analysis of hawaiian mints. nevertheless, taxonomic partitioning among the fca-like alleles alone could be excluded, since repeat lengths were not significantly different between the genera phyllostegia and stenogyne . our interpretation is that the fca-like protein may be only one factor regulating polygenic trait differences underlying morphological distinction between the currently recognized genera.

we also performed island-wise regression analyses, the results of which  demonstrated that three reproductive morphological variables significantly correlated with fca-like allele length on younger islands only . these findings echo the right-hand tail on the fca homolog allele distributions .

selection in the context of the hawaiian environment
an easily understood whole-island selective force that may be operating to reduce cag repeat length over time is the well-known nutrient cline of the hawaiian island chain. phosphorus , in particular, leaches from volcanic soils as they age, generating a competitive environment for plant growth  <cit> . another growth-compromising factor that may have influenced present-day older islands is periodic drying during glacial periods  <cit> . although we were not able to directly observe it, competition may be manifested at the level of the fca root phenotype  since it has been shown that availability of p can have a dramatic effect on root dynamics in the hawaiian islands. sites low in p on kaua'i show greater living fine-root mass and root length density than do younger sites on hawai'i  <cit> . although it remains to be empirically demonstrated, our evidence is consistent with fca-like alleles of reduced wild-type function permitting greater allocation of resources to reproduction on younger, nutrient-rich islands where benefits of extensive root systems are less important. it is even possible that positive selection on slightly deleterious alleles could occur if reproductive isolation via flowering time modulation were advantageous in founder populations inhabiting pioneer habitats  <cit> .

altered fca-like protein function from a structural framework
we investigated the inferred slightly deleterious nature of longer polyq tracts by examining the hypothetical structure of fca-like proteins. in addition to the conserved ww protein-protein interaction domain, fca-like proteins have two conserved rna recognition  domains  <cit> . along with the fy factor that binds to the ww domain, fca is a component of a 3'-end rna processing complex  <cit> . aside from its well-defined domains, fca-like proteins are unlike any other known protein family. however, detailed homology analysis and structural modeling based on multiple complete sequences reveals important structural features .

in order to function in an autoregulatory rna processing complex, it is clear that simultaneous binding of rna, fca and the fy protein is required for physiological effect  <cit> . as such, the variable ca.  <dig> aa long intervening sequence between the second rrm and ww must have a well defined, rather rigid structure . no strong matches were found by threading programs for the complete segment, or for parts of it, but various beta-folds dominate among the weak matches. the first  <dig> residues, which differ between monocots and dicots, show normal compositional variability and are likely to fold into regular secondary and tertiary structure. two potentially stable, pseudo-dimeric  <dig> aa segments  occur in this region. the following segment of ca.  <dig> residues is enriched in glutamines and prolines, and poor on charged residues. moreover, glutamines and prolines occur scattered throughout the entire length of this segment, spaced by 4– <dig> residues. similar features are also observed after the ww domain. in several regions, the number of q residues varies  among otherwise similar sequences .

what could this rigid, q-rich structure be like? one possibility is that a left-handed beta-helix would form. in these large structures of least  <dig> residues, beta strands and turns alternate to form a macrohelix that can be  <dig> Å long. for example, beta-helices are suggested to form in the long polyq tracts of human disease-causing proteins past the critical value of q <dig>  <cit> . we hypothesize a long beta helix covering the latter half of the rrm-ww linker and extending some  <dig> aa after the ww domain. the glutamines would favor beta-strand formation, and the prolines, the requisite beta-turns to form the tertiary helical structure  <cit> . the ww domain would fold separately as a loop structure, as is seen, for example, in the beta helical structure of penicillin dextranase . similarly, the very c-terminal, non-repetitious  <dig> residues of fca-like proteins should also arrange into a normal irregular fold and participate in aba binding  <cit> . it could well be that the n-terminal rrm domains and the c-terminal ww domain come close to each other in three-dimensions, since beta sheets  bind well to the sides of other beta sheets  <cit> .

a structural/functional problem actively studied in relationship with q-rich proteins is fibril formation, found in several neurogenerative diseases  <cit> . the longer the q expansion, the more severe the effect  <cit> . in a beta-helix type of structure, long q-stretches in fca-like proteins could form an extra strand that would easily fit into the general fold. as a result, mutual orientation of the loops would change by about  <dig> degrees, and possible interactions between structural elements before and after the q-repeat would be eliminated. in the mints, only q-expansions up to  <dig> are observed, and whereas these would not be long enough to nucleate new structures, they would be sufficient to render the known functional domains of the fca protein more mobile , lessening the formation of functionally productive  <dig> end-processing complexes. as such, polyq expansions could retard fca homolog autoregulation and have deleterious physiological  effects while not being long enough to permanently hinder folding of the functional structure.

CONCLUSIONS
the hawaiian mint fca-like system suggests the possibility that polyq variation, as readily measured over a relatively short geological time sequence, contributed to morphological change and participated in incipient speciation. paradoxically, these effects may have "taken advantage" of developmental pleiotropy by way of natural selection on genetic variation causing slightly deleterious protein function. this discovery supports suggestions that repetitive aa motifs might provide a general mechanism for driving morphological evolution  <cit> , and that variation at such motifs might permit rapid tuning to environmental change  <cit> . furthermore, our finding of substantial polyq variation in fca-like proteins across plants suggests the possibility that other species may modulate flowering time and simultaneously undergo morphological evolution via selection on polyq repeat polymorphism.

of great importance, however, is that the central hypothesis of this study must survive functional testing. this could be accomplished by heterologous or homologous transformation experiments with fca null arabidopsis plants, the former by incorporating different mint alleles, the latter by inserting engineered fca constructs with cag repeats of increasing lengths. furthermore, if the fca/fy interaction does indeed become less stable with increasing polyglutamine length, then changes in alternative splicing of mint fca-like rna  <cit>  might be detectable in vivo.

