BACKGROUND
leishmania spp.  are vector-borne parasites of man worldwide. the precise pathology of leishmaniasis varies across the world depending on which species and strain are concerned, but many result in acute tissue necrosis and can be fatal. the genome sequence of the aetiological agent of old-world cutaneous leishmaniasis, l. major, was recently completed  <cit>  and this study addresses the impact of the genome sequence on our understanding of β-tubulin repertoire in leishmania. β-tubulin is one half of the α/β tubulin dimer that comprises eukaryotic microtubules and has been interesting to molecular parasitologists as a model for gene regulation  <cit> , motility  <cit>  and transcription  <cit>  in kinetoplastids and as a potential drug target  <cit> .

the l. major genome sequence established that there are three β-tubulin loci on chromosomes  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> respectively, and a single α-tubulin locus on chromosome  <dig>  the genome project corroborated previous investigations that predicted a tandem array of duplicated β-tubulin genes at one locus, and two other singleton genes  <cit> , in contrast to the related kinetoplastid parasite, trypanosoma brucei, which has a single β-tubulin locus  <cit> . these loci were expected based on distinct transcripts in l. major that possessed characteristic length and specific expression profiles relating to the life stage of the parasite  <cit> . both l. major and l. mexicana possess an amastigote-specific isoform that is solely expressed in mammalian macrophage  <cit> , and this apparent similarity suggests that all leishmania spp. may have a diverse β-tubulin repertoire. in this study, draft genome sequences for two further species, l. infantum and l. braziliensis, causes of old-world visceral and new-world muco-cutaneous leishmaniases respectively, were searched for homologs to the three l. major loci.

transcription in kinetoplastids is polycistronic and individual promoter regions for each gene are absent  <cit> . regulation of gene expression takes place post-transcriptionally through recognition of motifs in the untranscribed regions  resulting in differential processing of transcripts and modulation of transcript decay  <cit> . this being so, the genomic environment around coding sequences is of interest when inferring operational differences and β-tubulin isoforms can be expected to differ in their 5' and 3' utrs if they are differentially expressed. in this study, the flanking regions around β-tubulin loci were compared between and within species to identify relative affinities and unique features.

the presence of three β-tubulin loci in leishmania spp. raises two related questions: why several loci exist in leishmania when these are not necessary in other kinetoplastids and what, if any, are the functional differences between loci. in the event of divergence among these loci in the three leishmania spp., the relative change in coding and untranscribed regions will determine if functional diversification has been derived from structural innovation, as in the case of vertebrate globins or immunoglobulins  <cit> , or whether structurally conserved duplicates are expressed distinctly, either spatially or temporally, as with polyploid cotton  <cit> . as well as comparing flanking regions to illuminate these issues, primary sequences of all isoforms were analysed to identify the molecular signatures of evolutionary processes, such as recombination, natural selection and gene duplication, which have shaped β-tubulin sequences in leishmania.

RESULTS
comparative genomics
tiling reads from the l. infantum and l. braziliensis libraries produced contigs homologous to the chromosome  <dig> β-tubulin locus . the karyotype and linkage structure of l. major is common also to l. infantum and l. braziliensis  <cit> , and hence, the chromosomal position of these loci is assumed to be conserved. figure  <dig> demonstrates that gene order was conserved both up- and downstream of the β-tubulin array . for l. infantum, tiling inwards from either flanking gene arrived at β-tubulin and tiling outwards from either the n- and c-terminus of β-tubulin arrived at another copy of the β-tubulin. for l. braziliensis, tiling outwards from β-tubulin arrived at another copy, confirming the presence of an array . it was not possible to tile inwards from flanking genes, although these are present in a conserved gene order, because of sequence gaps either side of the putative array. despite the lack of any notional links between the β-tubulin array and chromosome  <dig>  there was a physical link between β-tubulin and a 40s ribosomal protein, which is found upstream of the chromosome  <dig> locus in l. major. likewise, there was a physical link between the l. infantum β-tubulin and an atpase  found on chromosome  <dig> in l. major. hence, despite the sequence gaps either side of the arrayed genes, these physical links provide contextual evidence for β-tubulin tandem arrays on chromosome  <dig> in all three species.

the genes flanking the chromosome  <dig> singleton β-tubulin in l. major were clearly represented in the two other species, as shown in figure  <dig>  tiling inwards from these starting points revealed conserved synteny with the chromosome  <dig> locus and arrived at β-tubulin, although the upstream intergenic sequence  in l. braziliensis is substantially shortened. in l. infantum there were physical links between β-tubulin and the upstream igs . in l. braziliensis there were physical links between β-tubulin and both flanking genes, orthologs to chromosome  <dig> loci in l. major. on this, as on other chromosomes, β-tubulin retained the highest sequence homology between species, other loci being more labile. generally, the non-coding sequences in l. braziliensis were not well conserved , in contrast to l. infantum. these contigs are appended as additional files  <dig> and  <dig> 

assembling homologs to the l. major chromosome  <dig> locus was complicated by the presence of a repetitive region, duplicated such that it was on both sides of the β-tubulin gene. when tiling upstream from the gene, the presence of this motif meant that notional links were erroneously inferred with the downstream duplicate . as a result, using blast alone to tile sequence reads gave the impression of tandem β-tubulin genes. while this error has been avoided in the l. major genome sequence, it was possible to produce the same effect when tiling l. major reads for the corresponding region. however, after accounting for these duplicated, repetitive regions, tiling inwards from flanking genes in both l. braziliensis and l. infantum produced contigs that were homologous to the l. major locus . as with both other loci, there was conserved synteny in both directions and there were physical links with other parts of chromosome  <dig> to corroborate the notional links implied by read tiling.

comparison of flanking regions
all three β-tubulin loci in l. major have distinct 3' utrs. within the tandem array on chromosome  <dig> the igss between each pair of repeats was conserved at  <dig> bp and these had between 98% and 100% sequence identity. therefore, 3' utrs within the array were near-identical, with the exception of the last copy; here the 3' utr was almost entirely different, showing sequence homology with the internal igs for only  <dig> bp after the stop codon. due to sequence gaps, it was not possible to determine if each locus had a distinct 3' utr in l. infantum and l. braziliensis by tiling; however, of the three unique 3' utrs that could be discerned from blast searching in these species, two were associated with the singleton loci and therefore, this suggests that the array only comprises a single type of 3' utr. it is not possible to comment on the final 3' utr of the l. braziliensis tandem array because this data was not available; the final 3' utr in l. infantum tandem array was quite unlike the internal igss.

the singleton loci have different utrs to the tandem array. however, in l. major the chromosome  <dig> and  <dig> loci shared  <dig> bp immediately upstream of the start codon and  <dig> bp immediately downstream of the stop codon. beyond these regions, their utrs were unalignable. neither of the utrs flanking the chromosome  <dig> locus in l. major shared homology with the other two loci. this situation was replicated in l. infantum and l. braziliensis, where the chromosome  <dig> and  <dig> copies partially shared 5' utrs, while 3' utrs were largely unique in all cases.

comparisons between species reflected their known phylogenetic relationships; the l. major and l. infantum igss were highly conserved , whereas the igss in l. braziliensis were divergent and seldom exceeded 90% identity. despite obvious divergence, when the 3' utrs from the chromosome  <dig> and  <dig> assemblies in l. braziliensis were blasted against all sequences in genbank, their highest match was with corresponding regions in other leishmania spp. . the identity of two l. mexicana β-tubulin isoforms deposited in genbank was uncovered by comparing the distinct utrs of each locus. this showed that one isoform  closely matched the chromosome  <dig> 3' utr , while the amastigote-specific isoform  closely matched the chromosome  <dig> locus .

figures  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> clearly show that, although there was a general divergence between l. major/l.infantum and l. braziliensis igss, there were particular motifs in the 3' utrs of each l. braziliensis locus that display a conspicuously high sequence conservation with their homologs in old-world species. figure  <dig> identifies two regions of the β-tubulin tandem array igs in l. braziliensis, located  <dig> bp  and  <dig> bp  downstream of the β-tubulin respectively, showing 100% and 96% sequence homology respectively. similarly, a region  <dig> bp downstream of the chromosome  <dig> β-tubulin was 96% conserved between l. major and l. braziliensis . finally, two regions  <dig> bp  and  <dig> bp  downstream of chromosome  <dig> locus were 93% identical to corresponding positions in l. major.

sequence variation among isoforms
the two methods of read tiling and physical links produced identical sequences for the six β-tubulin isoforms of l. infantum and l. braziliensis. the total amount of variation among isoforms from four species was very low , figure  <dig> shows that only nine amino acid sites displayed any phylogenetically-informative variation. these substitutions were not diagnostic for either species or locus identity, that is, sequence similarity by species or locus could not be predicted based on amino acid replacements. for example, while the chromosome  <dig> and  <dig> assemblies for l. braziliensis share unique substitutions , these were not shared by the chromosome  <dig> isoform. conversely, while chromosome  <dig> isoforms from all three species share the gln <dig> substitution, this was also found in the l. major chromosome  <dig> isoform. of all the informative changes, the isoforms appear to vary most at two sites towards the n-terminus  and at the c-terminus .

phylogenetic relationships
likelihood mapping of sequence quartets was used to visualise phylogenetic signal among β-tubulin isoforms. the results are shown in figure 5; these demonstrate that a large proportion of sequence quartets produced unresolved tree topologies . when this is added to those quartets with conflicting resolutions , a total of  <dig> % of quartets could not be resolved unambiguously. the prevalence of ambiguous relationships was reflected in the ml phylogenies , which were normally unresolved and not supported by high bootstrap proportions. the exceptions to this pattern were the nodes uniting chromosome  <dig> isoforms from l. major and l. infantum  and the three l. braziliensis sequences . the phylogenetic network shown in figure  <dig> shows a consensus of all possible solutions to the phylogenetic tree, emphasising the various, and equally plausible, ways of depicting isoform relationships. no clear definition can be made between chromosome  <dig> and  <dig> isoforms in l. major, l. infantum, and to some extent, l. mexicana, but l. braziliensis isoforms are robustly monophyletic.

analysis of sequence variation
no evidence was presented by dn/ds ratios for positive selection; on the contrary, values for ω were consistently less than  <dig>  indicating that β-tubulin sequences have been under purifying selection. values for ω ranged from  <dig>  and  <dig>  . values for ω when comparing l. braziliensis with any other species were significantly lower than when comparing species other than l. braziliensis . thus, the number of non-synonymous substitutions was noticeably reduced in genetic distances over the greatest time periods.

there was no evidence for recombination among isoforms; both dss and pdm methods showed that there were no significant differences in phylogenetic signal along the length of the sequence alignment. therefore, all nucleotide sites support a single phylogenetic history. however, as figure  <dig> shows, there was considerable ambiguity as to the precise branching patterns in this history. given that this ambiguity largely derived from a lack of information, it follows that the test for recombination is limited because few significantly different topologies will be produced by a data set that lacks signal generally. in any event, the general conservation of these sequences makes site-specific recombination unlikely since this is a diversifying process.

discussion
this study has established that all three β-tubulin loci, and the single α-tubulin locus, found in l. major are present in l. infantum and l. braziliensis. amino acid replacements among β-tubulin sequences are scarce; those that occur are generally idiosyncratic but certain substitutions warrant further analysis. of particular note are the replacements affecting the c-terminus; at position  <dig> all array isotypes possess a glutamic acid residue, while all singleton isotypes  have a glutamine. additionally, the l. braziliensis chromosome  <dig> and  <dig> copies have an aspartic acid to glutamic acid replacement at position  <dig>  these e440q and d437e replacements fall within the 'axoneme-specific motif', which is important for flagellar function  <cit> , consistent with evolutionary specialisation of these isotypes to life stages with modified flagellar function. conversely, there are no replacements affecting the region important for post-translational glutamylation  <cit> , located upstream. towards the n-terminus, the a25s and s35t replacements also seem to preferentially affect the singleton loci and this may be important; it is the amastigote-specific locus that possessed a serine at position  <dig>  as is normal for most eukaryotes, whereas alanine was at this position in all the arrayed paralogs. in a gene where concerted evolution and negative selection are strong, constant pressures for conservatism, it is unlikely that these replacements are the result of neutral divergence. indeed, there was a consistent under-representation of silent changes. hence, while most of the evolutionary change associated with these loci has occurred in the non-coding regions, these few coding substitutions may yet prove to be functionally significant.

comparison of flanking regions supports the view that these loci produce unique transcripts with specific expression profiles. the conservation of gene order around each locus confirms that these three loci are paralogous, i.e., that the ancestor of these three leishmania species possessed a β-tubulin tandem array on chromosome  <dig> and singleton β-tubulin on chromosomes  <dig> and  <dig>  in a clear contradiction of these conserved gene orders, the phylogenetic relationships suggested by figure  <dig> indicate that paralogs within l. braziliensis and l. mexicana are more similar to each other than any are to their orthologs in other species. this situation is not extended to isoforms in l. major and l. infantum, where the precise relationships are unclear.

utr structure and the regulation of β-tubulin repertoire
leishmanial β-tubulin isoforms display a low substitution rate in coding regions but a substantial structural divergence of utrs. comparisons between species demonstrate that non-coding sequences rapidly lose structural homology over time, although isolated sections of highly conserved sequence may point to functional constraints on igs divergence; the first conserved domain described for chromosome  <dig> above contains a leishmania rna-binding site ggatc  <cit> . besides diverging after speciation, the most important feature of these comparisons is that utrs are typically dissimilar among loci and within a locus in the case of the tandem array. the exceptions to this are the similarity between the chromosome  <dig> and  <dig> loci in the 5' utrs, and the very beginning of the 3' utrs. these exceptions notwithstanding, the unique genomic environments around each locus corroborate the three distinct β-tubulintranscripts of  <dig> bp,  <dig> bp and  <dig> bp, identified in l. major by  <cit> , each predominantly expressed in the promastigiote, amastigote and infective metacyclic life stages respectively. alignment of the cdna deposited by  <cit>  with the genome sequences shows that the  <dig> bp transcript  corresponds to the internal tandem array copies and the  <dig> bp transcript  corresponds to the chromosome  <dig> singleton. it is now clear that these different transcripts are facilitated by divergence in the 3' utrs of the various loci, including the terminal utr of the tandem array, which is quite unlike its internal counterparts, and results in the distinct  <dig> bp transcript in the metacyclic stage. hence, it is likely that these very conservative proteins have acquired diverse expression profiles through restructuring of their flanking regions. this reinforces the view that 3' utr structure is crucial to the expression profile of any gene through post-transcriptional regulation  in trypanosomatids  <cit> .

it is intuitive that the various life stages of the leishmania spp. could be the basis for differentiation of β-tubulin isoforms. the promastigote inhabiting the insect gut, the non-proliferating metacyclic form waiting in the insect salivary gland for passage to a vertebrate, and the amastigote, aflagellate within the mammalian macrophage, each experience a different environment and may have suitably different β-tubulin expression requirements. unique flanking regions described here demonstrate that the amastigote-specific transcripts identified in l. major  <cit>  and l. mexicana  <cit>  derive from the chromosome  <dig> locus. the  <dig> bp and  <dig> bp transcripts identified by  <cit>  originate at the tandem array. the role of the chromosome  <dig> locus, with its distinctive utrs, remains elusive; given that it appears more distinct from the two other loci, in both coding and non-coding respects, this gene may fulfil a more distinctive role and could conceivably vary in spatial expression as well as temporal. in summary, the distinctive genomic environments surrounding each β-tubulin locus in leishmania suggest that these different loci satisfy a demand for diverse expression patterns, rather than structural innovation. in the context of poly-cistronic transcription, this could not be delivered by the tandem array on chromosome 33; the conserved flanking sequences within the array offer no opportunities for differential regulation of the copies, except for the terminal utr, which has been extensively modified. therefore, paralogous loci may have evolved in response to the derivation of new life stages in leishmania.

convergent evolution via ectopic gene conversion
the relationships in figure  <dig> show that the phylogeny of β-tubulin genes in leishmania has not simply been a matter of diversification through the inheritance of orthologs. there was insufficient evolutionary change among the isoforms from l. major and l. infantum for their relationships to be resolved. however, the monophyly of the three l. braziliensis isoforms was robustly resolved, which suggests, paradoxically, that they are each other's closest relatives. these loci are clearly paralogous and the conserved gene order across three species demonstrates that all three loci precede the separation of those species from their common ancestor. there was no evidence to support either positive selection towards some consensus sequence or site-specific recombination; in fact, the dn/ds ratio was always less than  <dig> and indicative of purifying selection. therefore, convergence has not occurred according to a fitness benefit associated with conserving a canonical β-tubulin structure. this result can be explained as a consequence of concerted evolution, which has operated to homogenise the different loci in a time-dependent manner.

in the absence of positive selection or recombination between isoforms, ectopic gene conversion may provide a mechanism for homogenisation. ectopic gene conversion is the unilateral recombination between non-allelic gene copies and has been shown to be a common and important process in gene family evolution  <cit> . in contrast to allelic gene conversion, an ectopic event occurs between all or part of unlinked loci. they have been shown to occur among amylase and heat-shock proteins in drosophila  <cit> ; it is invoked in the origin of novel multi-histocompatibility complex alleles in mammals  <cit> , but is most notably documented among vertebrate haemoglobin genes  <cit> . ectopic gene conversion is also known to affect plasmodium falciparum  <cit> , where it is responsible for the generation of sequence variation among var genes  <cit> , which are the basis for immune evasion. this process could account for the homogenisation of β-tubulin paralogs, while also accommodating other observations. first, l. braziliensis and l. mexicana isoforms are not completely homogenised, but the operation of gene conversion as a conservative influence on sequence evolution does not preclude the continued substitution of bases under mutation or selection pressure. the total divergence of two sequences would be a balance of these pressures. second, l. major and l. infantum isoforms are very similar but not homogenised; this would be expected if these species only recently diverged and gene conversion is a relatively rare event between paralogous loci in trans. it is known that the frequency of conjugation and subsequent conversion events declines with physical distance between loci and their sequence homology  <cit> . finally, the flanking regions of β-tubulin paralog have clearly not been homogenised. this is not implausible given that gene conversion often affects particular domains, rather than an entire locus. for instance, the exons of ruminant lyzozymes are known to convert, while the introns and flanking regions diverge  <cit> . in this instance, the non-coding regions may have diverged under positive selection to provide specific expression profiles for each locus; since all three leishmania species display the same patterns of variation in the utrs , it is likely that divergence occurred rapidly in a common ancestor and has been maintained by purifying selection since. whereas very strong purifying selection on the coding regions ensured that the structural function of β-tubulin was unchanged. while the conservation of coding regions provides a situation susceptible to conversion, the functional divergence of non-coding regions has abolished identity, thereby precluding homogenisation by homologous recombination, which would presumably be maladaptive if it were to occur.

CONCLUSIONS
since the origin of the distinct β-tubulin loci in leishmania, there has been substantial evolution of the untranscribed regions, in stark contrast to the conservation of coding sequences among all isoforms. the partial remodelling of utrs had previously been indicated by distinct transcripts belonging to specific life stages. this variation has now been directly related to variation in the genome sequence. in addition to the tandemly-arrayed isoform on chromosome  <dig>  leishmania spp. possess a singleton locus on chromosome  <dig>  which shares partial affinity with the arrayed isoform in its utrs, and a further singleton on chromosome  <dig> that shares no affinity with other utrs and the expression of which remains uncharacterised. these findings indicate that the evolution of distinct utrs relating to these loci has been coincident with the modification of their expression profiles. however, the conservation of the β-tubulin protein sequence suggests that the structural function has remained unchanged in the different life-stage contexts. in demonstrating the paralogous nature of the three β-tubulin loci, this study has shown that concerted evolution, perhaps through ectopic gene conversion, has operated to maintain uniformity among coding sequences. therefore, a subtle balance of concert and divergence in different regions of these loci might have allowed β-tubulin repertoire to evolve during the derivation of parasitism in leishmania, while preserving its fidelity in fundamental cell function.

