BACKGROUND
microbiologically contaminated water is a potential source of human enteric infections and indicates poor maintenance of hygiene-related infrastructure and problems in implementation of control measures especially in developing countries. discharge of inadequately treated sewage, run-off storm water and leakage of animal waste into the environment can lead to deterioration of quality of water sources. salmonella has been found to survive in tropical fresh waters, such as rivers, streams and wells in sierra leone, for several days  <cit> . salmonella carried by fish and other aquaculture products as well as by fresh produce irrigated with dirty water has been indicated as a vehicle for a growing number of enteric disease outbreaks . use of feces-contaminated water to irrigate the produce has been reported to lead contaminating of soil and vegetables with salmonella for an extended period of time  <cit> .

salmonella enterica remains an important cause of diarrhoeal illness in humans and salmonella infections are a major health concern that continue to have a serious economic impact worldwide  <cit> . furthermore, specifically in sub-saharan africa, non-typhoidal salmonella is among the leading causes of bacterial bloodstream infections in adults and children . yet, the common sources of salmonella infections in africa are poorly known.

in our previous study in ouagadougou in burkina faso, 9 % of the children suffering from diarrhea were found to be infected by salmonella  <cit> . in order to find out the potentially important sources for the salmonella infections, we examined the frequency and diversity of salmonella in beef, mutton and poultry carcasses  <cit>  as well as in the feces of cattle, poultry, swine and hedgehogs  <cit> . in the present study we expand our studies on the potential salmonella sources to include water, fish and irrigated lettuce.

in ouagadougou, channels built to drain runoff rain water are used as a human biological waste deposit by people living close to them. even a major hospital disposes much of its waste into a channel running nearby, casting serious doubt on the hygienic quality of the water. elsewhere in africa similar open storm drainage channels have been found to expose people to infections by salmonella and other pathogens  <cit> . the channels in ouagadougou run into reservoirs, which are nowadays used for fishing activities, irrigation of vegetables, washing clothes and cars. furthermore, the reservoirs remain a contingency source of drinking water during dry season being intermittently part of municipal infrastructure. in this study, we examined water samples from two reservoirs, two channels as well as from wells and treated tap water system for possible salmonella contamination. furthermore, we examined fish caught from one of the reservoirs and lettuce irrigated with its water. specifically, the aims of this study were  to determine the prevalence of salmonella,  to assess salmonella serotypes and antimicrobial resistance profiles of the obtained isolates and  to compare the serotypes to those previously obtained from the local children, animals and retail meat.

RESULTS
salmonella enterica was isolated from  <dig>  of the total of  <dig> samples examined . from all of the drinking water samples  only one isolate was obtained. instead, in the channel, reservoir and fish samples salmonella was common, 15-31 % of the samples were positive . in the lettuce samples the frequency was the highest, since half of them were positive.table  <dig> prevalence of salmonella and different serotypes detected

ca = channel a, cb = channel b, ry = reservoir of yamtenga rt = reservoir of tanghin



the obtained  <dig> salmonella enterica isolates represented  <dig> different serotypes, all the sample types containing a variety of serotypes . the most frequent serotypes were salmonella colindale and s. bredeney  . salmonella colindale was isolated from lettuce as well as from the reservoirs and channels, whereas another common serotype in lettuce, s. korlebu, was not detected in the water samples. s. bredeney was common in fish but was also detected in water and lettuce samples . s. bredeney, s. give, s. colindale, s. eastbourne, s. schwarzengrund, s. poona and s. llandoff were isolated from fish and water samples, but only s. colindale and s. schwarzengrund were isolated from both fish and the reservoir of tanghin where they were caught from. no common serotypes were found from the two different reservoirs. only two serotypes, s. colindale and s. senftenberg were common to the two different channels.table  <dig> diversity of salmonella serotypes



















































ca = channel a, cb = channel b, ry = reservoir of yamtenga rt = reservoir of tanghin



almost all of the isolates were sensitive to the  <dig> antimicrobials tested. only two isolates, s. wagadugu and s. adabraka isolated from the water of the reservoir of yamtenga, were resistant to streptomycin. however,  <dig> of all the  <dig> isolates showed decreased sensitivity  to streptomycin and  <dig> to sulphonamide.

discussion
our investigation on prevalence of salmonella enterica in water from taps, wells, channels and reservoirs, fish, and lettuce grown in ouagadougou, burkina faso, indicated that salmonella contamination is rare in drinking water but common in the samples from the other sources . in a previous study in lagos, nigeria, salmonella were isolated from  <dig>  % of drinking water samples  <cit> . serotyping of the salmonella isolated in our study revealed the great diversity of serotypes in these sources: we identified  <dig> different serotypes among the  <dig> isolates. recently, in burkina faso,  <dig> salmonella strains were isolated from animal faeces , representing  <dig> different serotypes  <cit> . of those, agona, bredeney, brive, carmel, chester, colindale, derby, drac, eastbourne, fresno, galiema, kokomlemle, korlebu, muenster, nima, nottingham, poona, rissen, schwarzenground, senftenberg, typhimurium and virchow were isolated also in our study indicating a possible transfer between animals, their faeces, water, fish and irrigated vegetables. the previously most commonly reported serotypes in africa , enteritidis and anatum  <cit> , were not isolated in our study. serotypes muenster , cubana, kentucky, montevideo, poona, fresno, virchow and typhimurium detected in our study, were also isolated in stool specimens from children under 5 years old suffering from acute diarrhea in ouagadougou and in rural burkina faso  <cit> .

salmonella were isolated from 23 % of the surface water samples . this frequency is lower than in the survey conducted in yaoundé, cameroon, where salmonella were isolated in  <dig>  % of the surface water samples  <cit> . we isolated  <dig> different serotypes from surface water, showing more diversity in salmonella than reported elsewhere . no same serotypes were found from the two reservoirs studied, which may be due to their different external factors. the reservoir of tanghin located in the city is influenced by people and the reservoir of yamtenga in the rural area is less frequented by people but more by animals. in any case, the presence of salmonella in the surface waters reveals the health risk posed by the use of this water for irrigation. it has been indicated that the potential hazards may be associated with poor hygienic standard of waters influenced by human sewage, livestock farming, or industry  <cit> . s. poona, the only salmonella serotype we isolated from well water, was also isolated from children under 5 years suffering from acute diarrhoea in ouagadougou and in rural burkina faso  <cit> .

among the fish samples examined,  <dig>  were positive to salmonella with high diversity of serotypes,  <dig> different ones were detected. in kenya, along the lake victoria beaches, almost 17 % of tilapia samples were positive for salmonella with four different serotypes  <cit> . in indonesia, about 10 % of fresh fish were reported to be contaminated by salmonella  <cit> . the high prevalence of salmonella in fish in ouagadougou is not surprising since they were caught from water of poor hygienic quality. s. schwarzengrund and colindale were the serotypes found in both the fish and the reservoir of tanghin. although as many as  <dig> different salmonella serotypes were detected in the fish from tanghin, only four serotypes were detected in its water, presumably because the salmonellas are more sparsely distributed in the water environment and thus in water samples. s. typhimurium, an important clinical serotype, was isolated only from one fish sample  in our study, thus, being much rarer than in the study of fish along the lake victoria beaches, where it was more isolated   <cit> . in another study, conducted in winam gulf of lake victoria, kenya, s. typhimurium was isolated from 6 % of fish harvested  <cit> . we did not find any s. typhi, perhaps because the enrichment technique used is not optimal to this serotype  <cit> .

our results revealed that 50 % of the analysed lettuce samples were positive for salmonella with four different serotypes .

s. colindale was found in lettuce, reservoir water of tanghin and the channels. this suggested that the lettuce has been contaminated by irrigating water. on the other hand, s. korlebu and s. gerland found in lettuce samples were not detected in the water sources, but s. korlebu has instead been identified in cattle faeces in ouagadougou  <cit> .bacteria in lettuce might also come from another origin e.g. manure used as a fertilizer. salmonella has been demonstrated to contaminate vegetables  in field experiments following treatment with contaminated manure compost or irrigation water  <cit> . in finland, iceberg lettuce contaminated with s. reading and newport caused a nationwide outbreak, according to a traceback investigation  <cit> . s. colindale which was common in our lettuce samples was also described as the most common serotype in gambia of non-typhoidal salmonella in cases of enteric infection under the age of 5 years  <cit> .

reassuringly, our results showed that the great majority of environmental salmonella strains are susceptible to the antimicrobials tested. two strains, s. wagadugu and s. adabraka, both isolated from the reservoir water of yamtenga were resistant to streptomycin. domestic animals treated by antibiotics might transfer resistant salmonella from their faeces to this reservoir leading to antimicrobial resistance. no resistant salmonella were detected in fish reflecting the fact that antimicrobial agents are not used in fish farming in burkina faso. on the contrary,  <dig>  of the salmonella isolates from animal faeces in ouagadougou were resistant to one or more tested antimicrobials  <cit> . in nigeria, emerging multidrug-resistant salmonella serotypes were commonly found from water sources  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
our study highlights the common presence of salmonella in samples from different aquatic environments and indicates potential sources of human salmonella infections. we detected a high diversity of serotypes among the strains, which were, however, mainly fully sensitive for the common antimicrobials. but nearly 30 % of the isolates were intermediate, which gives rise to concern. these results indicate a need for microbiological quality monitoring of the fish production and water, which is used in various human activities eg. in irrigation of fresh vegetables.

