BACKGROUND
'interactomes' are novel biological entities that correspond, ideally and formally, to the complete set of interactions existing between all the macromolecules of an organism  <cit> . currently, the available interactomes are primarily formed by protein-protein interaction  networks in which the interactions have been experimentally obtained either from high throughput experiments  or by different types of low-scale experiments. despite the fact that interactomes are far from being complete, the current ppi maps  form large intricate networks  <cit> .

concurrently to the deciphering of the interactomes, bioinformatics methods allowing their analysis have been developed. since interaction networks are represented by complex graphs in which nodes correspond to proteins and edges to their interactions, a number of these methods have been grounded on principles deriving from graph partitioning theory such as the search for interaction-dense regions  <cit> , shortest paths in the graph  <cit> , graph disconnection according to edge betweenness  <cit> , the sharing of interactors  <cit>  or a combination thereof  <cit>  . all these algorithms partition the interaction network into sub-graphs. among those, the prodistin method that we previously proposed  <cit>  allows the functional classification of the proteins through the computation of a distance reflecting the sharing of interactors between each possible protein pair. as previously demonstrated, proteins participating to the same cellular processes are clustered by the method into the same prodistin classes  <cit> .

signalling consists of multiple sequential events which relay information by transmitting signals from cell surface receptors to intracellular effectors that eventually activate the transcription of target genes. these events are promoted by specific interactions between signalling molecules  among which the more prominent and numerous are the protein-protein ones. essentially due to the temporal dynamics of signal transduction and to the experimental choices often made for investigation , the signalling mechanisms have long been perceived and described as distinct and isolated linear cascades of reactions, namely the signalling pathways. nowadays, this vision is progressively changing with the discovery of important crosstalks between pathways  <cit>  and the assumption that unknown crosstalks should be responsible for the difficulty to predict output states for particular pathways  <cit> . finally, the discovery of large numbers of new participants to well known signalling pathways in metazoans, resulting from novel investigations using functional genomics and proteomics methods  <cit> , is widening the signalling space  <cit> .

we have taken advantages of our recent efforts 1) in participating to the deciphering  <cit>  and the manual curation of the drosophila interactome  <cit>  and 2) in developing prodistin, an interactome analysis method  <cit> , to investigate the topological organization of the signalling pathways when embedded within a global ppi network. this may predict the participation of unforeseen actors to the pathways and provide an integrated view of the signalling mechanisms by assessing the existence of important interactions between them.

thus, we have applied the prodistin method to a high quality drosophila interactome. we established and analyzed the functional classification of the proteins participating to  <dig> canonical signalling pathways and identified  <dig> classes which potentially correspond to  <dig> functional modules. from the detailed analysis of these modules, their composition and interconnections, it appears that the linear perception of the signalling pathways does not resist to a global interactome analysis. rather, our work delineates a highly modular and interconnected signalling network showing a central and plausibly organizational position within the global interactome.

RESULTS
functional classification from the protein-protein interaction network: a bi- to tri-partite organization of the signalling pathways based on the sharing of interactors
in drosophila, at least eleven pathways are crucial for signalling in development and adult cell physiology, namely the wingless , hedgehog , notch , decapentaplegic , janus kinases and signal transducers and activators of transcription , sevenless , torso , epidermal growth factor receptor , insulin , toll  and fibroblast growth factor  pathways. these pathways have been chosen for the subsequent analysis and according to our curation of the literature , each of them transmits external signals through a cascade of reactions mediated by a ten of canonical proteins . given that these proteins are parts of a larger ppi network, studying the structure of these signalling pathways with an interactome perspective may bring new insights not only into their composition and possible regulation but also their integration into cell functioning.

for this purpose, a high confidence drosophila interactome composed of  <dig> binary protein-protein interactions involving  <dig> proteins  was analyzed with the prodistin method  <cit> . briefly, this interactome analysis method first calculates a functional distance between each possible pairs of proteins in the interaction network with regard to the number of interactors they share ; the distance values are then clustered leading to a classification tree which is subsequently subdivided into formal classes, using the tree topology and the functional annotations of the proteins .

in the present work, we obtained a classification tree containing  <dig> proteins  among which  <dig> are canonical components of  <dig> out of the  <dig> signalling pathways cited above. the fgf and jak-stat pathways were not further investigated because  <dig> to 100% of their canonical proteins are so poorly connected in the high quality interactome that they are not classified. on average, 68% of the canonical signalling proteins initially taken into consideration are present in the classification tree .

then, in order to annotate this tree following the prodistin procedure, classes of proteins involved in the same cellular function were defined according to the go biological process ontology. among the prodistin classes containing less than  <dig> proteins , those containing at least one canonical protein have been chosen to be further investigated. twelve such classes have been identified, containing 56/ <dig> of the canonical proteins present in the tree . on average, these prodistin classes contain  <dig>  proteins among which 48% are canonical proteins from the signalling pathways. all these classes but one are annotated with a go biological process term related to 'signal transduction', or are nested within a larger class annotated with such a term  . noticeably, the 'signal transduction'-related annotation of almost all these classes is supported by the best p-value  , reinforcing the proposal that the proteins belonging to these classes are signalling actors.

we then investigated the detailed distribution of the canonical proteins by analyzing the  <dig> prodistin classes. whereas one could have anticipated the clustering of the proteins participating to the same signalling pathway into one single class, it strikingly turned out that without any exception for the  <dig> considered pathways, the canonical proteins were distributed into  <dig> or  <dig> classes per pathway . since the prodistin method clusters proteins sharing common interactors  <cit> , this result means that the canonical proteins of a particular pathway belonging to a same class share more common interactors between them and with the other non-canonical proteins of the same class than with the other canonical proteins of the same pathway found in other classes. as a control, ten randomization experiments in which protein names have been randomly assigned to tree branches  showed that this clustering pattern could not have happened by chance since the canonical proteins of a pathway are then found distributed among  <dig>   classes on average.

as a conclusion, the analysis based on the sharing of interactors overall suggests a bi- to tri-partite organization of each fly signalling pathway within the interactome.

the distribution of go annotations among prodistin classes reflects the polarity of signal transduction: toward the notion of 'signalling modules'
for a better understanding of the functional significance of this bi- to tri-partite organization of the signalling pathways, we investigated the class composition and the functions of the classified proteins based on gene ontology annotations  <cit> . using the 'cellular component' and the 'molecular function' ontologies, we investigated the repartition of protein localizations and molecular functions in each prodistin class . in addition, we verified that the go term corresponding to the main sub-cellular localization of each prodistin class was statistically over-represented among the annotations of all the proteins of the class as compared to the fly proteome using the statistical tool of gotoolbox  <cit>  .

qualitatively, when considering the main localization of the classes containing the canonical proteins of a given pathway, the sub-cellular polarity of the pathway is perceptible. indeed, these proteins are subdivided into classes mainly membrane or membrane/cytoplasm-located, and classes mainly cytoplasmic or cytoplasm/nucleus-located . this partition of the canonical proteins in classes of different main sub-cellular localizations is also corroborated by the distribution of the molecular function annotations found within the classes . indeed, proteins acting at the same level of a signalling pathway through their interactions, such as ligands and receptors, are clustered in the same class. in other words, when the proteins of a particular pathway are considered, although the dynamic aspect of signalling is not taken into account for this analysis, the 'molecular function' and the 'cellular component' annotations of the clustered proteins reflect the polarity of signal transduction . taken all together, these results lead us to propose that the identified prodistin classes may correspond to 'signalling modules' defined as groups of signalling proteins acting together through their interactions.

the composition of the signalling modules reflects close relationships between pathways
since only  <dig> modules have been identified and each of the  <dig> pathways is split into  <dig> to  <dig> modules, some modules must necessarily include components belonging to more than one pathway. indeed, whereas  <dig> out of  <dig> signalling modules contain canonical proteins from a single pathway, the  <dig> others enclose proteins from several pathways . these modules contain proteins from the wingless and the notch pathways , the wingless, notch and tgf pathways , the sevenless-ras and the insulin pathways  and the hedgehog and egfr pathways . in  <dig> out of  <dig> of these 'mosaic' modules, several canonical proteins of the different pathways interact directly  from the eponymic pathway interacts with wingless  and dishevelled  from the wingless pathway, class wg <dig> n1) . these protein-protein interactions have different functional contributions to signalling: those mediating a functional crosstalk which involves information transfer from a pathway to another, such as dsh  inhibiting notch signalling through its physical interaction with n  <cit> , those revealing the sharing of a component between pathways, such as the use of groucho  from the wingless pathway as a co-repressor in notch and tgf signalling  <cit>  and those for which no functional role is known so far .

the fourth mosaic module, hh <dig> egfr, suggests a potential link between the hedgehog and the egfr pathways since patched , the receptor of the hedgehog pathway, is classified with the membrane/cytoplasmic part of the egfr cascade . this co-classification is not due to a direct interaction between canonical proteins of the pathways but rather by the sharing of interactors. indeed, the egfr ligand gurken  and sprouty , a negative regulator of the pathway, share respectively one and four interactors with ptc. interestingly, two of these interactors  are peptidoglycans known to modulate the signal activity by sequestering ligand molecules or by favouring the ligand-receptor interaction, therefore stressing the coherence of the classification.

finally, the fact that the hh <dig> egfr and the sev ras <dig> ins <dig> classes contain the membrane proteins of four signalling pathways known to use lipid rafts for signal transduction  <cit>  is also remarkable and reinforces the functional consistency of the modules found by the analysis.

overall, these results show that although the analysis is anchored on separate linear cascades , the co-classification of some of their components by the prodistin method reveals their close functional relationships.

signalling modules contain other proteins related to signalling: validations and predictions
the prodistin method clusters proteins participating in the same cellular process by grouping proteins that share interactors. the obtained clusters then provide a mean to identify potential new players in given cellular processes based on their co-classification with proteins clearly involved in these processes  <cit> . on average, half of the proteins contained in the signalling modules are not canonical proteins. this accounts for  <dig> proteins out of  <dig> proteins contained within the signalling modules. although these  <dig> proteins are candidates to participate in signalling, our results obtained on a high quality interactome may be dependent on its relative small size. indeed, a large number of available but possibly false interactions have not been incorporated in the high quality interactome and an unknown number of not yet detected but physiological interactions is probably missing. we thus address the robustness of our predictions based on co-classifications by proposing as putative new members or regulators of the signalling pathways only the proteins systematically found clustered with the canonical proteins both in the high quality network and in a larger one, containing almost all available drosophila interactions  . as a result, 45/ <dig> non canonical proteins contained in the signalling modules are robustly clustered with the canonical proteins . twenty of them correspond to already known regulators of the pathways after literature and gene ontology annotation searches, thus validating our approach. in addition and noticeably,  <dig> other proteins are members of alternate or other pathways. here again, we observed that a given signalling module may contain canonical proteins from a particular pathway as well as proteins from another pathway. interestingly, proteins belonging to signalling pathways not chosen to 'anchor' the analysis  and jnk ) are classified within signalling modules defined by the 'anchoring' pathways . this finding raises the number of classified pathways from  <dig> to  <dig>  therefore heavily underlining the fact that with a ppi network perspective, signalling pathways are intermingled. the functional consequences of this observation may reside in the integration of the signalling processes and their capacity to rapidly respond to diverse extra-cellular stimuli.

r, protein already known to regulate the pathway; ao, protein known to be involved in alternate or other pathways; p, protein predicted to be involved in the pathway by this analysis.

signalling modules contain new potential actors of the pathways
finally, among the  <dig> non-canonical pathway proteins robustly found in the  <dig> signalling modules,  <dig> proteins are neither known regulators of the pathways nor members of other pathways . they are thus predicted by the classification to participate to signalling processes. five of them have been previously described as involved in other biological processes  but their domain composition is compatible with a possible implication in signalling. the five others  did not have any gene ontology biological process annotations in flybase at the time of the work but arguments from the literature available for  <dig> of them suggest their potential role as components, regulators or effectors of the signalling pathways in drosophila.

hedgehog pathway
cg32209/serpentin is found in the hh <dig> module, containing the hedgehog , smoothened , costal- <dig> , fused , suppressor of fused ) and cubitus interruptus  proteins. it has been recently involved in late tracheal development  <cit> . its possible involvement in the hedgehog pathway is suggested by several lines of evidence. first, cg <dig> is interacting with the receptor patched  and the transcription factor ci via two different domains with a high confidence score  <cit> . second, cg <dig> contains a low density lipoprotein -like receptor domain and hedgehog is a lipidated molecule. from a genetic point of view, a transposon insertion into cg <dig> is presumably lethal  <cit>  and the gene belongs to a complementation group rescuing the jaft mutation, identified in an enhancer/suppressor genetic screen designed to characterize novel components of the hedgehog pathway  <cit> .

notch pathway
cg3962/keap <dig> is found in the signalling module wg <dig> n <dig> containing the notch  and delta  proteins and interacts with dl. taken together with the facts that 1) the human ortholog keap <dig> is an adaptor protein regulating steady-state levels of the transcription factor nrf <dig> in response to oxidative stress  <cit>  and 2) the accumulation of reactive oxygen species in mammalian cells was recently shown to occur following disruption of notch signalling  <cit> , cg <dig> may play a role in the notch pathway.

ras pathway
in agreement with its classification in the signalling module containing the cytoplasmic part of the ras cascade , cg <dig>  which contains two ra  domains, was recently proposed to represent a ras effector candidate based on its interactors  <cit> .

wingless pathway
cg <dig> belongs to the wg <dig> module containing the cytoplamic part of the wingless pathway , shaggy , axin , adenomatous polyposis coli tumor suppressor homolog  <dig> , casein kinase i alpha  and cg3402). the protein contains a single pdz domain – usually found in diverse signalling proteins – of  <dig> amino-acids, evolutionarily conserved from arthropods to humans, which is interacting with arm with a very high confidence score  <cit> . the interaction is conserved throughout the evolution since recorded in c. elegans  <cit> , m. musculus and h. sapiens  <cit> . intriguingly, cg <dig> also interacts with an arrestin-like protein of unknown function   <cit> , whereas arrestins are regulators of -coupled receptor signalling  <cit> , and g-proteins are involved in both the canonical and the non-canonical wingless pathways  <cit> . finally, the facts that the mammalian ortholog is implicated in -coupled receptor signalling  <cit>  and inhibits the transcriptional activity of β-catenin  <cit> , strongly suggest that cg <dig> may represent a new player of the drosophila wingless pathway.

interactions between modules define the signalling network
the composition of the signalling modules defined by our interactome analysis method shows that signalling pathways are closely intertwined. this observation naturally prompted us to next investigate the interactions between signalling modules. an interaction linking any protein of a signalling module to a protein belonging to another signalling module is considered here as a link between those modules. we then differentiate intra-pathway links i.e between the different modules assigned to a same signalling pathway, excluding links within a module, and inter-pathways links between modules of different signalling pathways. among the  <dig> links connecting the  <dig> signalling modules together , 53% correspond to intra-pathway links whereas the other 47% are inter-pathways links . thus, there is almost no numerical difference between the 'classical pattern' of interactions of the signalling modules in the spirit of the linear cascade and the links between signalling modules of different signalling pathways. this observation holds when considering, the interaction pattern of each protein of the signalling modules in the larger dataset . given that almost all inter-pathways links  involve canonical signalling proteins , these results are thus extending our previous observation that signalling pathways are intertwined within modules, to a higher organizational level corresponding to the links between signalling modules. the functional contributions of these particular interactions to signalling are diverse and are detailed in additional file  <dig> 

is the interaction pattern between signalling modules different from the one between other prodistin classes composing the interactome? to test this, we calculated the density of interactions linking the modules as the number of existing interactions between modules compared to the number of possible ones . we found that whereas the average density of interactions within modules does not show any important discrepancy between the signalling modules and the other classes , the average density between them shows variations . indeed, the average density of interactions between signalling modules is  <dig> times higher than between non-signalling prodistin classes. it is also  <dig> times higher than between all the classes composing the interactome . finally, it is  <dig> times higher than the average density calculated between  <dig> classes picked randomly, taken as a control .

these results are obtained on a high quality but relatively reduced interactome. consequently, they might be influenced by the size of the interactome studied. we re-calculated the density measures between modules after considering the interaction patterns of each protein in the larger dataset. we showed that again, the average density of interactions between the signalling modules is still  <dig>  times higher than between all classes and twice as high as between random classes .

a numerical bias towards signalling interactions in the studied datasets may have influenced the density results. as a matter of fact, whereas the mean connectivity of the proteins of the high quality ppi network is almost  <dig>  the canonical proteins are connected to  <dig>  interactors on average. are the signalling proteins genuinely more connected than others datasets' proteins because of their intrinsic signalling function or is it explained by the fact that a larger number of interactions is known for signalling proteins due to their extensive investigation? this question has been addressed by analyzing the number of interactors identified for both types of proteins  in a same set of experiments, therefore in a context devoid of any bias. we compared the number of interactors identified for  <dig> of the canonical proteins when tested as baits in the ls-y2h screen of formstecher et al.  <cit>  to the number of interactors found for the  <dig> other baits tested in the same screen. in these conditions, canonical proteins are  <dig>  times more connected than other proteins . in addition, whereas  <dig> % of the interactions of the canonical baits involve another canonical protein, only  <dig> % of the interactions of non canonical proteins do. therefore, these results provide support to the fact that the observed higher density of links between signalling modules is not due to a bias towards signalling interactions but rather to the natural higher connectivity of the signalling proteins and their propensity to interact with other proteins involved in signalling.

taken together, these results thus suggest that we here define a modular sub-network of the interactome devoted to signalling into which interactions between signalling modules are prominent.

the signalling network lies centrally in the interactome
the betweenness of an edge is the number of shortest paths between all possible pairs of nodes that run along it . this graph topological feature has been used to define community structures in networks and to partition them  <cit> . it is assumed that when communities are loosely connected by few edges, all shortest paths between node pairs must run through those, therefore leading to a high edge-betweenness  value. consistently, when the eb values are calculated for all the drosophila network's edges, signalling modules are linked by high betweenness edges .

edge-betweenness is also interpreted as a measure of network centrality  <cit> . indeed, edges with high eb values have been proposed to control the communications between network's nodes and to contribute to the cohesiveness of the network. in this respect, signalling processes are expected to contain a large number of edges with a high eb value. in order to test this possibility, we studied the distribution of the eb values on the complete network. then, considering separately two subsets of edges, internal and external to the signalling network, we determined their repartitions among each of the  <dig> interquartile intervals of the eb values distribution  . whereas the edges external to the signalling network are evenly distributed between the four intervals of the distribution , the edges internal to the signalling network exhibit a non-uniform distribution with two striking features. on one hand, half of them  belongs to the fourth interval of the distribution. this interval contains the higher eb values of the distribution, corresponding to the more central routes of the network according to the eb definition. on the other hand, the internal edges are almost absent of the second interval of the distribution . this interval is essentially populated by the outward edges of the network, connecting proteins solely linked to the connected component via one interaction. therefore, the edges of the signalling network are excluded from the periphery of the network and the number of shortest paths running along them is significantly high. the signalling network thus appears to lie centrally in the interactome based on the eb calculation. this result may reflect the important role of the signalling network in connecting and coordinating the different biological processes and the integration of the signalling system into cell functioning.

discussion
by computing the drosophila interactome, we identified a modular signalling network lying centrally in the network after its topological properties. the deciphering of this highly connected sub-network underlines the topological importance of the interactions between signalling modules for the coherence of the interactome. the study also contributes to identify potential new players in drosophila signalling.

it is important to note that the ppi network is static and does not contain any spatio-temporal information. therefore, our conclusions are drawn from the analysis of 'a long-exposure photograph'  <cit>  of the interactions between proteins, i.e. the set of all possible interactions in all possible biological contexts.

computation of the drosophila interactions: quality assessment
protein-protein interaction networks have been often suspected to contain erroneous interactions, to be incomplete and biased towards certain type of interactions. for these reasons, our conclusions have been drawn from the analysis of a high quality interaction dataset in order to minimize the weight of potential false positive interactions. in addition, in order to build robust predictions and conclusions, we have reinforced and validated them on a larger dataset containing almost all the currently known drosophila ppis. this step insures that the results obtained on the high quality dataset are not sensitive to missing interactions and robust to potential false positive ones. the prodistin method has also been largely statistically assessed for robustness against the presence of false interactions in a previous study  <cit> .

functional modules devoted to signalling
the present analysis identified a signalling network formed by  <dig> groups of proteins organized around signalling proteins, that we assimilated to 'signalling modules'. although several different definitions of 'modules' are found in the literature, from static to dynamic , it is however admitted that they form groups of molecules, possibly evolutionary conserved, involved in the same pathway, the same protein complex or the same cellular process. in our experiments as well as in others  <cit> , modules identified by the computation of interaction networks are generally more than molecular complexes. they may contain proteins belonging to complexes as well as regulatory proteins and/or proteins involved in the same cellular process through interactions. these proteins thus do not necessarily act and bind each other at the same location and time in the cell. as a consequence, a common sub-cellular localization of the proteins of a same functional module is not mandatorily expected since, as known for numbers of signalling proteins, they may shuttle and translocate from one sub-cellular compartment to another to perform their function. indeed, we observed that half of the drosophila signalling modules are distributed between two sub-cellular localizations and the other half between  <dig> .

the identification of functional modules allowed us to predict the participation of  <dig> potential new actors to drosophila signalling. none of them was found in the high-throughput rnai screens recently performed on drosophila signalling pathways  <cit> . this lack of overlap is probably due to the fact that rnai screens identify regulators of the pathways which may act not only through protein-protein interactions but also through protein and other molecules  direct or indirect interactions.

modularity and signalling
by anchoring our analysis on the currently known signalling pathways herein considered as models  <cit> , and by computing the ppi network they belong to, we showed their systematic bi- to tri-partite modular organization. here, we generalize an observation made on one pathway of a unicellular eukaryote  <cit>  to the major signalling pathways of a metazoan organism. moreover, preliminary results obtained on the human interactome  confirm this organization, at least for the wnt pathway. indeed, the human functional homologs of the canonical proteins of the drosophila wingless pathway are also distributed between  <dig> signalling modules . moreover, the internal composition of each signalling module appears to be conserved throughout evolution.

in theory, the modular organization of the biological networks has been proposed to favour and even ensure the insulation necessary to the correct accomplishment of certain cellular process on one hand, and the connections needed to integrate information from multiple sources on the other hand  <cit> . remarkably, these properties constitute two important needs of the signalling process. so, how does this modular organization of the signalling pathways delineated by computational means fit with the functional requirements and principles of the signalling mechanisms? in mammalian cells, the ras/mapk signalling takes place in several subcellular compartments   <cit> . it was shown experimentally that the sensitivity to an input of a mapk module downstream of ras – composed of raf, erk, mek and ksr – is determined by its spatial localization  <cit> . in drosophila, we found the ras pathway organized in  <dig> modules: sev ras <dig> ins <dig>  formed by the membrane-bound proteins of the pathway and tor ras <dig>  formed by kinases and the scaffold protein. interestingly, the latter recapitulates the tested mammalian mapk module. indeed, it contains the drosophila counterparts of the mammalian proteins belonging to the tested module . taken together, these results lead to the proposal that the organization of the signalling pathways into different modules may provide the flexibility necessary to the functioning of the same signalling pathway in different spatial, cellular or developmental contexts, aiming probably at increasing the output repertoire complexity.

high density and high betweenness of edges: two topological features specific to the signalling network
two graph features, density and betweenness of edges, allowed us to delineate the signalling sub-network from the rest of the network. these topological characteristics – a high density of edges linking the modules and the high number of shortest paths running through the signalling network's edges – reveal the central position of the signalling network within the global interactome. hence, the role of the signalling mechanisms in connecting and coordinating the diverse cellular processes is here underlined by graph features.

edge-betweenness is a common concept in graph analysis. however, the question of its exact functional biological meaning remains open. the signalling network encompasses a large number of edges with high eb values. this leads to envisage that this could reflect, like in social networks  <cit> , an information flow in spite of the fact that edges in ppi networks are not directed. this last statement agrees with the recent proposal of yu and colleagues that nodes linked by such edges correspond to the dynamic components of the ppi network  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
we propose here a systems-level analysis of signal transduction from a protein-protein network point of view. overall, our results reflect the integration of the signalling system into cell functioning and its important role in connecting and coordinating the different biological processes at the level of the interactome.

