BACKGROUND
signaling by the epidermal growth factor receptor  has fundamental roles in mammalian development, where it regulates diverse processes such as eyelid opening, tooth growth, wound healing, hair follicle and mammary gland development. on the cellular level, it controls key functions including cell division, differentiation, survival, motility and apoptosis  <cit> . thus, it is not surprising that many tumors are associated with egf receptor overexpression, mutations or autocrine production of growth factors  <cit> .

the use of animal models such as drosophila melanogaster and caenorhabditis elegans has provided considerable advancement in understanding egf receptor functions in development and physiology  <cit> . in vertebrate model organisms, numerous studies have been conducted in the mouse, but in the common fish models - the zebrafish  and the japanese medaka  - only few publications address egfr function. in zebrafish, egf receptor signaling was shown to regulate cardiovascular processes during development  <cit> . furthermore, it promotes oocyte maturation in vitro  <cit>  and in vivo  <cit> . egf receptor signaling appears to be self-regulated by several of its ligands in the zebrafish ovarian follicle  <cit> , as deduced from the usage of recombinant human  egf, rh-betacellulin  and rh-heparin-binding egf-like growth factor . for the medaka, egfr detection with a human antibody directed against the tyrosine kinase domain showed temporarily and spatially different expression patterns during development  <cit> .

it is generally accepted that in addition to the two whole genome duplication events that occurred early in the vertebrate lineage , a later third whole genome duplication event, the so-called fsgd  occurred within the actinopterygian  fish lineage approximately 320- <dig> million years ago  <cit> . most of the duplicated genes have been lost secondarily . in many instances, however, gene duplicates from this event have persisted within fish genomes, for example when one of the duplicates acquired a new function  and/or when the ancestral gene functions have been distributed among the two gene copies   <cit> .

in the present study, we carried out phylogenetic and synteny analyses for a detailed insight into the evolution of egf receptors and their ligands in teleost fishes.

importantly, all previous studies in fish  that included the application of egf receptor ligands were performed using recombinant mammalian proteins  <cit> . this implies that mammalian egfr and egfr ligands share high structural similarity and functional homology with their fish counterparts and that mammalian ligands consequently have the ability to interact with the fish egfr binding domain to trigger its dimerization and activation. however, it is unclear whether heterologous application of ligands truly mimics the physiological situation. therefore, we examined egf receptor domains conservation between tetrapods and teleosts and investigated the domains involved in ligand binding. we particularly focused on medaka, monitored expression pattern profiles for the two copies of the egf receptor and the seven egf receptor ligands in the embryo and adult fish. finally, we developed an in vitro system to verify the functionality of medaka egf receptor ligands in terms of receptor activation. to our knowledge, this is the first work encompassing a functional analysis of the fish egf receptor-ligands system in this evolutionary context.

RESULTS
phylogenetic and syntenic analyses of teleost egfr ligands
in mammals, seven ligands bind and activate egfr, namely epidermal growth factor , transforming growth factor alpha , amphiregulin , betacellulin , epiregulin , heparin-binding egf-like growth factor  and epigen .

using blastn and tblastn searches, we thoroughly surveyed the teleost genome assemblies from medaka , stickleback , green spotted pufferfish , torafugu  and zebrafish  http://www.ensembl.org/ - as well as a platyfish  est sequence database  for egf receptors and egf receptor ligands. while we could identify two gene copies for the egf receptor in all teleost species investigated, surprisingly only one gene copy for each of the seven egfr ligands was isolated except for zebrafish that possesses two gene copies of the hbegf gene. a recent study by kassahn et al. in five teleost fishes  <cit>  also provided evidence that duplicated egfr but not egfr ligands genes have been retained after fsgd. amino acid sequences alignments of the identified tetrapod and teleost egf receptors and of the mature egfr ligands are shown in  and .

for a more detailed insight into egfr ligand evolution, a phylogenetic analysis based on tetrapod and teleost egfr ligand genes was performed. the mature part of the ligands containing the egfr-interacting motif was found to be the only part sufficiently conserved among all species to allow a phylogenetic tree reconstruction. a maximum likelihood  bootstrap consensus tree of the  <dig> bp nucleotide sequences encoding the mature part of the ligands is shown in figure  <dig>  a ml tree based on the original data is shown in . due to the short alignment used for its reconstruction, the trees exhibit many collapsed or poorly supported nodes, respectively. based on these and other trees obtained with different methods , the orthology between teleost and tetrapod genes is well supported only for egf, tgfa, hbegf, and ereg. therefore, we also undertook micro- and macro-synteny conservation analyses  in order to obtain further information about the relationship of the teleost ligands to their tetrapod counterparts.

the egf ligand gene
the chromosomal region surrounding the egf gene showed conserved synteny between and within tetrapods and teleosts . moreover, in d. rerio and t. nigroviridis, the egf gene is located on chromosomes dre <dig> and tni <dig>  which have been shown to correspond to the egf containing human chromosome hsa <dig>  <cit> . a further large-scale synteny conservation analysis using the synteny database  <cit>  revealed that the egf-containing regions in d. rerio  and t. nigroviridis  are derived from the teleost protochromosome f  <cit> . medaka egf has not been mapped to any chromosome yet and is found on ultracontig  <dig>  still it was found in the vicinity of the same genes that surround egf in the human genome . in addition, the phylogenetic grouping with characterized tetrapod and zebrafish egf  and the gene's unique structure further validated it as true egf ortholog. from the large-scale synteny analysis it can be inferred that medaka egf is most likely located on chromosomes ola <dig> or ola <dig> .

the tgfa ligand gene
tgfa displayed no conserved synteny between tetrapods and teleosts . d. rerio and t. nigroviridis tgfa are located on chromosomes dre <dig> and tni <dig> respectively, which possess only few orthologous genes that are located on tgfa containing human chromosome hsa <dig>  <cit>  . medaka tgfa  has not been mapped to a particular chromosome. the large-scale analysis shows that the tgfa region on hsa <dig> is syntenic to several chromosomes in the three teleost genomes but not to the tgfa containing ones . this might be due to an interchromosomal translocation of the tgfa gene in the teleost ancestor. nevertheless, the high bootstrap values of the teleost and tetrapod node , support the orthology of vertebrate tgfa genes.

the hbegf ligand gene
in the micro-synteny analysis, no conservation of synteny in hbegf regions was found between tetrapods and teleosts. the gene order is only maintained within the group of tetrapods or teleosts independently . however, teleost hbegf genes are located on dre <dig>  dre <dig>  tni <dig> and ola <dig>  which were reported previously to be syntenic to hsa <dig> where the hbegf gene is found  <cit>  . in addition, the phylogeny data also support the grouping of teleost hbegf with tetrapod hbegf .

the zebrafish is the only investigated teleost species that has two paralogs for hbegf. one copy, called hbegfa, is located on chromosome dre <dig> ; the other, called hbegfb, is found on dre <dig> . the macro-synteny analysis revealed that the region containing hbegf on hsa <dig> is highly syntenic to dre <dig> and dre <dig>  tni <dig> and tni <dig>  as well as ola <dig> and ola <dig> . these chromosomes were previously shown to be derived from the teleost protochromosome g  <cit> . thus, the most-likely scenario is that hbegf gene was initially duplicated in the teleost ancestor during the fsgd event. while hbegfa and hbegfb were kept in zebrafish, only the hbegfa copy was maintained in medaka and pufferfish, and the hbegfb copy was lost. so far, the two zebrafish hbegf paralogs are the only known teleost egfr ligand genes that were maintained in two copies after the fish specific genome duplication.

the epgn-ereg-areg-btc ligand gene cluster
an interesting feature of the egfr ligands is the clustering of the four remaining ligand genes, namely epgn, ereg, aregand btc on human hsa <dig> and mouse mmu <dig> . this cluster was also found on all well-annotated mammalian genomes. in chicken, only epgn, ereg and areg genes are part of a cluster on gga <dig>  two exons of chicken btc could be found on another segment of gga <dig> but they were not defined well enough to conclude the presence of a full functional btc on chromosome  <dig> in this species. still, it is likely that birds also possess a functional btc gene, since it was possible to identify a well defined btc gene on chromosome  <dig> of the zebrafinch  .

the orthology of these tetrapod genes with their teleost counterparts could not be resolved from the phylogenetic tree as most of the nodes were unresolved or poorly supported. the only exception is the relatively well supported monophyly of vertebrate ereg genes . we note that a previous study by stein and staros  <cit>  described similar problems with establishing the relationships of these genes among vertebrates using phylogenetic reconstructions only. therefore, we relied here on conservation of synteny to clarify the orthology of the respective medaka genes.

in medaka three of the ligands are also present in a cluster on ola <dig>  namely epgn, ereg and areg . the medaka btc gene is located on ola <dig>  in contrast to that, epgn was not found in pufferfishes and no ereg gene could be identified in zebrafish and pufferfish genomes. the zebrafish areg  and epgn  genes showed no conserved microsynteny with the medaka cluster . however, there is conserved synteny between the teleost btc regions  .

according to the macro-synteny analysis, dre <dig>  dre <dig> and dre <dig>  tni <dig> and tni <dig>  as well as ola <dig> and ola <dig> share numerous orthologous genes with the ligand cluster region on hsa <dig> . these teleost chromosomes were previously reported to be derived from the teleost protochromosome i  <cit> . thus, it appears that the ligand cluster located on protochromosome i was duplicated during the fsgd. after the fsgd, one of the cluster copies, which is now present on ola <dig>  has lost btc. in the zebrafish lineage, it broke further apart, separating areg and ereg genes. the other cluster then lost all genes but btc now found on ola <dig>  tni <dig> and dre <dig>  respectively . thereby, the single teleost epgn-ereg-areg and btc genes are located on paralogous rather than orthologous chromosomal segments. thus, the absence of the complete cluster in teleosts is not the result of translocation of btc to a new chromosome, but is due to differential gene loss from initially two clusters after the fsgd. a similar phenomenon has been observed for example for the parahox cluster  <cit> .

evolution of the vertebrate egfr ligand gene family by whole genome and other types of duplications
how did the egfr ligand gene family in vertebrates evolve in the first place? to answer this question, the surroundings of the human egfr ligand genes were analyzed with the synteny database  <cit> . dot plots of paralogous genes within the human genome revealed that the human egfr ligand regions on hsa <dig> , hsa <dig>  and hsa <dig>  are highly syntenic to each other as well as with hsa <dig>  which does not contain an egfr ligand gene . this pattern also became visible using a circle plot representation of human egfr ligand regions: all four egfr ligand gene regions share many paralogous connections with each other . furthermore, all regions are connected to hsa <dig>  while no other human chromosomes shares comparable numbers of paralogous connections with all four egfr ligand regions.

it has been previously hypothesized that parts of chromosomes hsa <dig>  hsa <dig>  hsa <dig> and hsa <dig> are derived from the vertebrate protochromosome c, which was then duplicated twice during the r1/r <dig> whole genome duplications giving rise to the gnathostome protochromosomes c <dig>  c <dig>  c <dig> and c <dig> <cit> . the chromosomal locations of egfr ligand genes in the chicken and teleost genomes  are also compatible with being derived from vertebrate protochromosome c and its four gnathostome derivatives. thus, we hypothesize that all egfr ligand genes in the present vertebrate genomes can be traced back to a single pre-r1/r <dig> egfr ligand gene. importantly, this does not rule out the possibility that multiple egfr ligand genes were present before the r1/r <dig> genome duplications. our model rather suggests that only one gene gave rise to the diversity of egfr ligand genes found in vertebrate genomes today. the situation in other chordates, which could help to resolve this issue, remains unclear as we did not find clear orthologs of the vertebrate egfr ligand in the genomes of ciona or amphioxus using blast and synteny analyses .

according to our model , the ancestral egfr ligand gene was then duplicated twice during the r1/r <dig> genome duplications. the egfr ligand gene located on gnathostome protochromosome c <dig>  which later became part of hsa <dig>  was lost secondarily. protochromosome c1gave rise to hsa <dig>  <cit> . the egfr ligand gene on this protochromosome was duplicated again onto the same chromosome. this might have been the duplication of a larger chromosomal block as several paralogous connections are found between the two egfr ligand gene regions on hsa <dig>  one of the two genes then became egf, while the other gene underwent several tandem duplications, thereby generating the egfr ligand gene cluster. the fact that the egf and cluster genes are not found on the same chromosome in teleosts may be due to the fission of protochromosome c <dig> in fish  <cit> .

our model suggests that an original cluster consisting of epgn, ereg, aregand btc dates back at least to a common bony vertebrate ancestor of fish and tetrapods. unfortunately, the genome assemblies of elephant shark  and lamprey  are still too fragmentary to get more insights into the timing of the egfr ligand cluster establishment in vertebrates . since its establishment, the cluster linkage has then been kept in the tetrapod lineage but is absent in the teleost lineage due to the differential loss of gene duplicates after the fsgd .

protochromosomes c <dig> and c <dig>  finally, became parts of hsa <dig> and hsa <dig> containing hbegf and tgfa, respectively.

we note that other ligand genes with egf domain, i.e. tomoregulins, neuregulins and others, may be related to the canonical seven egfr ligands analyzed here  <cit> . however, the tomoregulin genes do not show obvious synteny with the egfr ligand gene regions. their origin in relation to the canonical egfr ligands will have to be further investigated. the neuregulin gene family members , in contrast, are also located in protochromosome c-derived regions  and could have evolved along with the canonical egfr ligands .

evolution of tetrapod and teleost egfr subdomains
to get a better insight into the evolutionary need of maintaining so many egfr ligands, and, at least in fish, two copies of egfr, we investigated the conservation of the functional domains of the receptor, including the receptor-ligand interface. it is generally assumed that functional and interaction sites e.g. ligand binding pockets, are usually under high selection pressure and therefore more conserved than other subdomains of the protein. we investigated here the variability of functional sites of tetrapod and teleost egfr homologs, with a special focus on the receptor-ligand protein interface.

similarity between tetrapod and teleost egfr subdomains
the epidermal growth factor receptor is a transmembrane receptor tyrosine kinase  <cit> . it comprises an extracellular domain , a transmembrane domain , an intracellular juxtamembrane domain  and a tyrosine kinase domain  .

for our evolutionary study we looked at the amino acid conservation for each domain of the egf receptor between tetrapod and teleost species . all teleost species we investigated possess two gene copies for the egf receptor gene, egfra and egfrb, with egfra being more similar to tetrapod egfr. for our amino acid analysis, we omitted the domain located carboxy-terminally of the kinase domain since its length is highly divergent between the investigated species. nevertheless, the alignment between human egfr and medaka egfra and egfrb displayed in  shows that all major phosphorylation sites of the carboxy-terminal tail are conserved.

similarity percentages between human , mouse , chicken , medaka , platyfish , zebrafish , green-spotted pufferfish , fugu  and three-spined stickleback  egfr extracellular, trans- and juxta-membrane and intracellular tyrosine kinase domains.

expectedly, the tyrosine-kinase domain displays the highest similarity between tetrapod egfr and teleost egfra . the intracellular juxtamembrane domain, involved in the allosteric control of ligand binding by stabilization of the tyrosine kinase domain dimer  <cit> , is also well conserved. conversely, the whole extracellular domain is the least conserved part of the receptor, even when compared among teleosts .

three-dimensional structures of the extracellular domains  have been resolved for human egfr, revealing four subdomains in the extracellular part of the receptor  <cit> . subdomains i and iii are involved in the formation of high-affinity ligand binding pocket, subdomains ii and iv are forming an intramolecular autoinhibitory tether in the absence of ligand. on this level, subdomains i and iii, implicated in ligand binding, exhibit only low identity between tetrapods and teleosts  . subdomain ii, involved in receptor dimerization, is the most conserved part of the extracellular domain with  <dig> to 67% identity. presumably, this is at least partly due to the numerous conserved cysteine residues necessary for the proper secondary structure.

altogether, this indicates that the egfr extracellular part may have evolved differently compared to the rest of the protein between tetrapods and teleosts, and even among teleosts.

the egfr/egfr ligand interface
we were particularly interested in the evolutionary conservation of subdomains i and iii, which compose the interface between receptor and ligand. to analyze this region in detail, we compared the human egfr residues known to directly interact with egf and tgfa  <cit>  with their corresponding counterparts in medaka egfra and egfrb . we analyzed these receptor regions using the consurf tool http://consurf.tau.ac.il/ <cit> . this tool calculates evolutionary conservation scores between homologous proteins from different species and maps them on a given three-dimensional protein structure. thus, important regions on the protein surface can be identified and visualized. the conservation score of a given amino acid residue is directly linked to its evolutionary rate. some sites evolve slowly and are referred to as "conserved" while others evolve rapidly and are referred to as "variable".

as input, we supplied protein alignment and phylogenetic tree of human, mouse, rat and chicken egfr and their medaka, platyfish, spotted green pufferfish, torafugu and stickleback egfra and egfrb co-orthologous proteins. the three-dimensional structure of the extracellular part of human egfr in complex with tgfa  <cit>  was chosen as template. the overall view  outlines the three main interaction sites between receptor and ligand.  display the interface between receptor and ligand in more detail.  recapitulates all amino acid substitutions between human and teleost species for egfr residues that directly interact with egfr ligands within subdomains i and iii.

amino acid substitution can either be classified as radical or conservative, whether it involves or not a major change in the amino acid physicochemical properties. our analyses reveal that many amino acids located in the ligand-binding pocket are not conserved among vertebrates, and some even replaced with residues that induce a radical amino acid substitution. a similar picture emerged when comparing the egfr ligands, namely tetrapod and teleost egf and tgfa . in both cases, amino acids that directly interact with egfr  <cit>  are not always conserved between species. examples are the non-polar met <dig> in mammalian egf that is replaced by the small polar asp in chicken and by the aromatic phe in teleosts. likewise, the aliphatic ile <dig> in mammals is replaced by a smaller aliphatic val residue in chicken and by the aromatic phe or tyr in teleosts. another example is the positively charged lys <dig> in human egfr that is replaced by a small polar ser in mouse, a small polar asp in chicken, small non-polar ala in medaka and small polar ser in all other investigated teleosts and the mouse.

this lack of conservation suggests separate ways of receptor-ligand co-evolution in tetrapods and teleosts. it also implicates a possible subfunctionalization of the duplicated teleost receptors. to further investigate this hypothesis, we analyzed receptor and ligand expression exemplarily for teleosts in the medaka fish.

expression of medaka egfrs and egfr ligands
embryonic expression
both egfra and egfrb transcripts are present from stage  <dig>  to the hatching stage, but with much lower levels of expression past the stage  <dig>  when compared to stage  <dig> . this suggests that both receptor transcripts are maternally deposited in the embryo and low zygotic expression levels are sufficient until hatching to fulfill their functions. this is concomitant with immunochemistry data using an antibody recognizing both isoforms where during early development of medaka embryo all cells stained moderately for egfr until late blastula. then, at 24-somite stage, staining was detected only in the surface epithelia, aorta, intestinal epithelium and pronephric duct  <cit> .

in platyfish, egfra is slightly expressed in embryos whereas egfrb was not detected  <cit> . moreover, in zebrafish, addition of egfr kinase inhibitors resulted in cardiovascular defects in the developing embryo  <cit> . in the mouse, knock-out experiments pointed to a complex role of egfr during embryogenesis and early development; mutant mice are growth retarded and die at different postnatal stages depending on their genetic background. surviving mice present a wide range of abnormalities .

the egfr ligand transcripts for tgfa and ereg appear to be maternally deposited into the medaka egg as well but are not detected in the embryo after the mid-blastula transition . this points to no important contribution of tgfato later embryonic development. however, mutant mice for tgfashow defects in hair follicles, eye development and decreased forebrain neural progenitor cell proliferation  <cit> . zygotic transcription is observed for egf, hbegf areg, epgn and btc , with different expression patterns according to the developmental stage. from knock-out mice experiments, hbegf is known to be important for normal heart development  <cit> . the only growth factor gene to exhibit a strong transcription in medaka embryos is areg, with increasing levels of transcripts past stage  <dig>  when for instance the blood vessel system develops. in mammals, areg was shown to be the most potent mitogen for vascular smooth muscle cells  <cit> .

medaka embryonic stem  cells, which are blastula-derived cells, displayed large amounts of egfra mrna, whereas egfrb was only weakly expressed . only one egfr ligand is thoroughly expressed in the medaka es cells, namely hbegf . low expression levels are observed for btc  and areg , but all the other ligands are not present in medaka es cells.

in summary, the specific expression pattern of the seven medaka egfr ligands during embryogenesis suggest different functions, although the possibility for signaling redundancy by autocrine, paracrine and/or juxtacrine modes of action remains .

expression in adult tissues and organs
in adult medaka, both receptors are transcribed to a similar extent in brain, eye, heart, testis and muscles. however, egfra is expressed more strongly in spleen, kidney, and skin as well in stem cells, while egfrb is prominently expressed in gills, ovary and liver . these results are consistent with the observations made in the platyfish  <cit> . these distinct expression profiles for egfra and egfrb may reflect different functions for the two egfr genes.

in medaka ovary, prominent expression of egfrb is accompanied with the presence of tgfa, ereg and areg . in kidney, only egfra is transcribed, together with hbegf . both receptors are present in skin, egfra being the major transcript. here, hbegf is mostly strongly expressed compared to other ligands but presence of tgfa, areg and ereg is also detectable to a lesser extent.

taken together, the partly divergent expression patterns indicate that the two copies of the medaka egfr gene may have been preserved by subfunctionalization, a process where the ancestral gene functions are distributed among duplicated genes  <cit> . moreover, the two receptors not only show dissimilar expression patterns but are co-expressed with different subsets of ligands. in general, egfra is co-expressed with hbegf, while egfrb is co-expressed with tgfa, areg and ereg.

functionality of the medaka egfra-egfr ligand system
the low conservation of ligand/receptor protein interface  calls into question the usage of heterologous ligands for biochemical studies. in the few existing works on egfr signaling within fish species, only recombinant heterologous ligands from mammals have been used to activate fish egfrs  <cit> . in these studies, mammalian egf, but also tgfa, hbegf and btc were described to cross-react with the fish receptor. however, for the platyfish, only human egf, but neither human tgfa nor mouse egf was able to activate egfra and induce a mitogenic effect  <cit> . as the egf receptor ligand binding pocket is not well conserved between tetrapods and teleosts, the use of heterologous ligand to activate fish egfr may differ and could hamper or event prevent the biological output. to analyze on the one hand the functionality of medaka egfr and on the other hand its possible cross-specificity with human egf, we performed stimulation experiments using either recombinant human egf or a donor cell line expressing medaka ligands to stimulate a receptor cell line which over-expressed medaka egfr. we decided to examine only medaka egfra activation, as this receptor is more related to human egfr than egfrb, thus rendering egfra a more likely candidate for ligand cross-reactivity.

first, we applied recombinant hegf on murine melanocyte wild-type cells , melan-a cells that were stably transfected with medaka egfra  or melan-a cells stably transfected with human egfr . as shown by western blot analysis, only melan-a her cells displayed egf-dependent phosphorylation of egfr and the downstream signaling components akt and erk1/ <dig> . in case of melan-a ola-egfra cells, hegf treatment had no visible effect, thus speaking against cross-reactivity between hegf and the medaka receptor .

as egfra did not respond to hegf, we had to examine its functionality with species-specific ligands. as receptor cell line we used melan-a ola-egfra cells and as donor cell line we transiently transfected human embryonic kidney  293-t cells with expression vector constructs containing the cdna of different medaka ligands . expression of the different constructs was verified by pcr . wild-type melan-a cells and melan-a ola-egfra cells were then stimulated for  <dig> minutes with conditioned supernatants from the transfected 293-t cells and activation of receptor and downstream signaling pathways was assessed by western blot analysis. as expected, melan-a wt cells did not display any activation of egf receptor and its downstream signaling pathways in response to any of the conditioned supernatants . in contrast, melan-a ola-egfra could be stimulated with ola-egf, ola-areg or ola-hbegf conditioned supernatants as demonstrated by anti phospho-tyr  staining of a protein with the size of medaka egfra, that was only visible in cells expressing this receptor . ola-hbegf conditioned supernatant showed the strongest effect on receptor-, akt- and erk1/ <dig> phosphorylation, whereas the response was much weaker with ola-egf and ola-areg conditioned supernatants. however, a clear receptor phosphorylation was always and repeatedly observed in independent experiments. an explanation for the weak activation of downstream pathways by medaka egf and areg may indicate a better reactivity of medaka egfra with medaka hbegf when compared to other ligands, corroborating the expression patterns in adult organs data where medaka egfra was found to be preferentially expressed together with hbegf. differences in receptor- or erk1/ <dig> turnover in response to different stimuli or, alternatively, different ligand half-lives in solution are other possible explanations for the observed differences.

altogether, whereas recombinant hegf did not trigger any response, all three medaka ligands led to activation of medaka egfra or downstream pathways, indicating receptor functionality.

CONCLUSIONS
a detailed examination of the medaka egfr/egfr ligand system, considering both functional and evolutionary aspects, revealed that the medaka genome contains two egfr gene copies, namely egfra and egfrb, but only one copy of each of the seven egfr ligand genes. including conserved synteny data from various vertebrate genomes, we found that most likely all present vertebrate egfr ligands date back to a single egfr ligand gene, which gave rise to the egfr ligand repertoire found in extant teleost genomes.

all investigated fish egf receptor genes occur in two copies that have been maintained in the course of teleost evolution. this may be due to subfunctionalization and specialization of the two receptor proteins. this theory is supported by the differential expression of both genes in medaka embryo and adult tissues, together with the expression of a distinct subset of ligand genes.

finally, we assessed medaka egf, areg and hbegf functionality, demonstrating that all of them could trigger medaka egfra receptor activation. this was not accomplished using human egf. consequently, we strongly support the use of homologous ligands as prerequisite in future functional biochemical studies.

