BACKGROUND
despite the crucial need for genetic markers independent from the non recombining mitochondrial genome, nuclear markers remain much less used than mitochondrial ones in metazoans . when choosing molecular genetic markers for a given biodiversity study, two properties, codominance and the possibility of reconstructing evolutionary relationships among alleles, are generally desirable but are often difficult to obtain  <cit> . during the last decade, microsatellites became the most popular codominant markers. however, introns are well known for providing potential markers variable within species, using epic-pcr. epic loci have several advantages compared to microsatellites. owing to the position of the primers in conserved exons, epics are potentially applicable across species and much less prone to null alleles. after sequencing the variants, evolutionary relationships among alleles can be inferred much more accurately than for microsatellites, which are very susceptible to homoplasy  <cit> . there is also a less well known but important problem with microsatellites: in some species, most microsatellites appear to belong to the same family  of repeated elements; in such cases codominant genotyping is difficult since the primers often anneal to multiple paralogous regions .

a recent computer program  <cit>  allows the identification of introns at conserved positions in a species for which est sequences are available by comparison with a related model species for which extensive sequence information is available . another study developed a bioinformatic pipeline to identify epic loci by comparison of two or more whole-genome sequence datasets, and tested a dozen of these loci by pcr-sequencing in distantly related teleost fishes  <cit> . by contrast, our approach is designed to find intron positions and define primers able to amplify a wider variety of species from which we may have absolutely no sequence data.

the positions of introns are extremely conserved during evolution; for instance, 14% of animal introns match plant intron positions  <cit> . although this should have favoured the development of epic markers conserved in different phyla, only half a dozen epic loci were proposed by  <cit>  and by  <cit> . these loci have rarely been used outside vertebrates  and in numerous species none of the tested epic loci appeared usable . epic loci can be developed specifically for a given taxon, often using genomic and cdna sequence data . only vertebrates benefit from a relatively consistent set of epic loci  <cit> . several reasons for such biases can be invoked.  these "universal" epic loci were chosen in extremely conserved genes, and, not surprisingly, often appeared to belong to multigenic families, which limited their use as codominant markers due to simultaneous amplification of paralogs.  few sequences were available  to properly define pcr primers, thus pcr amplifications often failed.  primers were generally designed considering the nucleotide variation observed in the data set available , but ignoring amino-acid conservation and code degeneracy.

our study was designed to avoid these shortcomings. we identified putative universal epic loci and designed primers to amplify them in metazoans, taking advantage of the increased availability of properly annotated, phylogenetically diverse whole-genome sequences. we actively avoided multigenic families, and used a primer design strategy aimed at preserving amino-acid sequences while allowing synonymous codon changes. for this purpose, we developed dedicated bioinformatic tools, and then tested all the primer pairs designed in divergent animal phyla for pcr amplification under relatively standardized conditions.

results-discussion
potential epic loci found in data bases
the number of introns for which we designed and tested primer pairs was respectively  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig>  for stages i, ii and iii described in the methods section . intron numbers are not consecutive because we could not design satisfactory primer pairs for some introns that appeared good at the preceding step. in addition, we designed primers for two genes containing already known "universal" epics: in atps-α, one intron corresponds to the one in jarman et al   <cit>  with slightly different primer sequences, and primers were designed for an additional intron; in ef1-α, two primer pairs were designed for each of two introns. the  <dig> introns came from  <dig> different gene families and corresponded to  <dig> primer pairs tested in all species. surprisingly, a single family was retained from both stages i and ii . from the  <dig> families containing no duplication nodes  isolated during stage i, only six introns appeared to be present at exactly the same nucleotide position in 100% of the species, and for only  <dig> of these, corresponding to epic  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig>  could we design satisfactory primer pairs . thus, we also designed primers for some introns that were present in 100% of the deuterostome species in the amino-acid alignments . for subsequent stages, intron position was not necessarily perfectly invariant . fig.  <dig> displays an example of the output of the graphical script designed for stage iii. for  <dig> introns  we could define a forward and a reverse primer whose degeneracy did not exceed 8-fold. for  <dig> of them , degeneracy was lower than or equal to  <dig>  in particular, the primers designed for introns  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> displayed no more than a 2- or 4-fold degeneracy .

effect of taxonomy on pcr 
RESULTS
for each stage, protein family, and intron, table  <dig> and table  <dig> report the results of the pcr for each genus as observed on agarose gels  , distinguishing the three quality levels 'p', 'i'  and 'a'  defined in the methods section v. the number of introns producing an amplification product large enough to contain an intron of at least  <dig> bp, i.e. pooling the 'p' + 'i' categories, is rather similar among genera, and varies from  <dig> to  <dig> introns , i.e. from about 40% to 60% of the introns. some of the factors likely to generate variation in this value among taxa are:  the number of pcr conditions tested among genera,  dna extract quality,  phylogenetic distance of the taxon from strongylocentrotus and ciona, the species which most influenced primer design,  the molecular evolutionary rate of the phylum or lineage, and  the average size of introns in the taxon . the number of "promising" introns  appears more variable among taxa . factors causing variation in the proportion of "promising" introns  may be:  quality of dna extracts  since null pcr may infrequently occur due to bad dna extracts and cause a locus in a genus be scored as 'i' instead of 'p' ,  variable tendency to display null alleles  among taxa , and  genomic features such as the ploidy level or the frequency of transposable elements .

empty cells correspond to absence of amplification product or occurrence of primer dimer; "na"  corresponds to introns not tested in the considered genus

total number of introns in each category of results. *: cnidarians were not tested for all introns.

surprisingly  we did not observe any clear relationship between phylogeny and global pcr success , with an average of  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> introns amplifying  per genus in bivalves, ascidians and echinoderms respectively . some genera belonging to protostome phyla displayed better results than some deuterostomes. the cnidarian corallium, in which only  <dig> loci instead of  <dig> were surveyed, provided  <dig> amplifying introns . this absence of detectable phylogenetic influence is probably not an artefact resulting from variation in technical effort since, even when considering only the six initial species of the standard protocol  that were tested under a larger range of pcr conditions, the highest variation occurred within phylum . urochordates and molluscs, for which we applied the same level of technical effort, display very similar amplification results despite a very different phylogenetic distance relative to species which most influenced primer design. despite testing fewer primer pairs on the cnidarians, they display only slightly lower numbers of "p+i" intron loci than other taxa. ascidians tend to display small introns , consequently cases of null amplifications due to excessively large fragment size are expected to be less numerous, though this may also lead to reporting the absence of an intron if it is too small . for example, corella eumyota displays a lower number of successful loci and smaller intron sizes than other ascidians.

the letters a, b, c, and d after the intron number refer to primers f and r, f <dig> and r, r <dig> and f, f <dig> and r <dig> respectively. da, ee, gp and cr refer to initials of the authors who used them. ind.: individuals.

the absence of a relationship between global success and phylogenetic position in bilaterians is probably explained by the rules we used to select intron loci before primer design. in fact, the zones selected for the 3' region of the primer design were generally invariant in their amino-acid sequences. therefore, a good predictor for primer matching may be the similarity of the genome nucleotide composition  to the nucleotide composition of the reference species ; since nucleotide composition is variable even at low taxonomic levels , the absence of phylogenetic effect is not surprising. the only source of variation is therefore the degeneracy of the code; this is known to vary greatly even within species, so focusing on phylum-specific primers may not be useful when very few taxa are available for a phylum. actually we have now cloned and sequenced some of these epics in echinoderms and we nearly always observe variation within species  in the exon sequence . however, when the precise pattern at each intron was considered and the data  were analysed through a factorial correspondence analysis, the genera seemed to group according to their phylum , illustrating the fact that some introns are more useful in some phyla than in others. within echinoderms, more genera were surveyed, but we did not observe any taxonomic trend, either comparing ophiuroids versus echinoids, or regular versus irregular echinoids. echinoderms appear widely scattered, by contrast with urochordates. this may reflect different genome evolutionary rates of those phyla though a richer taxonomic sampling is required to test this hypothesis.

some gene families appear to be extremely good providers of epic markers . remarkably, five introns, from four different gene families, amplify intron-sized products  in all the metazoan genera tested  . the previously known universal epics tested, atps and ef <dig>  do not belong to these families.

the ten bilaterian genera were tested for all  <dig> introns, two cnidarian genera were tested for  <dig> and  <dig> introns respectively. the number of bilaterian genera displaying promising or intron amplifying patterns  out of the ten genera tested is indicated. the five best introns  appear in bold. in the right-hand columns, the results of the two cnidarian genera when tested : na ,  <dig> ,  <dig> .cr: corallium rubrum, pc: paramuricea clavata.

effect of primer design
the least degenerate primers provided the best results  for the primer pairs composed of two codehop primers . this result was not trivial: if the taxa available in our protein alignments had not been sufficiently representative of the diversity of phyla tested--among deuterostomes, for instance, the homolens database provided only vertebrates and one urochordate genus--higher amplification success would have been observed for more degenerate primers. despite this significant relationship, some of the least degenerate introns at the stage of primer design never amplified . codehop primers seem slightly more efficient than primers designed from nucleotide alignments only, though this is not statistically significant .

effects of pcr program and extraction method
comparisons, for  <dig> primer pairs, of touch-down and fixed annealing temperature programs suggest that touch-down programs are more stringent  and less prone to produce artefactual additional fragments  . the two-phase program  also appears to help . however, we obtained no statistical support for these effects. since in most experiments we used program td <dig>  our global results may be improved by using alternative programs.

a strong influence of dna extraction and/or tissue storage history, depending on the species, was revealed .

obtaining new epic loci for any eukaryote lineage
our method can potentially be applied to obtain new epic loci for any phylogenetic group. three strategies can be followed.  using the last version of homolens, the famfetch tool, and the graphical tool developed in this study, one can isolate numerous new epic loci, eventually decreasing the stringency level allowing duplication nodes in some genomes, if numerous loci are desired.  more simply, one can focus on the gene families we isolated, and retrieve from protein, nucleotide or est sequence databases the entries corresponding to the desired lineages; primer pairs should then be designed following our method.  one can just test the primer pairs developed in our study , preferably using several dna extraction methods, which can be done in less than  <dig> working days and for several species simultaneously. even for kingdoms very distant from metazoans  the second approach may provide successful loci since in some of these gene families the protein alignment files included sequences from plants. we can predict that the success rate will not depend much on the phylogenetic proximity of the taxa to deuterostomes  but will be influenced more on average by the genomic substitution rate of the taxonomic group. for instance, the ecdysozoan phyla  may not work as well as molluscs and annelids, though these phyla share a common ancestor relative to deuterostomes, since their genomes are known to evolve rapidly at the nucleotide level  <cit> . for the third strategy, based on already defined primers, genome nucleotide composition may be an important factor .

the facts that  low degeneracy codehop primers performed better than high degeneracy primers, and  phylogenetic distance  has no relationship with global amplification results, are positive experimental findings of this study, and suggest that the simplest strategy  may be sufficient in most metazoan species to obtain several epic loci. in the increasing number of phylogenetic groups where sufficient est sequence data are available to enrich nucleotide alignments in a variety of taxa, primer design may not require using the codehop strategy .

from epic identification to genotyping of large samples
once a promising epic locus has been found, it is not always straightforward to directly characterize populations with it. obtaining sequence data prior to genotyping is recommended. in some cases, good results are provided by direct sequencing of pcr products. there are generally no indels in the exon sequence, so the sequences are readable even with ambiguous positions due to heterozygosity in this region, allowing the design of specific primers. in some  species where homozygous individuals are common, direct sequencing is very useful, and eventually, "heterozygous sequences" may be deduced automatically from sequence files containing ambiguities, using dedicated software  <cit> . when direct sequencing is not satisfactory, we recommend cloning the epic amplicons from a dozen individuals and sequencing about  <dig> clones per individual to assess the nature and the level of the variation, permitting  the definition of more specific primers if necessary and  the decision whether to characterize alleles by sequence, by size, or by conformation. some of these introns have been cloned and sequenced in large samples of p. lividus, e. cordatum and species not included in the present study, and in all cases polymorphism is high due to both indels and substitutions . in some cases, the epic locus provides diploid mendelian variation in fragment size visible on agarose gels. alternatively, finer variations can be revealed using page or automatic sequencers  <cit> . conformation techniques  allow determination of allele classes, but they have a sensitivity limited to relatively small fragments and they provide no information on allele relationships. the richest information for diploid specimens is a diploid sequence genotype, but classical sequencing techniques do not deal well with heterozygosity. "next generation sequencing" technologies, such as " <dig> sequencing", in addition to their extreme rapidity, should allow sequencing a mixture of numerous pcr products, such as for instance from  <dig> epic loci in each of  <dig> or more individuals, identified by individual labels  for reasonable prices . these approaches differ in throughput, cost and sensitivity .

seq.: sequence. i: iam: infinite allele model . *: larger amplicons can be included in the run, but only the first  <dig> bp will be sequenced; however, to favor equal representation among loci, amplicons of relatively uniform lengths  are preferred. sequencing can be oriented if desired . this size threshold may increase in future. **: but cloning efficiency may depend on size . #: not recommended, since loci may be very unequally inserted by cloning vectors . μ : for each technique, the number of steps requiring human action is expressed as a function of the numbers of loci  and of genotyped individuals  and deduced from the five preceeding rows of the table. we do not consider the possibility of multiplex pcr  though this reduces the number of steps). μ': pooling three loci together for electrophoresis is generally easy ; more loci can be pooled when allelic distributions do not overlap.

CONCLUSIONS
our new method appears very efficient for finding universal intron loci  in sequence data bases whatever the phylum, in metazoans. these epics, in addition to providing a set of independent nuclear markers for population genetics and phylogeography, can complement or replace the barcoding molecule used for metazoans, coi, resolving problems associated with single marker studies or inherent in the mitochondrial genome, such as its lack of variability in some phyla  <cit> . for about ten of these epics we obtained sequence data for several individuals, from one to nine distinct genera . insertions and deletions were frequent , in only two cases there was no polymorphism, and a minority of cases displayed paralogs or distinct groups of sequences, a problem which was solved when internal primers were defined. this study therefore fills a serious gap in the toolbox of molecular ecologists. these new and universal epic loci should generate multilocus sequence datasets from populations of numerous non-model species. relative to single-locus sequence data sets or multilocus microsatellite loci datasets, the inferences made from such data using the coalescent theory will be much more precise.

