BACKGROUND
several tools are now available to describe plants metabolic pathways , but they are usually restricted to specific parts of the metabolism. however, it is often interesting to get a quick and complete overview of the whole data set, especially at the start of the analysis. furthermore, many tools are only offered as online-tools, thus the user has to rely on the availability of a fast internet connection at the time of the analysis. to overcome these problems, mapman  <cit>  introduced an ontology which removes redundancies, and displays metabolic maps including many processes at once, thus immediately highlighting important pathways. later on, statistical tools  <cit>  were added to this software package to get an unbiased overview of changed pathways or processes. the ontology was originally built for the model species arabidopsis thaliana, and furthermore extended to cover also maize  <cit> , medicago  <cit> , tomato  <cit>  and potato  <cit> . briefly, mapman ontology consists of a set of  <dig> hierarchical bins , constructed around central metabolism, as well as other categories . original bin assignments were based on publicly available gene annotation within tigr , adopting a process alternating between automatic recruitment and manual correction  <cit> . bins can be furthermore split into hundreds of subbins.

the grapevine  genome sequence has recently become available  <cit>  and approximately  <dig>  genes were predicted. an accurate gene prediction and gene annotation is however still lacking for the whole sequence. using strict rules for homology definition, around half of the predicted genes in the grape genome are specific for grape  <cit> , leading to the conclusion that some of the significant metabolic pathways for grape might not be easily inferred by homology transfer. we have therefore chosen to characterize a few pathways, important for wine production and quality, in a greater detail. to this aim we constructed new pictorial representations and, where necessary, rearranged bin representations in order to get a better overview on phenylpropanoid, terpenoid and carotenoid biosynthesis. grape secondary metabolites, particularly polyphenols and terpenoids, have a strong influence on wine quality since they determine colour, bitterness, astringency and aroma  <cit> . they also have important pharmacological effects acting as health-promoting compounds .

most phenolics derive from the nonoxidative deamination of the amino acid phenylalanine via phenylalanine ammonia-lyase , and encompass a range of structural classes such as lignins, phenolic acids, flavonoids and stilbenes. a key branching point in this biosynthetic pathway is the condensation of 4-coumaroyl-coa and malonyl-coa which can produce either trans-resveratrol , or tetrahydroxychalcone  due to the action of stilbene synthase or chalcone synthase, respectively. grapevine flowers and fruits are rich in flavonoids where they act as pollinator attractants and seed dispersers, uv-scavengers and are involved in disease resistance  <cit> . in red grape, flavanols and anthocyanins are the most abundant flavonoid classes, the latter accumulating mostly in berry skin and the former in seeds  <cit> . stilbenes content increases in grapevine in response to biotic and abiotic stress  <cit> , but also during berry ripening  <cit> . resveratrol, the first stilbene phytoalexin identified in grapevine  <cit>  has also been associated with the health benefits of red wine  <cit> . terpenoids are a very large and diverse class of metabolites synthesized starting from isopentenyl diphosphate and dimethylallyl diphosphate via the mevalonate or the mevalonate-independent pathways. they play an important role in plant growth and development as well as in plant interaction with environment  <cit> .

véraison is a transitional phase of grape berry development, during which growth declines and berries start to change colour and soften. in a previously conducted study  <cit> , three time points were selected in order to investigate fruit ripening. time-point a  was characterized by small green berries still accumulating organic acids, tp b  was characterized by berries in the green hard state with maximum acidic content and tp c  by ripening berries growing fast, colouring, softening and accumulating sugars. these time points correspond to the developmental stages e-l  <dig>  e-l  <dig> and e-l  <dig> according to the modified e-l system reported in  <cit> . due to the economic importance wine has, disease research on grapevine is very important. although grapevine fungal diseases have a major economical impact, and although they have been extensively described from a physiological standpoint, still little is known about the molecular basis of grapevine response to fungi. among the numerous diseases affecting grapevines, eutypiosis, caused by fungus eutypa lata, is very damaging. it is present in all grape growing areas around the world and causes important economic losses. after initial infection, a lag phase of several years is often observed before the appearance of symptoms whose intensity on a given plant may vary with each year. however, infected plants die within a few years. there is no known resistant cultivar, no efficient treatment and neither diagnostic tool available for this disease. therefore a better insight into the grapevine response to e. lata infection is required.

while the gene model based on the genome sequence has still not been released, a large grapevine transcript database is available, including  <dig>  unique sequences  which were used to construct several microarray platforms. the two most comprehensive ones are genechip®vitis vinifera genome array from affymetrix which has been available since  <dig> and interrogates  <dig>  transcripts and a ready to print 70-mer vitis vinifera  aros v <dig>  oligo set  covering  <dig>  transcripts. both were extensively exploited for genome-wide gene expression analyses  <cit> . in order to expand mapman ontology to grapevine we have annotated the tentative gene sequences from grape gene index  and have implemented them for use with operon and affymetrix microarrays experiments. due to specificities of the grape physiology, we have created new pictorial representations of the grape mapping file focusing on three selected pathways: carotenoid, terpenoid and phenylpropanoid. the visualization of differentially expressed  genes involved in berry development, first published in  <cit>  is discussed as an example of application to the affymetrix microarray platform. we have additionally performed the first analysis of processes underlying the pathogenesis of eutypa lata – grapevine interaction using dna microarrays in combination with the newly developed visualisation tool.

RESULTS
annotation of grapevine gene index
annotation of grapevine gene index  using the mapman ontology was performed by including information on grapevine genome and plant protein domains, the latter found in swissprot/uniprot plant proteins ppap  <cit> , the conserved domain database cdd  <cit> , clusters of orthologous groups kog  <cit>  and interpro  <cit> . manual annotation was performed by different contributors for the bins they have most expertise for. a manual correction usually consisted of blasting the appropriate tentative contig  sequence, followed by classification using expert knowledge and a literature search. altogether,  <dig> manual corrections of automated annotation were made using this approach . because many genes from vvgi are expected to be grape-specific, special emphasis was put on genes present on either array and classified into bin  <dig> , where typically genes with no or only weak similarity to arabidopsis and other plants included in mapman are found. we were able to successfully annotate  <dig> tcs from this bin. some bins, usually the smaller ones and the ones where a weaker emphasis was assigned, had a lower number/percentage of clones manually checked and corrected when necessary. other bins , which served as the basis of constructing new pictorial representations for phenylpropanoid, carotenoid and terpenoid metabolism were more thoroughly checked. a special case is bin  <dig>  where half of it was manually corrected due to recent changes in its annotation  <cit> .  <dig> tcs from the grape gene index were found to have high similarity to grapevine pathogen sequences, for example ralstonia solanacearum or do not belong to vitis vinifera and thus they were assigned to bin  <dig>  .  <dig> out of these  <dig> tcs can be found in the more recent grape gene index .

to enable visualisation of results of transcriptomics experiments two final mapping files were created, one to be used with operon microarrays and the other to be used with affymetrix microarrays. both final mapping files thus consist of the following data: bincode, binname, probe identifier from operon/affymetrix microarrays, respectively and gene description from grape gene index . due to specificities of grape physiology, we have created new pictorial representations of the grape mapping file focusing on three selected pathways: carotenoid pathway, terpenoid pathway and phenylpropanoid pathway.

validation of mapping file for affymetrix platform
the mapping file built for the analysis of data obtained with the affymetrix genechip was validated on a dataset of genes differentially expressed during berry ripening, reported in  <cit> . this study analysed two pre-véraison  and one post-véraison  stages during pinot noir grape berry development along three years, identifying a set of  <dig> genes conservatively modulated. they were manually annotated using the gene ontology vocabulary and grouped into biological process categories. here, we have annotated the  <dig> genes with the mapman mapping file. two processes important for berry development have been chosen for visualization in figure  <dig> and 2: an overview of ripening regulation and the phenylpropanoid pathway. the representation of berry development regulation provided by mapman immediately highlights the large number of genes involved in the berry developmental control , including  <dig> genes involved in transcription regulation,  <dig> in the hormonal metabolism and  <dig> in signalling and protein modification . a clear trend of prevalent gene induction from stage a to b and prevalent repression from stage b to c is evident. these observations are in agreement with the results reported in  <cit> , in which these three classes  included respectively  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> genes. the higher numbers are probably due to a wider functional classification and to annotation redundancy of the published analysis. the general trend of these classes is the same as reported in figure  <dig> of  <cit> , in which it is evident that all of them are prevalently induced from stage a to b and then mostly repressed. the main advantage of using mapman is no doubt the ease and speed of the analysis.

the visualization of the genes distribution among the phytohormones confirms the large involvement of genes linked to auxins and ethylene and fewer genes involved in the abscisic acid, brassinosteroid and gibberellic acid pathways as previously reported  <cit> , and as showed in table  <dig> of  <cit> .

finally, the two categories of receptor kinases and calcium regulation , which were not investigated in detail in the published analysis  <cit> , appear to be quite highly represented according to the mapman annotation and, in agreement with  <cit> . nonetheless, the two categories of light signalling and redox control, on which the published analysis had focused , include fewer transcripts and gene families, respectively.

this comparison shows that mapman is a reliable annotation and data display tool which is easy to use and particularly efficient for representing genome-wide gene expression experiments. obviously, when the interest is focused on a particular pathway or metabolism, further investigation is needed.

the pictorial representation of the general phenylpropanoid pathway is very effective, as it displays the information about the members of the gene families, the relative gene expression and the name of the enzyme in a single image. it is interesting to observe that before véraison the pathway is not modulated, with the exception of the flavonol synthase gene which is responsible for the flavonols biosynthesis. on the contrary during ripening, specific enzymes are strongly induced: phenylalanine ammonialyase , at the beginning of the pathway; stilbene synthase , responsible for resveratrol accumulation; chalcone isomerase  and flavanone- <dig> hydroxylase , at the beginning of flavonoid synthesis; udpglucose:flavonoid 3-o-glucosyltransferase , catalysing the final steps of colour accumulation. the picture clearly shows that, at the same time, the genes encoding the enzymes leucoanthocyanidin reductase  and anthocyanidin reductase  are repressed. altogether these results suggest that in the ripening process the branches of the phenylpropanoid pathway which lead to the accumulation of stilbenes and anthocyanins are favoured with respect to those which lead to tannins production.

overview of transcriptional changes in grapevine response to infection with eutypa lata
 <dig> cabernet sauvignon plantlets were experimentally infected with ne85- <dig> e. lata strain in three independent series. seven weeks after infection, the plantlets with confirmed eutypiosis and healthy plantlets were collected for the microarray hybridisations each in two technical replicates. the symptoms consisted of a clear necrosis appearing few mm above the infected zone . symptoms sometimes extended beyond this zone, inducing leaf yellowing and necrosis . similar symptoms were obtained after infection of various grapevine varieties with either e. lata mycelium  or culture filtrate   <cit> .

altogether  <dig> differentially expressed  genes were identified using strict statistical testing . we have however used less stringent statistical testing to get an pictorial overview of metabolic and signal processes involved using the expanded mapman tool . de genes were mapped into  <dig> out of  <dig> bins represented in mapman and the ones most significantly altered are shown in table  <dig>  interestingly, except few individual enzymes  that were significantly down regulated, all pathways represented by de genes were found to be up-regulated. however,  <dig> de genes  did not have a reliable annotation and were not assigned to any pathway/process . observed changes in expression were however relatively small as was the percentage of de genes obtained. one has to note that expression changes were monitored late after infection . when studying response of grapevine to powdery mildew over time, the strongest response was observed up to  <dig> h post inoculation, thus a stronger response could also be expected in our experimental system at shorter times post inoculation  <cit> .

significantly altered processes or protein families according to changes in gene expression level in symptomatic compared to healthy grapevine leaf samples. the results show numbers of genes annotated to each process or family  and corresponding p-values  according to the mapman gene ontology.

stress related responses in e. lata infected plants
in figure 4a we can see that changes in expression of genes involved in cellular responses clearly indicate that the only genes induced belong to the category of biotic stress. the exceptions are the two genes classified to development corresponding to legumins, a gene family that has been frequently mentioned as up-regulated by biotic stress  <cit> . this is more specifically shown in figure 4b showing biotic stress related genes which  <dig> out of the  <dig> strictly defined de genes are annotated to. the strongly regulated biotic stress related genes include several pr-proteins , chitinase , osmotin-like proteins , thaumatin , disease response protein , tumor related proteins ), three  <dig> -β-glucanases and several proteinase inhibitors. early induction of genes encoding chitinases and  <dig> -β-glucanases is a typical response of plants towards fungal pathogens. in the interaction between cladosporium fulvum and tomato, resistance against the fungus correlates with early induction of transcription of genes encoding apoplastic chitinase and  <dig> -β-glucanase and the accumulation of these proteins in inoculated tomato leaves  <cit> . it is additionally considered that genes encoding chitinases or β- <dig> -glucanases are the most attractive candidates for the genetic manipulation approach to increase anti-fungal tolerance in grapevine  <cit> . also strong induction of polygalacturonase inhibiting proteins  was observed. in plant tissues, the activity of pathogen's pgs is counteracted by pgips, leucine-rich repeat proteins  located in the cell wall. a role for pgips in plant defence has been demonstrated by showing that transgenic arabidopsis plants over-expressing pgips exhibit enhanced resistance to botrytis cinerea  <cit> .

induction of phenylpropanoid pathway in eutypiosis
secondary metabolism was also strongly induced after infection of grapevine by e. lata . phenylalanine ammonia-lyase, pal , the first enzyme of the pathway, was up-regulated  <dig>  to  <dig>  fold. likewise, chalcone synthase , chalcone isomerase , dihydroflavonol 4-reductase, dfr , and anthocyanidin reductase, anr  which control the pathways leading to flavonols, tannins, and anthocyanins were up-regulated. also the induction of secondary metabolites was shown to be associated with defence and pathogenesis related processes  <cit> .

however, these results are not in complete agreement with those obtained by treating grapevine cell suspension cultures with the eutypa pathogenic toxin, eutypine. in that experiment the authors observed a strong repression of the udp glucose-flavonoid glucosyltransferase gene  and no significant modulation of the chalcone synthase and dfr encoding genes  <cit> . a possible explanation of the incongruity can be different experimental systems used: complex response to the pathogen is most probably going to be different in a population of relatively uniform cells of a cell culture than in whole plants. in addition, the treatment with toxic compounds alone might not be directly related to effects of the real infection with pathogen.

similarly, no changes in activity of respiratory metabolism related genes were observed in infected plantlets, while a model bioassay using the yeast saccharomyces cerevisiae showed that the e. lata derived toxic metabolites inhibited the respiratory metabolism, causing the reduced growth of the cells. one possible explanation is that such a response of grapevine cells is masked due to the dilution of infected area with surrounding healthy tissue. the other explanation is that grapevine reacts differently from yeast and that primary target of toxic compounds is not yet determined  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
biological interpretation of data is the last step in microarray-based analysis of transcriptome. several tools that enable easier interpretation of plant microarray data are available , but have usually been designed specifically for arabidopsis microarrays. on the other hand mapman has an advantage in its flexibility, as it can be extended easily to any plant species. here, we present the extension of mapman ontology to grapevine experiments, performed with affymetrix or operon microarrays. validation of affymetrix mapping file was performed through biological re-interpretation of previously published grapevine berries development gene expression data  <cit> . together with the construction of pictorial representations for carotenoid, terpenoid and phenylpropanoid metabolism, a deeper insight into changes in these metabolic activities was possible. recently, grapevine genome has become available  <cit>  and complete gene annotations are yet to be done. improved mapman grapevine annotation will be an ongoing process through expert manual editing and can be easily modified when the genome annotations will become available as well as when new microarray platforms are constructed.

data on molecular basis of grapevine defence against fungal pathogens are gradually becoming available. powdery mildew induces defence-oriented reprogramming of the transcriptome in a susceptible but not in a resistant grapevine  <cit> . in addition, possible innate resistance against pathogenic fungi is being unravelled using transcriptional and metabolic profiling of grape  leaves  <cit> . here we present an overview of the transcriptional changes in a susceptible grapevine – eutypa lata interaction at the time of symptoms development. the results obtained through the use of the mapman representation of metabolic pathways showed that the responsive genes belong to families known to be involved in the plant defence towards fungal infection . nevertheless, the observed response was relatively weak. this is in line with the hypothesis that defence compounds are induced in resistant as well in susceptible interaction, the main difference being the speed and intensity of response. also, it should be stressed that not all responses to pathogens necessarily occur at transcriptional level, and that translational and post-translational events may also be involved.

