BACKGROUND
common carp cyprinus carpio carpio is the most widely cultivated fish for human consumption mainly in asian and in european countries including israel  <cit> . the subspecies cyprinus carpio koi or koi is cultivated as an expensive pet fish especially in japan but also worldwide  <cit> . since  <dig>  mass mortality among common carp and koi has occurred in the u.s.a, israel, germany, england, italy, netherlands, and more recently in indonesia and japan  <cit> . these outbreaks were due to a deadly infection with a newly recognized virus, the koi herpesvirus   <cit> . intensive fish culture, koi shows, domestic and international trading in the absence of health certifications or inspections have contributed to the rapid global spread of khv  <cit> . initial characterization of the virus showed that khv resembles members of the family herpesviridae although the virus was clearly different from two previously described herpes-like viruses from fish, herpesvirus cyprini  and the channel catfish virus   <cit> . further characterization, including taxonomic relationships of khv to other viruses will be dependent on more complete genome analyses. the definitive diagnosis of khv is based on the isolation of the virus from infected fish and is time consuming. therefore a polymerase chain reaction  assays to specifically detect the virus in fish tissues was developed by gilad et al. and gray et al.  <cit>  and currently these tests are used to complement or even replace virus isolation as a means to detect khv infections in koi and common carp. the pcr assays based on khv dna sequences fortuitously chosen and with no defined function  <cit>  are more prone to lose their diagnostic value due to random mutations or deletions than a pcr assay based on sequences of essential virulence or structural genes. we identified from a genomic khv dna library an open reading frame  that encodes a protein with significant homology to thymidine kinase  and developed a new pcr assay based on these sequences that is shown here to be significantly more sensitive than the previously described pcr assays.

RESULTS
characterization of the khv tk
when analyzing the sequence of the clones of the genomic khv library, we identified a hypothetical thymidine kinase gene . at the dna level, a low homology  was found only with the tk of leishmania major friedlin  . however, when translating the dna sequence into deduced amino acid sequences, similarities were found between the hypothetical khv tk and the trypanosoma brucei thymidine kinase , the tk of leishmania major , and the tks of poxviridae  . we could not find any significant similarity between khv tk and the equivalent genes in any described fish viruses. southern blot hybridization with the labelled tk gene showed definitively that the khv tk gene hybridized only with the dna of khv and not with carp dna .

the khv tk gene had an open reading frame of  <dig> amino acids encoding a polypeptide with a putative molecular mass of  <dig>  kda. the similarity to eukaryotic tk may reflect a gene acquired from the host  <cit> . the proper nomenclature of the khv will be solved by a complete genome analysis and not by the analysis of a single gene like in this study or by the histopathology performed on diseased fish  <cit> .

the khv tk gene was expressed in vivo in experimentally infected kf- <dig> cells as shown by rt-pcr analysis. the mrna of the tk gene was not detected during the first  <dig> hours of infection  but was detected for at least  <dig> days after infection . by southern hybridization, we proved that the fragment amplified by rt-pcr was indeed the tk khv gene .

the khv tk gene cloned into plasmid pyb <dig> was over expressed in e. coli er <dig>  sds-page analysis of the recombinant tk showed a unique band of about  <dig> kda, in agreement with the size predicted from the dna sequence  . enzyme activity was determined using tritium labeled deoxy thymidine and deoxy cytidine as substrates.  <cit> . preliminary analyses show that the enzyme is specifically active using methyl-3h thymidine  but had no activity on deoxy cytidine  similar to other herpesvirus tk. acyclovir  and gancyclovir  in up to  <dig> molar excess over dthd, did not compete at all with the substrate.

tk based pcr assay
tk has been shown to be essential for virulence in herpes viruses  <cit>  and therefore is a good candidate for the development of a pcr assay. the khv infection is an emerging viral disease for common carp and koi. the highly contagious nature of this disease will unfortunately continue to negatively impact the aquaculture industry by increasing the mortality and restrictions on product movements. rapid diagnosis of the virus is therefore essential for the control of khv outbreaks. currently, khv outbreaks are assessed by multifactorial analyses comprising the post mortem observation of gross pathology lesions, the dynamics of mortality in all sizes of fish, the water temperature and the continuing mortality despite chemotherapy. the gold standard method for the diagnosis of khv infection is based on virus isolation using kf- <dig> cells followed by pcr testing of the virus isolate  <cit> . this protocol is time consuming and therefore pcr assays alone have been suggested as possible substitutes for diagnosis of khv disease  <cit> .

based on the tk sequence a newly developed pcr assay using the primers, khv-tkf  and khv-tkr  has been developed. under optimal conditions  this pcr assay amplified a  <dig> bp fragment when khv dna was used as template . this assay was specific for khv and did not amplify any fragment when using ccv, chv or kf- <dig> cell line dnas as dna templates . a comparison of the sensitivity of two published pcr assays to the tk pcr assay  using for each assay the conditions described by the authors gilad et al.  <cit>  and gray et al.  <cit>  are shown in figure  <dig> and table  <dig>  using purified khv dna as template, the tk pcr assay, whose product was visualized by agarose gel electrophoresis, ethidium bromide staining and uv illumination, was able to detect as little as  <dig> fg of khv dna . preliminary unpublished data showing that the genome size of khv is around  <dig> kb  is in accordance with that estimated by ronen et al.  <cit>  indicate that the  <dig> fg detected by the tk pcr assay correspond to approximately  <dig> virions. the two previously described pcr assays were consistently  <dig> to  <dig> times less sensitive  than the new tk pcr. similar results were obtained when dna extracted from kidneys of diseased fish were tested by the three pcr assays . recently, real time pcr assay  <cit>  and lamp assay  <cit>  have been developed for the detection of khv dna. the sensitivity of these two methods was not shown to be much higher than that obtained by the tk based direct pcr assay developed in this work.

in addition to assessments of the specificity and sensitivity of the pcr assays, the new assay was compared to virus isolation from koi with different histories in relation to khv infection. koi were examined from ponds with active disease, or that had been voluntarily exposed to a khv challenge and that were with or without disease signs at different times after the experimental exposure. lastly, populations of koi surviving khv in israel were also examined. the survivor groups were the result of a procedure of exposing fish to experimental khv infection at different seasons of the year and different water temperatures  <cit>  with the claim that they developed resistance to khv challenge and were free of virus . the presence of khv virus or khv dna in the kidney tissues of freshly collected koi was determined with the three pcr assays and the virus isolation method. the results showed that only the tk based pcr assay paralleled the virus isolation method  proving its sensitivity and its usefulness . the two other pcr assays were similar to each other in their performances and did not produce any false positive results but resulted in false negative results  when compared to tk based pcr assay or virus culture. we were able to detect khv and its dna in fish that were intentionally infected even two months after the experimental infection . these data match with the results obtained by gilad et al.  <cit>  using a taqman pcr assay to detect the presence of khv dna in experimentally infected koi and raise the question of potential carriers in fish exposed to khv in order to obtain immune survivors.

the kidney was selected as a representative organ for virus and dna detection because it was shown previously that khv is found in this organ  <cit> . aliquots of three kidney samples that were positive with the three pcr assays were frozen and were shown also to be positive after  <dig> months storage at -70°c using the three pcr assays. however the tk based pcr assay was always able to detect viral dna in the positive samples at a  <dig> to  <dig> higher dilution than the two other pcr assays  confirming by this its sensitivity and robustness.

these first field evaluations show the advantage of the tk based pcr for detection of khv dna as compared to two previously described pcr assays. the tk pcr assay is based on an essential virulence gene that has little chance to be deleted and is therefore potentially more stable/robust than the published pcr assays based on khv sequences of no defined function  <cit> . these initial trials show that the three pcr assays do indeed give different sensitivities with tk-pcr clearly performing the best. it was more sensitive, and unlike the other assays was able to detect viral dna in fish samples even two months after experimental exposure to khv. khv dna was not detected among koi two years post experimental exposure if survivors were not held in an infected environment. the carrier status of the survivor population remains unclear. negative results by pcr may or may not indicate freedom of khv infection or a viral load lower than the detection threshold. in conclusion, in all cases in our study, the tk pcr was the only direct pcr assay that always paralleled the gold standard viral isolation method. as the pcr assay is easier and less time consuming, this newly developed tk pcr assay is an excellent candidate for a simple and rapid diagnosis of khv infection.

CONCLUSIONS
the tk based pcr assay developed in this work was shown to be specific for the detection of khv. the tk based pcr assay was as sensitive as virus isolation which is the golden standard method for khv diagnosis, and was able to detect as little as  <dig> fentograms of khv dna corresponding to  <dig> virion particles. it was found to be  <dig> to  <dig> times more sensitive for the detection of khv than previously described pcr assays. although real time pcr and lamp technologies may be as sensitive if not more, than the direct pcr assay developed in this study, they have not been yet tested in field conditions and they require, at least for the real time pcr method, more sophisticated equipment and more expensive reagents than the direct pcr.

