BACKGROUND
lichenized fungi form mutualistic relationships with photoautotrophic organisms , mainly green algae  and/or cyanobacteria. the lichen symbiosis has been highly successful within fungi, especially ascomycota, with more than  <dig>  currently accepted species  <cit>  and an estimated diversity of greater than  <dig>  species  <cit> . due to the availability of genetic data and analytical improvements, dna-based approaches play an increasing role in the recognition of diversity in lichenized fungi that would otherwise be impossible to recognize using classical phenotypic characters due to morphological convergence or parallelism  <cit> .

in spite of the recent advancements in recognizing diversity in lichen-forming fungi, assessing diversification within a temporal context remains largely unexplored in nearly all groups of these important fungal symbionts, . this is largely due to the poor fossil record for lichenized fungi, and also fungi in general, and uncertainties in the interpretation of the few known fossil records  <cit> . however, the timing of speciation events plays a valuable role, complementary to discovering and describing diversity, by addressing biogeographical, climatic, ecological, and other factors associated with diversification and extinction within a temporal context, .

in spite of difficulties in obtaining accurate estimates of divergence times  <cit> , recent analytical advances in using relaxed molecular clocks, the inclusion of multiple fossil calibrations, and informative priors on substitution rates have improved accuracy in molecular dating  <cit> . however, a recent study also suggested that methods that fail to incorporate the process of gene lineage coalescence may provide inaccurate estimates of divergence dates  <cit> . while gene trees, including phylogenies estimated from concatenated sequence data, can overestimate divergence times because they do not correct for genetic divergence that predates speciation, species tree methods incorporating the process of gene lineage coalescence likely provide a more biologically realistic framework for dating divergence events  <cit> .

within lichen-forming ascomycetes, parmeliaceae  constitutes one of the largest and best-studied families  <cit> . although some lichen-forming fungal lineages have geographically restricted distributions, , there is mounting evidence that transoceanic dispersal has commonly occurred within some lichenized fungi and has played a major role in diversification within parmeliaceae  <cit> .

unrecognized diversity is common in many phenotype-based species circumscriptions in the family, confounding the current interpretation of ecological and biogeographical patterns  <cit> . additionally, interpreting biogeographical patterns and factors driving diversification is further complicated by a common pattern of long-distance dispersal in many taxa in parmeliaceae, . therefore, accurate estimates of divergence times are especially critical for identifying major factors driving diversification. a recent study investigating the origin and diversification in the largest clade of macrolichens, the parmelioid lichens , provides valuable taxon-specific estimates of substitution rates for three genetic markers based on three calibration points, including two dated fossils from parmeliaceae  <cit> .

within parmeliaceae, the genus melanohalea o. blanco et al. includes  <dig> species based on traditional taxonomy, most of which occur primarily on bark and wood throughout the holarctic  <cit> . only four known taxa occur in the southern hemisphere  <cit> . many melanohalea species display broad geographic and ecological distributions, although a limited number of taxa appear to have more restricted ranges  <cit> . otte et al.  <cit>  suggested that distribution patterns in melanohalea are largely determined by contemporary ecogeographical factors, and most species have largely filled their potential distributions in the northern hemisphere. furthermore, the distributions of some melanohalea taxa, including m. elegantula  o. blanco et al. and m. exasperatula  o. blanco et al., have been linked to eutrophication, air pollution, and other anthropogenic factors  <cit> .

while pleistocene events have been shown to have been important factors driving diversification and affecting distributions in many groups, , recent estimates suggest that the melanohalea radiation vastly predates pleistocene glacial cycles  <cit> . within many parmelioid genera, major radiations occurred from the late oligocene to the early pliocene, before the climate became cooler, drier, and more seasonal at the end of the pliocene  <cit> . however, the overall importance of pleistocene glacial cycles in diversification within melanohalea is unknown.

reproductive strategies vary among melanohalea taxa. sexual reproduction is restricted to characteristic fungal fruiting bodies  producing meiospores , and is common in at least  <dig> of the  <dig> described species. ascospores are dispersed independent of the photosynthesizing partner  and require reacquisition of the appropriate photobiont partner in order to re-establish the lichenized condition. in contrast, other species within melanohalea commonly propagate asexually by means of vegetative diaspores, either isidia or soredia. these specialized vegetative reproductive propagules contain both fungal and algal symbionts, eliminating the need for independent acquisition of the appropriate photobiont partner. the isidiate taxa m. elegantula and m. exasperatula show a remarkable potential for dispersal and may be spreading in some areas  <cit> . poelt  <cit>  hypothesized that lichenized fungi reproducing asexually  are generally more successful in pioneering formerly glaciated areas than forms that reproduce sexually. in contrast, nimis  <cit>  argued that the distribution of holarctic lichens is more likely determined by general ecology than by their reproductive strategy alone. the latter argument supports the assumption that the distribution of melanohalea within the holarctic today widely reflects their biological constitution, rather than their geographic origin or dispersal strategy  <cit> . however, population structure and history is poorly understood in most lichen-forming ascomycetes and the role of their reproductive strategy in response to climate fluctuation remains unclear.

cryptic lineages within phenotypically circumscribed taxa are common in parmeliaceae  <cit> , and previously unrecognized species-level lineages have now been recognized within six of the phenotype-based melanohalea species from a broad sampling of populations in the northern hemisphere  <cit> . diversity within this genus is now well-characterized, at least in the northern hemisphere, providing an excellent study system with which to test the relative influence of miocene orogeny and climatic conditions and pleistocene glacial cycles on common lichen-forming fungi.

in this study our goals are twofold:  we aim to estimate divergence times in the lichenized genus melanohalea using both concatenated gene tree and coalescent-based multilocus species tree approaches; and  we evaluate the impact of pleistocene glacial cycles on the population demography among four common sexually reproducing lichen-forming fungal species and two taxa reproducing largely via vegetative diaspores. with estimates of divergence times, we examine the relative roles of miocene orogeny and climate change and pleistocene glacial cycles on diversification in the lichenized fungal genus melanohalea. we are also interested in population demographic changes in common melanohalea species after the last glacial maximum , including anthropogenic factors. here we present estimates of divergence times within melanohalea and assess population demographic histories in relation to the lgm.

RESULTS
the complete its data matrix consisted of  <dig> sequences and  <dig> aligned nucleotide position characters . the six locus data matrix, representing genetic diversity identified from the its gene tree, consisted of  <dig> samples and  <dig> aligned nucleotide position characters . all sequences generated for this study have been deposited in genbank under accession nos. jq <dig> – jq <dig>  table  <dig> summarizes patterns of variation in sampled loci and the best-fit model of evolution selected using the akaike information criterion  in jmodeltest.

age estimates on concatenated and species topologies
high posterior effective sample sizes  were observed for all parameters in the beast analyses. the substitution rates in melanohalea of the six sampled loci , estimated under a relaxed clock, are shown in table  <dig>  the estimated substitution rate in the nuclear its was nearly five times higher than the mtssu and nulsu, and over two times higher than the sampled protein-coding loci. the protein-coding markers had relatively similar estimated substitution rates.

units: substitution/site/year x 10- <dig>  hpd: highest posterior density interval.

our calibrated maximum clade credibility chronograms from analyses of the concatenated data matrix  and multi-locus species-tree approach are shown in figures  <dig> and  <dig>  respectively. divergence times estimated from the species tree approach were between  <dig>  and  <dig>  million years more recent across the genus, with smaller differences at more recent timescales, i.e. divergences that occurred during the pleistocene .

bolded values correspond to posterioir support values greater than 95%;.

‘-’ corresponds to posterioir support less than 50%.

the divergence of melanelixiamelanohalea, estimated from the concatenated six gene dataset, occurred ca.  <dig>   million years ago  and is similar to a previous estimate of  <dig>  ma  <cit> . however, in the multilocus species tree approach this split was estimated to have occurred more than eight million years more recently, ca.  <dig>   ma . divergence dates estimated in the concatenated multilocus analysis support the initial radiation of melanohalea during the oligocene, ca.  <dig>   ma, while divergence estimates from the multilocus species tree approach suggests a more recent radiation during the oligocene-miocene boundary, ca.  <dig>   ma . both the concatenated and species tree approaches suggest that most diversification of melanohalea occurred throughout the miocene and pliocene, and divergence estimates suggest that diversification during the pleistocene glacial cycles was not accompanied by speciation in melanohalea . divergence dates from the multilocus concatenated analysis suggests a relatively synchronous initial radiation of the four major clades in melanohalea with mean diversification times occurring between  <dig>  –  <dig>  ma , with no clear temporal pattern in subsequent diversification events. however, dates estimated from the species tree approach provide a somewhat different perspective of diversification, with mean diversification times occurring between  <dig>  - <dig>  ma . the greatest disparity found in estimates was in the radiation of clade iv, estimated to begin radiating  <dig>   and  <dig>   in the concatenated and species trees approaches, respectively .

in the dated chronogram estimated from concatenated data, species divergences that occurred during pleistocene glacial cycles were limited to two distinct clades, a clade containing m. subexasperata and m. olivaceoides  <dig> and a clade with m. gomukhensis, m. olivaceoides  <dig>  and m. poeltii. dates estimated in the species tree analysis suggest pleistocene divergence for two additional clades, a split between the two lineages in the m. subolivacea complex and a split between m. elegantula and m. elegantula spain .

historical demography
genetic diversity indices  for lineages previously recognized in  <cit>  are summarized in table  <dig>  overall, lineages producing sexual fruiting structures  showed greater nucleotide and haplotype diversities, relative to lineages that commonly reproduce via vegetative diaspores . however, haplotype diversity was relatively high in the isidiate taxon m. laciniatula , and, in contrast, haplotype diversity was low in the apotheciate lineage m. multispora  <dig> .

n = sample size, h = number of haplotypes, hd = haplotypic diversity, s = number of segregating  sites, π = nucleotide diversity, fs = fu’s f statistic, ri = raggedness index, ssd = sum of squared deviations. bolded values indicate significant tajima d, fu’s f statistic, ri and ssd values.

although both tajima’s d and fu’s f statistic values were negative in most cases , tajima’s d statistic was significant  and negative for m. elegantula  and m. subelegantula ; and fu’s f statistic was significant and negative for m. elegantula  and m. olivacea . the mismatch distributions generally showed relatively unimodal patterns for taxa commonly producing vegetative diaspores , and mismatch distributions largely appeared multimodal for taxa producing ascomata  . no tests were carried out for m. exasperata spain, m. gomukhensis, m. halei, m. elegantula spain, m. lobulata, m. multispora  <dig>  m. olivaceoides  <dig>  m. olivaceoides  <dig>  m. poeltii, m. subexasperata, m. ushuaiensis argentina, and m. ushuaiensis chile, due either to their lack of polymorphisms or small sample sizes.

the effective population sizes and demographic trends estimated by the bayesian skyline plot  analyses for m. elegantula, m. exasperatula, m. multispora  <dig>  m. olivacea, m. septentrionalis, and m. subolivacea indicated population size increases during the pleistocene for the four sexually reproducing species and two taxa commonly producing vegetative diaspores . however, bsp plot analyses suggest population expansion predated the end of the lgm in all sampled species. our data suggest that the overall increase of the two taxa commonly producing vegetative diaspores occurred much more recently than the expansions of the lineages strictly reproducing through sexual propagation , with the exception of m. septentrionalis . based on the mutation rate of  <dig>  s/s/myr for the its marker, population growth started at approximately  <dig>  years before present  in the sampled isidiate taxa, m. elegantula and m. exasperatula . in contrast, population expansion for the sexually reproducing taxa m. multispora, m. olivacea, and m. subolivacea appears to have started approximately  <dig>  to  <dig>  years bp . however, the bsp for the apotheciate taxon m. septentrionalis suggests a more recent expansion, relative to the other apotheciate taxa .

discussion
concatenated gene tree and multilocus divergence estimates
in this study, we estimated divergence times for the lichen-forming fungal genus melanohalea using parmeliaceae-specific substitution rates for three dna regions. mccormack et al.  <cit>  suggested that estimating divergence times using a multilocus species tree approach is especially relevant for investigating taxonomic groups with poor fossil representation, and here we provide the first implementation of calibrated coalescent-based species-tree divergence time estimates for lichen-forming fungi.

similar to a previous study  <cit> , we found that divergence times varied greatly among estimates from concatenated gene tree and multilocus species-tree approaches. a comparison of the divergence estimates from the concatenated gene tree versus multilocus coalescent-based species-tree showed a consistent pattern of more recent divergence times estimated from the species trees approach, regardless of node age . although gene trees will necessarily overestimate divergence times in recent speciation events  <cit> , in this study we found the greatest disparity in estimates at deeper relationships, differing by over  <dig> million years at some nodes . additionally, we found that the multilocus coalescent-based species tree approach consistently provided narrower 95% confidence intervals than the concatenated gene tree approach .

topologies derived from concatenated datasets are not necessarily equivalent to species trees  <cit> . in addition to inferring incorrect relationships and estimates of support, using concatenated gene trees for estimating divergence times will likely produce overestimates for the divergence events  <cit> . in contrast, methods incorporating a full probabilistic coalescent framework, such as the *beast analysis implemented herein, have been proposed to provide more biologically realistic estimates because multiple gene trees provide independent realizations of divergence history, accounting for mutational and coalescent stochasticity  <cit> .

pre-pleistocene divergence
we estimated that the melanelixia- melanohalea split occurred during the eocene, with stem node age estimates of  <dig>  or  <dig>  ma in the concatenated and multilocus species tree approaches, respectively . a previous study suggested that the radiation of major parmelioid genera started at the end of the eocene  <cit> , and our estimates support a similar pattern of divergence for the melanelixia and melanohalea split. our data suggest that the radiation of melanohalea began either during the oligocene, or the transition at the oligocene – miocene boundary, with crown node age estimates of  <dig>  ma and  <dig>  ma in the concatenated and multilocus species tree approaches, respectively . the date from the concatenated analysis is approximately five million years older than that presented in amo de paz et al.  <cit> , but this is most likely due to our inclusion of the early diverging south american endemic m. ushuaiensis sensu lato, which was absent from their analysis.

our results also suggest that most major speciation events within melanohalea occurred during the miocene and pliocene, and were likely the result of complex patterns associated with new habitats formed during miocene orogeny events, major climatic changes, and global shifts in vegetation. the miocene was a time of major climatic and vegetative changes worldwide, especially in the northern hemisphere, including major tectonic activity and orogeny  <cit> . increasing aridity in the middle miocene  resulted in woodlands giving way to more open habitats and grasslands  <cit> . however, given the incredible dispersal capacity of some melanohalea species, and other fungi within parmeliaceae , inferring the geographic origin of lineages and associated temporal biogeographic factors remains challenging.

distributions of most melanohalea species are largely determined by contemporary ecogeographical factors, and most species have largely filled their potential distributions in the northern hemisphere  <cit> . in general, the distributions are in high concordance with those found in vascular plants and can be widely explained by contemporary ecogeographical factors  <cit> . although the distribution of lichenized fungal species is limited by the availability of the appropriate substrata, other unrecognized dispersal barriers appear to have limited the dispersal of some melanohalea species. for example, the amphiatlantic distribution of m. exasperata and the strictly european distribution of m. laciniatula remain unexplained. although we currently do not know the origin of the distribution patterns in these two species, incomplete spread into north america, particularly western north america, cannot be excluded  <cit> .

interestingly, within the morphologically cryptic m. multispora and m. ushuaiensis species complexes, species-level lineages also appear to have diversified largely during the miocene . the two defined m. olivaceoides sensu lato  lineages  <cit>  were not recovered as sister taxa and their most recent common ancestor  was estimated over 20 ma . similarly, the morphologically similar taxa m. elegantula and m. infumata are found in separate major clades within melanohalea, with the mrca estimated to have been over 20 ma in the dated coalescent-based species tree . these results suggest that in some cases, i.e. m. multispora s.l and m. ushuaiensis s.l, taxonomically diagnostic characters, including number of spores and isidia morphology may be maintained among divergent lineages for millions of years. in other cases, similar phenotypic characters, among non-sister taxa, including reproductive strategies , suggest the potential for convergent evolution due to similar selective pressures among distinct lineages inhabiting similar environments  <cit> .

climatic changes during the pleistocene are hypothesized as one of the foremost contributors to biological diversity . however, in this study, we show that species divergence during pleistocene glacial cycles was restricted to only a limited number of clades. of the morphologically indistinguishable species-level lineages recognized in  <cit> , only m. subolivacea sensu lato and m. elegantula sensu lato appear to have diversified during the pleistocene. however, additional supporting evidence, such as morphology, geographic range, ecological preference, chemistry, etc., will be required to establish robust species boundaries among the recently derived lineages.

our data suggests that two other clades also diversified during the pleistocene, one containing the sorediate taxa m. gomukhensis, m. olivaceoides  <dig> and the isidiate taxon m. poeltii; and the second containing the apotheciate taxa m. lobulata and m. subexasperata and the sorediate taxon m. olivaceoides  <dig>  in both clades, these species are restricted to asian highlands  and northern latitudes of western north america. this unique distribution pattern found in two distinct clades impacted by pleistocene divergence provides circumstantial evidence of transcontinental dispersal from the asian highlands to the new world through beringia. studies have demonstrated that beringia has served as a biological corridor for the dispersal of a variety of organisms , and we hypothesize that glacial refugia in beringia during the pleistocene have likely played an important role in transcontinental dispersal and diversification for some lichenized fungi, including melanohalea.

demographic histories
during the pleistocene, glacial advances affected the physical and biological environments of the northern hemisphere  <cit> . the more traditional methods for inferring population growth used in this study  predict population expansion unambiguously for only m. elegantula, although fu’s f and tajima’s d were negative but not significant for other taxa, including lineages assessed using bsp analyses . in our study mismatch distributions generally showed relatively unimodal patterns for taxa commonly producing vegetative diaspores , and mismatch distributions largely appeared multimodal for taxa producing ascomata  . although a multimodal mismatch distribution is generally interpreted as evidence for population stability  <cit> , bsp analyses of apotheciate taxa with multimodal mismatch distributions suggested pleistocene population expansion of the four tested lineages. multimodal distributions that fit sudden-expansion models can also be an indication of infraspecific structuring  <cit> , a pattern consistent with the phylogenetic sub-structuring present in the many apotheciate taxa in the its topology . additional research investigating infraspecific population structure in fertile melanohalea species and associated demographic histories will be essential to assess the reliability of the demographic histories inferred in this study.

bsp analyses suggest that population expansions predate the lgm in apotheciate taxa , as well as those propagating via vegetative diaspores . our results indicate that at least some melanohalea populations were able to expand during pleistocene glacial cycles, albeit with apparently different demographic histories. similar to other organisms  <cit> , these data suggest that pleistocene glaciations were not inherently unfavorable or restrictive for some melanohalea species. however, the relative impact of interglacial periods on population expansion in melanohalea remains unclear.

with the exception of m. septentrionalis, apotheciate taxa evaluated here appear to have expanded over  <dig> ka, suggesting a similar response to pleistocene climatic factors among both broadly distributed  and geographically restricted species . the differences in the timing of population expansions seen between m. septentrionalis and other apotheciate species may be related to ecology as the treeline migrated north  <cit> . melanohalea septentrionalis is essentially a boreal species, while outpost populations of m. olivacea south of the boreal zone are markedly more common than in m. septentrionalis <cit> . melanohalea multispora  <dig> and m. subolivacea  <dig> are essentially western north american species, commonly found in dry forests  <cit> . the contemporary distributions patterns and results from the bsp analyses suggest that climatic changes and associated shifts in vegetation in non-glaciated ecosystems during the pleistocene had a significant impact on population demographics of fertile melanohalea species.

although it has been proposed that the contemporary distribution and abundance of common isidiate melanohalea species is a result of recent expansion after the lgm and subsequent anthropogenic disturbances  <cit> , bsp analyses of vegetatively propagating species  suggest synchronous population expansion ca.  <dig> ka, with 95% confidence interval providing strong evidence that this expansion predates the lgm . bsp analyses indicate that the beginning of the population expansion of these taxa coincides with the saalian pleniglacial cycle  and continued the expansion into the weichselian glacial cycle . both isidiate taxa have broad ecological amplitude and are commonly found in formerly glaciated areas, as well as lower elevation sites, but are also found in other nutrient-rich habitats  <cit> .

nimis  <cit>  argued that the distribution of holarctic lichens is likely determined by general ecology rather than by their reproductive strategy alone. the latter argument supports the assumption that the distribution of melanohalea within the holarctic today widely reflects their biological constitution, rather than their geographic origin or dispersal strategy. however, contemporary distributions of isidiate taxa, m. elegantula and m. exasperatula, and apotheciate taxa, m. multispora  <dig>  and m. subolivacea  <dig>  largely overlap in western north america, and these species co-occur to varying degrees in some habitats. in spite of the fact that these species share similar distributions and habitats in some regions, bsp analyses suggest that lineages sharing reproductive strategies also share similar demographic histories, with population expansions in apotheciate lineages largely predating expansions in isidiate lineages. whether these similarities are due to reproductive strategy-dependent fitness advantages, availability of the appropriate photosynthetic partner or fine-scale ecological niches remains unknown and merits future investigation.

caution must be taken with the results from the bsp analyses presented here due to the potential limitations of using genetic data from the ribosomal tandem repeat and potential violations of the assumption of panmixia in lineages reproducing largely via vegetative diaspores. the selection of genetic loci for inferring demographic histories is not always straightforward . mitochondrial markers have been the locus of choice in skyline-plot analyses of animal populations  <cit> . however, within parmeliaceae, mitochondrial markers generally have very low intraspecific variation  <cit> . additionally, introns and paralogous copies of other commonly used mitochondrial markers have been found in fungi . although previous studies have found evidence of multiple its sequence types within individuals of several fungal species, including lichenized fungi  <cit> , intragenomic ribosomal variation has not been reported in parmeliaceae. multiple studies have confirmed the utility of variable markers within the ribosomal cistron  for species and population-level studies in lichenized ascomycetes  <cit> . furthermore, the its region has a high mutation rate and is the most variable marker commonly used in parmeliaceae  <cit> . in this study we found that the substitution rate was over two times higher than that of the sampled protein-coding loci  and nearly five times higher than that of the sampled mitochondrial marker .

we are aware of potential limitations of using ribosomal markers to infer demographic histories, but we consider this a good “first pass” marker with which to investigate population demographics in lichenized fungi. while additional studies will be required to confirm the utility of the its marker for inferring demographic histories of lichenized ascomycetes using bayesian skyline analyses, our study provides a valuable “hypothesis generating” approach for assessing historical factors driving population dynamics in lichen-forming fungi.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study we provide a comparison of dated divergence time estimates between concatenated gene trees and a calibrated multilocus species tree for the lichen-forming fungal genus melanohalea. our results showed a consistent pattern of more recent divergence times estimated from the coalescent-based species tree approach, relative to the concatenated gene tree analysis. although earlier divergence times were estimated across the species tree topology, relative to dates estimated from the concatenated gene tree, we found the greatest disparity between methods at deeper nodes. this discrepancy clearly has important consequences for understanding factors driving diversification, extinctions, and biogeographic patterns. given the results of this study, we propose that additional care must be taken when attempting to place divergence events within a temporal context by including estimates from calibrated coalescent-based species tree methods. results from both divergence dating methods implemented herein indicate that most diversification within melanohalea occurred during the miocene and pliocene, and was likely the result of habitat changes due to mountain uplift, major climatic changes  and associated shifts in vegetation patterns. this timeframe was also a period of significant mountain uplift, including major phases in the andes  <cit> , alps  <cit> , and himalayas  <cit> . however, the temporal concordance of these diversification events with major vegetation changes in other geographical regions suggests that a more global environmental driver likely contributed to diversification in lichen-forming fungi in parmeliaceae  <cit> . however, pleistocene glacial cycles appear to have played a limited role in the diversification of some taxa in the asian highlands and northern latitudes of north america and morphologically two cryptic lineages in western north america and europe. in addition, we provide evidence for population expansions of common melanohalea species during the pleistocene. our data provide evidence that the abundance of m. elegantula and m. exasperatula is likely not the result of anthropogenic factors. rather, the population expansion of these common species coincides will the beginning of the saalian glacial period. although the timing of population expansions of distinct reproductive strategies predates the lgm, lineages commonly reproducing with vegetative diaspores expanded more recently  than most strictly sexually reproducing species . these data suggest that pleistocene glaciations were not inherently unfavorable or restrictive for some melanohalea species.

