BACKGROUND
by definition, parasites have a negative effect on host fitness. since parasites usually show a shorter generation time than their hosts, they are also able to adapt rapidly to newly arising host genotypes. both characteristics together select for hosts with efficient counter-adaptations. subsequently, parasites are favoured if they can circumvent these host countermeasures. such interactions may result in a co-evolutionary arms race, consisting of repeated cycles of the emergence of new parasite offences and host countermeasures. hence, parasite-host interactions can lead to extremely rapid evolutionary change  <cit> . as such, they are thought to be responsible for much of the complexity found in the immune system of animals  <cit> . they are also likely to account for the evolution of diverse genetic mechanisms, which aid in generating fast changes, including sexual reproduction and recombination  <cit> . they may also affect the evolution of other life-history traits, such as reproductive rate, longevity, or competitive ability, which compete for available resources with defence and virulence traits in host and parasite, respectively  <cit> .

co-evolutionary arms races between hosts and parasites  are in many cases assumed to be determined by negative frequency dependent selection. in particular, rare parasite and host genotypes should be at an advantage because commonness facilitates evolution of host or parasite counter-adaptations, respectively  <cit> . such frequency dependent dynamics rely on two important conditions: i) natural genetic variation in both host resistance and parasite virulence, and ii) natural genotype-specific interactions between hosts and parasites  <cit> . empirical evidence for the presence of both of these prerequisites is still rare, especially for invertebrate hosts  <cit> . they include various associations between snails and trematodes , the association between the waterflea daphnia magna and its microparasite pasteuria ramosa  <cit> , between drosophila melanogaster and its parasitoid asobara tabida  <cit> , between the bumble bee bombus terrestris and the trypanosome crithidia bombi  <cit> , or between the copepod macrocyclops albidus and the cestode schistocephalus solidus  <cit> . clearly, more data is needed to determine the importance of parasite-mediated co-evolutionary arms races in nature.

in this study, we evaluated differences in host resistance and parasite virulence, both defined in a broad sense and reciprocally as the effect of an infection on host condition . in particular, we tested the presence of genetic variation and also the presence of strain- and genotype-specific interactions during the infection of the nematode caenorhabditis elegans  by the gram-negative bacterium serratia marcescens . c. elegans has recently been established as a model to study parasite-host interactions and in particular the genetics of host defence  <cit> . it is a soil inhabitant found in almost all temperate regions of the world. it seems to be common in decomposing material, where it feeds on diverse microorganisms  <cit> . about  <dig> natural strains are currently available. these strains are genetically very diverse, even when isolated from populations at a single location  <cit> . they also differ in many life-history traits, including their response towards the potential parasite bacillus thuringiensis  <cit> . the parasites that c. elegans encounters under natural conditions have not yet been unambiguously identified. the ubiquitous soil-dwelling bacteria pseudomonas aeruginosa, b. thuringiensis and s. marcescens are all likely candidates  <cit> . for our study, we chose s. marcescens, recently adopted as a model to study the genetic basis of virulence  <cit> , as a pathogen as it is able to produce a persistent infection and it is likely to benefit from the infection  <cit> , thus behaving as a true parasite of the nematode.

RESULTS
in our main experiment, we compared the consequences of infection of eight different natural c. elegans strains with  <dig> different s. marcescens strains plus one control . the c. elegans strains were isolated from münster, in northwest germany, and belong to four different microsatellite genotypes  <cit> . the s. marcescens strains originate from different locations around the world. the interaction between the two species was examined with the help of a survival assay, in which the survival of individual worms was monitored in the presence of a defined concentration of bacteria  <cit> . the survival assay was performed in 96-well plates on five occasions . during each run, all possible bacterial and worm strain combinations were assayed in parallel, resulting in a total of  <dig> data points per factor combination per run and  <dig> data points per factor combination in total.

 <dig> out of a total  <dig> cases  had to be excluded because of errors during automated worm-transfer , resulting in between  <dig> and  <dig> usable data points per combination of worm and bacterial strains. the number of valid cases did not differ significantly among these factor combinations . in the control , only  <dig> out of  <dig> were not found in the category "alive" . of these,  <dig> were morbid and  <dig> were dead. the recorded number of live worms per strain did not differ significantly from 100% . it also did not differ significantly among the worm strains . these results show that the experimental set-up itself does not cause significant levels of dead or morbid worms and that it does not have a different effect on different worm strains.

the different c. elegans strains show substantial differences as to their ability to survive in the presence of pathogenic s. marcescens . in general, the strains my <dig> and my <dig> were most resistant, whereas my <dig> and my <dig> were most susceptible. moreover, the strains with identical microsatellite genotypes generally produce similar but not identical levels of resistance. this suggests that these strains bear additional genetic differences, which were not resolved by microsatellite genotyping. at the same time, the different s. marcescens strains differ considerably in their effect on c. elegans . here, strain sm <dig> was most virulent, whereas strains sma <dig> and sma <dig> generally produced the fewest cases of mortality and morbidity. since s. marcescens strains were grown under identical conditions and since some of them are already known to differ in phenotype , the observed differences are most likely determined genetically. most interestingly, the interaction between specific worm and bacterial strains seems to differ across the table. for instance, c. elegans strain my <dig> is more susceptible to s. marcescens strain sma <dig> than to atcc <dig>  whereas the opposite is true for c. elegans strain my <dig> . similarly, host strain my <dig> is more susceptible to pathogen strain atcc <dig> than to strain db <dig>  whereas the pattern is reversed for almost all other host strains .

in general consistency with these observations, ordinal logistic regression  analysis indicates a significant effect of the factors bacterial strain, worm strain or genotype, the interaction between the two, and also experimental run on the treatment response . the two respective models employed are significantly better than models without any predictors . however, they are both significantly worse than the respective saturated models . the latter test examines whether the model employed considers a sufficient number of factors or factor combinations to explain the variation found in the data. the results suggest that the model is not sufficiently complex. we decided against employing more complex models , because the response variable is ordinal with only three categories , such that a larger number of predictor variables in the model would most likely lead to highly increased random error in the regression analysis. thus, as an alternative, we analysed the data using association tests.

ordinal logistic regression was based on a model, which contained bacterial strain, worm strain , the interaction between the two and run nested within both bacterial strain and worm strain/genotype as factors. the importance of different factors was assessed with the likelihood ratio test. significant probabilities after dunn-sidák correction are given in bold.

two-way associations were analysed with the lrt. the results show a significant effect of either of the different factors on worm condition . the relevance of these associations was further examined by taking into account a second predictor variable using the cochran-mantel-haenszel  test of conditional independence. all previously identified associations remained significant, irrespective of the second predictor variable considered . the only exception refers to the case where the factor worm strain was corrected by the factor worm genotype, suggesting that the observed variation among c. elegans strains is due to differences in genotypic composition. the remaining results indicate that the significant effect from one of the factors on the treatment response is independent of the significant effect from one of the other factors. this finding is consistent with the presence of an interaction effect from the factors bacterial strain and nematode strain/genotype, as above suggested by olr.

the associations were assessed with the likelihood ratio test  or the cochran-mantel-haenszel  test. bold probabilities are significant after dunn-sidák correction.

in the second experiment, we specifically addressed the presence of an interaction between two bacterial strains  and four host strains , the latter belonging to two different host genotypes. for this experiment, all factor combinations were included in each 96-well plate and in one experimental run. only  <dig> out of  <dig> cases had to be excluded for the reasons given above , resulting in  <dig> to  <dig> data points per factor combination. again, the number of valid cases did not differ among factor combinations . in the control treatment of this experiment, all animals were alive.

the second experiment confirmed the presence of variation in host resistance and pathogen virulence, although the overall level of virulence was lower than in the main experiment . subsequent olr revealed a significant effect from the factor worm strain or worm genotype, and also the interaction between the bacterial strain and either worm strain or genotype. the effect of bacterial strains was significant before dunn-sidák adjustment of significance levels , but insignificant afterwards . for these olr analyses, the models employed were significantly better than a model without any predictors . moreover, they were not significantly worse than the respective saturated models , suggesting that they contained sufficient details to explain the observed variation.

ordinal logistic regression was based on a model, which contained bacterial strain, worm strain , and the interaction between the two as factors. the importance of different factors was assessed with the likelihood ratio test. bold probabilities indicate significance after dunn-sidák correction.

subsequent performance of association tests generally corroborated the olr analyses: the different predictor variables had a significant effect on the treatment response . with two exceptions, this was still true after correcting for one of the other predictors . one of the exceptions refers to the factor bacterial strain, which no longer produced a significant effect if corrected by any of the other factors. this is in agreement with results from the olr analysis. the other case shows that the factor worm strain becomes insignificant if corrected by worm genotype, which confirms the findings for the main experiment . consequently, the results clearly demonstrate that there are significant differences among host genotypes and, most importantly, that there are significant strain- or genotype-specific interactions between the two species.

the associations were assessed with the likelihood ratio test  or the cochran-mantel-haenszel  test. bold probabilities are significant after dunn-sidák correction.

discussion
we here provide evidence for the presence of i) genetic differences in resistance among natural c. elegans strains, ii) genetic differences in virulence among natural s. marcescens strains, and also iii) strain- or genotype-specific interactions between the two. the first of these points is generally consistent with our previous results on the presence of strain-specific differences in resistance of c. elegans towards bacillus thuringiensis  <cit> . however, in the previous study, we compared c. elegans strains from different locations across the world, whereas in the present study all strains derive from the same place   <cit> . previous microsatellite genotyping demonstrated that these strains are genetically extremely diverse  <cit> . our present results highlight the fact that genetic diversity translates into phenotypic differences in resistance. importantly, as these differences are present in one population, they could provide the basis for and/or represent the outcome of evolution under natural conditions. these conclusions are restricted to the host c. elegans, because the s. marcescens strains considered did not come from the same location.

the observed strain- and genotype-specific interactions represent an important precondition for negative frequency dependent selection. as such, they may contribute to the emergence of co-evolutionary arms races  <cit> . the relevance of our results for the association between c. elegans and s. marcescens in the wild must currently be considered unclear. to date, it is unknown whether the two species indeed co-exist under natural conditions, even though it is strongly suggested by the fact that both – especially s. marcescens – are common soil inhabitants  <cit> . if they do co-exist, they clearly show the potential to engage in co-evolutionary interactions. in fact, in this case, the observed specificity may represent a signature of past counter-adaptations. our results would then also suggest that such highly specific interactions are widespread among invertebrate hosts; they are currently only known in a few arthropods and molluscs .

the situation is clearly different if the two species do not share the same natural habitat. in this case, the observed specificity must be the result of independent adaptations of parasite and host strains to other environmental conditions. pleiotropy of such adaptations should then have produced the specific c. elegans-s. marcescens interactions as a side effect. for example, the c. elegans strains may have adapted differently towards environmental toxins. if the underlying detoxification mechanisms are also employed in the defence against pathogens, then this may result in the observed differences in resistance. such mechanisms could indeed be of relevance in the interaction with s. marcescens, for which at least one toxin  was previously suggested to contribute to pathogenesis in c. elegans  <cit> . moreover, such mechanisms may also account for highly specific interactions, even if the two species did co-exist in the wild, underlining the idea that past co-evolutionary events cannot be reliably deduced from the observation of specific interactions without further information .

whatever its origin, the finding of high specificity in the interaction has further implications. the molecular basis of highly specific resistance is currently unexplored in invertebrate hosts. it could be due to the presence of different alleles of a certain cell surface protein targeted by specific parasite effector molecules. such cell surface proteins have been suggested to be important for the interaction between c. elegans and bt toxin, the main virulence factor of b. thuringiensis  <cit> . as a non-exclusive alternative, specificity may be a consequence of the inducible immune system as recently suggested for the specific interactions between the copepod m. albidus and the cestode s. solidus  <cit>  or the waterflea d. magna and its microparasite p. ramosa  <cit> . the presence of an inducible system was recently demonstrated for c. elegans in response to s. marcescens  <cit> , the fungus drechmeria coniospora  <cit> , and also the bt toxin of b. thuringiensis  <cit> . considering that diverse molecular tools are available for c. elegans, this nematode may in the future provide a valuable model system to dissect the molecular basis of specificity in invertebrate-pathogen interactions.

similarly, the observed highly specific virulence was previously unknown for s. marcescens. this bacterium is considered to be an opportunistic pathogen with a broad host range  <cit> . hence, it should mainly possess unspecific virulence factors, which are effective against a large number of different taxa. interestingly, some of the genes previously identified to contribute to pathogenesis in c. elegans also mediate virulence in other hosts , whereas other genes do not  <cit> . this already indicates some degree of specificity. our results may now provide the basis for a molecular genetic characterisation of virulence factors that vary in their specific effects against different strains of a single host species. this information may potentially be of great value for understanding pathogenicity of s. marcescens in humans, where this bacterium has become a growing health problem, primarily in nosocomial infections  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
based on the analysis of natural isolates of the nematode c. elegans and its potential microparasite s. marcescens, our study provides evidence for i) genetic variation in host susceptibility and parasite virulence, and also ii) strain- and genotype-specific interactions between the two. these two factors represent an important precondition for frequency dependent selection and as such for the emergence of co-evolutionary arms races. such highly specific interactions were previously unknown for c. elegans or s. marcescens. moreover, they have not as yet been reported for invertebrates other than molluscs and arthropods. at least for c. elegans, the observed variation was found among strains from the same population, such that it could indeed be of relevance for evolutionary changes under natural conditions. taken together, these findings suggest that there is widespread potential for co-evolutionary interactions in animal hosts. both c. elegans and s. marcescens represent important model organisms in biological research for which a diversity of manipulative techniques is available. therefore, the association between these two species may in the future provide a valuable tool for the comprehensive analysis of such highly specific interactions.

