BACKGROUND
populations of genetically identical bacteria are conventionally regarded as being phenotypically homogeneous. over the past decade however, it has become apparent that bacterial cell clones are not necessarily functionally homogeneous. for example, heterogeneity within clonal bacillus sp. populations has been extensively investigated  <cit> . we previously observed heterogeneous behavior of quorum sensing  regulated bioluminescence in a v. harveyi population  <cit> . even at high cell densities, the population was found to comprise two subpopulations: two-thirds of all cells exhibited luminescence, while the rest remained dark.

qs is a form of cell to cell communication, which involves production, excretion and sensing of signaling molecules, the autoinducers  . the gram-negative marine bacterium v. harveyi  produces three different ais. hai- <dig> belongs to the group of acylhomoserine lactones used by many gram-negative species  <cit> . cai- <dig>  a long-chain ketone, is the main ai in v. cholerae, whereas it seems to be less important in v. harveyi <cit> . ai- <dig>  a furanosyl borate diester derived from  <dig> -dihydroxy- <dig> -pentandione, is widespread in the bacterial world  <cit> . the three ais are recognized by three hybrid sensor kinases located in the cytoplasmic membrane : hai- <dig> by luxn, ai- <dig> by luxq  and cai- <dig> by cqss  <cit> . information is transduced via phosphorelay to luxu and further to the response regulator luxo  <cit> . a recently described new circuit consisting of the no-sensing h-nox and the soluble histidine kinase hqsk also feeds its information to the qs network at the level of luxu  <cit> . phosphorylated luxo activates the transcription of five small regulatory rnas . four of these, acting together with the chaperone hfq, destabilize the transcript that encodes the master regulator luxr  <cit> . luxr is both an activator and a repressor of a large number  of genes  <cit> . several feedback loops regulate the level of luxr in the cell. these involve the autorepression of luxr <cit> , the induction of qrr <dig> transcription by luxr  <cit> , the autorepression of luxo <cit> , the down-regulation of the translation of luxo and luxmn by qrr srnas  <cit> , and the direct repression by apha, an antagonist of luxr  <cit> .

v. harveyi is an opportunistic pathogen mainly for shrimps, but also for fish, squids and lobsters  <cit>  and causes major losses in shrimp aquaculture  <cit> . the response to qs signals is of interest in this context, because genes regulated by qs encode proteins required for biofilm formation  <cit>  and virulence factors, such as siderophores  <cit> , type iii secretion   <cit>  and exoproteolytic activity   <cit> , in addition to bioluminescence   <cit> .

here we focused on the single cell analysis of fluorescent reporter strains bearing plasmids containing promoter::gfp fusions, which allowed us to simultaneously monitor the expression of two ai-regulated genes in single cells.

RESULTS
ai-regulated bioluminescence correlates well with the activity of the corresponding promoter::gfp fusion
to expand our previous findings on heterogeneous behavior of a v. harveyi population found for bioluminescence  <cit>  to other ai-regulated genes, we decided to construct promoter::gfp fusions. it was important to use a wild type genetic background to monitor bioluminescence as a marker for an intact qs cascade in each strain. therefore, all promoter::gfp fusions are plasmid based. to set up the reporter system we tested first a plasmid containing a promoter::gfp fusion of the constitutively expressed housekeeping gene reca to estimate the degree of heterogeneity in the expression of this gene  <cit> . wild type cells conjugated with this plasmid were grown to the exponential growth phase, stained with propidium iodide to identify dead cells , and single cells in the same field of view were analyzed in phase contrast and fluorescence modes. images were analyzed using imagej. luminescence and fluorescence intensities of each living cell are expressed as intensity values per cell after normalization to the same cell size. all living cells were fluorescent, indicating expression of reca in all cells. fluorescence intensities were determined in about  <dig>  cells. the average fluorescence intensity was calculated to be  <dig>  a.u./cell  with a standard deviation of  <dig> % . for comparison all living cells of strain bb120gfp containing a chromosomal encoded gfp were fluorescent and showed an average fluorescence intensity of  <dig>  a.u./cell with a standard deviation of  <dig> % . testing for statistical significance  revealed that these two fusions were not significantly different, with Δμ =  <dig>  σ. these results indicated that plasmid and chromosomal encoded genes exhibit a comparable expression pattern at the single cell level. furthermore, promoter::gfp fusions of constitutively expressed genes result in fluorescence of all living cells.

after that, a plasmid containing a promoter::gfp fusion for the lux operon in addition to the intact luxcdabe operon was constructed to test whether bioluminescence in single cells correlated with the fluorescence intensity of the corresponding pluxc::gfp fusion. the wild type strain conjugated with a plasmid encoding a pluxc::gfp fusion was grown to the mid-exponential growth phase, and single cells in the same field of view were analyzed in phase contrast , bioluminescence  and fluorescence  modes. intensity data for  <dig> living bacteria were acquired and depicted in a correlation plot, with each dot representing a single cell . there was a strong correlation between bioluminescence and fluorescence  , indicating that the pluxc::gfp fusion reliably mirrors natural bioluminescence induction.

we analyzed the third construct, which contains a pvhp::gfp fusion. vhp encodes an exoprotease. bacteria were cultivated as described above, and  <dig> living cells were quantitatively analyzed with respect to bioluminescence and fluorescence intensities . here, single cell analysis revealed no correlation between bioluminescence and fluorescence  . this is reflected in the fact that luminescent cells were not necessarily fluorescent and vice versa . in addition, the culture contained a larger fraction of luminescent than fluorescent cells. this finding is in agreement with our observation that exoproteolytic activity does not coincide with bioluminescence during growth of v. harveyi . overall, these data indicate that promoter::gfp fusions provide a reliable mean to monitor ai-regulated gene expression at the single cell level in v. harveyi.

expression of various ai-regulated genes is heterogeneous
next we analyzed the time-dependent expression of three ai-regulated genes and two ai-independent genes at the single cell level. in addition to the pluxc::gfp, the pvhp::gfp and the preca::gfp strains described above, strains with pvscp::gfp and pluxs::gfp fusions were generated. the vscp gene encodes a translocation protein of the type iii secretion system and the product of luxs is involved in the synthesis of ai- <dig>  our preliminary experiments and a microarray study indicated that luxs expression is not dependent on ais . for all experiments, wild type cells  from an overnight culture were diluted about  <dig> -fold into fresh medium, effectively returning the cells to an environment without extracellular ais . cultures were then grown until the end of the exponential or into the early stationary growth phase . when a suitable cell number was reached , cells were collected and analyzed by microscopy as described above. first, the average fluorescence per cell was determined for each of the five fusions  as well as for the bb <dig> strain without any fusion to determine the autofluorescence of v. harveyi  . as expected the mean values of cells containing pluxs::gfp or preca::gfp did not change significantly over time . in contrast, the measurements revealed induction of luxc and vhp, and repression of vscp over time . the luxc promoter was induced up to 100-fold  during the exponential growth phase. the vhp promoter was maximally induced  in the early stationary phase. conversely, the vscp promoter was repressed 8-fold over the course of the exponential growth phase.

at the single cell level we found that luxc was induced in a subpopulation during the early exponential growth phase . over time more and more cells induced luxc, but a substantial fraction of the population  did not activate the luxc promoter at all .

promoter activity of pvhp::gfp was detected only in a minority of the population  at early times  . the percentage of fluorescent cells increased slowly over the exponential growth phase. therefore, we decided to analyze this promoter also during early stationary growth. by the time the population had entered the stationary growth phase  80% of the cells had initiated transcription of vhp. in the remaining 20% the promoter was silent.

single cell analysis of the population containing pvscp::gfp in the early exponential phase  revealed two distinct subpopulations exhibiting high  and low fluorescence . as the cell density further increased, the signal level in the former decreased, so that the two subpopulations eventually fused into one, which was characterized by low fluorescence. in parallel, we investigated the promoter activity of the two qs-independent genes luxs and reca at the single cell level. although fluorescence was detectable in all cells of the strain containing the pluxs::gfp fusion, we observed that a small fraction  of the population expressed luxs at a constant low level . the reason for this phenomenon is unknown. moreover, all living cells of the strain containing the preca::gfp fusion showed comparable fluorescence intensity, which resulted in one peak independent of the growth phase of the population .

overall, these data show that all the ai-regulated promoters tested are expressed heterogeneously within expanding populations of v. harveyi . strikingly, this heterogeneity of expression was observed for both ai-induced genes and an ai-repressed gene.

the deletion of luxo causes an ai-independent expression of all qs-regulated genes  <cit> . thus, v. harveyi jaf <dig>  is characterized by an all-bright phenotype  <cit> . we conjugated this strain with plasmids containing promoter::gfp fusions for luxc, vhp, or vscp and analyzed single cell expression at the mid-exponential growth phase. all living cells of jaf <dig> conjugated with either of the plasmids containing a pluxc::gfp or a pvhp::gfp fusion showed fluorescence, whereas no fluorescence was detectable in jaf <dig> conjugated with the plasmid encoding pvscp::gfp . moreover, average intensities of the pluxc::gfp and the pvhp::gfp fusions were significantly higher and the standard deviation was lower in the jaf <dig> strain compared to the bb <dig> strain . these data are consistent with the luminescence behavior of jaf <dig> versus bb <dig> cells at the single cell level  <cit> . these results indicate that heterogeneous promoter activity is dependent on ais.

v. harveyi jaf <dig>  cells were grown to the mid-exponential growth phase, analyzed at the single cell level as described in figure  <dig>  and compared with the wild type bb <dig> 

simultaneous analysis of two ai-induced genes reveals division of labor
next we analyzed the induction of two ai-induced genes in cells of the same reporter strain. for this study we used cells containing the pvhp::gfp fusion and monitored the induction of both fluorescence and bioluminescence in  <dig>  cells simultaneously. cells were grown to the transition from exponential into early stationary growth to ensure that both genes are readily expressed . different types of response were found among cells in the same field of view. some cells exhibited high levels of bioluminescence and medium or no fluorescence . cells expressing the converse pattern were also observed , as were others that showed medium-intensity signals in both channels . while the majority of bacteria simultaneously expressed both phenotypes at different levels, some of the population produced neither fluorescence nor bioluminescence . very few cells were found to exhibit high-intensity signals in both channels.

to compare induction of bioluminescence and fluorescence , the intensities of each were calculated for every single living cell and evaluated in two histograms. subsequently, cells were grouped in “no”, “medium”, or “high signal intensity”. the borderline between the two peaks in each histogram  was used to classify between “no intensity” and “bright intensity”. moreover, the bright cells were classified into “medium” and “high intensity”. therefore, the  <dig>  quantile was chosen to distinguish between cells with truly high intensity  and cells with medium intensity . based on these groups for bioluminescence and fluorescence, six types of intensity classes were defined . some of the cells  showed no fluorescence and luminescence. both medium fluorescence and luminescence were found in  <dig> % of the cells. the majority of vibrios  showed an unequal behavior, such as high fluorescence and no luminescence and vice versa , medium fluorescence and no luminescence and vice versa , and high fluorescence and medium luminescence and vice versa . only  <dig> % of the population exhibited both high fluorescence and high luminescence intensities. these data indicate that individual cells are essentially unable to induce the lux operon and the gene encoding the protease simultaneously at high levels. the heterogeneous response of ai-dependent genes gives rise to a division of labor in a genetically homogenous population of v. harveyi.

discussion
here we show that several ai-regulated genes are heterogeneously expressed in populations of v. harveyi wild type cells. we found that the promoters of luxc, vscp and vhp – genes that are important for bioluminescence, type iii secretion and exoproteolysis, all show wide intercellular variation in their responses to ais. in contrast, luxs, an ai-independent gene, is expressed in an essentially homogeneous manner. homogenous promoter activities for luxc, vscp and vhp were found after conjugation of v. harveyi mutant jaf <dig>  which expresses qs-regulated genes in an ai-independent manner, with the corresponding plasmids. these findings extend our original observations on the heterogeneous induction of bioluminescence, the canonical readout of qs in v. harveyi <cit> .

based on these results, we hypothesize that ais act to drive phenotypic diversification in a clonal population. a heterogeneous response to ais has also been described for the bioluminescent phenotype of individual aliivibrio fischeri cells  <cit> . in addition, single cell analysis of listeria monocytogenes has indicated that the agr qs system induces heterogeneity within the population and does not primarily sense cell density  <cit> . in salmonella enterica promoters that show a high level of phenotypic noise have been identified  <cit> . the genes concerned are involved in flagella biosynthesis or associated with virulence and host-pathogen interactions. single cell analysis revealed heterogeneous expression of the cardinal virulence factor of s. enterica, the type iii secretion system, which is crucial for host manipulation and elicitation of the disease  <cit> . the fraction of type iii secretion-positive cells increased from < 10% to 60% during the late exponential growth phase. in v. harveyi we found a decrease from 60% to < 20% of cells that express vscp. even though the regulation clearly differs, a fractionation of the population into producing and non-producing cells was found in both organisms. proteases also play important roles in pathogenesis, e.g. in pseudomonas aeruginosa <cit> , legionella pneumophila <cit> , and v. harveyi <cit> . our results indicate a fractionation of the population into cells with and without exoproteolytic activity, suggesting an advantage for the whole population to produce ‘public goods’ only in a subpopulation.

moreover, we simultaneously examined the expression of two ai-dependent phenotypes in one reporter strain. based on the very good correlation between luminescence and fluorescence  for the lux promoter  we used bioluminescence  and fluorescence  as read-outs. nevertheless, it is worth mentioning that bioluminescence is the result of an enzymatic reaction, which might be affected by other factors. the strain was cultivated until the early stationary phase when both genes were readily expressed . only  <dig> % of these cells were characterized by equal fluorescence and luminescence intensity, whereas  <dig> % did neither induce fluorescence nor luminescence. these apparently non-responding cells might express other ai-regulated phenotypes. surprisingly, very few cells  activated both luxc and vhp at high levels. in the majority of cells , transcriptional levels of the two genes clearly differed. high-level induction of both of these ai-induced genes at the same time seems to be excluded in the wild type. previous results with v. harveyi mutant jaf <dig> , indicated that all living cells were bright, but biofilm formation was significantly  reduced compared to the wild type . moreover, the artificial increase of the ais concentration within the wild type population resulted in the same phenotype   <cit> . overall, these data suggest division of labor in ai-regulated processes in the non-differentiating bacterium v. harveyi. this conclusion is in line with earlier suggestions according to which ai-dependent gene regulation seems to support the evolution of cooperation among bacteria  <cit> . ai-regulated cooperation could be viewed as a superimposition of and interaction between two cooperative behaviors, namely a cooperative communication system that coordinates cooperative behavior to produce ‘public goods’, such as exoenzymes, exopolysaccharides, and siderophores.

CONCLUSIONS
our results reveal heterogeneous expression of three ai-regulated genes in v. harveyi. furthermore, simultaneous analysis of bioluminescence and exoproteolysis in single cells by transcriptional analysis of a corresponding promoter::gfp fusion provided evidence for a division of labor. based on these results, it is suggested that ais not only serve as indicators for cell density but also play a pivotal role in the diversification of the population, and the coordination of qs-regulated processes.

