BACKGROUND
the measure of the protein stability change upon single point mutations is a thermodynamic quantity whose accurate prediction is a key problem of structural bioinformatics. in the last years a significant number of different methods are been developed to predict the stability free energy changes  in protein when one residue is mutated. some methods developed different energy functions, suited to compute the stability free energy  <cit> , while other machine learning approaches  <cit> . the introduction of machine learning approaches follows the increasing number of experimental thermodynamic data and their availability in the protherm database  <cit> . however, these automatic methods suffer from the fact that experimental data are affected by errors. when the value of the free energy change is close to  <dig> and the associated error is considered, for one single measure the sign of ΔΔg can change from decreasing to increasing and vice versa. another problem is that the training data are intrinsically non symmetric and unbalanced, with destabilizing mutations outnumbering stabilizing ones . this can bias training and testing, effecting the final statistical performance of the predictors at hand.

in this paper we describe a possible solution to the above-mentioned problems and implement a new predictor able to discriminate between  <dig> classes . the new implementation predicts the free energy changes starting for the protein structure or from the protein sequence with an improved scoring efficiency with respect to our previous implementations that routinely discriminate only two putative classes . our present method provides therefore a better discrimination of single mutated residues that may have negligible effects on protein stability.

RESULTS
sequence-based predictor
previously we showed that it is possible to predict the sign of the ΔΔg using sequence and/or structure information  <cit> . here, differently than before, we implement a svm-based method that discriminates between stabilizing, destabilizing and neutral single point mutations. to optimize our method we consider different protein sequence contexts, and when starting from the sequence we analyse the effect of different lengths of the input window on the scoring efficiency .

+, − and n: the indexes are evaluated for increasing , decreasing or neutral protein free energy stability change, respectively according to the classification described in section 2; for the definition of the different indexes see the system and methods in  <cit> .

it appears that the best scoring of our method is obtained when a window of  <dig> residues is taken into account, reaching an overall accuracy  of  <dig>  and a mean correlation coefficient  of  <dig> . the accuracy of our predictor is tested with respect to a baseline predictor that does not consider a sequence context . the sequence context improves the overall accuracy of 5% and the mean correlation of 4%. in figure  <dig> we plot the overall accuracy and the mean correlation coefficient as a function of the reliability index .

noticing that the q <dig> and <c> values increase at increasing values of the reliability index, we argue that the ri value may help in selecting which mutations are more suited to increase, decrease or leave unaltered the protein stability.

structure-based predictor
the prediction of the sign and value of protein stability free energy change ΔΔg is more accurate when structural information is considered  <cit> . we implement this finding by considering spheres centred on the c-alpha of the mutated residues with different increasing radius values .

for notation see table  <dig> 

in agreement with our previous work that considers an all heavy atom representation of the mutated residue, the best method for the three class discrimination is obtained when a radius of  <dig> Å is considered. the structure-based method reaches an overall accuracy of  <dig>   and a mean correlation coefficient  of  <dig> . in order to provide a good indicator for selecting more reliable predictions, again q <dig> and <c> values can be adopted given their increase as a function of the reliability index  .

analysis of the prediction
the sequence-based and the structure-based methods here proposed show a similar behavior in the predictions of the three different classes of single point mutation. for the destabilizing  and stabilizing  mutations obtained values of correlation coefficients are higher than those of neutral mutations .

when the sequence and structural environments are considered, an improvement of the prediction of neutral mutations is detected. this is evident from the two different roc curves of the stabilizing/destabilizing mutations  compared to those of neutral mutations . in the case of neutral mutations the increment of the roc curve area is higher than that obtained when the baseline predictor is considered .

similar plots of the roc curves are also reported for the structured-based method . in this case higher values of roc curve areas are generally obtained for all the three mutation classes and as before with sequence-based methods, the improving of the area for neutral mutations is greater that those obtained for stabilizing and destabilizing mutations .

when mutations with relevant effects on the protein stability  are considered, the prediction of the destabilizing and stabilizing mutations is well balanced and reaches accuracy values of 78% and 84% with correlation coefficient of  <dig>  and  <dig>  for sequence-based and structure-based predictions, respectively.

interestingly, the accuracy of our predictors can be evaluated as a function of the chemico-physical properties of the wild-type and of the mutated residues. the q values obtained as a function of the chemical-physical type of wild type and mutated residue  are shown for the sequence-based and structure-based methods, together with the abundance of the mutation type in the symmetric data base. data are shown in figures  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> and reported with respect to destabilizing, stabilizing and neutral mutations, respectively. in the stabilizing and destabilizing groups of mutations the most difficult to predict are those relative to the charged/charged and polar/charged residues. this is so irrespectively of the abundance in the symmetric data base .

the general higher accuracy of the structure-based method with respect to the sequence-based ones is evident for each pair of mutations, and in agreement with what previously found  <cit> : it is more difficult to predict the protein stability change when mutations of charged/charged or polar/charged residues are considered .

comparison between sequence-based and structure-based methods
in order to better assess the quality of our predictors in relation with the provided output, we compare the prediction of sequence-based method with those obtained with the structure-based method. the comparison was performed selecting only the mutations associated to the proteins with known structure and dividing the db3d dataset in three different range of relative accessible solvent area. in figure  <dig> we report the overall accuracy  and the mean correlation coefficient <c> for highly buried residue  ≤10%), for residues with 10%<rsa≤50% and exposed residue .

we find that the larger differences between the sequence-based method svm-win <dig> and the structure-based method svm-3d <dig> occur in the prediction of highly exposed residues, suggesting that when this is the case the structure-based code is better suited than that sequence-based to grasp the relevant features of the environment.

test and comparison with previous methods
we compare the new three-class discriminating implementation with our old two-class discriminating ones  <cit> , by using a blind set: newdb . in table  <dig> the results of our two methods are compared with results obtained classifying the i-mutant ΔΔg value output on the three different discriminated classes . even though the training data are the same, it is evident that the new svm-based methods  achieve on average higher scores then the two algorithms of the previous i-mutant predictor. more in details when sequence-based predictions are considered, the new method gains 3% in accuracy and 11% in correlation values; structure based predictions gain 4% in accuracy and 11% in correlation.

for notation see table  <dig>  i-mutant seq, i-mutant 3d, svm-win <dig> and svm-3d <dig> are tested on  <dig> mutations of newdb database.

CONCLUSIONS
our new development provides a more detailed prediction of the effects on the thermodynamics changes due to single point protein mutations considering that:

1) the thermodynamic reversibility adopted here generates a balanced data set that can help in over passing the problem of data-disproportion in favour of the large number of mutations associated to stability decrease found in the experimental databases. moreover the thermodynamic reversibility assumption makes the predictive methods intrinsically symmetric, similarly to the energy-based methods.

2) the introduction of a third class of neutral mutations grouping all the mutations that have a ΔΔg value close to  <dig>  partially prevents blurring in learning wrong associations due to the appreciable associated experimental errors. we suggest that our new approach can be successfully applied when thermodynamic data of protein stability need to be analyzed in order to find more stabilizing/destabilizing mutations as compared to those that do not appreciably change the protein stability.

