BACKGROUND
group i introns are autocatalytic rnas that are widespread in organellar and nuclear genomes of eukaryotes, in eubacteria, and in phages and viruses . how these elements "move" within and between genes and between natural populations and species is poorly understood  <cit> . two mechanisms are invoked to explain group i intron spread. the first is homing and is initiated by an intron-encoded endonuclease  that recognizes and cleaves an intron-less allele at or near the intron insertion site . following endonuclease cleavage at a specific  <dig> –  <dig> nt target sequence, the intron-containing allele is used as the template in a double-strand break repair pathway resulting in insertion of the intron and co-conversion of flanking exon sequences  <cit> . hegs appear to be recurrently gained, degenerate, and lost in a cyclical manner and the intron-heg combination is eventually lost from a population after all individuals are fixed for these elements  <cit> . a recent analysis in our lab of hegs in nuclear rdna group i introns showed that these coding regions are mobile elements  that move either to introns in homologous rdna sites or to introns in neighboring sites in often evolutionarily distantly related species  <cit> . the invading hegs can then mobilize their new intron partners and achieve rapid spread within populations. however, our in-depth phylogenetic analyses of the hegs failed to show the involvement of these endonucleases in the movement of group i introns into distant rdna sites  <cit> . this type of long-distance  movement has, however, been suggested by phylogenetic studies that show group i introns from sites such as ssu rdna s <dig> and s <dig>  to be closely related  <cit> .

long-distance intron movement can in principle be achieved by reverse splicing that facilitates intron mobility through an rna intermediate  <cit> . in reverse splicing, group i introns recognize their target sequence through complementary base pairing with a short  internal guide sequence  followed by integration into the transcript  and then putatively reverse-transcription, and general recombination to achieve spread. the importance of this pathway in group i intron movement in nature, however, remains to be established because reverse splicing-mediated intron movement has not been demonstrated in genetic crosses. furthermore, whereas homing is highly efficient in spreading introns in populations, it is likely that reverse splicing with its reliance on chance integration followed by two additional steps  would be less efficient in promoting intron movement. an additional constraint is that rdna exists as a multi-copy gene family necessitating that alleles containing transferred introns must rise to high frequency  in individuals and in populations to ensure survival and ultimately, fixation. if group i introns are weakly deleterious, then fixation may occur only in species with small population sizes  <cit> . these considerations suggest that rare reverse splicing events may be most successfully recognized in the context of broadly sampled host and intron phylogenies in which many potential candidates for reverse splicing movement are studied. the large collection of fungal group i introns that has recently accumulated provides an ideal opportunity to test comprehensively the contribution of reverse splicing to the extant intron distribution.

to assess whether phylogenetic evidence exists that is consistent with a reverse splicing mechanism of group i intron spread, we analyzed a large group i intron data set  from the pezizomycotina. these fungi are particularly intron-rich with some taxa containing up to  <dig> ribozymes in the rdna . in addition, we included  <dig> rdna group i introns from the yeast-like fungal symbiont of anobiid beetles, symbiotaphrina spp.  <cit> . we addressed two questions with this study: 1) is there phylogenetic evidence for the reverse splicing-mediated spread of group i introns in the pezizomycotina fungi? 2) are the multiple group i introns in symbiotaphrina spp. that are shared with other fungi the result of independent lateral transfers into the rdna genes of these taxa, or have some or all of these introns been vertically inherited in the fungi? for the latter question we were particularly interested in determining whether symbiotaphrina, which lives in the gut of beetles and could therefore theoretically come in contact with many different cells, be a potential vector for group i intron spread. although many studies have provided evidence for the movement of group i and group ii introns across broad evolutionary lines , there is little known about the vectors that facilitate their spread. our analyses demonstrate a complex evolutionary history of the fungal introns with many cases of vertical inheritance  and intron lateral transfer. in addition, there are several examples in which introns, many of which are still present in s. buchneri, may have spread through reverse splicing into heterologous rdna sites.

RESULTS
general patterns of fungal group i intron inheritance
we took advantage of the most group i intron-rich of all eukaryotes, the pezizomycotina fungi , to address the movement and long-term evolution of these mobile elements. the nuclear group i introns are found exclusively in rdna genes with some taxa containing  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig> , or  <dig> insertions  in their ssu and lsu rdna. to facilitate the analysis of fungal group i introns, we first inferred a "host" tree of the pezizomycotina based on the analysis of ssu and lsu rdna + rpb <dig> data . the rdna sequences for the four s. kochii strains were identical . the rdna coding regions of s. buchneri jcm <dig> were interrupted by  <dig> introns in the ssu rdna coding region  and by  <dig> introns in the lsu rdna . in the host tree, s. buchneri and s. kochii form a clade with bayesian but not bootstrap support, providing weak evidence for their monophyly . this result was previously found in a more limited analysis of partial small subunit rdna sequences  <cit> . in our tree, the symbiotaphrina species diverge before the split of most of the major lineages of lichen fungi , but again without bootstrap support. if the early divergence of symbiotaphrina is correct, then the fungal host tree suggests that under a model of vertical inheritance, in intron trees, the nine s. buchneri group i introns should each form independent monophyletic groups containing other fungal introns at the respective insertion sites. the s. buchneri sequences should not cluster on the basis of their common occurrence in this species and ideally, they should branch after the sordariomycetes but before the lecanoromycetes + eurotiomycetes group .

given these expectations, we first analyzed the 189-sequence intron data set that was used as input for the jc-nj and bayesian inference of phylogeny . this tree was consistent with a model of vertical inheritance with the fungal introns assorted primarily on the basis of their sites of rdna insertion and not intermixed, which would result if they had been frequently laterally transferred to ectopic sites . a jc-nj analysis using a subset of  <dig> sequences provided the same results  but with higher bootstrap support due to the reduced number of taxa in the data set. in particular, the nine s. buchneri group i introns  are distributed in the tree on the basis of their site of rdna genic insertion, often in clades with bootstrap and/or bayesian support. the same holds for the p. perisidiosa group i introns  in fig.  <dig>  these results argue for a separate evolutionary history for the different introns although within each intron lineage there could be a combination of vertical inheritance and lateral transfer between fungi . this would result if some of the introns were targeted  at the homologous rdna site in other species resulting in their monophyly; i.e., supporting intron vertical inheritance even though the ribozymes had moved between species. this phenomenon is best addressed with targeted analyses of specific intron lineages and the fungi that contain these introns .

in general the introns in s. buchneri are either limited to the lecanoromycetes  or are more closely related to homologs in this group than in the sordariomycetes, as would be expected under a model of vertical inheritance . the single l <dig> group i intron in s. kochii appears however to have an origin through lateral transfer from a sordariomycetes source . we tested the hypothesis of independent origins of the s. buchneri group i introns by forcing the monophyly of these sequences from different sites in the tree inferred from the 51-sequence data set . the shimodaira-hasegawa statistical test significantly rejected trees, for example, in which the s. buchneri s <dig> and s <dig> , the s <dig> and l <dig> , or the s <dig> and s <dig>  introns were united in one clade. forcing the monophyly of any of the s. buchneri ic and ie introns resulted in the greatest differences in log likelihood arguing for a long evolutionary separation of these intron subgroups. the only tree rearrangement that did not result in significant sh-test scores was for the union of the s. buchneri s <dig> and s <dig> group i introns . this suggests a potential common evolutionary origin of these introns.

in summary, our data are consistent with the idea that the s. buchneri group i introns have independent origins and that they been vertically inherited in many fungi. our data argue most strongly for the view that the s. buchneri introns have not recently spread in rdna through ectopic transposition within this taxon. consistent with these ideas, detailed analysis of the sordariomycetes support the hypothesis of long-term group i intron vertical evolution  <cit> . we cannot, however, unambiguously ascertain the extent of intron lateral transfer between all pezizomycotina because of the uneven and sporadic distribution of the data . within the lecanoromycetidae, detailed analysis of this group using ssu rdna comparisons shows that entire derived lineages  are intron-free even though their sisters often contain multiple different group i introns .

evidence for group i intron spread
although group i introns form monophyletic groups in figure  <dig>  there are also cases of a close relationship  between intron clades at ectopic rdna sites. inspection of figures  <dig> and  <dig> suggests seven potential transposition events . these same cases were also present in the 189-sequence data set . the intron movements involve four cases that were previously found in more limited phylogenetic analyses of clades s <dig> – s <dig>  s <dig> – s <dig>  s <dig> – s <dig> , s <dig> – s <dig>  <cit>  and three putative new cases found in this study . perhaps most interesting in this analysis is the finding that five of the nine s. buchneri ssu rdna introns  are nested inside, or sister to introns at heterologous sites in the lecanoromycetidae . this suggests that the five potentially ancestral ssu rdna introns that were present in s. buchneri may have spread into  <dig> novel sites  during fungal evolution resulting in  <dig> different intron lineages. the timing of these intron movements suggests that most have occurred in derived members of the lecanoromyectidae, in particular the lichenized physicaceae  <cit> . the s <dig> to s <dig> movement, for example, must have been relatively recent because, despite extensive sampling  <cit> , the novel s <dig> intron is known only from the closely related taxa, gymnoderma coccocarpum, physcia stellaris, lecanora dispersa, and cladonia spp. . the s <dig> to s <dig> movement is also likely to be recent because the derived s <dig> intron is limited to two members of the physciaceae . other intron movements that are independent of s. buchneri include the s <dig> – l <dig> and s <dig> – l <dig>  sites. these groupings are only weakly supported in fig.  <dig>  all of the phylogenetic analyses with the 51-sequence data set suggest however that the acarospora cf. dissipata s <dig> group i intron shares a specific evolutionary relationship with the intron at the l <dig> site in a member of the lecanoromycetidae  and the ostropomycetidae . the majority-rule bayesian consensus tree inferred from the intron core regions is consistent with these results showing that the intron transpositions are supported even when a restricted number of sites from the most highly conserved regions of the ribozymes are used in the analysis . this result argues against the spurious clustering of introns in figures  <dig> and 4a resulting solely from long-branch attraction of divergent sequences.

taken together, our phylogenetic analyses provide evidence not only for the ancient origin of many fungal introns that can be traced back to their presence in s. buchneri, but also provide indirect evidence for the spread of some of these introns into novel sites, thereby giving rise to additional vertically inherited sequences. given this hypothesis, we predict that some taxa may maintain introns at both the ancestral and novel sites. this prediction is met for the s <dig> – s <dig> , s <dig> – s <dig> , and s <dig> – s <dig> introns . the low number of taxa containing both ancestral and derived introns suggests again that intron loss is widespread in fungal rdna because in most cases one or both of the ribozymes have been lost from the genes. we cannot yet identify, however, the source of many introns that are putatively of a putative recent origin but are unrelated to the introns in symbiotaphrina . clearly, external sources such as viruses or bacteria may also play an important role in the introduction of group i introns in fungal rdna.

reverse splicing group i intron spread
we suggest that reverse splicing may be an important mechanism of group i intron spread into distant rdna sites in fungal nuclear rdna for the following reasons: 1) virtually none of the pezizomycotina rdna group i introns  contain endonucleases  <cit> . if endonucleases  did mediate the lateral transfer of rdna introns, then one would have to postulate complete loss of these coding regions after the introns had attained their present distribution. when endonucleases have been found in nuclear group i introns , they appear to have been inserted into existing intron sequences and generally do not contain extensive deletions but rather frame-shift mutations or short truncations that result in their inactivation . no large insertions  have been found in these introns that could be the remnant of an inactivated endonuclease open reading frame. 2) generally, intron homing requires extensive exon flanking sequence identity  that is not found among the different rdna group i intron movements . 3) in the cases of intron transposition shown here, all of the heterologous rdna sites show high conservation of only  <dig> –  <dig> nt of the 5' exon flanking sequence . this region is involved in the internal guide sequence interaction that is required for both forward- and reverse splicing . in our analyses, the s <dig> – s <dig> and s <dig> – s <dig> introns share the 5' flanking exon sequences 5'uaacrggu3' and 5'ugkkggu3', respectively . a close evolutionary relationship between the s <dig> – s <dig> introns is also supported by this analysis . this pattern of sequence conservation is predicted for reverse splicing-mediated intron spread  <cit> . a recent analysis of the s <dig> twin-ribozyme in the myxomycete didymium iridis demonstrates that it can accurately reverse-splice into the homologous site in both e. coli and yeast rrna  <cit> . surprisingly, this intron does not integrate into related heterologous rrna sites as has been reported for the t. thermophila ribozyme, which was shown to partially reverse-splice into  <dig> sites and completely integrate into one site in e. coli large subunit rrna  <cit> . the s <dig> – l <dig> intron group also displays a conserved motif at the site of insertion  but one of these introns appears to have "slid" along the exon by one nucleotide either at the time of reverse splicing or sometime thereafter.

CONCLUSIONS
given the results of our exhaustive study, we propose that reverse splicing is potentially an important mechanism of intron spread in pezizomycotina nuclear rdna. our analyses provide strong support for the idea that the evolutionary history of nuclear group i introns may differentiate itself markedly from organellar group i introns which appear to rely primarily on homing for spread and may be characterized by massive and independent invasions into the homologous dna sites of related taxa . in contrast, the nuclear introns often have protracted histories in the host genomes  and their spread into novel sites may be a direct consequence of this long-term stability; i.e., existing introns reverse-splice at different times into heterologous sites. the availability of reverse transcriptase in the cell and the fixation rate of intron-containing alleles in the multi-copy rdna gene family are likely the primary determinants of the rate of reverse splicing-mediated movement. limited analyses of intron+ and intron- strains fail to show any clear advantage or disadvantage to the host cell when introns are present  <cit> . this suggests that mobile group i introns may be "silent" parasites that have no measurable phenotype  <cit> . the neutral nature of group i introns suggests that their spread and loss may be stochastic events with rare movement occurring through reverse splicing and the more frequent intron loss occurring most likely through chance or when intron mobility, splicing, and/or processing  poses a cost to the host cell  <cit> . successful group i intron excision is of critical importance because these sequences are normally found in functionally important regions of rdna  <cit> .

our study suggests that the beetle gut symbiont s. buchneri  contains a set of introns that has likely been vertically inherited in later-diverging fungi with reverse-splicing spread of some of these ribozymes into ectopic rdna sites, particularly in the intron-rich lecanoromycetes. our data do not support the idea that s. buchneri is a vector for facilitating intron spread in the fungi. we did not find an unexpectedly close phylogenetic relationship between any of the introns in this taxon with others in our data set, which would have indicated a recent later transfer event. the phylogenetic positions of the s. buchneri introns relative to other ribozymes  are generally consistent with the expectations of host relationships. however, these group i intron data do not have enough resolving power to allow us to address the possibility of more ancient transfer events involving s. buchneri. in conclusion, it is apparent from our work that nuclear group i introns in the fungi have remarkably complex evolutionary histories, therefore our analyses are likely only scratching the surface of intron movement in these taxa. more detailed studies of specific intron lineages  will more accurately reveal the dynamics of fungal rdna group i intron evolution.

