BACKGROUND
cancer is a complex multi-gene disease. for a long time, gene mutation has been considered to be related to cancer. a number of oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes linked to mutations have been shown to drive the neoplastic process by increasing tumor cell numbers  <cit> . however, with progress in the understanding of cancer and the ongoing development of epigenetics, it has been reported that aberrant dna methylation events are involved in many types of cancers  <cit> . genome-wide hypomethylation and region-specific cpg island promoter hypermethylation are a hallmark of the cancer epigenome  <cit> . thus the mechanisms that drive cancer development and progression cannot be effectively uncovered by studying only genetic factors. for a more profound understanding epigenetic characteristics must also be examined.

abnormal dna methylation has been found in many different tumors, including brain tumor, breast cancer, and prostate cancer. dna hypomethylation is often considered to activate oncogenes. dna hypermethylation of the promoter region, on the other hand, may initiate the silencing of tumor suppressor genes. it has been reported that the overexpression of fen <dig>  in breast and other cancers is associated with cpg island hypomethylation of the promoter region in the tumor cells  <cit> . similarly, in a recent study by sun et al., it was found that the promoter of tktl <dig>  had a high frequency of hypomethylation which induced the overexpression of the gene in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma   <cit> . brca <dig> is a well-characterized tumor suppressor gene which codes for proteins that have important roles in the regulation of the cell cycle and in the apoptosis of tumor cells. in breast and ovarian cancers, brca <dig> is inactivated by hypermethylation within the promoter region of the gene  <cit> .

thus, as the number of epigenetic studies gradually increase, the importance of dna methylation in cancer research is being recognized. simultaneously, a series of methods for dna methylation detection have been developed. the earliest dna methylation detection methods were mainly single-gene sequence-specific methods such as methylation sensitive restriction endonucleases  <cit> , methylation specific pcr  <cit> , and combined bisulfite restriction analysis  <cit> . subsequently, high-throughput genomic dna methylation detection methods were developed like, for example, the large-scale microarray and sequencing technologies  <cit> . numerous studies of gene methylation have used traditional experimental methods to generate large amounts of methylation data; more recently, a large number of genome-wide dna methylomes have been generated through the traditional methods being combined with the high throughput technologies.

some cancers have been identified as different subtypes based on the methylation level of cpg islands  <cit>  and cancer-related genes have been identified by their epigenetic variations. loss et al. prioritized genes with epigenetic regulation in  <dig> breast cancer cell lines by their ranked methylation-expression association using logistic regression, and identified  <dig> genes as epigenetically regulated genes in the breast cancer cell lines  <cit> . some cancer-related genes have been identified by combining epigenetic characteristics and network theory. network theory provides a platform for the systematic study of diseases  <cit> . the prioritization of cancer-related genes has also been widely studied using network theory. most network theoretical approaches are based on the assumption that cancer-related genes participate in common functional modules including protein complexes, molecular pathways and developmental processes, and may have the same or similar functions that are involved in the development of cancers. charles et al. established a weighted function network composed of human genes, and ranked the related genes to  <dig> different diseases . this study revealed the recondite relationship between diseases with quite different phenotypes  <cit> . in a study by cui et al., a manually curated human signaling network was constructed and a set of cancer mutated genes and a set of cancer-associated methylated genes were mapped into the signaling network. these researchers found that methylated genes were mainly enriched in negative regulatory loops encoding tumor suppressors in cancer cells  <cit> . thus, they successfully developed an approach to identify cancer-related genes that could be used as biomarkers of cancers from high-throughput data.

a human protein-protein interaction network, constructed using a machine learning method, has been shown to be of benefit when applied to the study the disease-related genes using network theory  <cit> . here, we report the construction of an integrated and weighted network using protein-protein interaction  data and its correlation with dna methylation to provide a comprehensive approach for prioritizing the cancer-related genes with abnormal methylation from genome and epigenome data.

RESULTS
in this study, the workflow is shown in figure  <dig>  it consists of four major stages:  the construction of whpn, a weighted human ppi network by integrating dna methylation and protein-protein interaction features,  the formation of casn, a cancer-associated subnetwork extracted by seed genes which from pubmeth,  the analysis of topological features between the two networks,  the prioritization cancer-related genes with aberrant methylation as optimized genes and the analysis of the optimized genes.

the weighted human ppi network and cancer-associated subnetwork
protein-protein interaction  networks can be more perspicuous for the representation of the complex relationships between large numbers of elements and better at depicting the structure and function of the elements. in this study, we used a ppi network to understand the dna methylation patterns present in the development and progression of cancers. we constructed the network by integrating dna methylation and protein-protein interaction features to prioritize cancer-associated genes. the genes were used as nodes and the correlations of dna methylation among genes were used as the linkage weight. the linkages whose methylation correlations were below the threshold are removed. the weighted human ppi network  that we built contained  <dig> interaction pairs covering  <dig> human genes  .

we identified  <dig> seed genes for the four types of cancers  from pubmeth using text mining . the set of seed genes were classified into four types according to how many types of the four cancers the seed genes are associated with . the seed genes were mapped to whpn and a subset of  <dig> seed genes was obtained. in the set of  <dig> seed genes,  <dig> genes were for glioblastoma,  <dig> were for ovarian cancer,  <dig> were for hepatocellular carcinoma, and  <dig> were for leukemia. using the seed genes, the cancer-associated subnetwork  was extracted from whpn. casn contains the seed genes and the genes which connect with the seed genes in whpn comprising  <dig> genes  and  <dig> interaction pairs  .

comparison of the topological features of whpn and casn
the topological features for whpn and casn were computed. casn should have a network structure that is different from whpn, which should show the specific genetic and epigenetic relations between genes in cancers.

the average degrees for whpn and casn were  <dig>  and  <dig> , respectively, showing that casn was much closer than whpn. casn was also more highly connected when compared with the  <dig> randomly simulated subnetworks sampled the same number of nodes as in casn from whpn . when the degree distributions of whpn and casn were compared , both whpn and casn followed a power-law distribution. the r values for the two networks were also obtained; rwhpn =  <dig>  for whpn and rcasn =  <dig>  for casn. a network which has a power-law degree distribution is generally called a scale-free network  <cit> . in both networks, there were a few nodes with high connectivity, referred to as hub nodes; however, most nodes had low connectivity.

by analyzing the clustering coefficient of each node in whpn and casn, we found that casn had a higher clustering coefficient than whpn . most of the nodes in whpn had lower clustering coefficients  than the nodes in casn . the clustering coefficient of casn was also compared with the  <dig> randomly simulated subnetworks sampled the same number of nodes as in casn from whpn .

the average path length and the probability density distribution of the average path length were also compared for the two networks. the results showed that casn had a shorter average path length  than whpn  . as for the other topological features, the average path length of casn was significant when compared with the average path lengths of the  <dig> randomly simulated subnetworks . the network diameters for whpn and casn were  <dig> and  <dig>  respectively.

although the topological features of casn were significantly different from those of whpn and the random subnetworks, to confirm the significance of our results, we used the topology-matched random subnetworks that were generated as described in the method section. compared with the topology-matched random subnetworks, the topology features of casn were all statistically significant . we also generated  <dig> random networks by keeping the same number of nodes and connections as in casn. we found that, compared with the three different random subnetworks, the degree and clustering coefficient for casn were much significant those of the three random subnetworks, suggesting that the nodes in casn were not randomly distributed .

the calculated topological features of the networks indicate that casn had a more densely connected network community than whpn. it is generally believed that the mutant proteins contribute to diseases with similar phenotypes directly or indirectly interact and cancer is considered to be the result of the deregulation of some interrelated pathways. so, if a gene in the network is close to a cancer gene, then that gene is likely to be involved in some of the events that lead to the cancer. further, the genes in casn were also related to cancer through their abnormal methylation. thus, the casn genes may be involved in the same or similar biological processes as the seed genes, which may in turn be display changes of methylation levels in cancers.

prioritizing the cancer-related genes with aberrant methylation
to further investigate the proposed hypothesis that the genes that were close in the casn network may have similar methylation levels, we selected  <dig> genes that were connected with the seed genes in casn as candidate genes. the  <dig> candidate genes were assessed to prioritize the cancer-related genes with aberrant methylation that had not been detected in casn before. using the neighborhood-weighting decision rule  <cit> , every candidate gene was scored to measure the possibility that the methylation state of the candidate genes varied in cancers. the candidate genes whose scores were larger than any of the  <dig> simulated scores were identified as the optimized genes . finally,  <dig> casn genes were prioritized using the seed genes and neighborhood-weighting decision rule . the optimized genes are also classified as four types according to the number of cancer types that the genes connected;  <dig> optimized genes for type i,  <dig> for type ii  <dig> for type iii and  <dig> for type iv .

analysis of hub nodes and optimized genes
the genes in whpn were divided into two types, casn gene set and non-casn gene set. overall, the connectivity of the casn genes was higher than that of the non-casn genes . the degrees for the casn genes were in the range  <dig> to  <dig>  and for the non-casn genes the range was only from  <dig> to  <dig>  the percentile  <dig> of degrees in casn genes and non-casn genes were  <dig> and  <dig>  respectively . we found that, in whpn, the top  <dig> genes with the largest degrees were all casn genes .

casn genes were divided into three types: seed gene set, optimized gene set and rest potential gene set. the percentile  <dig> of degrees in the seed gene set, the optimized gene set and the rest potential gene set were  <dig> ,  <dig> and  <dig>  respectively . the results showed that the seed genes and the optimized genes had higher degrees than the rest potential genes . of the top  <dig> genes with the largest degrees in casn,  <dig> were seed genes,  <dig> were optimized genes and only one was a rest potential gene which was ranked  <dig> . four of the optimized genes  were all in the top  <dig> genes with the highest degrees in whpn.

the gene, myc associated factor x , with the second highest number of degrees in casn and the highest number of degrees  in whpn, was prioritized as an optimized gene. the max protein coded by this gene is a member of the basic helix-loop-helix leucine zipper  family of transcription factors. max usually forms heterodimers with other family members such as mad, mxi <dig> and myc. myc is an oncoprotein involved in cell proliferation, differentiation and apoptosis  <cit> . therefore, max may also participate in the same or similar biological processes that affect the development and progression of cancers. in casn, some hub nodes were prioritized as cancer-related genes with aberrant methylation. other studies have shown that cancer-related proteins often have high connectivity that are usually considered to be the hub notes in networks, rather than the peripheral notes  <cit> . the optimized genes in our study tended to have high connectivity, suggesting critical roles for them in important biological processes and in the deregulation of genes during the development and progression of the cancers.

analysis of go categories and kegg pathways
the go function enrichment analysis of the casn genes indicated that these genes were mainly enriched in the go terms of regulation of programmed cell death and apoptosis, terms which are relevant of tumors . the non-casn genes, on the other hand, were mainly involved in the biological processes of regulation of protein rna metabolic processes and cell proliferation . of the many significant go terms listed for the non-casn genes, only some of them were related to programmed cell death and apoptosis and they were significantly lower for the non-casn genes than for the casn gene set. these findings revealed that the casn genes were much more closely related to cancers than the non-casn genes. in the subsequent analysis, we focus on the casn gene set.

the seed genes are mainly involved in go biological processes associated with the regulation of the apoptosis and programmed cell death . the seed genes were selected because they may be methylated aberrantly; thus, the abnormal methylation may induce their involvement in apoptosis and programmed cell death, affecting the development and progression of cancers  <cit> . we also found that the optimized genes were mainly enriched in the go terms involving regulation of gene expression, regulation of transcription and in the biological processes of cell apoptosis and programmed cell death . apoptosis is a basic biological phenomenon that may have a direct or indirect relationship with many diseases, such as cancers and autoimmune diseases  <cit> . apoptosis is negatively regulated in cancers and the disruption of apoptosis is involved in the initiation of cancers. these biological processes might be deregulated by the aberrant methylation of the optimized genes, thus affecting the process of cancers.

the casn and non-casn gene sets in whpn were next analyzed for kegg pathway enrichment. the findings revealed that the casn genes were enriched in many cancer and cancer-associated pathways ; the non-casn genes were not enriched in any cancer pathway. we investigated the three gene groups in casn in the same way as we did for the go enrichment analysis. the results for the optimized genes and seed genes are shown in additional file  <dig>  the seed genes were annotated to  <dig> of the  <dig> cancer pathways in the kegg database. two of the other pathways, the p <dig> signaling pathway and the wnt signaling pathway, are closely related to cancers  <cit> . the optimized genes were also annotated to cancer pathways, and to the notch signaling pathway and the cell cycle in kegg. some studies have shown that abnormalities of the notch signaling pathway are linked to breast carcinogenesis, t cell malignancies, neuroblastoma, myeloid leukemia and lung cancer  <cit> . our results also show that the optimized genes may be linked to cancers, suggesting that the abnormal methylation levels affect the development and progression of cancers.

finally, the go and kegg enrichment analysis for the rest potential genes indicated that these genes may also be enriched in some cancer-related go biological processes and in some kegg cancer- related pathways . a possible explanation for this result may be that the all genes in the networks were interactional and all the genes in casn interacted with the seed genes which were all cancer-related genes. genes that interact often participate in common functional modules like protein complexes, molecular pathways and developmental processes; so, the rest potential genes may have some functions that are similar to the cancer genes.

the expression level of the optimized genes
the expression profiling data for the four types of cancers were obtained from ncbi geo . the differentially expressed genes were screened in the expression profiles for the four types of cancers by sam  <cit> . the candidate differentially expressed genes that appear in more than  <dig> re-sampling differentially expressed gene sets were identified as the differentially expressed genes . this process helped us to identify and remove the numerous insignificant differentially expressed genes. the resultant set contained  <dig> differentially expressed genes that were ranked by the sam score diff_scorei . comparing the differentially expressed genes with the corresponding optimized genes for each of the cancer types , we found that, for the hepatocellular carcinoma expression profiles,  <dig> of the  <dig> differentially expressed genes overlapped with our set of  <dig> optimized genes; for the glioblastoma expression profiles, of the  <dig> differentially expressed genes,  <dig> of them overlapped with our set of  <dig> optimized genes; for the leukemia expression profiles, there were  <dig> differentially expressed genes,  <dig> genes were contained in the set of  <dig> optimized genes; and for the ovarian cancer expression profiles, only  <dig> of  <dig> differentially genes were contained in the set of  <dig> optimized genes.

these findings suggest that some of the optimized genes in our data set might be differentially expressed in the corresponding cancers, indicating that these genes may be regulated by aberrant methylation resulting in their involvement in the cancer-related pathways.

pubmed co-citations for the optimized genes
to evaluate the relationship between the optimized genes and cancers, we queried the pubmed database for publications that contained the combination of optimized gene, type of cancers and hypermethylation/hypomethylation  <cit> . the results showed that  <dig> of  <dig> optimized genes were associated with cancers and aberrant methylation in pubmed . of the  <dig> cancer and aberrant methylation related genes in pubmed,  <dig> were reported to have aberrant dna methylation . in the  <dig> optimized genes that we found reported in the literature to have changes of methylation level in cancers,  <dig> were cited as possible diagnostic and prognostic markers for cancers respectively, and  <dig> were recognized as drug targets . the promoter region of med <dig> , one of the optimized aberrant methylated gene associated with cancers, was reported to be frequently methylated in ovarian and colorectal cancer cell lines and this had been to result in the low expression of med <dig>  <cit> . med <dig> was also identified as a drug target. prkcdbp, the gene that encodes the delta binding protein, protein kinase c, was reported to be significantly hypomethylated in breast cancers and the expression of the encoded protein was found to be down-regulated in various cancer cell lines  <cit> . this gene has also been cited as a diagnostic marker for neuroblastoma.

the star  in the top right corner of the first column represents this gene is methylated aberrantly in cancers validated by literature. the triangle  in the second column represents this gene can be a diagnostic marker for diseases. and the pentagram  in the third column represents this gene can be a prognostic marker for diseases supported by literature.

we also manually searched pubmed for an association between all the optimized genes and their use as diagnostic or prognostic markers. we found that  <dig> of the  <dig> optimized genes were in the literature as diagnostic markers, and  <dig> optimized genes were in the literature as prognostic markers for breast cancer, nasopharyngeal carcinoma, prostate cancer, and for other non-cancer diseases that included rubinstein-taybi syndrome, type ii diabetes and familial dysautonomia . subsequently, we searched for the optimized genes in the drugbank database, and found that  <dig> genes were annotated as the targets for drug markers  <cit> . therefore, we conclude that the promoter regions of the optimized genes may be methylated aberrantly, leading to the activation or inhibition of gene expression and contributing to their involvement in the development and progression of cancers.

discussion
here, we prioritized potential cancer-related genes with aberrant methylation based on the constructed weighted human protein-protein interaction network. network theory has been applied widely to the study of diseases  <cit> . as a method of describing the interactions between biological molecules, biological network theory reveals the processes and laws involved in, for example, growth, development, aging, and disease. proteins play important roles in the activity of cells and protein-protein interactions are the main path by which proteins function. many researchers have used network theory to construct protein-protein interaction networks and combined them with other characteristics, such as molecular pathways and go annotations, to identify disease-related genes  <cit> . however, a few studies have attempted to combine network theory with both epigenetic and genetic characteristics  <cit> . dna methylation is an important epigenetic modification that influences a variety of physiological activities of the cell, such as x chromosome inactivation, aging, temporal and spatial expression and the development of diseases  <cit> . aberrant dna methylation can affect tumor formation by affecting the chromatin structure and the expression of oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes  <cit> . therefore, we prioritize the potential cancer-related genes with aberrant methylation by integrating epigenetic and genetic characteristics based on network theory.

in this study, we ensured the reliability of the linkages in the whpn by deriving the interaction data from five different ppi databases and by selecting only the ppis which were validated by experiments or which have been reported in the literature. we then built the cancer-associated subnetwork  from whpn. the network topological features evaluated using r values related to power law distribution indicate that whpn is a typical scale-free network. most biological networks constructed so far are scale-free networks with a degree distribution that follows the power law with degree exponents in the range  <dig> < r <  <dig>  <cit> . although rcasn is below this range, casn still follows power law distribution and has the characteristics of a scale-free network that has a few hub nodes with high connectivity and most nodes with low clustering coefficients. thus, casn is an approximate scale-free network. this characteristic may be due to the synergetic effect of dna methylation and the cancer-related seed genes that were used to construct it. this also causes the network structure of casn to be closer than that of whpn. the clustering coefficient for casn  is more than the clustering coefficient for whpn . therefore, in casn, the genes connected with the seed genes may participate in the same or similar biological processes as the seed genes and may have the same or similar functions as the seed genes. thus, it can be concluded that the deregulated dna methylation may affect the development and progression of cancers.

we prioritized  <dig> potential cancer-related genes with aberrant methylation using the neighborhood-weighting decision rule based on casn. in the pubmed co-citations analysis for these  <dig> genes, we found  <dig> genes that were associated with cancers and aberrant methylation in pubmed. the pubmed co-citations analysis is only a rough assessment which may have a high rate of false positives  <cit> . of the  <dig> genes in the pubmed co-citations, only  <dig> could be confidently validated to be aberrantly methylated in cancers from the literature analysis. the optimized genes that were not identified in the pubmed co-citations may be cancer-related genes with aberrant methylation that are, as yet, undetected. these genes are prime candidates for validation by further experiments.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study, we constructed a weighted human protein-protein interaction network . based on whpn, a cancer-association subnetwork  was obtained using a set of seed genes derived from pubmeth. comparing the topological features of the two networks, we found that casn had a much denser network community than whpn, indicating that the genes in casn might be aberrantly methylated in cancers and likely participated in the same or similar biological processes as the seed genes.  <dig> genes were prioritized as potential cancer-related genes with aberrant methylation based on neighborhood-weighting decision rule. the enrichment analysis of go and kegg showed that the prioritized genes were generally enriched for biological processes related to apoptosis and programmed cell death and for pathways associated with cancers. many of the optimized genes showed some degree of differential expression in the sam analysis, revealing that these genes might be abnormally methylated in the cancer-related biological processes. abnormal methylation would affect the expression level of these identified genes leading to the development and progression of cancers. in this study, we prioritized the cancer-related genes with aberrant methylation by integrating dna methylation and protein-protein interaction characteristics based on the network theory. this method will be helpful for the further understanding of the mechanisms of the development and progression in cancers and may help develop new avenues for the prioritization of cancer-related genes with aberrant methylation for diagnosis and therapeutics.

