BACKGROUND
protein structure comparison is a fundamental approach in many areas of biomedical studies. its applications range from protein classification and establishing evolutionary relationship between proteins to functional prediction, molecular modeling and protein engineering. while structure comparison can be done in a number of ways, protein structure alignment is one of the major techniques used, populated today with more than  <dig> methods, the most complete list of which can be found at wikipedia  <cit> . these methods rely on a wide variety of statistical, geometrical, physical, and other structure properties in order to produce an alignment. but most of them follow a simple sequential rule: two proteins are aligned in sequential order, by placing their chains adjacent to each other from n-terminal to c-terminal and introducing gaps.

the key representation of such sequential alignment was introduced as a matrix approach by needleman and wunsch  <cit> , which states that given a scoring function, the optimal alignment is the best way through the matrix. such an approach has fertilized a large number of methods on sequence and structure alignments and resulted in many achievements in our understanding of protein similarities, their evolutionary relationships, functionality and so on. however, there is a number of cases reported in literature, which are unusual from the sequential point of view, for which structurally equivalent parts have different connectivity in the sequences of compared proteins. these alignments cannot be represented as a diagonal path through the matrix. figure  <dig> shows an example of such an alignment. the alignment consists of four segments; only three of them can be included in a sequential alignment. since the remaining segment is a part of the alignment, but is not in a sequential order, it is called non-sequential ; accordingly, the alignment is called non-sequential. a non-sequential alignment is an alignment where structurally similar parts are not in the same order in protein sequences.

understanding more about these types of alignments is interesting; are they unique, sporadic cases; do they occur frequently; do they belong to a few specific folds or spread among many different folds as a common feature of protein structure. such a large-scale study is also important for the theoretical understanding of protein organization, the evolution of proteins, and using non-sequential approach has a practical application as a designing tool in protein engineering.

many researches have reported cases of non-sequential alignments such as circular permutations, domain or region swaps  <cit> , and β-hairpin flip  <cit> . the most studied case of non-sequential alignments is a circular permutation, when the n-terminal of each aligned protein is aligned with the c-terminal of the other protein. the circular permutations have been analyzed by both sequence and structure related computational methods  <cit> . a suggested evolutionary mechanism for circular permutation in proteins  <cit>  states that first a gene duplication of the precursor gene occurs in such a way that both genes become fused in frame, leading to a tandem protein. after generation of a new start codon within the 5' part of the tandem gene and a stop codon at an equivalent position in the 3' part of the gene, a protein is encoded that represents a circular permutation of the precursor gene product. later the mechanism was shown to be valid for a protein family of adenine-n <dig> dna methyltransferases  <cit> . many naturally occurring proteins were experimentally redesigned to have circular permutation and it was shown that they preserve their structure and function  <cit> ; thus providing evidence that circular reordering of protein structural elements does not affect protein folding and functionality.

the appearance of similar domains/regions in different orders in sequence as a domain/region swap have been analyzed by fliess and coworkers  <cit> . their study was based on sequence alignments of proteins in the swiss-prot database  <cit> , where they found  <dig> swap cases and concluded that the swapping of regions is a relatively rare evolutionary event. a comparatively large  structure based large-scale analysis of non-sequential cases has been reported about a decade ago  <cit> , where  <dig> representative structures from pdb were analyzed by the sarf <dig> method. along with other results, that work presented several cases of non-sequential alignments and estimated that they are found in 11% of cases.

since then several methods for protein structure alignment have been developed which can produce non-sequential alignments  <cit>  including topofit  <cit> , developed in our group. mass  <cit>  method was developed to produce multiple structure alignments; gangsta  <cit>  and scali  <cit>  were suggested to be used for structure classification; ssm  <cit>  and kenobi  <cit>  appear to be computationally efficient and opaas  <cit>  was applied to analysis of alternative structure alignments. topofit compares topologies of delaunay tessellation patterns calculated using positions of cα-atoms in protein structures and does not assume any sequential order of residues in an alignment. its distinctive feature is that the method does not balance between lower rmsd and a higher number of aligned positions  but rather identifies the largest group of residues which have the same neighbors in the same locations common in both compared structures, defined mathematically as a topological invariant and detected by saturation point  in the spatial tessellation graph. such an objective methodology provides unambiguous identification and separation of the structurally invariant parts from the variable parts by identifying a precise border between the two. unlike all other methods , composing alignments of fragments or secondary structure elements, topofit extends an alignment pair by pair of residues; thus, is not biased by fragment choice or secondary structure element definition. the method is also computationally efficient, so that all proteins in the pdb  have already been calculated, grouped into clusters and stored in the topofit-db database  <cit> . we have used topofit in our comprehensive large-scale analysis of non-sequential relations between proteins. to the best of our knowledge this is the first comprehensive large-scale analysis of non-sequential alignments between all available protein structures.

RESULTS
non-sequential alignments between proteins do occur systematically and in large quantities
a comprehensive large-scale analysis of  <dig>  non-redundant representatives from each protein cluster in topofit-db  <cit>  has been performed. topofit-db is a collection of alignments for all significant values of z-score, i.e. z-score >  <dig>  from the experience of using t-db we should mention that the range of z-score values from  <dig> to  <dig> is the "twilight zone" where together with structurally significant alignments there are also trivial cases containing just one or two secondary structure elements; while alignments at z-score >  <dig> typically represent high structural similarity between proteins. but to ensure the validity of this study we used an even tighter criteria: only the alignments with very high structural similarity, z-score >  <dig>  have been collected, resulting in total of  <dig>  structurally similar protein pairs. these alignments are referred to as dataset d <dig>  the alignments collected in the dataset d <dig> are considerably large in size  and represent high structural match  as shown in figure  <dig>  thus, there is no doubt of their structural similarity.

another dataset has been collected by compiling alignments between protein families as defined by scop  <cit>  . for each family, the first structure in the list of proteins for the corresponding family has been used as a representative, resulting in  <dig>  representatives.  <dig> , <dig> structural alignments have been produce and stored in topofit_db database  <cit>  by comparing the representatives. as for dataset d <dig> only alignments with z-score >  <dig> have been used, resulting in total of  <dig>  alignments. the distributions of their alignment sizes and rmsd are similar to the ones for dataset d <dig>  these alignments will be referred to below as dataset d <dig> 

the most striking and surprising result from the analysis performed here is that non-sequential  alignments have been found in large quantities in structurally similar proteins. in other words, there are many alignments between highly structurally similar proteins for which the alignment matrix is not diagonal. the overall proportion of non-sequential alignments was estimated to be as high as  <dig> %, but not lower than  <dig> % when tightened thresholds have been applied . the detected non-sequential alignments are presented in a large variety of alignment patterns with various orders of alignment fragments in structurally similar proteins, as well as with various sizes and numbers of non-sequential fragments. they can be as simple as an almost sequential alignment with the rearrangement of a single fragment, and as complex as it is hard to define what the sequential part in the alignment is. even more interesting, many cases of reverse alignments have been detected, i.e. alignments where fragments structurally match each other but the polypeptide chains go in opposite directions.

annotation of classes: f is forward, m is mixed and r is reverse. annotation of subclasses: s is simple, c is circular, w is swap and x is complex. the column "best alignment" shows numbers obtained using the best  alignment, while the column "alternative" shows the statistics calculated when trivial cases of non-sequential alignment have been eliminated using alternative alignments, as described in the text. the last two columns show the statistics when tightened criteria have been used. there is no line for forward simple alignments as they are sequential.

types of observed non-sequential alignments
the easiest and also the most studied case of non-sequential alignment is a circular permutation, which is defined as a case where the structurally equivalent part of a protein has been rearranged from n- to c-terminal  in the protein sequence. an example of a circular permutation alignment for posphoinositide-specific phospholipase c delta  and c2-domain of synaptotagmin i  is shown in figure  <dig> . the structures are aligned at ne =  <dig> and rmsd =  <dig>  Å, where ne is number of equivalent residues in alignment and rmsd is root mean square deviation between cα-atoms of the equivalent residues; and the alignment consist of two parallel layers of  <dig> β-strands. in synaptotagmin one of the β-strands is located at the n-terminal end, while in phospholipase, its structural equivalent is at the c-terminal end. this β-strand is the non-sequential part of the alignment and can be seen on the alignment plot as a small fragment  parallel to the long sequential alignment .

similar to the circular permutations there are also alignments with just one structurally equivalent part rearranged in the sequence, but not necessarily from n- to c-terminal. an example has already been shown in figure  <dig>  where there is a long sequential alignment, while the non-sequential part  is located in the middle of the alignment. another example of an alignment of such type is shown in figure  <dig>  where the structure of 2-dehydro-3-deoxygluconokinase from thermus thermophilus  and adp-dependent glucokinase from thermococcus litoralis  are aligned at ne =  <dig> residues and rmsd of  <dig>  Å. in this example, two structurally equivalent regions: 1) α-helix and 2) α-helix and β-strand are located one after another but in a different order in the sequences of the compared proteins. most of the alignment is sequential, namely, one can produce a long sequential alignment out of the aligned residues with only a small part of it being non-sequential, either magenta or orange on the picture. it is evident that if those parts were swapped in any of the sequences then one would get a perfect sequential alignment. based on this observation, we will call such alignments "swaps". interestingly, the functionality of these proteins is similar and involves atp/adp binding. moreover, the binding site residues are composed from the parts, which are non-sequential.

another type of simple non-sequential alignment is similar to the above examples, but different in the direction of the polypeptide chain. such alignment is observed when all the structurally aligned fragments have the same order in the sequences, but the direction of the chains in one fragment is opposite, i.e. in one protein the residues in this fragment go from n- to c-terminal, while in the other protein they go from c- to n-terminal. an example of such alignment is shown in figure  <dig> for adoment-dependent methyltransferase from mycobacterium tuberculosis  and zeta-crystallin from homo sapiens . these two structures are very similar  with the non-sequential region found at the place where antiparallel β-strand of methyltransferase is aligned to the parallel β-strand of zeta-crystallin. there is no permutation of fragment order in these proteins; most of the alignment is sequential while the reverse part, just  <dig> residues, is small but noticeable. to separate such cases  from the previous alignments we will call the aligned fragments with the same direction of the polypeptide chain as the 'forward' alignment and those with the opposite direction as the 'reverse'.

more complex examples consist of alignments with several non-sequential fragments, which can be forward and/or reverse. as shown in figure  <dig>  an alignment of udp-galactose 4-epimerase from escherichia coli  andcatechol o-methylstransferase from rattus norvegicus  has four non-sequential fragments, one of which is reverse. the two proteins share a large common structural part, consisting of  <dig> residues superimposed at rmsd of  <dig>  Å. the major part of it is the long sequential alignment, while the non-sequential fragments are three secondary structural elements  and an irregular fragment of four residues. even though the number of residues in the non-sequential fragments  is not that large, the permutation of fragments in the sequences of protein is complex, which is shown on the schematic diagram .

in the above examples there is a common feature: one can clearly identify a long sequential segment in an alignment with the non-sequential part being substantially smaller than the sequential one. while alignments with such a feature occur frequently, nevertheless, we have observed many cases without a dominant sequential part. an example of such case is shown in figure  <dig> displaying an alignment of alpha subunit of 2-oxoisovalerate dehydrogenase from homo sapiens  and molybdenum cofactor biosynthetic enzyme from escherichia coli . both proteins belong to the α/β class, but to different folds: thdp-fold and molybdenum cofactor biosynthetic enzymes fold respectively. the core of the domains consists of five β-strands surrounded by six α-helices. in dehydrogenase all strands are parallel while in biosynthetic enzyme one of the strands  is antiparallel. the structures are aligned with ne =  <dig> residues and rmsd of  <dig>  Å. the structural alignment consists of six fragments , one of the fragments contains an α-helix and a β-strand , while the others are single secondary structure elements: α-helixes or β-strands. four parallel β-strands are well aligned, but their orders in polypeptide chain are completely different , i.e. β <dig> is aligned to β <dig>  β <dig> to β <dig>  β <dig> to β <dig>  and β <dig> to β <dig>  the order of α-helices is also different in both polypeptides . interestingly, the sizes of the aligned β-strands are almost the same, while the sizes of the α-helices are different, e.g. helix α <dig> in the dehydrogenase has an extra turn compared to the corresponding helix α <dig> in the biosynthetic enzyme. the longest possible sequential alignment is just  <dig> residues long, which is less than one third of the entire structural alignment.

another interesting type of alignment is a completely reverse alignment. in this type two proteins share significant structural similarity, while their sequences align in the opposite directions in all the aligned fragments. to the best of our knowledge, only one case of the reverse alignments is well-known; the α-helix bundle with several helices, where one or many of the helices can be aligned in the opposite direction. in the presented study many cases of the reverse alignments have been found. a reverse complex alignment of adenylate kinase from methanococcus thermolithotrophicus and glucose/galactose-binding protein from salmonella typhimurium  is shown in figure  <dig>  the alignment consists of four segments. the longest segment consists of four consecutive fragments: α-helix, β-strand, β-strand, and α-helix. in both proteins the segments have long insertions: in the adenylate kinase three helices are inserted between the two aligned β-strands, while in the glucose/galactose-binding protein another domain is inserted between the second aligned β-strand and last aligned α-helix. the fourth segment represents an alignment of consecutive α-helix, β-strand, and α-helix. the remaining two segments represent an alignment of single β-strand. this is a remarkable example of how the same structure can be formed by the polypeptide chain going in opposite directions; moreover, the order of the segments forming the structure is different in both sequences.

general statistics on all different alignment types is shown in table  <dig> and described in the following sections.

alternative alignments
non-sequential alignments can be trivial if they occur as a result of symmetry or shift in protein structure, but such cases are easily detected: in this case an alternative sequential alignment should exist. it is known that proteins with symmetries and repeats have many alternative alignments, thus, for each protein pair we have evaluated all possible alternative alignments with similar length . once, an alternative sequential alignment has been found the protein pair was considered to be sequential. only those non-sequential alignments without any alternative sequential alignments have been considered as true non-sequential cases and are included in the following analysis.

general classification of non-sequential alignments
we have classified non-sequential alignments between proteins into three classes based on the types of alignment fragments in the alignment: forward , reverse , and mixed . furthermore, each class has been subdivided into subclasses based on the pattern of fragment permutation: simple , circular , swaps , and complex . statistics on the number of non-sequential cases using different thresholds  and considering alternative alignments have been summarized in table  <dig> 

as seen from table   <dig>  the majority of non-sequential alignments  are of the forward class; the number of mixed alignments is smaller but, is still significantly large , while the reverse alignments are much less populated  with only several hundred such cases found. the forward circular alignments is the most populated class, with more than 50% of all non-sequential alignments belonging to this class.

there is a clear tendency that the more complicated alignments are less prevalent for forward and reverse classes, i.e. there are fewer complex than swap alignments, while there are fewer swap than circular alignments. contrary to this tendency, more complicated alignments in the mixed class are more abundant, i.e. there are more complex than swap alignments, while there are more swaps than circular alignments. interestingly, the number of simple alignments in this class is of the same order as the number of complex ones, i.e. there is a tendency that if an alignment has two types of fragments  then it is either very simple  or very complex  alignment. table  <dig> also demonstrates that variation in parameters  does change the proportion of non-sequential alignments; nevertheless, the proportion remains significant, of the order of 20%. the table  <dig> also shows that the usage of different data sets results in comparable numbers, thus, crosschecking the obtained numbers.

ns alignments occur across many folds, as well as between different folds
since all structures in scop are split into domains and classified, the d <dig> dataset is better suited for analysis of alignment distribution among protein folds. all alignments can be clearly separated into three groups by dominant type of secondary structure elements of the aligned residues: all-α, all-β, and mixture of αand β . the majority of non-sequential alignments  are found for proteins with a mixture of helices and sheets, while for all-αand all-β groups the proportion is 24% and 28% respectively. remarkably, the proportions are not very different from the proportions for all alignments, showing an even distribution of non-sequential alignments in protein classes. another interesting fact is that consideration of alternative alignments eliminates a large amount of symmetry and/or shift related case , with the majority of all-αalignments being α-helical bundles.

the line "symmetry and/or shift related" displays statistics for alignments, which are considered to be sequential after analyzing alternative alignments.

the following observations have been made using true non-sequential alignments:  <dig>  in dataset d <dig> and  <dig>  in dataset d <dig> . non-sequentially related proteins have been found in  <dig> folds and several most frequently found folds with non-sequential alignments are presented in table  <dig>  while one can see that a lot of non-sequential cases are found for proteins with symmetrical structure, their frequency  has to be normalized to the occurrence of proteins in a particular fold to allow for proper comparison of numbers. in other words, one has to compare a fraction of non-sequential alignment in each fold. the table shows that a typical fraction of non-sequential alignments within a particular fold, regardless of its symmetry, is of the order of 20–30% . moreover, the fraction of non-sequential alignments for proteins with different folds  is of the same order of magnitude as for proteins with the same fold. interestingly, up to 50% of non-sequential alignments are found for proteins with a different fold, which signifies that non-sequential alignments are not limited to a particular fold or set of folds.

the line "other folds" shows the percentage of non-sequential cases in all other folds not in the table. the last line shows the percentages of non-sequential alignments where compared proteins have different fold assignments or do not have an assigned fold.

the table also shows that the numbers, obtained using the two data sets, agree with cases of large discrepancy -binding domain') being exceptional. the reason for this is the outdated version of scop , when compared to topofit-db , and ambiguity in assigning scop folds to topofit-db's centroids, which are not split into domains and can represent multi-domain proteins. thus, the discrepancies in numbers are explained purely by technical rather than biological or methodological reasons and results obtained using the two datasets are consistent.

protein structure symmetry does not explain non-sequential alignments
while trivial non-sequential alignments  had been eliminated, still non-sequential alignments in symmetrical structures have been found. this points to the fact that a non-sequential alignment in a symmetrical structure is not always a trivial case. consider as an example, the structure alignment of transaldolase b from escherichia coli  and class i aldolase from drosophila melanogaster  shown in figure  <dig>  both structures are tim barrels and can be aligned sequentially preserving the order of α/β-units  over  <dig> residues with rmsd of  <dig>  Å . most of the alignment methods will agree that such an alignment is statistically significant. however, as discussed  <cit>  the correct "biological" alignment must be a circular permutation, where the first α/β-unit of transaldolase is aligned to the third unit of aldolase, i.e. there must be a shift by  <dig> units in the alignment. the best structure alignment for this protein pair produced by topofit reflects such a circular permutation with  <dig> aligned residues and rmsd of  <dig>  Å. therefore, this example shows that non-sequential alignment for symmetric protein structures is not necessarily a trivial consequence of symmetry and in fact, can represent the true biological relation between proteins.

another interesting case of alignment in proteins with symmetrical structures can be found for proteins of 6- and 7-bladed β-propeller folds. proteins in these folds are characterized by  <dig> and  <dig> blade-shaped β-strands arranged toroidally around a central axis. each strand typically has four antiparallel β-strands twisted so that the first and fourth strands are almost perpendicular to each other. the majority of non-sequential alignments for proteins of these folds are circular permutations. an important aspect of these alignments is that they cannot be explained by a simple symmetrical shift by a whole number of blades because there is always a non-sequential region inside of a blade consisting of  <dig>   <dig> or  <dig> β-strands . besides circular permutation, more complex cases of non-sequential alignments can be found while aligning structures of β-propeller. the complexity of the alignment arises from different topology, referred to as β-pinwheel  <cit> , of β-strands in some structures . again, for these cases a symmetrical shift by a whole number of blades does not explain non-sequential alignments. thus, the unusually high  fraction of non-sequential alignments in β-propellers folds is not surprising. overall, these examples show that indeed one can find true-positive non-sequential alignments in symmetrical structures.

to show that non-sequential cases are found not only in symmetrical structures we have made an additional test. knowing that  <dig> % of non-sequential alignments are found when aligned structures belong to different folds , we have excluded folds from the analysis where there are at least two proteins with non-sequential alignment. thus, all potentially symmetrical folds have been excluded resulting in a new dataset , where all non-sequential alignments occur only between proteins of different folds. it was found that non-sequential cases are found in  <dig> % of cases of reduced dataset, which is smaller than  <dig> % on the whole data set, but is still very significant. in other words, at least one third of non-sequential alignments are found in non-symmetrical structures.

the previously observed results can be briefly summarized: 1) non-sequential alignments are found in many non-symmetrical folds; 2) non-sequential alignments are spread more or less evenly across folds, i.e. there is no specific fold preferable for non-sequential alignments; 3) up to 50% of non-sequential alignments are found for proteins with different folds; 4) the proportion of non-sequential alignments for proteins with different folds is comparable with proportions for proteins with the same fold; 5) at least one third of non-sequential alignments are found in non-symmetrical structures. thus, the conclusion is that non-sequential alignments do occur in any class and type of protein structures and a protein structure symmetry/shift does not explain non-sequential alignments. in other words, the occurrence of non-sequential alignments is a general feature of protein structure.

all possible complexities of fragment rearrangements have been observed
non-sequential alignments can be very simple that only one fragment is non-sequential, whereas, they can be so complex that only one fragment can be put in sequential order in both sequences. in other words, we have observed very simple and complex rearrangements of structurally equivalent elements in proteins. in order to address rearrangement complexity we introduce the term "rank" of an alignment, which is the number of rearrangements of structurally equivalent parts of proteins needed to put them in sequential order in the sequences of both proteins. according to this definition, sequential alignments are represented as a single structural equivalent and thus have rank zero, while circular permutations and cases similar to the one shown in figure  <dig>  have rank one and more complex alignments have rank two or higher. technically, we have calculated rank as the number of segment rearrangements rather than fragment rearrangements . this was done to ensure that rank is not overestimated due to the presence of several fragments in one segment. using this definition, it is easy to see that any alignment with n fragments can have the highest rank of n -  <dig>  because at least one structural element is not rearranged relative to others .

analysis of the redundant data set
it is interesting to understand whether there are any non-sequential cases in highly similar proteins, both in structure and in sequence, i.e. those that have been grouped in topofit-db in clusters. thus, alignments between the structures of each of  <dig>  clusters have been collected for a total of  <dig> , <dig> alignments. the analysis reveals that the absolute majority of detected non-sequential cases are circular permutations with few exceptions. statistically,  <dig>  out of  <dig> , <dig> alignments were non-sequential, out of which  <dig> %  were circular permutations,  <dig> % represented alignment of different conformation of same protein, and the remaining 1% have been accounted for non-sequential alignments in only  <dig> protein families: fructose- <dig> -bisphosphatase , arrestin , annexin , aspartate/ornithine carbamoyltransferase , 3-isopropylmalate dehydrogenase , nadh peroxidase , α-β tubulin . thus, we can state the absolute majority of proteins with high sequence similarity have only circular permutations cases of non-sequential alignments.

discussion
in the presented study a comprehensive large-scale analysis of non-sequential alignments between all pdb structures  has been performed. we have found that up to  <dig> % of all significant alignments are non-sequential. consideration of different thresholds and alternative alignments has been made to ensure robust detection of non-sequential cases. these variations in methodology revealed that non-sequential alignments are found in at least  <dig> % of cases. thus, the estimated proportion of non-sequential alignments is in the range of values between  <dig>  to  <dig> %, which is a significant proportion of structural relations not detected by most of the current methods.

it was found that the majority  of the non-sequential alignments fit to the formal definition of circular permutation. it is important to stress here how this number should be understood. often, proteins aligned in a circular way are assumed to be evolutionary related and this assumption is often encoded into an alignment method to detect such cases. there is no such assumption  in the methodology used in this study and thus, a large number of circular alignments alone does not necessarily mean an evolutionary relationship between the compared proteins. the same way, the origin of more complex non-sequential alignments is not clear.

besides circular permutations, non-sequential alignments with a large variety of alignment patterns have been found. all possible complexities of rearrangements, various sizes and numbers of non-sequential fragments have been observed. it has been found that non-sequential alignments are not limited to proteins of any particular fold and are present in more than two hundred of different folds. moreover, up to 50% of non-sequential alignments are found for proteins with a different fold assignment. while many of the non-sequential alignments were found for proteins with symmetrical structures, it has been shown that protein structure symmetry does not explain non-sequential alignments. therefore, compelling evidence of different forms has been provided, confirming that non-sequential alignments between proteins are diverse and widespread across the protein universe.

many cases of reverse alignments in various folds have been found in this study. to the best of our knowledge, only one case of reverse alignment is well known, the α-helix bundle with several helices, where one or many of the helices can be aligned in the opposite direction. the α-helix bundles have been studied experimentally and successful attempts on redesigning the four-helix bundle to have inverted helices have been reported  <cit> . such successful redesign of α-helix bundle can be theoretically extended to other protein folds with the cases of reverse alignments observed in this study. thus, the existence of the reverse alignments for proteins of other folds can serve as the basis for new approaches in protein engineering to redesign proteins.

the discovery of the existence of all theoretically possible complexities of fragment rearrangement in proteins is intriguing . the plot is not complete due to limited statistics, which we assume as of the lack of the data for the large proteins. we believe that there is a strong confidence in a statement that any possible combination of fragments can be found in any protein structure. currently, one can introduce a hypothesis to test , which can be formulated as follows: the three-dimensional shape of tertiary structure does not depend on the order of protein fragments in the polypeptide chain, the protein core has just to be organized in a complementary manner and internal fragments have to fit to each other, while the external loops might reconnect the internal fragments in any reasonable way. the protein core here is the structural invariant, which was introduced earlier in our topofit method  <cit> , while the external loops are the fragments outside of the structural invariant.

such a hypothesis can be tested experimentally and will provide a strong empirical basis for protein redesign as a recombination of different fragments; one can see many practical applications from it to create new proteins. the validation of the hypothesis will broaden our understanding of protein structure organization and folding, and can be directly applied in fragment-based methods for protein structure and function prediction  <cit> . it is encouraging that the hypothesis is supported by experimental studies on circularly permuting protein structure  <cit>  and redesigning four-helix bundle proteins to have several different topologies of helices  <cit> . therefore, a similar reengineering by rearranging fragments may be applied to other protein folds.

CONCLUSIONS
the discovery of the widespread occurrence of the non-sequential alignments among many different protein folds presents an interesting phenomenon. based on this phenomenon, one may suggests that there is some unknown common rule that governs relations between proteins detected by the non-sequential alignments, a missing rule in our understanding of protein structure organization. finding such a rule can be a challenge for the future research, but, apparently, the existence of the non-sequential alignments is not rare effect but rather a systematic feature of all proteins. more detailed studies of these alignments will bring new insight in our understanding of protein evolution, protein stability and protein folding and functionality. as a first step toward understanding the non-sequential alignments, a testable hypothesis has been suggested, stating that the three-dimensional shape of protein structure does not depend on the order of protein fragments in the polypeptide chain.

