BACKGROUND
rehabilitative treatments result in incomplete motor recovery after stroke. six months after stroke,  <dig> percent of survivors cannot use their paretic hand into daily living activities to the extent done before  <cit> . absence or minimal hand movements by four weeks is predictive of poor motor outcome  <cit>  and only a small percentage of patients recover function to the extent of community-matched healthy subjects  <cit>  resulting in marked difficulties in carrying out activities of daily living .

recent studies demonstrated that enhancing activity in motor areas of the affected hemisphere  by means of anodal transcranial dc stimulation   <cit>  or repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation   <cit>  results in improvements in performance of complex adl-like tasks with the paretic hand  <cit> . the tasks utilized in these studies, including the jebsen-taylor test , are cognitively demanding, only in part preprogrammed, and require complex online updating of sensory information as well as adequate sensorimotor integration for accurate performance  <cit> . successful performance of the jtt requires a complex pattern of activation of muscles and joints as well as the use of targets and tools  <cit>  and such skilled movements engage an extensive network of brain regions  <cit> . as a consequence, adl-like tasks included in the jtt can be fully carried out by a minority of stroke patients  <cit> .

at present, it is not known if the beneficial effects of tdcs apply only to complex motor tasks in patients with reduced impairment, capable of performing adl-like tasks or if it can also benefit performance of simpler motor tasks which can be done by patients with higher impairment levels. in this investigation, we studied the effects of anodal tdcs on performance of motor tasks that predominantly rely on m <dig> functioning such as maximal pinch force production and a simple reaction time task  <cit> . we hypothesized that noninvasive anodal tdcs  <cit>  applied to m1affected hemisphere would improve reaction time and pinch force compared to sham stimulation  <cit>  in a group of patients with subcortical stroke. attention, fatigue and discomfort as possible confounds were evaluated using visual analogue scales  <cit> .

RESULTS
psychophysical data
intervention did not influence attention , fatigue . discomfort/pain was negligible and comparable in the tdcs  and sham sessions  on a scale of  <dig>  to  <dig> . none of the patients were able to distinguish between the tdcs and the sham sessions.

effects of anodal tdcs of m1affected hemisphere on reaction time
the anovarm revealed no significant effects of the factors intervention  or time , but a significant interaction intervention × time  on rt. post hoc testing showed that rt experienced a significant reduction with tdcs  and a nonsignificant trend to lengthening with sham . baseline values did not differ significantly between sham and tdcs. given the wide inter-patient variability in reaction times , post intervention values were also analyzed relative to baseline in each patient . all patients tested showed shortening of rt in the tdcs session . six patients showed slightly longer reaction times with sham compared to baseline.

stratification of patients according to impairment levels revealed that tdcs-induced improvement was more pronounced in the more impaired group  compared to the less impaired group . correlation analyses showed a nonsignificant trend for more prominent tdcs-induced improvement in rt in patients with lower mrc scores 

effects of anodal tdcs of m1affected hemisphere on pinch force
the anovarm revealed no significant effects of the factors intervention  or time , but a significant interaction intervention × time  on pf. post hoc testing showed that tdcs elicited a nonsignificant trend towards increase in pf with tdcs  and towards decrease with sham  with comparable baselines . given the wide inter-patient variability in absolute pf , post intervention values were also expressed relative to baseline in each patient. all patients but one showed improvements in pf with tdcs relative to changes experienced with sham . six patients showed a transient slight decrease in force with sham compared to baseline.

stratification of patients according to impairment levels revealed that tdcs-induced improvement was more pronounced in the more impaired group  compared to the less impaired group . correlation analyses did not show a significant correlation between tdcs-induced improvement in pf and the patients' mrc scores .

effects of sham tdcs of m1affected hemisphere compared to the no stimulation condition
to determine if relatively slower rt and mild decrement in pf during sham were a consequence of the  <dig> sec application of tdcs, we compared effects of sham  with no stimulation . both sham and no stimulation elicited comparable trends towards slightly longer rt and weaker pf  consistent with the independence of these effects from the  <dig> sec tdcs application during sham.

discussions and 
CONCLUSIONS
the main finding of this double-blind sham-controlled cross-over study was that a  <dig> min period of noninvasive anodal tdcs applied to m1affected hemisphere resulted in transient improvements in maximal pinch force and reaction times of the paretic hand relative to sham in a group of chronic stroke patients in the absence of measurable nonspecific changes in attention, discomfort or fatigue. these effects were documented in every single patient tested with rt and in all but one with pf. all patients were blind to the intervention type as were investigators testing the endpoint measures.

previous reports using tdcs and rtms showed improvements in performance of tasks that mimic activities of daily living performed with the paretic hand after noninvasive cortical stimulation of m1affected hemisphere  <cit> . performance of these tasks, like the jebsen-taylor test, require complex visuomotor integration and skilled coordination of force production as well as proper management of attentional and motivational resources  <cit> . this study, designed to determine if anodal tdcs over m1affected hemisphere exerted comparable effects over simpler motor tasks, identified improvements in pinch force and reaction times in the paretic hand with this intervention but not with sham or no stimulation. these effects suggest that anodal tdcs to m1affected hemisphere enhanced activity within the primary motor cortex  <cit> , actively engaged in control of force production and simple visuomotor integration processes  <cit> .

the lack of effects on attention, fatigue and discomfort evidenced by the analysis of visual analog scales, as well as the inability of patients to identify the stimulation and sham sessions are consistent with results from previous investigations  <cit> . furthermore, tdcs was applied over the primary motor cortex, distant from areas involved in modulating attentional and motivational processes   <cit> . interestingly, repetition of both tasks after sham resulted in a trend towards longer reaction times and weaker pinch force. the finding of this effect in the control experiment with both sham  and no stimulation  indicates that it was unrelated with the application of  <dig> sec tdcs during sham. most likely, it reflects mild experimental fatigue, subthreshold for detection by the vas questionnaires  <cit> .

recovery of motor function after stroke starts first with improvements in performance of repetitive, relatively simple motor activities like force production, evolving later to relearning of more complex motor synergies and skillful tasks. it is a common finding that while most chronic stroke patients are able to generate various levels of force, only a fraction of them are able to perform skilled motor tasks like those involved in activities of daily living tested with the jebsen-taylor test  <cit> . since the ability to control properly force production and visuomotor integration represents a prerequisite to meaningful skilled complex motor activity  <cit> , it can be speculated that a first rehabilitative step to promote functional recovery after stroke might focus on reacquisition of these motor primaries. subsequent training could then utilize these basic skills to train more complex actions, such as proposed in sports and musical practice programs  <cit> . in this way, motor training of these primaries could be utilized to orchestrate more complex skillful motor tasks  <cit> . the finding that anodal tdcs applied to m1affected hemisphere improved force production and a simple visuomotor integration task relative to sham suggests that these mechanisms could contribute to the behavioral gains reported by anodal tdcs of m1affected hemisphere on more complex activities of daily living  <cit> . of note is that these improvements were present in patients with higher impairment levels unable to perform skilled adl-like motor tasks .

in summary, the present study provides novel evidence that anodal tdcs of m1affected hemisphere may enhance performance of a wider range of motor tasks than previously thought, some of them relatively simple and mediated predominantly by m <dig> function.

