BACKGROUND
the early developmental environment is an influential predictor of subsequent phenotypes and disease risk later in life. a growing body of work supports the “developmental origins of health and disease”  hypothesis, which posits that chemical and/or nutritional influences during early life result in long-lasting effects and point to epigenetic inheritance as a prime mechanism  <cit> . epigenetic modifications, such as dna methylation and chromatin markings, are established early in development and can shape susceptibility to disease, resulting in diverse phenotypes among genetically identical individuals  <cit> . until recently, however, most attempts to elucidate the effects on the epigenome following environmental and nutritional exposures were either candidate gene driven or based on epigenetic techniques with limited genome coverage/sensitivity. using bisphenol a  as a representative early environmental exposure alongside an established dose-dependent mouse model of perinatal exposures  <cit> , we have developed a comprehensive strategy for evaluating environmental effects on the developing epigenome .

bpa is a high-production volume monomer used in the manufacture of polycarbonate plastic and epoxy resins. it is present in products that are routinely used, including food and beverage containers, baby bottles, dental composites, and thermal receipt paper  <cit> . several studies have reported detectable levels of total urinary bpa in a large proportion of populations around the world  <cit> . an evaluation of circulating blood bpa levels in pregnant women in southeast michigan indicated exposure levels between  <dig>  μg/l and  <dig>  μg/l   <cit> , and our recent study of human fetal liver samples indicated that there is considerable exposure to bpa during pregnancy and that bpa in fetuses was in a unconjugated form not readily eliminated from the body  <cit> . these findings indicate that in utero development and infancy may be particularly vulnerable time periods for exposure to bpa.

toxicology studies indicate bpa exposure, both at high levels and levels well below the established u.s. environmental protection agency  reference dose of 50 μg/kg body weight/day, results in a variety of physiological changes implicated in breast and prostate cancer, reproductive dysregulation, and behavioral abnormalities  <cit> . epidemiology studies have described associations between increased bpa levels with cardiovascular disease risk, decreased semen quality, altered childhood behavior, and recurrent miscarriages  <cit> . bpa can mimic or antagonize endogenous hormones by binding weakly to steroid receptors including estrogen receptors  and thyroid hormone receptor  <cit> . bpa also binds strongly to the trans-membrane er, g protein-coupled receptor  <dig> , as well as the orphan nuclear receptor estrogen related receptor gamma   <cit> , and can also activate transcription factors, including peroxisome x receptor  and aryl hydrocarbon receptor , which can dimerize with steroid receptors  <cit> .

bpa is associated with epigenetic alterations following developmental exposures  <cit> . in a rat model, ho and colleagues observed multiple changes in gene-specific dna methylation patterns in the adult male prostate, including hypomethylation of the phosphodiesterase type  <dig> variant  <dig>   <cit> . hypomethylation of the nucleosome binding protein- <dig>  gene promoters and hypermethylation of the hippocalcin-like  <dig>  gene promoter was also reported in rats following neonatal exposure to low concentrations of bpa   <cit> . altered methylation and subsequent aberrant gene expression was associated with a marked increase in prostate cancer risk. using the viable yellow agouti  mouse model, we have shown that maternal dietary exposure to moderate levels of bpa  resulted in decreased dna methylation at the a
vy
, and cabp
iap
 metastable epialleles  <cit> , while exposure to lower doses  led to hypermethylating effects at these candidate loci  <cit> . finally, using restriction-enzyme based methylation technology, yaoi and colleagues reported both hyper- and hypomethylation at a methylation-sensitive noti loci in murine offspring forebrain following gestational exposure to 20 μg/kg body weight of bpa  <cit> . recently, the differential methylation in imprinting control regions was reported in maternally bpa-exposed mouse embryos and placentas using pyrosequencing technology. this change in methylation also resulted in abnormal expression in placenta and abnormal placental development  <cit> .

capitalizing on advances in whole-genome epigenomic and high-throughput quantitative dna methylation technologies, we developed a comprehensive approach to identify the constellation of genomic loci with altered epigenetic status following dose-dependent perinatal bpa exposure. using a tiered focusing approach, our strategy proceeded from unbiased broad dna methylation analysis using methylation-based next generation sequencing technology to in-depth quantitative site-specific cpg methylation determination using the sequenom epityper massarray platform. we compared the regions of altered methylation  following bpa exposure using bioinformatics and biostatistics methods, and the cellular pathways in which the genes with nearby rams function.

RESULTS
analysis pipeline and quality control for identifying differential methylation
we used the methylplex-next generation sequencing  platform to evaluate genome-wide alterations in dna methylation following perinatal bpa exposure in mice, which requires minimal dna input  and enriches methylated dna using a cocktail of methylation-dependent restriction enzymes prior to deep sequencing . following alignment to the reference mouse genome , we confirmed that methylplex library reads were enriched in genomic regions containing higher numbers of genes and cpg islands  . for initial standardization of the data analysis pipeline, we employed a sex-based analysis comparing methylation profiles on chromosomes x and y between female and male offspring . the difference in mapped reads on chromosomes x and y was clearly distinguishable between male and female samples with minimal background noise observed on chromosome y from female samples. upon examination of the chromosomal distribution of windows with significant differential methylation applying the same criteria employed in the exposure comparison strategy outlined in the methods,  <dig> and  <dig> windows  were located on chromosome x and y, respectively, compared with only  <dig> windows on autosomes . despite the presence of a limited number of background reads on chromosome y in female samples, no regions on this chromosome were identified to harbor hypermethylation in female samples. this analysis provides us an estimate of the maximum false discovery rate  of  <dig> %  for our analysis presented below; however, the actual fdr may be much lower, if true autosomal differences in methylation exist between sexes.

bpa exposure dependent regions of altered methylation 
when genome-wide dna methylation patterns were compared across bpa exposure categories , a small percentage  of windows  were identified as preliminary regions of altered methylation   prior to applying additional filtering steps described in methods. across the three bpa exposure comparisons, a majority of rams  were distinct from one another . rams were identified both within and outside of cgis, cgi shores , and cgi shelves  .

to minimize the influence of a single sample in predicting rams, we further analyzed data with filtered rams that 1) exhibited methylation change in at least two samples per exposure category and 2) displayed differential methylation either in at least one out of two flanking windows  or two 100 bp windows within a 500 bp stretch. these filtering steps were used for the male versus female comparison and thus are expected to result in an fdr no greater than  <dig> %. we then conducted a refined downstream analysis, similar to the unfiltered analysis described above. following filtering, within each exposure comparison we observed a greater number of hypermethylated rams compared to hypomethylated rams . the largest number of rams was observed when ug exposed offspring were compared to mg exposed offspring . the control versus ug exposure category resulted in the smallest number of rams , while the control versus mg exposure category resulted in  <dig> genome-wide and  <dig> promoter region rams . similarly to the unfiltered analysis above, across the three bpa exposure categories, rams were largely distinct from one another .

using the filtered dataset, we also examined the distribution of rams among cgis, cgi shores , and cgi shelves , and compared these to the proportion of the m-ngs library and mouse \genome  covered by cgis, cgi shores, and cgi shelves. the distribution of cgis, cgi shores, and shelves in the mouse genome  is shown in additional file 1: figure s <dig>  where less than half of the genome was shown to be associated with cgis, cgi shores, or shelves. in the m-ngs libraries enriched for cgs, over 85% of the reads were associated with cgis, cgi shores, or shelves . less than 15% of the reads were located outside of cgis and their surrounding area  . approximately half of the total differential regions were located within cgi shores in the ctr vs. mg  and the ug vs. mg  comparisons, followed by cgi shelves, which accounted for over 20% of the total differential regions . in the ctr vs. ug comparison, however, a smaller proportion of the differential regions were located within cgi shores  and shelves  . the relative distribution of cgis, shores, and shelves of the rams in comparison with the m-ngs library identified a slight enrichment of rams in cgi shores  and cgi shelves , and depletion of rams  in cgis. in the ctr vs. ug comparison, the relative distribution was decreased in cgi shores by  <dig> %, in contrast with ctr vs. mg and ug vs. mg comparisons with an increase in relative distribution of cgi shores. these results identified the cgi shores and shelves to be the more susceptible and cgis to be more resistant to methylation changes upon environmental exposure. additional pie charts in additional file 1: figure s <dig> display the proportion of hyper- and hypo-methylated regions with respect to cgis, cgi shores, and shelves.

in addition, we examined the distribution of epigenetic changes within various genomic locations including exons, 5′ and 3′ untranslated regions , and within  <dig> and 5 kb of transcription start sites  upon various bpa exposures using rseqc package  <cit> . in ctr vs. mg and ug vs. mg analyses, the genomic distribution of differentially methylated regions showed more than 3-fold enrichment of coding sequence  exons  compared to background levels in the mouse genome . in addition, the enrichment of 5′  and 3′utrs  and the depletion of the upstream tsss  was observed. in the ctr vs. ug analysis, however, the genomic distribution difference between the rams and the mouse genome background was not observed, except for a 2-fold increase in cds exons. despite the small overlap of rams between ctr vs. mg and ug vs. mg comparisons, the genomic and cgi distributions of the differential regions were highly similar, and unlike the ctr vs. ug comparison, the results deviated from the genomic background.

promoter regions associated with bpa-dependent regions of altered methylation
differential methylation in promoter regions may play a substantial role in gene transcriptional regulation. the identified rams in promoter regions  that occur within ± <dig>  kb from tsss are visualized in figure  <dig>  fifty-three percent of rams gained methylation at promoters , and forty-seven percent lost methylation  upon bpa exposure. promoter rams can be further classified into types that respond to ug exposure, respond to mg exposure, or respond to both exposures. for rams with a gain of methylation, only a small proportion of the tsss were associated with the ug exposure only . thus, gains of methylation upon exposure were either observed in both the ug and mg exposure groups  or in only the mg exposure group . for rams with a loss of methylation, a large proportion of the tsss were affected by the ug exposure only , while only a small number of tsss showed differential methylation upon both ug and mg exposure groups  or only in the mg exposure group .

enriched gene ontology terms and pathways among bpa exposure dependent differentially methylated genes
we examined the enrichment of gene ontology  terms and pathways present in our candidate regions within  <dig>  kb of a tss  using the gene set enricher application from the comprehensive toxicogenomics database  site, and the results were visualized using the revigo web application . go biological processes enriched for bpa-exposure rams in ctr vs. mg comparison  included metabolism and stimulus response . only  <dig> significant go molecular functions were observed, and they were involved in general binding activities . the significant pathways altered include transmembrane transport of small molecules  and metabolism . in the ctr vs. ug comparison,  <dig> genes were assessed, and two go biological process terms include metabolic process and cellular process . in addition, cancer related pathways were enriched  . for the ug vs mg comparison, a total of  <dig> genes were assessed, and we observed strong enrichment of go terms involved in metabolic processes and stimulus as well as signaling processes . the significant pathways include glutamatergic synapse  and regulation of autophagy  .

enriched go terms and pathway analysis was also performed on  <dig> known bpa-interacting genes , that are known to be expressed in the mouse liver from mouse genome informatics gene expression database and compared with the results from our methylation data . this analysis identified  <dig> pathways and  <dig> go terms that are significantly enriched among bpa-interacting genes, representing genes whose altered dna methylation may be associated with concomitant gene expression changes in the liver. some of the top pathways include pathways in cancer , metabolism , and adipocytokine signaling pathway . by identifying enriched pathways using two lists, including one focusing on epigenetically altered genes and another on transcriptionally regulated genes, the similarities as well as the differences between the affected pathways via two different mechanisms can be compared.

in addition to our promoter based enrichment analysis above, whose differential sites were restricted to within  <dig>  kb of tsss, we also performed pathway enrichment analysis with all rams using chip-enrich . the chip-enrich application assigns peaks to genes based on a chosen method  and tests peaks from chip-seq experiments for enrichment of biological pathways, go terms, and other types of gene sets using an empirical method to adjust for the relationship between probability of a peak and the genomic length associated with a gene. associating genomic sites or peaks to nearest tsss has been widely applied in the biological functional analysis of chip-seq data  <cit> . in the ctr vs. mg and in the ug vs. mg comparisons, similar pathway enrichments were obtained as seen in our promoter region based testing, mainly metabolism and its related processes , as well as go terms related to development and morphogenesis  . in the ctr vs. ug enrichment results, only  <dig> go terms were significant with fdr &  <dig> , while there are  <dig> terms enriched in ctr vs. mg, and  <dig> terms enriched in ug vs. mg comparisons . three of the top  <dig> enriched go terms were lipoprotein particle receptor activity , low-density lipoprotein receptor activity , and apolipoprotein binding .

validation of regions of altered methylation using sequenom epityper
rams from  <dig> genomic regions were quantitatively validated using the sequenom epityper platform. we validated two rams located in the gene promoters of myosin, heavy chain 7b, cardiac muscle, beta   and renal-specific transporter   . both of these genes were associated with metabolic process in our chip-enrich testing . several enriched concepts involved in binding processes such as ribonucleotide, nucleotide, actin, and cytoskeletal protein bindings  in our chip-enrich analysis were associated with myh7b, and those involved in transport activities and nitrogen metabolic process  were associated with slc22a <dig>  the methylation gain in the promoter region of myh7b in both the ug and mg exposures  was validated, showing a median methylation of  <dig> %  in ctr compared to  <dig> %  in ug and  <dig> %  in mg . the gene expression change in myh7b was monitored using real-time qpcr, revealing no change in expression in pnd <dig> mouse livers. the hypomethylation in the slc22a <dig> promoter region in the ug exposure group  was confirmed with a median methylation level across four cpg sites observed at 90%  in ctr, 84%  in ug, and 89%  in mg. the decrease in methylation at cpg site  <dig> in ug exposure group was statistically significant compared to ctr  and mg  groups . the gene expression change in slc22a <dig> was assayed via qpcr, revealing that this gene is not expressed in pnd <dig> mouse liver tissue.

additionally, we measured methylation in three rams in intergenic regions from chromosome  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> to confirm differential methylation associated with bpa exposure. hypomethylation was validated in the region from chromosome  <dig>  , with a median methylation level of  <dig> %  in the ctr group compared to  <dig> %  in ug and mg bpa group. the intergenic region from chromosome  <dig> was hypermethylated as indicated by the m-ngs  with a median methylation of 86%  in the ctr group, compared to  <dig> %  in the ug bpa group, and  <dig> %  in the mg group . the remaining region on chromosome  <dig> that showed a m-ngs identified loss of methylation with bpa exposure was not differentially methylated following bisulfite sequencing validation , with a median methylation of  <dig> %  in ctr,  <dig> %  in ug, and 87%  in mg groups.

discussion
we have previously shown that bpa exposure at 50 mg bpa/kg diet during development plays a role in epigenetic programming at candidate metastable loci a
vy
 and cabp
iap
 <cit> . in a follow-up study using multiple doses of dietary bpa exposures, we observed dose-dependent effects on dna methylation at a
vy
 and cabp
iap
 with the lower doses  leading to the opposite, hypermethylating effect  <cit> . we have now employed a next-generation sequencing approach and identified non-monotonic effects on the dna methylome following human physiologically relevant perinatal bpa exposures. the identification of low dose and non-monotonic effects of endocrine disrupting chemicals, such as bpa, is a topic of growing interest in toxicology and endocrinology  <cit> .

genome-wide platforms allow for identification of the constellation of genomic loci with altered epigenetic status following exposure or in relation to disease status. for example, irizarry et al. used a microarray approach and demonstrated that approximately 70% of methylation changes in colon cancer samples occurred in “shores” defined as regions up to 2 kb away from cpg islands  <cit> . newer approaches to query the methylome now involve next-generation sequencing, and the technology in this field is rapidly advancing, including whole genome and reduced representation bisulfite sequencing, which quantitatively measure methylation changes at single-based resolution, yet remain costly in addition to the need for complex bioinformatics pipelines. an alternative to bisulfite conversion approaches include affinity enrichment techniques  that involve the enrichment of methylated regions via methylation-targeted antibody or protein. these methods, however, are sensitive to antibody lot that may lead to inconsistent enrichment between experiments. in this project, we employed the methylplex-next generation sequencing  platform, which uses enzymatic enrichment to identify regions of altered methylation and requires only 50 ng of starting genomic material. because the exact composition of the enzymes used for the methylation enrichment is proprietary information , we assessed cg enrichment prior to downstream analysis and confirmed an average of  <dig>  fold cg enrichment across our  <dig> study samples compared to mouse reference genomes using this technology. in addition, we have previously assessed and published on the performance of the methylplex platform on cg enrichment in prostate cancer cell lines and tissues  <cit> .

our genome-wide analysis of liver dna from mouse offspring exposed to bpa indicates that dna methylation patterns exhibit non-monotonic effects following perinatal exposure to bpa, corroborating previous studies using multiple doses of bpa with non-monotonic outcomes  <cit> . we observed an enrichment of rams in cgi shores, accounting for nearly half of the identified rams in mg bpa group compared to either control or ug bpa groups. this suggests that cgi shores and regions outside of often-profiled cpg islands may be more susceptible to epigenetic changes following perinatal exposures. for example, rams identified in the higher bpa exposure group  were more likely to be located within cgi shores, and cgis were more resistant to epigenetic change. in the lower bpa exposure group , however, an enrichment of the rams among cgi shores was not observed; instead regions with low cg density were highly enriched as rams. in addition, the overall distribution of the rams within cds, utrs, and tsss was also distinct between mg and ug exposed samples.

in order to identify gene promoters with altered dna methylation upon exposure, we scanned ± <dig>  bps flanking the tsss of  <dig>  transcripts in the mouse genome . this analysis indicated distinct exposure-dependent methylation patterns around tsss  and identified several hundred novel bpa-induced promoter methylation events. several of the identified promoter methylation events occurred in genes previously associated with transcriptional change following bpa exposure, including hmgn <dig>  hpcal <dig>  hoxa <dig>  brca <dig>  pde4d <cit> , and esr <dig> and esr <dig> <cit> . in addition, decreased promoter methylation and increased expression were reported in high mobility group nucleosome binding domain  <dig>  from the prostate of male adult rat neonatally exposed to 10 μg bpa/kg diet  <cit> , and in homeobox protein hox-a <dig>  from the reproductive tract of cd- <dig> mice neonatally exposed to 5 mg bpa/kg diet  <cit> . increased promoter methylation and decreased expression in hippocalcin-like protein  <dig>  in new born male rats exposed to 10 μg bpa/kg diet  <cit>  and breast cancer type  <dig> susceptibility protein  in human mammary epithelial cells exposed to bpa for  <dig> week at the early passage  <cit>  have also been reported. using the comparative toxicogenomics database , we identified  <dig> genes with previously reported changes in gene expression upon bpa exposure that also harbored aberrant dna methylation near promoters in our bpa-exposed mouse liver samples .

to perform technical validation as well as to identify true differential methylation target genes upon bpa exposure, the original  <dig> samples along with  <dig> additional samples were included in the validation set. two of the validation loci were located within gene promoter regions, and thus an alteration in methylation upon bpa exposure may result in concomitant gene expression changes. one of our candidate genes that gained methylation upon bpa exposure in our m-ngs data was myh7b. quantitative and cpg site specific validation using the sequenom epityper platform confirmed the increase in dna methylation within the promoter region of myh7b in a monotonic dose-dependent manner . the myh7b protein is known to interact with esr <dig>  <cit> , and one of the myh7b estrogen-response elements   is located within an identified ram. despite the validated quantitative change in methylation in the myh7b promoter, no exposure dependent alteration in expression was observed in pnd <dig> mouse liver samples. during development, genes exhibit unique time windows of expression, and it’s possible a change in expression may have been missed or could occur at a future time point. alternatively, the observed altered methylation upon bpa exposure may merely be an effect on the epigenome that will not manifest itself in a change in expression, protein level, or protein activity. slc22a <dig> is a candidate ram displaying decreased level of methylation upon bpa exposure. in humans, the presence of single nucleotide polymorphisms  in the slc22a <dig> gene was found to be associated with obesity and metabolic syndrome in caucasians with hypertension  <cit> . as in the m-ngs data, a significant decrease in dna methylation was observed in samples in the ug exposure group, but not in the mg exposure group, adding to the weight of evidence supporting non-monotonic epigenetic responses following bpa exposure.

our pathway analysis indicated strong enrichment of genes involved in metabolism and stimulus response upon bpa exposure. this observation, in combination with previously reported data supporting a role for bpa in immune  <cit>  and metabolic response  <cit> , indicates the importance of changes in epigenetic pathways following perinatal exposures as a mechanism linking developmental exposures to disease risk in adulthood. for example, the activity of the adiponectin gene, which codes for a hormone controlling insulin sensitivity, was previously shown to be suppressed by bpa  <cit> , implicating bpa in the development of type  <dig> diabetes. stimulus response upon bpa exposure was previously identified in a prenatally bpa-exposed mouse with increased regulation of t helper  <dig> and  <dig> immune responses  <cit> . estrogen is a known regulator of the immune response through various activities including the secretion of interferon-Ɣ and cytokine  <cit> . several immune response experiments of environmental exposures including bpa have been previously conducted; in a mouse study, female offspring of mothers exposed to > 50 μg bpa/kg had elevated lung inflammation, compared with offspring of control dams  <cit> . further, prenatal exposure to 10 μg bpa/ml in drinking water enhanced allergic sensitization and bronchial inflammation and responsiveness in a susceptible animal model of asthma  <cit> .

to understand the full extent of bpa and associated perinatal exposures on the epigenome as a whole, it will be important to incorporate genome-wide analysis other epigenetic mechanisms such as histone modifications and non-coding rnas, as well as full transcriptome analyses, such as rna-seq. indeed, we have recently identified dna methylation and histone modifications to act in concert with one another at the a
vy
 metastable epiallele  <cit> . increasing the number of studies focusing on multiple epigenetic mechanisms will strengthen the understanding of environmentally induced alterations to the epigenome.

CONCLUSIONS
it is increasingly recognized that environmental exposure to chemical, nutritional, and behavioral factors alters gene expression and affects health and disease by not only mutating promoter and coding regions of genes, but also by modifying the epigenome. the investigation of early environmental effects can inform the fields of toxicology and environmental epidemiology by elucidating the mechanisms underlying developmental exposure and disease risk later in life. the identification of epigenomic loci dysregulated in a dose-dependent manner will ultimately strengthen human health risk assessment and shape diagnostic and therapeutic strategies for disease. the mouse is a tractable and popular model for human diseases; however animal models for toxicology studies may not be the best choice for modeling the potential impact on the human genome if the repertoire of epigenetically labile genes is markedly species dependent. additional toxicologically relevant animal models, including rats and sheep should also be considered for this approach along with parallel approaches in human tissues. ultimately, researchers must integrate the layers of epigenetic changes with the windows of susceptibility to understand and generate the best prescriptions for human health and disease. the comprehensive methylome map presented here will further our understanding on the methylation targets of bpa exposure. since epigenetic profiles, unlike genetic mutations, are potentially reversible, approaches for prevention and treatment, such as nutritional supplementation and/or pharmaceutical therapies, may have significant impact on disease trajectory and, ultimately, human health.

