BACKGROUND
transcription occurs due to many different signaling pathways leading to activation of transacting factors that regulate promoter activity. transcriptional deregulation has been implicated in several diseases such as cancer and inflammatory conditions, and many transcriptional factors themselves are drug targets. for example, the nf-κb signaling pathway has been increasingly seen as a promising target for pharmacological intervention, especially in inflammation and cancer, where the pathway is often constitutively active  <cit> . the reporter assays offer an important tool in assessing transcription and gene expression changes due to many extra- and intracellular events including modulation by receptor agonists, intracellular signaling events, and inhibitor compounds. in transcriptional reporter systems, cloning of promoters and inclusion of transcriptional control elements such as transcriptional factor sites and their variations, e.g., mutations and insertions/deletions are time-demanding efforts. likewise, regulated transcriptional systems, such as the tetracycline-resistance operon -based system, requires cloning of the teto upstream or downstream of the tata box of a reporter or other gene product  <cit> . in this report, we describe a simple cloning-free system to construct reporter linear dna by pcr that is transcriptionally controllable and useful in transcription and regulated gene studies.

a large number of transcriptional control elements, estimated to be in the vicinity of  <dig>  their genetic variations, and regulatory clusters   <cit>  were recently found due to large scale sequencing, functional genomics, and computational prediction studies. thus, a need for a simplified approach as opposed to cloning and plasmid-based techniques would be desirable. although high throughput applications of promoter studies have been recently developed  <cit> , there is a constant requirement for studying minimal transcriptional regions, to introduce genetic variations, and to manipulate position and arrangements of transcriptional cis-acting elements of single or multiple genes. here, we utilized mammalian transfection of transcriptionally-regulatable reporter pcr products that are generated with any variation of the transcriptional control elements, i.e., by a simple and cloning-free step. the utility of this strategy is flexible and can be used in constructing as many as desired promoter and transcriptional element manipulations with a larger throughput than conventional cloning. additionally, the conversion of any gene in an expression vector to tet-inducible/repressible system without any cloning indicates the notable simplicity of the described approach.

RESULTS
transcriptionally-controllable cloning-free reporter assay
the reporter assay is dependent on amplification of a functional reporter cassette from a vector with efficient mammalian expression modules, e.g., strong promoter, intron, and the bovine growth hormone  3'utr . when transfected as a linear product, it is sufficient to express the reporter. the design of the pcr forward primer, through a 3' end sequence, allows flexibility in targeting any position in the source vector, e.g., minimal promoter, while the 5' end part includes other desired transcriptional control sequences, e.g., transcriptional factor site or its variants . we have used this approach with a number of different strategies. each is described here with a demonstration of its utility in several applications of transcriptional studies, particularly in inflammation and innate immunity models.

inflammatory response of nf-κb-regulated pcr reporter product
to demonstrate the applicability of the described approach in a commonly-studied inflammation response model, we constructed, by a single pcr, a linear construct using a forward primer that includes two copies of the consensus nf-κb site and 3' end sequence that targets a region in the cmv promoter in vector . as a control, mutant nfκb sites were also incorporated in a different linear construct. thus, a pcr product was produced containing the nfκb-responsive minimal promoter upstream of the egfp reporter along with a 3' utr. after transfection onto hek <dig> cells overnight, il-1α was added. il-1α increased, in a dose-dependent manner, the egfp reporter activity produced from the pcr product that harbors the nf-κb-minimal promoter . in contrast, il-1α did not upregulate any reporter activity from the linear pcr construct made with the mutant nfκb site . there appears to be a higher  constitutive activity of nf-κb when compared to mutant nf-κb pcr products . a five-fold increase  in the transcriptional induction was seen with the highest dose of il-1α , when readings were normalized to background basal levels. there was also appreciable promoter activity  due to nf-κb activation as assessed with fluorescence signals after only four hours of treatment  indicating the sensitivity of the transcriptionally-modulated linear reporter. normalization by co-transfection with red fluorescent protein  yielded the same results . the transcriptional induction was also seen at mrna level. il-1α induced significant egfp mrna expression  when assayed at  <dig> and  <dig> hr post-treatment .

the reverse universal primer targets a region downstream of the polya site.

i-tfs: inducible transcriptional factor sites .

underlined is the 3' end region of the primer complementary to the vector template.

the minimal promoter of seq 1– <dig> and 10– <dig> is derived from cmv minimal promoter .

there was a dose-dependent increase in egfp fluorescence from the transfected linear pcr construct that harbors the two nfκb sites in response to another pro-inflammatory cytokine, tnf-α . a maximal response of 6-fold increase was seen with  <dig> ng/ml of tnf-α. as with il-1α, the transfected linear pcr products that incorporate mutant nfκb were not responsive to tnf-α .

dynamic response of promoter activity from pcr reporter products
enhanced dynamic response to the cytokines can be improved by varying the minimal reporter region and copies of the response elements . using a forward primer of the pcr to target further minimal region of cmv promoter  fused with four copies of nf-κb sites led to higher stimulation ratios  from the transfected pcr products when compared to pcr products with  <dig> copies of nf-κb and - <dig> minimal cmv promoter .

in order to further evaluate the difference in response of reporter plasmids versus the reporter pcr product, both dynamic response and absolute expression levels were evaluated. the dual firefly/renilla-normalized luciferase pgl <dig> system was performed using the transfected pcr product or the source plasmid each harboring three copies of nfκb. though the absolute expression levels of the reporter expressed from pcr products were lower  than those from the plasmid, the levels were still significant and quantifiable . more importantly, the dynamic and specific response of the linear reporter pcr product is superior than the plasmid. tnf-α caused enhnaced response of the nfκb in case of the nfκb-harboring pcr product when compared to mutant nfκb, in contrast to the plasmid . treatment of either il-1α or tnf-α, caused specific and higher dynamic response  of the luciferase reporter generated from the pcr product when compared to the plasmid .

the transfection efficieny was evaluated using gfp fluorescence and cell count ; the transfection efficiency of the pcr product  was comparable to that of the plasmid transfection  in hek <dig> cell line-similar results were obtained with flow cytometry. however, expression levels, as with the luciferase, were lower with the pcr product when compared to the plasmid but they are significantly quantifiable. fore example, the fluorescence levels were  <dig> ±  <dig> million pixels per  <dig> cells transfected with the plasmid while in case of pcr products the fluorescence levels were in the range vicinity of  <dig> ±  <dig> million pixels per  <dig> in hek <dig>  using a flow cytometry experiment, the mean value of fluorescence released from linear pcr product was  <dig> and from the plasmid was  <dig> in hek cells.

promoter activity from metal- and interferon responsive pcr reporter product
the cloning-free approach  was easily applied to generate a pcr product expressing egfp reporter under the control of metal responsive element -mediated transcription. minimal metal response elements  <cit>  that belong to metallothioneins promoters, mt1f and mt1g , were included in the forward primer. the heavy metal, cadmium, was used to upregulate the transcription of the mre-containing minimal promoter from the transfected egfp reporter pcr product . at  <dig> um of cadmium, response from mt1f, which contains three mre sites was stronger than that of mt1g, which has two mre sites. however, at  <dig> um, both mres mediate similar responses.

a minimal ifn-response element  from the ifn-stimulated gene, isg <dig>   <cit>  was incorporated in the forward primer of the pcr. ifn-α was able to induce the transcriptional activation of the transfected linear egfp pcr product that contains the isre-containing minimal promoter, in the ifn-sensitive huh <dig> cell line . in contrast, the transcriptional activation by ifn-α from the isre-bearing pcr cassette was not observed in a stat <dig> response-deficient cell line,  <dig> clone . as low as  <dig>  u/ml was able to induce reporter activity due to transcriptional stimulation by ifn. maximum stimulation  was observed at  <dig> u/ml of ifn-α . at mrna levels, ifn strongly induced isre-responsive reporter activity from the transfected pcr product at  <dig> hrs post-treatment .

evaluation of minimal constitutive and inducible sequences
a variation of our approach was used to examine minimal promoter regions . a minimal promoter sequence of interest can be incorporated in the forward primer, whereas the 3' end of the forward primer anneals to a region upstream of the reporter cdna. in our case, the region is exon  <dig>  downstream of the cmv promoter. this strategy was applied by evaluating the previously uncharacterized promoters of ribosomal proteins, rps <dig> and rpl <dig>  and comparing them with the cmv minimal promoter as a control . the cmv minimal promoter was the strongest, as expected. the rpl <dig> had weaker constitutive activity when compared to rps <dig> .

we also tested an inducible minimal promoter of ifnb <dig>  which possesses virus response inducible element   <cit> , and was entirely incorporated in the forward primer of the pcr . the ifnb promoter is inducible with the double-stranded rna, poly , a viral intermediate mimic. the hek <dig> cells, which are known to lack tlr- <dig>  are not responsive to poly   <cit> , thus, we used tlr- <dig> over-expressing hek <dig> cell line. here, poly  was able to increase the minimal ifnb promoter by 5-fold in hek <dig> cells that over-express tlr <dig> . there was a basal level of ifnb promoter which is likely due to over-expression of tlr <dig>  but was further attenuated with the use of lower input of the reporter construct .

cloning-free conversion of genes into inducible-repressible expression cassettes
the egfp expression vector was used as a template to generate a tet-off/on linear cassette by the single pcr method . linear constructs were generated by pcr that contains different teto copies and minimal promoter arrangements. the design of the forward primer, through 3' end sequence, allows flexibility in choosing the minimal sequences of the cmv promoter. the targeted regions are either - <dig> or - <dig> bases upstream of the site of transcription in the source dna while the 5' end part allows inclusion of two or more copies of the teto . the pcr products are transfected into a hela-tet off cell line that constitutively expresses the transactivator, tta. in the presence of the tetracycline analog, doxycycline, tta is inactive. in the absence of doxycycline, the tta is active, and binds teto containing promoter and thereby activates transcription of the linked gene. the teto2-minimal promoter  containing construct had slightly increased suppression in the presence of doxycycline when compared to the construct with extended  minimal promoter . the transfected pcr products with three copies of teto resulted in greater repression  compared to those with two teto copies . doxycycline has no effect on egfp linear control constructs that lack teto sequences . the moderate reduction of the egfp is likely due to the long half life of egfp. subsequently, we rendered egfp unstable by fusing with mouse ornithine decarboxylase  domain leading to shorter half life . there was almost complete  repression  with the unstable egfp when compared to the wild type gfp  . both teto <dig> and teo <dig> yielded the same results  in case of the unstable egfp . doxycycline also had no effect on either stable  or unstable egfp that lacks teto sites . representative images of teto-regulated experiments are shown with and without of rfp-normalized quantitation  indicating that, in general, normalization is not needed as shown previously in figure 5c. further, we use the teo pcr-mediated conversion approach to turn off the ectopic expression of the rna binding protein, tristetraproline . the hela tet-off cells which lack any detectable ttp protein expressed ttp from the transfected pcr product that was amplified in a similar manner as the reporter. addition of doxycycline completely turned off ttp expression . converting any reporter or gene product into a tunable teton-off expression system with a single pcr is evidence of the remarkable simplicity of the described approach.

discussion
monitoring gene expression in a number of applications using reporter genes is a widespread research tool. the described approach provided a reporter technology for manipulating promoter and transcriptional regulatory elements, including introduced mutations and genetic variations, without the need for the time-demanding cloning steps. the ease of making these linear reporter constructs and simplicity of introducing the desired regulatory sequences, make this reporter technology versatile and amenable to high-throughput applications. the performance of the described technology is reproducible with various combinations of promoters, reporters , cis-acting elements, minimal promoters, cell lines, and inducers. furthermore, the described cloning-free concept was applied to a regulated gene system, specifically, the teto inducible/repressible expression system.

the cmv minimal promoter was used in conjunction with several cis-acting elements, namely, nf-κb, isre, mre, vre, and teto. nfκb is a member of the rel family of transcription factors that regulates several important physiological processes, including immune responses, inflammation, cell growth, apoptosis and tumorigenesis. many different stimuli have been identified that activate the nf-κb pathway such as the pro-inflammatory cytokines tnf-α and il- <dig>  both cytokines increase the reporter activity from the transfected nf-κb-regulatable pcr product generated by the described technology. since many tumor cell lines are high in nf-κb activity  <cit> , we have observed higher reporter activity in the cell line used in case of the nf-κb-regulated, but not the nf-κb mutant harboring linear construct.

in most of the experiments, only two copies of either nf-κb or isre were assessed, giving response in the vicinity of five fold. the response of the reporter assay can be improved through the use of multiple copies of the cis-acting elements  <cit>  and use of de-stabilized forms of reporters  <cit> . additionally, the minimal cmv promoter region can be attenuated if the target region of the forward primer is downstream towards the tata box. a forward primer with four copies of nf-κb that also target - <dig> of cmv minimal promoter region results in enhanced reporter response to the cytokines . this feature of the variable positioning of the target region of the forward primer allows versatile manipulation of transcriptional control elements of any promoter and production of a pcr product harboring the desired variation.

the method was applied in another cellular model, ifn response, by incorporating the isre of the strong ifn-responsive isg <dig> gene  <cit> . isre is a consensus sequence that exists in the promoter of ifn-stimulated genes and binds certain members of the ifn-regulatory factors   <cit> . the ifn response of the transfected isre-controllable linear pcr product was observed in the ifn-sensitive huh <dig> cell line but not in the  <dig> cell clone. this cell line clone is resistant to ifn at doses ≤  <dig> u/ml  <cit> .

many of the genes in humans and other organisms are of unknown function, and evaluation of their promoters offers valuable information. also, mapping of minimal promoter regions of complex gene structures and rearrangements requires a versatile approach. the ability to evaluate any sequence of interest for the ability to elicit the reporter transcription using the described pcr strategy is of notable application. we have used this approach to evaluate the differential ability of the minimal promoter sequence of rps <dig> and rpl <dig> to induce the reporter activity. the rpl <dig> minimal promoter which lacks both the typical tataaa signal and sp <dig> site when compared to rps <dig>  although it possesses taaa, has weaker constitutive reporter activity when compared to rps <dig>  an entire minimal ifnb inducible sequence  <cit>  was incorporated into the forward primer of the pcr and was responsive in tlr3-expressing  <dig> cell line but not in  <dig> cells that do not express the tlr <dig> gene and thus is not responsive to the viral intermediate mimic, poly   <cit> .

although any reporter can be employed with this approach, we mainly used the egfp system. we also used, but to a lesser extent, the luciferase system. particularly when coupled with advanced imaging processing, the egfp is sensitive and has a large dynamic range. use of fluorescent reporters have several advantages including repeated measurements in live cells, single cell assessment, reduced variability and ease due to the absence of cell lysis. the egfp reporter assay resulted in intra-well variance in fluorescence that was mainly <6%, which does not warrant intra-well normalization of transfection  <cit> , although some of the experiments utilized red fluorescent protein  for the purpose of confirming this normalization feature. there are many recent improvements in fluorescent proteins and their biophysical characteristics that render them more sensitive  and with different colors  <cit>  that can also be used with the described approach.

the most important feature of the described method here is the enhanced applicability since it involves no cloning. an additional advantage of the use of pcr products in contrast to plasmid in transfection is the absence of plasmid preparation. although, transfection with pcr products is generally less efficient than with plasmids, successful results are obtained with optimized expression cassettes  <cit> , particularly when coupled with a sensitive reporter system and use of advanced image segmentation methods as in the case of fluorescent proteins. other added advantages are lower cellular toxicity and extended expression  <cit> .

further advantages of the reporter pcr method is attributed to lack of certain characteristics that commonly encountered with plasmids use in gene and reporter expression studies, namely, cryptic transcription and supercoiling-quality variations. the elimination of the plasmid backbone may results in reduction of cryptic transcriptionally active sequences that normally found in the plasmid backbone  <cit>  leading to more specific and larger dynamic response. supercoiling in general is known to have positive effect on transcription, and supercoiled plasmids may be more efficient for transient mammalian gene expression when compared to linear dna; however, there are reports that show that this is promoter-specific, and supercoiling effect was not seen with certain promoters  <cit> . thus, the use of the pcr products at least minimizes the variations of supercoiling quality of plasmids.

a limitation is that only short transcriptional regions  of a large promoter can be studied. however, most of the regulatory cis-acting elements are typically short of 5– <dig> bases  <cit>  and transcriptional studies rely on smaller regions that can be accommodated with the targeting position and length of the oligonucleotides. moreover, additional pcr reactions can append additional promoter regions as required. studies with deletion promoter mutants can also benefit from the cloning-free strategy by designing primers that target sequential regions of the promoter.

converting any gene product from an expression vector into an inducible/repressible expression linear construct is made possible by the cloning-free linear dna construction. in this study, we utilized the common teto system in which the tetracycline-responsive teto elements are regulated by the repressor, rtta, or the activator protein, tta the tet-on and tet-off systems  <cit> . significant leakage reduction and gene repression was achieved by the teto-pcr product transfection, particularly with the use of unstable egfp and three copies of teto leading to total repression.

CONCLUSIONS
this study reports several cloning-free strategies to generate transcriptionally-regulatable pcr products that when transfected express measurable reporter activity. there are many other variations and subsequently versatile applications for the described approach. tunable manipulations in gene and reporter expression such as the number of transcriptional element copies, mutations, gene destabilization elements, and minimal region are made straightforward by the described approach. the versatility and ease of making the linear reporter constructs for transcriptional studies should make this approach widely used and suitable for high throughput applications. this cloning-free system is utilized to fine tune the transcriptional control of any gene of interest and it makes transcriptional assessment studies and converting genes into inducible/repressible systems a simple task.

