BACKGROUND
evaluation of the importance of various processes determining community structure and function is an important topic in ecology. unlike just a decade or so ago, few studies today question whether or not community assembly is strictly random, recognizing the role of both stochastic and deterministic processes  <cit> . this change can be attributed to accumulating data on organisation in experimental and natural communities, and new perspectives gained from the fields of evolutionary population ecology and phylogenetics . it is worth noting that empirical tests for much of this theory have been attempted relatively recently in experimental microcosms research in particular, yielding valuable insights into the role of processes in driving long-term community dynamics  <cit> .

this newfound view of community ecology is an excitingly realistic one, and has the potential to make valuable contributions to conservation biology as well  <cit> . however, though studies on long term dynamics of communities are obviously important, they are extremely difficult to implement. a vast majority of field studies are restricted to exploring correlates and predictors of species diversity and other emergent community properties. this is in part due to the problems associated with studying complex natural communities. but to a great extent, difficulties also arise because community ecology studies have traditionally been skewed towards relatively long-lived vertebrate groups, or are restricted to short study periods due to logistical constraints, especially in the tropics  <cit> . although these studies yield valuable information, they are carried out at timescales that at best, give insight into short-term processes, providing limited information about community organization, persistence, or assembly.

circumventing this problem is obviously very difficult. one possible approach is to study communities along gradients of habitat succession using space-for-time substitution  to obtain chronosequential communities  <cit> . thus, instead of studying changes in a single community over time, successional habitats of known ages that can be arranged on a temporal gradient are compared. this method can reveal changes in community structure, environmental predictors of these changes, and provide estimates of the rate of community change  <cit> . although many studies have examined recovery of faunal communities with tropical forest regeneration, a vast majority have been restricted to one or two vertebrate  and invertebrate  groups  <cit> . for example,  <dig> of the  <dig> studies reviewed by dunn  <cit> , were on vertebrates, out of which only two were on amphibians and/or reptiles. considering that amphibians and reptiles are ectothermic and have life history traits different from mammals and birds  <cit> , more data on these taxonomic groups is important to test the generality of conclusions about effects of tropical habitat alteration on fauna.

this study takes an sft approach to compare changes in frog and lizard community structure in two contrasting habitat succession gradients:  1-yr jhum fallows giving way to mature forest, and  1-yr jhum fallows planted over with teak, leading to monoculture stands. slash-and-burn or shifting cultivation  agriculture involves clearing and burning of forest patches, so the original rainforest communities are effectively obliterated, and succession involves recovery of communities from scratch. the following questions were addressed in this study:

 <dig>  how much does frog and lizard community succession differ between the two gradients of habitat recovery?

 <dig>  does composition of the entire community change in synchrony, or does the recovery pattern differ between subcommunities such as frogs vs. lizards and guilds?

 <dig>  what aspects of habitat change influence frog and lizard community recovery, and if habitat parameters are linked to niche axes, do they predict changes in guild composition?

 <dig>  do successional changes in guilds also show trends in phylogenetic structure? this last question is expected to yield interesting insights into possible evolutionary mechanisms underlying changes in community composition  <cit> , but has not explicitly been addressed in previous work on faunal recovery during tropical forest regeneration .

in this paper, a chronosere is defined as a habitat that has recovered from perturbation for a known length of time, and can be assigned a place in the sft. an assemblage is the set of all species of a taxonomic group in a landscape of interest. ecological groups  are species' subsets of the assemblage with similar niche characteristics. communities comprise species of the assemblage which share a habitat stratum  in the landscape. guilds are members of the egs that actually coexist in the same chronosere i.e., belong to the same community, and are thus likely to have ecological and evolutionary interactions .

to draw inferences about what aspects of habitat change determine sequential communities, habitat and frog-lizard community data were analysed hierarchically. as a first step, species richness and turnover of frog and lizard communities along habitat recovery gradients was summarised, and the entire assemblage classified into ecological groups  based on niche similarities. guilds identified from this classification were then examined for phylogenetic structure. using factor analysis, orthogonal combinations of variables that described biotic and abiotic aspects of habitat transition were extracted. we then tested for correspondence between these composite variables and composition of frogs and lizard communities and guilds. based upon the relationships between different habitat factors and frog and lizard communities, variables were interpreted as composite adaptive zones, and we tested whether they predicted successional changes at different levels of community organization.

RESULTS
gradients of vegetation recovery
the three mature forest plots  were of untraceable age . they were characterized by high tree density, canopy cover, and a sparse understorey with few herbs or true shrubs . one of the sites  was slightly disturbed by dead wood and palm leaf extraction, and had a relatively dense understorey in places. bamboos were mainly restricted to moist gullies, and occasionally in the understorey.

the 4-yr teak plot  was a young plantation characterized by a monodominant stand of teak trees. the understorey was sparse, with some tall grass, shrubs  and occasional herbs. the 22-yr teak plantation site  had a monotonous, uniform structure characteristic of a mature, managed teak monoculture. undergrowth was sparse, consisting mostly of tall grass and lantana sp. table  <dig> summarises differences in four habitat parameters that show broad contrasts between chronoseres. these results are very similar to those of a another study in the same region  <cit> . for the purposes of these comparisons, data for the two undisturbed mature forest plots matb and matc are presented together because they are were very similar in macrohabitat characteristics.

eight factors were extracted after principal component analysis , and by varimax rotation of the factor structure, which explained a cumulative  <dig> % of the variation . eigenvalues, factor loadings and factor scores are given in additional file  <dig>  the ordination of the sampling plots based on scores of the first two pca factors is shown in figure  <dig>  this ordination was very similar to one obtained by non-metric multidimensional scaling   <cit> . the two gradients of vegetation recovery have very different trajectories of change in habitat attributes. the predominant macro-habitat characteristic along the factor  <dig> axis is high bamboo abundance, while high positive loading on the factor  <dig> axis indicates tree-forest dominated habitat. the gradient towards mature forest succession includes intermediate stages dominated by bamboo, which are succeeded by a tree dominated forest.

in general, although there is a change towards a tree dominated habitat in both recovery gradients, the end result is very different because the  <dig> year teak plantation is a monoculture, whereas the mature forest consists of a diverse tree community.

successional changes in frog and lizard communities
the three sampling techniques used in conjunction during the study  yielded sixteen frog and seventeen lizard species. figure  <dig> shows changes in species richness, and figure  <dig> differences in community composition for frogs and lizards along the two recovery gradients. clearly, there are distinct similarities in overall community composition between the early jhum fallows and teak plantation communities on one hand, and the mature forest and the  <dig> year jhum fallows on the other.

the pattern of recovery is very different for the two gradients. for the mature forest succession gradient, the rate of frog and lizard community recovery is similar to that found for birds by raman  <cit>  in the same region in northeast india, with the community approaching mature forest characteristics after about  <dig> years. even more remarkably, this timescale is also comparable with those reported by similar studies on other fauna elsewhere in the tropics  <cit> . the gradient from jhum to mature teak plantations on the other hand, seems to show little change in species richness or composition even after  <dig> years of plantation growth.

it is worth noting that there are dissimilarities in the manner of species accumulation for frogs vs. lizards. there is much less augmentation of species number in the case of the latter, the main reason for this being that younger chronoseres support more lizard than frog species richness. species accumulation curves  show that these differences are not sampling artefacts. moreover, across chronosere species turnover  for lizards is significantly higher than that for frogs , indicating that lizard community succession was characterized by relatively high replacement and low accumulation of species.

guilds
ecological groups defined by non-metric multidimensional scaling  of the niche based dissimilarity matrix for the entire assemblage are shown in figure  <dig>  the nmds configuration was derived in  <dig> dimensions with low stress and high rsq values, indicating a very good representation of actual niche dissimilarities  <cit> . on dimension  <dig>  the dominant niche characteristic determining high negative loadings is arboreality, and high positive values indicate that the species is predominantly terrestrial. on dimension  <dig>  higher positive values indicate predominantly diurnal diel activity pattern, and negative values indicate crepuscular and/or nocturnal activity pattern. identities of species in each group are in additional file  <dig>  of the five egs, two consist of both frogs and lizards: the nocturnal arboreal  group with eight species of frogs  and four species of lizards , and the crepuscular-nocturnal terrestrial  group, which consists of seven frogs and one crepuscular-nocturnal lizard. the diurnal arboreal group  consists of five agamid lizards, some of whom are occasionally terrestrial. the diurnal terrestrial  group consists of six skinks and one lacertid lizard. more detailed natural history descriptions of these species can be found in pawar  <cit> .

phylogenetic structure
these results on successional changes in guild structure and representation indicate a distinctly non-random sequence of community assembly, as certain guilds appear in later stages, followed by increase in their species richness and in many cases, phylogenetic structure. habitat attributes that determine these changes are explored in the next section .

correspondence between habitat factors and frog-lizard community succession
higher-order community structure
the strongest association is between factor  <dig> and overall species composition  across chronoseres. factor  <dig> was strongly and non-linearly correlated with age along both teak and mature forest succession gradients , and represents deterministic, linear aspects of vegetation succession. it has high positive loadings for tree species richness, and macro-habitat variables such as tree density, canopy cover, and canopy height, most of which increase deterministically along both gradients of habitat change. among the measured variables, these are primary and independent, which over time drive changes in secondary  variables such as bamboo density, shrub abundance, and various measures of habitat heterogeneity . this factor clearly influences species composition at all levels of frog and lizard community structure.

frog vs. lizards
along with factor  <dig>  the frog subcommunity was also associated with factor  <dig>  which shows no significant age determinacy along either gradient of habitat recovery. this factor has high positive loading for soil moisture content, which is an important limiting factor for frogs. the lizard subcommunity was associated with factor  <dig> along with factor  <dig>  factor  <dig> has high loading for soil moisture variability, which is highest in chronoseres with spatial variation in insolation. this factor is crucial for diurnal lizards, many of which are heliotherms. factors  <dig> and  <dig> are probably also surrogates of unmeasured or unclassified variables which influence successional changes in these two communities.

guilds
three out of five guilds are secondarily correlated with factors orthogonal to factor  <dig>  the two that were not, i.e., the diurnal-arboreal  and diurnal-terrestrial  groups, were correlated with factor  <dig>  this suggests that in contrast to other guilds, these two, which are both made up only of lizards, are directly influenced by a hierarchically higher order of habitat attributes.

these were also the two groups that showed non directional trends in species richness as well as phylogenetic trends along habitat recovery gradients .

along with factor  <dig>  the crepuscular-nocturnal terrestrial  group was correlated with factor  <dig> and  <dig>  factor  <dig> scores increase and then decrease with plot age along both habitat recovery gradients . this factor had high loading  positive for both macro- and micro-habitat variables such as bamboo density canopy cover, leaf litter cover and depth and negative loadings for many habitat heterogeneity variables such as cvs of canopy cover and litter cover. these variables are interpretable as ones that are associated with, or influence ground microhabitat conditions. factor  <dig> decreased logarithmically with age along both teak and mature forest gradients . this factor had no strong loadings, but is associated with shrub density, canopy height variability and tree density, all of which also affect ground cover, and can be considered macrohabitat variables.

the nocturnal arboreal frog group ), was correlated with factor  <dig>  which is non-deterministic with respect to chronosere age. this factor as a high loading for soil moisture, which by itself is difficult to interpret as a variable directly affecting this ecomorphological group. it is likely that this factor is a surrogate for an unmeasured or unclassified variable. lastly, the nocturnal arboreal lizard group ) is correlated with factor  <dig> along with factor  <dig>  factor  <dig> shows a weak negative linear relationship with recovery age along both gradients gradient . it has high positive loading for cv of soil moisture, which as mentioned above, is highest in chronoseres with spatial and/or temporal variation in insolation. among the measured variables, factor  <dig> probably subsumes most habitat parameters that affect both na groups directly .

adaptive zones?
can biologically meaningful adaptive zones be interpreted from these associations? as each factor is orthogonal with respect to the others, factors subsume different habitat variables, or their variability in the same variable. note that the composite variable represented by each factor consists of negative as well as positive loadings of variables. this means that if a guild was associated with a factor, both positive and negative trends in different variables affected it simultaneously, together representing a composite adaptive zone. however, an important fact to consider here is that these "adaptive zones" thus identified may actually be surrogates for actual sets of unmeasured variables. raman  <cit>  inferred that floristics  and physiognomy  were the dominant habitat attributes that independently predicted changes in bird species composition at the level of communities, but not at much at the level of guilds. in the case of frogs and lizards, factor  <dig>  which includes a measure of floristic attributes , is a strong predictor of frog and lizard community composition at all levels. but factor  <dig> also includes numerous structural attributes that are correlated with tree species diversity, from canopy height to understorey and ground habitat structure, all of which have equal or higher positive loadings. also, figure  <dig> shows that understorey habitat complexity increases with post-jhum succession towards mature forest.

thus, it is difficult to infer the extent to which tree species diversity per se influences frog and lizard community structure. previous work has shown that unlike endothermic vertebrates, amphibian and reptile distributions are likely to be influenced more strongly by abiotic rather than biotic features  <cit> . the effect of physiognomy on the other hand, is definitely important, though at a different scale than for birds. the idea that a habitat with higher structural complexity will support more species  <cit> , and have a strong influence on re-colonisation success  <cit> , has been shown for amphibians and reptiles . it can therefore be inferred that factor  <dig> subsumes nested subsets of biotic and abiotic variables that directly affect the  fitnesses of species' populations in different guilds. also, it is clear that guilds are also associated with other, independent variables sets that can be considered to comprise additional aspects of each member species' adaptive zone.

factors  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> showed no significant association with any level of community composition. the obvious reason for this appears to be that unlike other factors, these are completely non-deterministic with respect to age of succession, thus representing temporally and/or spatially stochastic attributes that were unlikely to show any influence on the conspicuously deterministic nature of frog and lizard community and guild  succession . at this resolution, it is impossible to say whether these variables are adaptively significant for certain subgroups/species of frogs and lizards or not. nevertheless, this complex, nested pattern of these alleged adaptive zones, is ecologically realistic . although difficult to interpret at this level of resolution, this hierarchical partitioning of variables is an indicator of which attributes of habitat change influence community assembly and turnover with such gradients of vegetation succession.

composite variables and successional changes in community characteristics
the dt group does not show correlation with any of the factors. interestingly, this ecological group along with the da group, also occupies the smallest niche space , has the most consistent presence across chronoseres  and a phylogenetic structure that varies non-directionally along successional gradients . similar patterns have been observed for diurnal terrestrial herpetofauna  elsewhere  <cit> . members of this group also have the highest population densities, and most have wide geographic distributions . all these data strongly suggest that this guild is not resource constrained in chronoseres along the habitat recovery gradients, and is more randomly assembled during recovery than any of the other groups.

in general, these results help explain the trends seen in figures  <dig> , <dig> and  <dig> by indicating attributes of habitat change that drive changes in community structure in successional frog and lizard communities. the succession of jhum fallow towards mature forest involves a deterministic, directional change in attributes that allow coexistence of successively more speciose and phylogenetically structured communities. in terms of change in species richness, these results are qualitatively similar to those of similar work on bird, butterfly, and reptile communities  <cit> . previous work has not however attempted to look at phylogenetic structure for such successional communities. the jhum to teak monoculture gradient also has many aspects of deterministic habitat change, but apparently not for the variables that are essential for a diverse community. the trajectory of habitat change also indicates that this pattern is unlikely to change with transition towards older plantations either. no previous data exists on herpetofaunal community changes in post-jhum monoculture plantations.

CONCLUSIONS
by comparing disparate trajectories of habitat change and recovery of different taxonomic groups, this study provides useful insights into faunal community change in response to habitat recovery. to summarise, the results show that  the two gradients of habitat recovery are very different and accordingly affect frog and lizard community assembly differently,  although both groups increased in species richness with habitat recovery, lizards had higher species turnover, combined with lower species augmentation within each recovery gradient  looking at a finer scale of community organization, assembly appears to be driven by changes in guild representation and composition, where some guilds change directionally with age of habitat recovery by species augmentation, while others change by species turnover  guilds that showed directional increase in species richness also increased in phylogenetic structure  hierarchies of community organisation were affected by composite, nested habitat attributes that correspond to particular niche axes, and  the increase in species richness along the mature forest gradient in contrast to lack of change along the teak gradient was due to availability  of variables that comprise these complex adaptive zones. also, the results show that a niche-based guild classification reveals patterns that would have been hidden in the gross response pattern of the entire community.

some indication of the qualitative nature of potential evolutionary and ecological processes in community turnover comes from the fact that changes in phylogenetic structure are tied to guild structure in the communities. using phylogenetic techniques, recent work has demonstrated the importance of evolutionary adaptation in assembling ecological communities  <cit> . it is clear that specialisation on different subsets of resources, in a habitat drive the origin and as well as persistence of diversity  <cit> . frogs and lizards have incongruent patterns of community succession, mainly because they generally differ in fundamental niche dimensions axes such as diel activity  <cit> . however, although most lizards are diurnal and most frogs nocturnal, there are many sub-lineages that are an exception, and species do share niche space transcending taxonomic boundaries . such subgroups probably have congruent ecological and evolutionary dynamics.

it is an open question as to what extent vegetation succession leads to changes in the number of adaptive peaks and corresponding changes in mean fitnesses of species' populations such that multiple species can persist in the same habitat. in more ecological terms this is same as asking how habitat succession leads to changes in niche availability, occupancy, and overlap . another related question, that was partly explored using the s/g ratios in this paper, is whether similar adaptive zones  tend to be occupied by more closely related taxa. the results here do indicate that this may be true for such gradients of community change, as phylogenetic and guild structure increase directionally and in tandem with succession towards mature forest. whether this change is driven by immigration from the regional gene pool or due to local divergent adaptation is an interesting question  <cit> . reptiles, and to a greater extent amphibians, have limited dispersal ability compared to most vertebrates. this distinction in itself may drive differences in local adaptation and community assembly from other biotic groups.

conservation issues
the time scale of recovery on the jhum-rainforest succession gradient, which is about  <dig> years for both frogs and lizards, and suggests that recovery of diverse communities can be relatively fast, as has been reported for other fauna  <cit> . however, this pattern of community recovery  is tightly coupled to changes in certain sets of habitat attributes, which in turn are dependent upon vegetation succession wherein post-jhum chronoseres are gradually replaced by trees. this vegetation succession is obviously reliant on seed rain/dispersal from nearby mature forests. in this region and many other areas southeast asia, apart from continued pressure from shifting cultivation and shortening cultivation cycles, it has also become popular practice to plant and maintain monocultures of timber species. as the results of this study indicate, such plantations are unlikely to support natural recovery of faunal communities, and will harbour lower biological diversity compared to primary forest.

it is possible that the combined effects of short jhum cycles, plantation forestry and invasion by non-native species such as lantana and eupatorium will lead to the local extirpation of even remnant forest patches. this loss of recolonisation pools for flora and fauna, will alter natural trajectories of succession, and strongly impact the biological diversity supported by the landscape. it is therefore important that conservation and prioritisation agencies in these areas consider the value of habitat mosaics containing even small patches of primary forest vegetation.

