BACKGROUND
modern population genetics have attempted to explain patterns of genetic variation in light of evolutionary forces thought to affect dna sequence evolution. one obvious factor to form a candidate for governing local polymorphism levels is the rate of mutation since, in the absence of selection, sequence divergence should be proportional to the mutation rate
 <cit> . another obvious factor is selection since both positive and negative selection reduces levels of genetic diversity at target loci. selection should also affect diversity levels in regions linked to target loci. in the absence of recombination, the entire haplotype within which a selected allele is contained will be subject to change in frequency by selection. from this follows that recombination should itself be a factor of importance for levels of polymorphism. specifically, when the local recombination rate is high, only regions within a relatively short physical distance from loci under selection are expected to show reduced polymorphism levels. there is well-developed theory for the expected effects of both types of selection relevant in this context, i.e. background selection arising from purifying selection
 <cit>  and selective sweeps arising from positive selection
 <cit> .

empirically, one of the clearest patterns that have emerged from studies of the distribution of levels of polymorphism across the genome is the positive effect of recombination rate on genetic diversity. this relationship was first observed in drosophila melanogaster <cit>  and then confirmed in various organisms including mouse
 <cit> , human
 <cit> , nematodes of the genus caenorabditis <cit> , sea beet
 <cit>  and grasses
 <cit> . however, a direct effect of recombination on mutation rate, i.e., a neutral scenario, has also been proposed to explain the correlation between recombination and polymorphism
 <cit> , although this possible mutagenic effect of recombination is debated
 <cit> . a recent large-scale analysis failed to demonstrate a relationship between recombination hotspots and mutation rate in the human genome
 <cit> . however, the fact that recombination rate as well as the rate of substitution often covary with several other genomic features impedes the understanding of any causal relationships
 <cit> .

the possibility to capture patterns of sequence polymorphism across whole genomes allows critical tests of the importance of different evolutionary factors in shaping diversity levels
 <cit> . this information is especially important when making inferences of selection, not least when it comes to detecting signs of positive selection in searches for candidate loci for adaptive evolution. it is then imperative that variation in polymorphism caused by different factors can be distinguished from each other. here we analyze genome-wide patterns of genetic diversity in domestic chicken g. gallus domesticus and its wild ancestor the red jungle fowl g. gallus gallus. this system is of particular interest given that intense artificial selection during domestication may have left strong footprints on patterns of genetic diversity within the genome
 <cit> . we examine how nucleotide diversity in chicken is related to recombination rate, divergence in intergenic regions and at synonymous and non-synonymous sites, gene density and local gc content.

RESULTS
using published information on a total of  <dig>  million chicken snps obtained from re-sequencing of pooled samples
 <cit> , we derived genome-wide estimates of local  diversity level for three chicken populations  based on non-repetitive and putatively non-functional sites in the genome . basically, this represents diversity in intergenic regions, which in the following we simply refer to as ‘diversity’. we also estimated diversity at synonymous and non-synonymous sites, which we refer to as ps and pn, respectively. domestic breeds had lower diversity levels than rjf , however, principal component analysis  showed that  <dig> % of the variation was common to all three populations, represented by principal component  i . pairwise correlations between local diversity level and ps and pn, respectively, had correlation coefficients in the range  <dig> - <dig>  and generally showed a stronger relationship in the domestic breeds than in rjf. for all three populations the strongest correlation was found between diversity level and ps .

in order to investigate the causes of local variation in diversity level we performed multi-linear regression analysis using a number of candidate explanatory variables selected to represent the effects of variation in mutation rate , local dna composition , recombination and selection , respectively. here, intergenic divergence, ds and dn represent chicken-specific divergence estimates based on triple-alignments between chicken, turkey and zebra finch. gene density represents the proportion of genic sites in the chicken sequence and gc content is computed based on non-genic sites in the chicken sequence. then, using diversity levels as response variable, regression analysis was performed for each population separately as well as for pc i of diversity levels of all three populations. the latter was considered an appropriate representative of the genetic variation common to all populations. recombination rate was found to be the main explanatory variable followed by gene density, both being positively correlated with diversity. gc content showed a statistically significant impact in rjf and for common genetic variation, whereas divergence showed a significant and unexpected negative impact in layer and for common genetic variation. ds and dn were not significantly correlated with diversity level at a p-value threshold of  <dig>  in any population . overall, similar patterns were found for regression analysis based on 500 kb and 250 kb windows. however, the amount of genetic variation explained, represented by multiple r <dig>  decreased from 15% for analyses based on 1 mb windows to 8% and 5% for 500 kb and 250 kb windows, respectively. the decrease for the smaller window sizes is likely a result of a reduction in the signal-to-noise ratio, which motivated further analyses to be focused on 1 mb windows .

common variation reflects pc i of diversity level of all three populations. estimates and p-values significant at a threshold <  <dig>  are highlighted in bold.

as multi-linear regression analysis is sensitive to multi-collinearity in the explanatory variables, we performed partial least square regression  analysis, a regression setup that accounts for multi-collinearity in the explanatory variables and allows dissection of the interrelationships between explanatory variables. plsr groups together explanatory variables into pcs based on their correlations with each other. subsequent regression analysis and the number of significant pcs then illustrate the number of independent effects on the response variable. each significant pc represents an independent effect by one of the contributors to the respective pc on the response variable, most likely the main contributor, which we refer to as the true explanatory variable. the remaining contributors to the pc are likely to be dragged by the true explanatory variable via their correlations to the true explanatory variable. as such plsr enables us to quantify a lower bound of the amount of variation explained by the true explanatory variable, where the upper bound is given by the r <dig> obtained by simple linear regression.

in agreement with the results of the multi-linear regression analysis, the plsr analysis showed that recombination rate explained most of the variation in diversity level  . gene density , gc content  and divergence  explained part of the variance, whereas the impact of ds and dn on diversity was < 1% and considered negligible. figure 
 <dig> illustrates that most of the explanatory variables grouped together in pc i, which accentuates the complexity associated with determining independent effects of correlated explanatory variables. based on pc i and in agreement with the multi-linear regression analysis the relationships between recombination rate, gc content and gene density, and diversity was positive, while divergence, ds and dn showed a negative relationship to diversity. since recombination rate constitutes the main contributor to pc i it is likely to drag other correlated variables with it, like gene density, gc content and divergence. as recombination rate and gene density were positively correlated , this could explain why we find a positive correlation between gene density and diversity level, despite theory predicting the opposite. similarly, this could lead to a negative correlation between divergence and diversity level, as recombination rate and divergence were negatively correlated . note that correlations between gene density and recombination rate, and between divergence and recombination rate, do not need to be causal. however, the negative correlation between recombination rate and divergence argues against a mutagenic effect of recombination  in birds. also note that correlations might be caused indirectly via a third parameter, like gc content , and thereby blur any true effects of mutation rate and/or gene density on diversity level. based on pc ii and iii we again found a positive relationship between recombination rate and gene density, and diversity, and a negative relationship between divergence, ds and dn, and diversity. however, opposite to the results based on pc i, gc content now showed a negative relationship to diversity. this suggests that after correction for the effect of recombination rate on diversity, gc content shows an independent negative effect on diversity.

values in parentheses are for parameters that did not meet the p <  <dig>  threshold in multi-linear regression.

we tested if the lack of, or a negative, correlation between divergence and diversity level could arise as a result of differences in the range of spatial variation of the two parameters by performing an autocorrelation analysis based on 100 kb windows. however, the patterns were similar for both diversity and divergence . correlations decreased from r >  <dig>  between adjacent windows to r <  <dig>  already at a distance of about 2 mb, where p-values stayed low for a long distance.

motivated by the results of the regression analysis, we investigated the impact of the explanatory variables for the possibility to identify candidate loci for selective sweeps. based on the observation of locally reduced levels of genetic diversity, rubin and colleagues identified  <dig> genomic regions as putative locations for selective sweeps in chicken
 <cit> . table 
 <dig> lists mean values for explanatory variables, and for ps and pn, in these candidate regions together with genome-wide averages. this clearly highlights the importance of recombination rate for the ability to identify possible targets of positive selection: the mean recombination rate of candidate loci was reduced to 68% of the genome-wide average. other explanatory variables also showed significant differences, but the effects were lower and are likely related to the correlation between explanatory variables.

the data are divided into genome-wide and candidate loci for selective sweeps identified by rubin and colleagues
 <cit> . p-values are based on bootstrapping. for diversity level, ps and pn means are reported for each of the three populations broiler, layer and rjf separately. note that the absolute values of our diversity estimates are not directly comparable to previous estimates in chicken
 <cit>  since different sequencing methodologies and sampling design were used.

discussion
recombination as a determinant of levels of genetic diversity in chicken
diversity levels are expected to reflect the product of the mutation rate and ne <cit> . as a consequence, intra-genomic variation in the two latter parameters should lead to genomic heterogeneity in diversity levels. this heterogeneity can thus be framed either under a neutral scenario and reflect a mutation-driven pattern or under a model invoking natural selection causing variation in ne, or both. it is well established that there is significant variation in the rate of mutation across the genome , providing a basis for variation in diversity level. ne is also expected to vary among genomic regions, in this case for reasons related to the incidence and efficiency of natural selection
 <cit> . importantly, with more functionally important sites follows more targets for selection. moreover, when recombination rate is low, selection at linked sites will lower ne over larger physical distances along chromosomes
 <cit> . whether mutation or selection is the main factor governing diversity levels is a matter of on-going debate
 <cit> .

we found that recombination rate had the strongest effect on diversity levels in two domestic chicken breeds and in rjf. in contrast, divergence, taken as a proxy for the rate of mutation, had either no effect or an unexpected minor negative effect. this supports a selection model where the effect of background selection and/or selective sweeps is  more widely reaching in genomic regions with low recombination rates. a positive correlation between diversity and recombination has been frequently observed in previous work, however, that the effect of recombination is indirect via selection has been difficult to disentangle from a possible direct mutagenic effect of recombination
 <cit> . in our case, the negative correlation between recombination rate and divergence strengthens the selection model and argues against a mutagenic effect. moreover, this interpretation is supported by the positive correlation of both ps and, in particular, pn with intergenic diversity level, showing that selective events that reduce the diversity within coding regions also reduce diversity at nearby linked sites , or vice versa.

as mentioned above, selective effects are expected to increase with gene density, each coding site representing a potential target for selection. in this respect, the positive correlation between gene density and diversity goes against the theoretical expectation
 <cit> . we suggest that this is a statistical artifact caused by collinearity of explanatory variables, like the relatively strong positive correlation between recombination rate and gene density . estimates from multiple regressions should be interpreted cautiously if explanatory variables are correlated since they may lead to spurious and non-causative correlations, which very well might be the case here. moreover, this might explain a similarly surprising result recently reported for asian rice  where the association between gene density and recombination rate could potentially explain a negative relationship between recombination rate and polymorphism
 <cit> , similar to earlier findings in arabidopsis thaliana and a. lyrata <cit> .

several studies have shown that recombination rate is correlated with chromosome size
 <cit> , which is not unexpected given the requirement of at least one recombination event per chromosome  for successful meiosis; as a consequence, smaller chromosomes will have a higher recombination rate per physical distance compared to larger chromosomes. this is confirmed in our data, with a negative correlation between chromosome size and recombination rate . as correlations are transitive relations, a correlation between chromosome size and recombination rate together with a correlation between recombination rate and diversity will lead to a correlation between chromosome size and diversity; this has been empirically demonstrated in previous analyses of birds
 <cit> . in our main analysis we did not include chromosome size as candidate explanatory variable as we had no a priori reason to expect it to assert a direct effect on diversity level . this was subsequently justified by a multi-linear regression analysis including chromosome size as explanatory variable . this analysis suggested that in the rjf and broiler population there was no and in the layer population in fact an unexpected positive effect of chromosome size on diversity. thus, we conclude that chromosome per se does not explain a negative correlation between chromosome size and diversity, as was also suggested by megens et al.
 <cit> .

the absence of an effect of divergence on diversity levels
we approximated local mutation rate by divergence estimates of the chicken branch after the split from turkey based on cpg-masked intergenic sequences as well as divergence at synonymous sites, ds. using these estimates we failed to find a persuasive effect of divergence on level of genetic diversity. this is surprising considering theory , and empirical evidence from some
 <cit>  but not all previous studies
 <cit> . the lack of a significant effect could be explained by several factors. first, in theory, it could reflect a lack of local variation in mutation rate across the chicken genome. however, this is clearly not in line with earlier observations from avian genomes
 <cit> . also, the auto-correlation analysis of divergence and diversity level  suggests that the two vary on a similar scale. second, sequence features such as the local gc content appear to be strongly related to divergence in avian genomes. however, gc content is strongly correlated also with recombination rate via gc-biased gene conversion , a process linked to recombination mimicking natural selection and leading to high gc content in high recombining regions
 <cit> . as a consequence, the covariation of recombination rate, gc content and divergence together with a strong impact of recombination rate on diversity could blur independent signals between divergence and diversity as suggested by the plsr analysis . thus, taken together the positive correlation between recombination rate and diversity and the absence of correlation between divergence and diversity support a selection model, where the weaker impact of mutation rate on diversity, if any, becomes indistinct by the stronger impact of recombination rate on diversity.

the impact of genomic features on identifying targets of adaptive evolution
there is considerable current interest in using population genomic data to identify regions that have been subject to recent events of positive selection. one means to do so is to search for outlier regions of nucleotide diversity, specifically regions of reduced diversity. the demonstration of recombination rate having a large impact on diversity level in the chicken genome should have at least two implications in this context. first, footprints of selection  will be most easily seen in regions of low recombination, even if they occur less frequently in such regions due to hill-robertson interference. in addition, regions with low recombination and an associated reduced ne are more likely to show hard sweeps than soft sweeps
 <cit> . this should be manifested both in diversity level being reduced over a larger genomic region and the reduction being visible over a longer time scale since the sweep. second, and as consequence of the former, studies of the genomic distribution of adaptively evolving loci will be biased towards regions with low rate of recombination. this was confirmed when we analyzed the location of candidate loci for selective sweeps identified by rubin et al.
 <cit> , with recombination rate being significantly lower in these candidate regions compared to the genomic average. this emphasizes the necessity of a rigorous statistical framework that incorporates genomic features such as recombination rate when interpreting polymorphism levels.

the footprint of domestication on patterns of chicken diversity
although a significant part of the variation in diversity level was common to all three populations, we observed several important differences between domesticates and their wild ancestor. rubin and colleagues found significantly lower overall heterozygosity in the two domestic breeds than in rjf
 <cit> . our results corroborate this observation, with the most pronounced difference seen in intergenic regions, with diversity level of the broiler and the layer being 83-93% of rjf. the difference is clearly in the expected direction given bottlenecks during domestication and genetic drift in closed commercial populations. microsatellite-based genotyping has revealed this to be a common feature among chicken breeds
 <cit>  and, to a varying extent, the same trend has also been seen among other domestic animals and plants
 <cit> .

strong artificial selection for traits of agronomical interest during domestication should also act to lower ne <cit> . if artificial selection occurs frequently genome-wide it could create a stronger link between polymorphism at functional and neutral sites in domesticates than in natural populations
 <cit> . in agreement with this prediction, the correlation of ps and pn to diversity level was stronger in the two domestic chicken breeds than in rjf .

CONCLUSIONS
two previous studies have sought to address the influence of recombination on chicken diversity levels. fang et al.
 <cit>  used low-coverage genome sequence data from three birds to obtain polymorphism estimates and made pairwise linear regression between diversity and recombination rate estimates from a medium-density linkage map. rao et al.
 <cit>  sequenced  <dig> introns, and used data from sundström et al.
 <cit>  for another  <dig> introns, and performed pairwise linear regression between diversity and recombination rate, and between diversity and chicken-turkey divergence. similar to our findings, these two studies reported a correlation between diversity and recombination. however, our study adds to previous work in several ways. notably, by the combined use of a genome-wide approach for diversity estimation from population samples and with the access to divergence data from across the genome, we were able to address and quantify the role of mutation and recombination on diversity level in a rigorous statistical framework. in addition we considered possible impacts of ds, dn, gene density and the local gc content. based on our analysis we suggest that local levels of genetic diversity in the chicken genome are mainly governed by the rate of recombination. the fact that divergence and recombination rate were negatively correlated argues against a mutagenic role of recombination and for a selection model. in support of the selection model, divergence, taken as a proxy for the rate of mutation, had either no effect or an unexpected minor negative effect. moreover, by including genome-wide estimates of ps and pn we were able to directly study the role of selection and to integrate information from functional sites in the genome. in addition, the genome-wide approach allowed us to test for possible effects of various genomic features on the ability to identify target loci of adaptive evolution. further, we showed that artificial selection during domestication is likely to explain several differences in levels of diversity between domestic breeds and the wild ancestor , for example a stronger relationship between recombination rate and intergenic diversity, as well as a stronger relationship between intergenic diversity levels and diversity at synonymous as well as non-synonymous sites.

