BACKGROUND
rhodoferax ferrireducens is of interest because of its potentially important role in carbon and metal cycling in soils and sediments and its novel ability to convert sugars into electricity  <cit> . r. ferrireducens, which was isolated from subsurface sediments in oyster bay, va, is a facultative anaerobic microorganism in the comamonadaceae family of the betaproteobacteria  <cit> . it is one of the few known facultative microorganisms that can grow anaerobically by oxidizing organic compounds to carbon dioxide with fe serving as the electron acceptor. this property, as well as its ability to grow at the low temperatures found in many subsurface environments, suggests that it could contribute to the oxidation of organic matter coupled to the reduction of fe in many soils and sediments. microorganisms closely related to r. ferrireducens have been detected in a number of subsurface environments  <cit> . the novel ability of r. ferrireducens to oxidize sugars to carbon dioxide with quantitative electron transfer to electrodes in microbial fuel cells is of interest because of the possibility of using sugars as a renewable energy source for power production  <cit> .

r. ferrireducens has a number of important physiological characteristics that distinguishes it from other members of the genus rhodoferax. for example, it appears to be unable to grow phototrophically  <cit> , a previous hallmark feature of the genus  <cit> . furthermore, unlike other rhodoferax species, r. ferrireducens cannot grow anaerobically via fructose fermentation. no other rhodoferax species have been shown to grow via anaerobic respiration, whereas r. ferrireducens can grow by oxidizing a wide variety of organic electron donors, such as acetate, lactate, propionate, pyruvate, succinate, malate and benzoate, with fe serving as the electron acceptor  <cit> . in addition to fe, r. ferrireducens can utilize mn oxide, fumarate, and nitrate as electron acceptors to support anaerobic growth  <cit> .

the production of linear polyesters in the form of polyhydroxyalkanoates   <cit>  is an interesting characteristic of r. ferrireducens with important biotechnological implications. phas are typically synthesized in bacteria from sugars or lipids and have industrial interest due to their properties as thermoplastics and elastomers  <cit> .

in order to further elucidate the physiology of r. ferrireducens, the publicly available genome sequence  was annotated in more detail and a genome-scale metabolic model was reconstructed using the constraint-based modeling approach  <cit> . constraint-based modeling couples stoichiometric reconstructions of all known metabolic reactions in the organism with a set of constraints on the fluxes of each of these reactions in the system. this approach unveiled a variety of previously unknown physiological features of r. ferrireducens that contributed to a better understanding of its potential role in subsurface environments and converting organic compounds to electricity.

RESULTS
general features of the genome
the rhodoferax ferrireducens genome as sequenced and assembled by the joint genome institute   <cit>  consists of a circular chromosome of  <dig> , <dig> base pairs  and a plasmid with  <dig>  bp. manual curation of this sequence predicted a total of  <dig> coding sequences  from the chromosome and  <dig> cdss from the plasmid . of the chromosomally located cdss, blast searches matched  <dig>  to a database of proteobacterial proteins, by selecting for alignments with a 70% length requirement, 35% identity and an e-value less than  <dig> e- <dig>  analysis of the best blast match for each cds against the database of proteobacterial proteins established the taxonomic breakdown as follows: betaproteobacteria , gammaproteobacteria , alphaproteobacteria , delta/epsilonproteobacteria , and unclassified proteobacteria . beyond examining best blast matches, the "blast curves" analysis was also employed. blast curves  visually display the number of genes in each percent identity bin, and each color-coded curve corresponds to matches to a particular genome in the blast database. by comparing the profiles of all the curves in the graph, relative rankings of completely sequenced proteobacterial genomes in the blast database can be elucidated for r. ferrireducens. for example, a curve having a profile with a peak on the right side of the graph, which indicates high percent identity matches to r. ferrireducens, is ranked higher than a curve displaying a peak on the left side of the graph. an important note concerning blast curves is that a database genome with a lower absolute number of matches can have a more significant ranking if it has a high percent identity profile compared to another genome with a higher absolute number of low percent identity matches. as shown in figure  <dig>  the genomes in the blast database, which are most closely related to r. ferrireducens, are polaromonas sp. js <dig> and polaromonas napthtalenivorans cj <dig> species with  <dig> and  <dig> matches respectively  <cit> . the next several closely ranked organisms include acidovorax sp. js <dig> and acidovorax avenae subsp citrulli aac00- <dig> , delftia acidovorans sph- <dig> , and verminephrobacter eiseniae ef01- <dig> . compared to these examples of comamonadaceae, the unclassified burkholderiales, methylibium petroleiphylum pm <dig>  and ralstonia eutropha h <dig>  have a lower profile in the blast curves output. r. ferrireducens is also a better match to the gammaproteobacterium escherichia coli k <dig>  than to the deltaproteobacteria geobacter metallireducens gs  <dig> and g. sulfurreducens pca .

of the  <dig> predicted cdss in the plasmid, blast searches matched only  <dig> to a database of proteobacterial proteins, using the same criteria used for the chromosome . these include possible conjugation proteins,  <dig> integrases separated by large spans of hypothetical proteins, a helicase, a dna methylase, a gene for dna repair protein rada, a copy of polymerase dnan , at least  <dig> crispr cas genes, a dna ligase, a thymidine kinase,  <dig> secretion proteins,  <dig> sensor histidine kinases, and possible type  <dig> pilin proteins. an unusual finding was a copy of a trna-ile, which is different in sequence from the identical copies in the chromosome but shares the same anticodon.

in silico constraint-based modeling as a tool to gain new insights into the physiology of r. ferrireducens
development of the constraint-based in silico model
of the  <dig> genes in the r. ferrireducens genome used for developing the in silico model,  <dig> genes were included in the reconstructed genome-scale network. the r. ferrireducens metabolic model contains  <dig> reactions and  <dig> metabolites, including  <dig> extracellular metabolites . a detailed list of genes, reactions, metabolites, and gene-protein-reaction  associations in the metabolic model are available in additional file  <dig>  the functional characterization of the  <dig> reactions in the model is summarized in figure  <dig>  among different functional groups, reactions for biosynthesis of amino acids, lipids and cell wall components, cofactors, and nucleic acids are the most abundant, accounting for 65% of all the reactions. currently, there are  <dig> reactions associated with transporting metabolites, including redundant transporters for the extracellular metabolites.

stoichiometry of the electron transport chain
the model incorporates two types of maintenance energy parameters: the growth-associated maintenance , which reflects the energy cost during division ; and the non-growth associated maintenance , which reflects the basal energy requirement of the cell regardless of growth. based on the similarity in biomass composition between r. ferrireducens and e. coli, the gam was set at  <dig>  mmol atp/gdw h, the same as the e. coli model  <cit> . three independent sets of physiological and growth data were used to determine the ngam and the stoichiometry of the electron transport chain of the genome-scale model of r. ferrireducens: 1) acetate and fumarate, 2) acetate and fe  <cit>  and 3) citrate and fe . in order to determine the most consistent values with experimentally determined growth yields, an optimization algorithm  iterated the h+/2e- ratio of nadh dehydrogenase from  <dig> to  <dig>  the h+/2e- ratio of cytochrome reductase from  <dig> to  <dig>  and the ngam from  <dig> to  <dig>  mmol atp/gdw h. this process identified optimal energy parameters of an h+/2e- ratio of  <dig> for both nadh dehydrogenase and cytochrome reductase, and an ngam of  <dig>  mmol atp/gdw h . this set of energy parameters was applied to the metabolic model in simulations to compare between in silico predictions and experimentally determined yields. a fourth set of experimental data, obtained from a batch culture grown on fumarate as the electron donor and acceptor, was used to validate the model. the biomass yield of fumarate was calculated by constraining fumarate, succinate, and acetate fluxes to simulate the experimental conditions, and the yields obtained through the simulation closely matched the actual experimental results . the use of fumarate as electron donor and acceptor by r. ferrireducens is further described in the fumarate dismutation section.

it is interesting to point out that the obtained ngam for the r. ferrireducens genome-scale model is similar to that of g. sulfurreducens, another acetate-oxidizing fe reducer  <cit>  often found in the same microbial niche  <cit> . both r. ferrireducens and g. sulfurreducens in silico models have an h+/2e- ratio of  <dig> for the nadh dehydrogenase of the electron transfer chains. however, the h+/2e-ratio for cytochrome reductase is  <dig> in r. ferrireducens as opposed to  <dig> in g. sulfurreducens  <cit> . such a difference between the two models implies that the electron transfer chain of r. ferrireducens is more efficient than that of g. sulfurreducens. the evolution of electron transport chains with different efficiencies suggests that microorganisms could adapt to different lifestyles within the same community. additional modeling studies on microbial community competition have shown that g. sulfurreducens is better adapted to acetate-rich environments, whereas r. ferrireducens thrives in nutrient-depleted environments . understanding these survival strategies is crucial for modeling complex microbial communities.

central metabolism
r. ferrireducens possesses a full tricarboxylic acids  cycle and pentose phosphate pathway. oxaloacetate is likely replenished by the combined action of pep carboxylase  and pyruvate phosphate dikinase . genes coding for the enzymes of the glyoxylate cycle and a glyoxylate oxidase  are present, which allow this organism to utilize glycolate as the sole electron and carbon source .

the versatility in donor utilization is reflected by the existence of several pathways and their associated enzymes by which the key intermediate pyruvate can be produced. these include the enzymes of the glycolytic pathway, l-lactate dehydrogenase  , and the pyruvate-oxidoreductase  complex. likewise, the genome provides multiple alternatives for generating acetyl-coa: pyruvate dehydrogenase, aldehyde dehydrogenase/acetaldehyde dehydrogenase, acetate-coa ligase and acetate kinase/phosphate acetyltransferase. notably, of these enzymes only the pyruvate dehydrogenase and acetate kinase/phosphate acetyltransferase are shared by g. sulfurreducens.

no fermentative growth with sugars was observed in r. ferrireducens, which contrasts with other rhodoferax species  <cit> . fermentative growth on glucose was simulated with the in silico model and the result confirmed the experimental observation. detailed analysis of the metabolic network suggested that the lack of fermentative growth of r. ferrireducens with glucose is likely due to its inability to recycle reduced nadh generated from glycolysis for redox balance without an electron acceptor. compared to the e. coli metabolic model, the r. ferrireducens model lacks several reactions, including the reversible lactate dehydrogenase , the pyruvate formate lyase , and the acetaldehyde coa dehydrogenase/alcohol dehydrogenase . these reactions are important to the e. coli fermentative growth that produces acetate, ethanol, lactate, and formate to allow the balance of the reducing equivalents generated during glycolysis  <cit> . simulations with the r. ferrireducens model predicted that introducing any one of these enzymes into r. ferrireducens should support the fermentation of glucose .

r. ferrireducens differs from most other acetate-oxidizing fe reducers in its ability to completely oxidize sugars to carbon dioxide with electron transfer to fe and electrodes  <cit> . the genome contains genes coding for the entner-doudoroff glycolytic pathway, typical of pseudomonads and comamonas. sugars are likely to be imported into the bacterial cells by a homolog of a general hexose phosphotransferase system . in addition, several abc transporters might be related to sugar transport. for instance, rfer_0952- <dig> have weak similarity to abc-type sugar transporters and are surrounded by genes related to carbohydrate metabolism . a larger cluster comprising cdss rfer_ <dig> to rfer_ <dig> contains at least two putative sugar abc transporters as well as other genes involved in sugar metabolism. r. ferrireducens is able to oxidize other sugars such as fructose, sucrose and mannose, but not lactose . the presence of two putative betaglucosidases in the genome  suggested that r. ferrireducens might also be able to metabolize cellobiose, a fact confirmed in subsequent growth studies . cellobiose degradation is of biotechnological interest because of the potential of turning common cellulosic waste products into energy. the in silico r. ferrireducens model includes the pathway for cellobiose degradation and predicts growth on this substrate.

fumarate dismutation
new experimental evidence indicates that r. ferrireducens is able to grow with fumarate as the sole electron donor, electron acceptor and carbon source . this type of metabolism is known as fumarate dismutation and has been previously described in desulfovibrio sp.  <cit> , and the main products in r. ferrireducens are acetate and succinate. the r. ferrireducens genome contains genes whose products account for this metabolism, including a fumarate transporter dcub  with 79% identity to the characterized homolog from wolinella succinogenes  <cit>  and a putative malate dehydrogenase    with 89% identity to its homolog from p. aeruginosa . in fumarate dismutation simulations, fumarate is reduced to succinate accepting electrons from reducing equivalents that are generated in: 1) from fumarate through malic enzyme to acetyl-coa, or 2) from fumarate to acetyl-coa and the complete oxidation of acetyl-coa through the tca cycle. the first route is more efficient in generating atp, but the in silico model predicted that the second route is also active in simulations constrained with experimental data, probably due to the high activities of the tca cycle enzymes.

citrate utilization
citrate tested negative as an electron donor in the initial description of rhodoferax ferrireducens  <cit> . however, other members of the rhodoferax genus are able to utilize citrate  <cit> , and examination of the genome suggests that it might be the case for r. ferrireducens as well. rfer_ <dig>  is 44% identical to a putative citrate transporter from e. coli cft <dig>  <cit>  and is located in a cluster of genes also associated with citrate metabolism. further experimental evaluation confirmed that r. ferrireducens could utilize citrate as electron donor and carbon source with fe or nitrate as the electron acceptor . even though other betaproteobacteria can also use citrate  <cit> , blast-based analyses revealed that these r. ferrireducens citrate-related proteins are more closely related to gammaproteobacteria and alphaproteobacteria homologs . an exception is isocitrate dehydrogenase , for which there is a lineage-specific gene duplication in the r. ferrireducens genome  that resembles homologs of the betaproteobacteria. rfer_ <dig>  annotated as a citb, a citrate-utilization protein, might also be involved in this metabolism.

the in silico model predicted that r. ferrireducens could completely oxidize citrate with fe as electron acceptor . however, this requires a very high fe flux, 18-fold higher than that of citrate. when culturing r. ferrireducens it was difficult to provide enough fe for complete oxidation of the citrate added. therefore, the experimental growth of r. ferrireducens was under electron acceptor limiting conditions, which resulted in incomplete oxidation of citrate and production of acetate and succinate. the in silico model suggested four other pathways of citrate oxidation that could also produce acetate and/or succinate under acceptor limiting conditions. these pathways have different fe:citrate stoichiometry and generate different amounts of atp . citrate lyase , a key enzyme in citrate utilization, is active in pathways p <dig> and p <dig>  the reversible malate dehydrogenase  can proceed in both directions: reductive in pathways p <dig> and p <dig>  and oxidative in pathway p <dig>  succinate dehydrogenase can act in both directions, too: it is reductive in pathway p <dig> but oxidative in pathways p <dig> and p <dig>  in order to figure out which of these pathways are the most likely to be active in vivo, citrate consumption was simulated in silico with data from two independent growth experiments applied as constraints . the model predicted that three pathways were active. when the fe:citrate ratio was low, r. ferrireducens utilized pathways p <dig>  p <dig>  and p3; which have low requirement of fe availability. when more fe was available, r. ferrireducens shifted towards pathway p <dig>  which uses electron acceptors with a higher efficiency and more atp is generated per citrate consumed . the integration of experimental data and computational modeling in this case greatly improved our understanding of citrate metabolism, and can be readily applied to understanding other aspects of cellular physiology.

degradation of aromatic compounds
the genome of r. ferrireducens harbors genes for benzoate degradation that are likely to be active under both aerobic and anaerobic conditions. interestingly, unusual genes and enzymes are involved in both cases. recently, a novel pathway for aerobic benzoate catabolism was characterized in azoarcus evansii  <cit> . the unorthodox pathway combines features from the classical aerobic and anaerobic pathways of aromatic catabolism. in addition to an oxygen-dependent hydroxylation step similar to the aerobic route, it has the following features which are characteristic of the anaerobic pathways  <cit> ;  the substrate is activated by co-enzyme a  formation,  the intermediates are processed as coa thioesters,  ring cleavage is non-oxygenolytic, and  a β-oxidation-like reaction sequence is involved in the last steps of the pathway. in r. ferrireducens the genes of the new catabolic route are clustered and their products are most similar to orthologs from polaromonas naphtalenivorans, one of the closest relatives of r. ferrireducens . interestingly, r. ferrireducens also possesses genes coding for protocatechuate- <dig> -dioxygenase , which catalyzes the oxygen-dependent ring cleavage of protocatechuate, an intermediate in aerobic benzoate degradation pathway.

in the absence of oxygen, the first step in benzoate catabolism is the production of benzoyl-coa. the fact that there is only one gene for benzoate-coa ligase in the r. ferrireducens genome  suggests that benzoyl-coa formation is catalyzed by the same enzyme under both aerobic and anaerobic conditions, as observed in the denitrifying organism thauera aromatica  <cit> . in facultative anaerobes, benzoyl-coa is reductively dearomatized by an atp-dependent benzoyl-coa reductase, but the genes coding for this enzyme could not be found in the r. ferrireducens genome. it has been recently postulated that benzoyl-coa reduction in obligate anaerobes like geobacter metallireducens is mediated by a novel atp-independent enzyme complex encoded by the genes bamb-i  <cit> . the genome of r. ferrireducens contains several genes whose products are moderately similar  to some bam genes of g. metallireducens , but they do not appear to form a cluster. the possibility of r. ferrireducens having a novel system for benzoyl-coa reduction cannot be excluded. the full elucidation of these pathways warrants further study. the r. ferrireducens model contains a pathway for benzoate degradation, and predicts the growth of r. ferrireducens on benzoate with fe as an electron acceptor.

the genome of r. ferrireducens also contains a putative pathway for the anaerobic catabolism of phenylalanine that includes a transaminase , a phenylpyruvate decarboxylase  and phenylacetaldehyde dehydrogenase . the end product of this pathway, phenylacetate, could be converted into benzoyl-coa by the successive action of putative phenylacetate-coa ligase   <cit> , phenylacetyl-coa: acceptor oxidoreductase  and phenylglyoxylate:acceptor oxidoreductase   <cit> .

the complete oxidation of benzoate requires an elevated fe:substrate ratio. this suggests that benzoate or other aromatic compounds could be a good feedstock for r. ferrireducens based microbial fuel cells to generate electricity. thus, using aromatic waste stream for r. ferrireducens based microbial fuel cells could be an attractive idea that can achieve both bioremediation of aromatic compound contaminants and generation of electricity.

analysis of substrate efficiency
the ability to predict growth yields on various substrates can be helpful for understanding the growth of microorganisms in various environments as well as for practical applications. r. ferrireducens, growth on eight representative electron donors  was simulated under electron donor-limiting conditions with fe as electron acceptor . among the c <dig> compounds, glucose was predicted to yield more biomass than equivalent molar concentrations of citrate or benzoate. the simulations with different complex electron donors will allow a fast and easy analysis of substrate efficiency for bioremediation and electricity generation applications.

photosynthesis and autotrophic growth
although other members of the rhodoferax genus are capable of autotrophic growth  <cit> , this is not the case for r. ferrireducens  <cit> . no evidence of photosystems i or ii was found in the genome. however, incomplete pathways associated with co <dig> fixation are present. for instance, there is a gene coding for the large subunit of ribulose- <dig> -bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase  , but not the small subunit. some genes encoding enzymes for the calvin-benson-bassham cycle are present as well, but genes for phosphoketolase and seduheptulose-bisphosphatase are missing. the reductive carboxylate cycle, present in many photosynthetic bacteria, is also incomplete as a gene for the key enzyme atp citrate synthase, is missing.

cytochrome content
well-studied fe-reducing microorganisms such as shewanella and geobacter species have abundant c-type cytochromes that are essential for extracellular electron transfer  <cit> . r. ferrireducens also has an abundance of c-type cytochrome genes . based on matches to prosite and hidden markov model  profiles, the r. ferrireducens genome possess  <dig> putative c-type cytochromes, of which  <dig> have matched above the high confidence scores to the prosite profiles for the cytochrome c family  and multiheme cytochrome c family profiles . of the r. ferrireducens putative c-type cytochrome complement, approximately 45%  possess a homolog to a c-type cytochrome indentified in a previously sequenced  <cit> geobacter spp. genome and the majority appears to reside in the periplasm or outer membrane based on the presence of predicted signal peptides. one c-type cytochrome gene in r. ferrireducens, rfer_ <dig>  is a homolog of omce, an outer-membrane c-type cytochrome that is essential for fe oxide reduction in g. sulfurreducens  <cit> . however, there are no homologs to several other cytochromes shown to be important in g. sulfurreducens fe oxide reduction  including omcb, omcc, omcf, omcs, omct and omcz  <cit> . these results suggest that c-type cytochrome complements can vary in fe oxide reducing  prokaryotes. however, whether or not a subset of c-type cytochromes essential to fe oxide reduction  exists within the set shared between rhodoferax and other fe oxide reducing prokaryotes remains to be determined. this may not be surprising as there is poor conservation of cytochromes even among geobacter species .

nitrogen metabolism
the genome of r. ferrireducens contains a respiratory nitrate reductase complex , and nitrate was previously reported to serve as an electron acceptor supporting growth  <cit> . further investigation revealed that nitrate is reduced to nitrite . although genes coding for nitric oxide and nitrous oxide reductases are present , r. ferrireducens is not a denitrifier, probably due to the absence of a no-forming nitrite reductase. approximately 80% of the nitrate was converted to nitrite , thus failing the criteria that at least 80% of the nitrogen ought to be recovered as gas for an organism to be considered a denitrifier  <cit> .

r. ferrireducens also contains assimilatory forms of nitrate reductase  and nitrite reductase nadh  that allow growth on nitrate without the addition of ammonia, although the growth rate was higher in the ammonia-amended cultures .

the r. ferrireducens model contains reactions that account for nitrate utilization as electron acceptor and nitrogen source. it predicts a 20% faster growth rate if ammonium is added to the medium, in agreement with actual experimental results . the model also accurately predicted the proportion of nitrate converted to nitrite, ca. 80% . the rest is likely converted to ammonium, of which 60% is predicted to be assimilated into biomass, probably via glutamine synthetase.

metalloid and metal resistance
the r. ferrireducens genome contains a cluster of genes related to arsenic metabolism . the gene cluster rfer_3663- <dig> encode respectively: a putative arsenite efflux pump; an arsenite-activated atpase and a arsenate reductase which are likely to be involved in removing arsenic from the cell. however, tolerance to arsenic has yet to be evaluated.

the genome contains two genes, rfer_ <dig> and rfer_ <dig>  which have 30% and 27% identity respectively to the characterized chromate transporter homolog, chra, in p. aeruginosa  <cit> . chrb , on the other hand, is 58% identical to the cr-sensing regulator chrb in ochrobactrum triciti, an alphaproteobacteria isolated from chromium-contaminated sludge and able to grow in the presence of high concentrations of chromium  <cit> . a chromate reductase  homolog was not evident. the r. ferrireducens genome also encodes a heavy metal efflux pump czca , which might confer resistance to cd, zn and co  <cit> . other genes encoding proteins involved in metal resistance are four putative copper-translocating p-type atpases  and a periplasmic copper-binding protein .

storage capabilities: polyhydroxyalkanoates
many organisms have the ability to trigger the production of carbon storage compounds under unfavorable conditions such as limited or inaccessible electron acceptors and/or lack of key nutrients   <cit> . some of these polymers have attractive physical properties that make them relevant for industrial use, particularly in biodegradable materials  <cit> . genome analysis indentified three genes well characterized for their involvement in pha synthesis present in a putative operon in the r. ferrireducens genome: acetoacetyl-coa reductase , acetyl-coa acetyltransferase  and pha synthase . even though production of phas has been previously observed in r. ferrireducens  <cit> , the in silico model does not account for this pathway. it is expected to be included once experimental data are available.

response to environmental challenges
r. ferrireducens is a psychrotolerant organism that can withstand temperatures as low as 4°c, which might confer a competitive advantage in certain environments  <cit> . notably, no genes coding for major cold shock proteins   could be identified in the r. ferrireducens genome or other members of the comamonadaceae whose genomes have been sequenced . other members of the betaproteobacteria for which whole genome sequence is available  possess these csp homologs. this suggests that other cold shock proteins or other mechanisms for surviving cold shock events have yet to be identified in r. ferrireducens.

r. ferrireducens is a facultative organism and can utilize atmospheric oxygen as a terminal electron acceptor. the genome contains a cytochrome c-oxidase and also several genes coding for enzymes related to the oxidative stress response, such as superoxide dismutase  and several alkylhydroxyperoxidases .

examination of the r. ferrireducens genome revealed that this organism has potential to respond to a wide variety of stimuli, with over  <dig> genes coding for putative sensor histidine kinases,  <dig> methyl-accepting chemotaxis proteins  and  <dig> dna-binding response regulator elements. the genes coding for sensor proteins and response regulators  are often found in pairs, and at least  <dig> such pairs were found in the r. ferrireducens genome . homologs of chea, chew, chev and chey are also present, though the chemotactic behavior of r. ferrireducens is largely unknown.

r. ferrireducens is motile by means of one polar flagellum  <cit> . genes coding for flagellin-like proteins have been identified  that cluster with genes coding for a flagellar hook-associated protein  and for flagellin-specific chaperons flis and flit  <cit> . at least  <dig> genes are directly  or indirectly  related to flagellar motility and are grouped in two clusters in the genome.

crispr sequences and immunity to phage attack
a  <dig>  kb array of clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats  was identified in the chromosome of r. ferrireducens, using the crispr recognition tool  <cit> . it has been previously shown in a different bacterial system that new crispr spacer sequences derived from phage genomic dna are added after viral challenge  <cit> . the presence of these sequences in the host genome was shown to confer phage-resistance, in association with the cas genes. thus, the crispr locus in the chromosome of r. ferrireducens may protect against phage attack. in addition, there is a  <dig>  kb crispr array in the plasmid, encoding  <dig> spacer sequences of  <dig> bp. the crisprs in the chromosome and plasmid are  <dig> bp and  <dig> bp respectively, and these two loci are associated with separate sets of cas genes. thus, the plasmid-encoded crispr appears independent of the chromosome-encoded crispr. spacer sequences in both loci have no significant matches to entries in the ncbi databases . the results suggest that a significant cache of horizontally transferrable genetic elements which the r. ferrireducens chromosome and plasmid have encountered previously have yet to be sequenced and identified. alternatively, if the horizontal acquisition of these elements occurred a long time ago in terms of r. ferrireducens evolution and selective pressure to maintain the original sequence is low, these spacer regions may have been ameliorated to such a degree that homology to the original sequence is no longer detectable.

CONCLUSIONS
this study demonstrates how genome-scale metabolic modeling, coupled with enhanced genome annotation and laboratory studies, can accelerate the study of the physiology of environmentally relevant, but understudied microorganisms. in relatively short order the understanding of metabolism of r. ferrireducens has advanced from a description of growth characteristics  <cit>  to a detailed understanding of metabolism  and the ability to predict the growth and metabolism of r. ferrireducens under a diversity of environmental conditions. the genome-scale metabolic model of r. ferrireducens is expected to be a useful tool for studying the role of this microorganism in soils and sediments and its interactions with other microorganisms, such as geobacter species, that share some physiological characteristics. furthermore, the genome-scale metabolic model of r. ferrireducens is likely to be a powerful tool for optimizing potential applications of r. ferrireducens such as the bioremediation of contaminants, the production of polymers, and the conversion of organic compounds to electricity.

