BACKGROUND
ruminal microbial urease plays an important role in the nitrogen metabolism in ruminants such as cattle and sheep. the urea from diet or recycled from blood to rumen is hydrolyzed by urease to ammonia, the major source of nitrogen for many ruminal bacteria including several known cellulolytic bacteria  <cit> . the traditional recommendation for urea feeding is less than 1% of the concentrate portion of the diet, approximately 135 g/cow daily  <cit> . between  <dig> and 80% of the urea-n synthesized by the liver also return to the rumen and gut, where  <dig> to 55% of this n is used in microbial anabolism in both cattle and sheep  <cit> . however, the rate of urea hydrolysis  is about four fold greater than that of ammonia assimilation, resulting in ammonia accumulation, which can lead to toxicity, excessive ammonia excretion to the environment, and poor n utilization when diets contain a high urea content  <cit> . to alleviate this problem, different urease inhibitors have been evaluated to reduced ureolytic activity, including acetohydroxamic acid, phenyl phosphorodiamidate, n- thiophosphoric triamide, boric acid, and bismuth compounds, to slow down production of ammonia in the rumen  <cit> . however, their efficacy decreases over time due to microbial adaptation  <cit> , and some of these compounds pose potential risk animal and human health, precluding their use in production.

recent studies have shown that immunization is a potential approach to mitigate methane emissions  <cit> , lactic acidosis  <cit> , and to decrease protozoal population  <cit>  in the rumen. we hypothesize that immunization against rumen urease can be an effective approach to slow down ureolysis in the rumen. bacterial urease consists of two  or three  structural subunits. the alpha subunit  contains a urea binding site and a catalytic site. the urec gene has been used as a gene marker to examine urec diversity in bacterial communities because it is quite conserved among different bacterial species  <cit> . in one study, the urec of jack bean urease has been tried as an antigen to immunize sheep to inhibit rumen ureolysis in sheep rumen  <cit> ; however, no obvious anti-urease activity was achieved probably because of low immunological homology between jack bean urease and rumen bacterial urease. the objectives of the present study were to examine the diversity of urec in the rumen, identify an antigen that has high immunological homology with rumen urec, develop an anti-urease vaccine from bacterial urec, and evaluate anti-urease immunization as an approach to decrease ruminal ureolysis.

RESULTS
diversity of rumen bacterial urease gene
the urec diversity in the rumen was examined by cloning and sequencing of urec genes using degenerate primers. in total,  <dig> urec sequences were obtained from the microbial dna of rumen digesta of chinese holstein cows. phylogenetic analysis revealed five urec clusters . cluster i contained  <dig>  of the urec sequences, and it was about 84% identical  to the urec gene of helicobacter pylori . clusters iia and iib represented  <dig>  and  <dig>  of the urec sequences, respectively, and both were closely related  to the urec of h. pylori. clusters iii and iv, each of which contained a small number of urec sequences, and cluster v, represent the rest of the urec sequences, had no match with any known urec sequences.figure  <dig> a neighbor-joining tree of the urec sequences recovered from rumen digesta. the consensus tree was constructed from amino acid sequences inferred from the urec sequences recovered from rumen and known bacterial species. bootstrap values were calculated from  <dig>  trees. only bootstrapping values greater than 50% are shown.



immunological homology between purified rumen urease and h. pylori urease
immunological homology between urease purified from the rumen and the h. pylori urease was evaluated using western blotting. urease protein with an activity of  <dig> u was purified from rumen bacteria by anion exchange chromatography. western blotting of the purified urease using anti-urease serum from the cows immunized with overexpressed urec of h. pylori identified the positive band of expected molecular weight , indicating a high immunological homology between the overexpressed urec of h. pylori and the urease purified from the rumen bacteria.figure  <dig> western blot of urease purified from the rumen of dairy cows using anti-urease serum collected from cows immunized with overexpressed urec of h. pylori
. the urec band was indicated by arrow.



vaccine and specific antibody titers
the above urec diversity data showed that the majority  of the urec in the rumen share high homology  with the urec of h. pylori. the urease of h. pylori also share high immunological homology with the urease of rumen bacteria. therefore, h. pylori urec was selected as the antigen to elicit immunization against urease in the rumen of dairy cows. another reason to choose the urec of h. pylori was the availability of full-length sequence of its urec gene so that this urec protein can be overexpressed in e. coli. the urec of h. pylori was successfully expressed in e.coli bl <dig> following induction with iptg. the molecular weight of the expressed urec was about 66 kda, consistent with the molecular mass predicted from the urec sequence . about 20 mg purified urec was obtained. the expressed urec protein, together with freund’s adjuvant, was used as the vaccine to immunize the dairy cows.

after the immunization with h. pylori urec, no apparent adverse effect was seen on health, milk production, or digestion of dry matter and crude protein . low titers of anti-urease antibody were detected in the serum and the saliva samples from the control group from day  <dig>  to day  <dig> . compared to the control group, the vaccinated group had higher  serum titers of both igg and iga from day  <dig> onward, while higher  saliva titers of igg and iga were noted from days  <dig> and  <dig> onward, respectively. the iga titer peaked at day  <dig> in both the serum and the saliva, but the igg titers peaked later at day  <dig>  the variation of both iga and igg titers had similar trends in the serum and the saliva. the highest titers of both igg and iga in the serum were 13- and 20-fold greater, respectively, than those noted for the saliva.figure  <dig> titers of igg  and iga  in the serum  and the saliva  of cows. arrow indicates days of vaccinations. values are means , with error bars representing standard deviation. the asterisks  indicate significant  difference between the control group and the vaccinated group at the same days.



urease activity and rumen fermentation after immunization
the effect of immunization against urease was assessed by analyzing rumen fermentation characteristic and ureolysis in the rumen of the vaccinated cows. no significant difference in rumen urease activity was seen between the control and the vaccinated groups from days  <dig> to  <dig>  . at day  <dig> , however, urease activity in the vaccinated group was 17% lower  than that in the control group. rumen ph and volatile fatty acid  concentration were not affected by the immunization . after direct infusion of urea into the rumen at day  <dig>  ammonia concentration in the rumen ascended during the first hour and then descended to the pre-infusion level . compared to the control group, the vaccinated group had lower  ammonia concentration at  <dig> and 2 h post infusion, but not thereafter.figure  <dig> urease activity in the rumen after immunization  and ammonia concentration variation after urea was infused into the rumen . values are means , with error bars representing standard deviation. the asterisks  indicate significant  difference between the control group and the vaccinated group at the time points.



inhibition of urea hydrolysis by anti-urease serum in vitro
the ability of anti-urease antibodies to decrease ureolysis by rumen microbes was evaluated using fresh rumen fluid in vitro. compared to the control, the addition of serum anti-urease antibody from the vaccinated cows significantly reduced the rate of urea disappearance and corresponding ammonia formation . urea was completely hydrolyzed within 4 h of the incubation in the absence of the anti-urease serum; however, urea disappearance was slowed down in the presence of the anti-urease serum. concomitantly, increase in ammonia concentration was reduced within 12 h after the anti-urease serum addition.figure  <dig> effect of addition of anti-urease serum to fresh rumen fluid on the rate of urea disappearance  and corresponding ammonia formation  in vitro. values are means , with error bars representing standard deviation. the different alphabets above error bars indicate significant  difference between treatments.



discussion
most of the ureases in the rumen are produced by bacteria, but little is known about the diversity of the urease-producing bacteria because only  <dig> % of the rumen bacteria have been cultured or characterized  <cit> . the urease genes carried by rumen ureolytic bacteria have not been systematically examined. in a study conducted in 1970′s, cook et al.  <cit>  found that urease from rumen bacteria, such as staphylococcus spp., was either intracellular or bound to the surface of the cell wall. the diversity of ureolytic bacteria and their urease gene have to be identified before highly effective urease vaccine can be developed. the present study is the first study that examined the diversity of urec genes in the rumen of dairy cows using a cultivation-independent approach. about 86% of the recovered urec sequences shared high sequence identity  to that of h. pylori; however, interestingly, none of the recovered urec sequences matched that previously recovered from any cultured rumen microbes. the urec from h. pylori has been verified to have high immunogenicity in mice and human  <cit> . in the present study, overexpressed urec of h. pylori was shown to be highly immunologically homologous to rumen urec of dairy cows. the observed inhibition to urease activity and corresponding decrease in ammonia accumulation suggest that specific antibodies against rumen bacterial urease were produced by the dairy cows vaccinated with the overexpressed urec of h. pylori.

as demonstrated in the present study, urease vaccination did elicit a humoral immune response as indicated by the elevated serum and saliva specific antibody titers observed in the vaccinated cows but not in the control cows. specific igg and iga titers in the serum and the saliva were further increased following booster immunization and peaked after the third and second booster immunization, respectively. the igg and iga titers in the serum had high positive correlation with those in the saliva. the specific igg and iga could flow into rumen fluid with saliva, because the liquid in the rumen is primarily  derived from saliva  <cit> . although rumen contains proteolytic bacteria, no significant degradation of igg molecules within the first 4 h of incubation in fresh rumen fluid  <cit> . as such, anti-urease antibodies produced by vaccination can persist long enough in the rumen to bind to urease and reduce ureolytic activity.

immunization with jack bean urease failed to reduce urease activity or urea kinetics in sheep rumen  <cit>  or produce antibody against the urease of helicobacter in vaccinated mice  <cit> . this inability is probably attributed to a lack of immunological homology between bacterial urease and jack bean urease. the reduced urease activity by the bovine anti-urease antibody elicited by the urec of h. pylori, both in vitro and in vivo, clearly indicates that the urec of h. pylori has high immunological homology with rumen bacterial ureases, at least many of them, and can be used as an effective vaccine in cows. the western blotting further confirmed the immunological homology between the rumen bacterial urease and the h. pylori urease. however, given the diverse urec present in the rumen , a vaccine prepared from a combination of representatives of different rumen urec clusters may be more effective than urec of h. pylori or single rumen bacterial urec. future studies are also needed to identify ureolytic bacteria and their ureases so that anti-urease antibodies with greater efficacy might be developed.

CONCLUSIONS
the alpha subunit of h. pylori urease may serve as a vaccine to immunize cows to slow down ureolysis in the rumen. combined representatives of rumen bacterial urec may be an even more effective vaccine to improve urea utilization efficiency without the adverse effects associated with chemical urease inhibitors.

