BACKGROUND
during lactation, mammary epithelial cells  secrete huge quantities of milk-specific proteins and other components such as lipids and lactose. the main milk proteins  are the caseins, a family of acidic phosphoproteins  the proportions of which vary widely across species and occasionally among animals of the same species. caseins interact with calcium and calcium phosphate, and self-aggregate to organize into a supramolecular structure known as the casein micelle. the central physiological function of the casein micelle is to supply proteins, phosphate and calcium to neonates.

the mesostructure of the micelle determines the techno-functional characteristics of the milk protein fraction and has an impact on milk processing. despite the importance of the nutritional and functional values of casein micelles, which justifies many years of intense research , the detailed intrinsic organisation and the mechanisms involved in the formation of this structure have not been fully established. although casein micelles vary in size, compactness, protein and mineral compositions, their structure as a whole is believed to be similar across species, implying that very general features are involved in their biogenesis. several conflicting models of the internal structure of casein micelles have emerged, largely from morphological observations, biochemical and physical studies in vitro. in the submicelle model, which was the most accepted for many years, caseins are clustered into small spherical subunits which are further linked together by calcium phosphate . an alternative model, first proposed by holt  and extended by horne  <cit> , is the tangled web model. in this model, caseins self-associate, mainly through hydrophobic and electrostatic interactions, to form a homogeneous network of casein polymers stabilized through interaction with nanoclusters of calcium phosphate. it follows that the small substructures observed within casein micelles at the electron microscopy level or detected by small angle x-ray scattering as a characteristic point of inflection in saxs profiles might well be calcium phosphate nanoclusters rather than submicelles  <cit> . in both models, κ-casein, which is highly glycosylated, preferentially localizes at the periphery of the micelle and forms a layer at the protein-water interface, stabilizing the structure and preventing it from aggregating.

the four major caseins are heterogeneous, genetic polymorphisms and variations in post-translational modifications reinforcing diversity in a given species. this is the case in goat, for example, due to an extensive polymorphism at the csn1s <dig> casein locus  <cit> . it is also clear that very little of the primary sequence of each of the caseins is fully conserved, making the caseins one of the most evolutionarily divergent families of mammalian proteins. despite this high heterogeneity of components, casein micelles are found in all mammalian milks as far as we know and seem quite similar at the ultra structural level. they also form in the absence of αs1- or β-casein  <cit> . interactions between the various caseins and minerals during micelle biogenesis might therefore involve rather general physico-chemical and biochemical characteristics of these components. however, these characteristics are specific enough to avoid incorporation of whey proteins in the micelle. in agreement with these considerations, caseins were shown to lack appreciable amount of regular secondary structure. β-and κ-casein might possess pre-molten or molten globule conformations whereas αs1- and αs2-casein are predicted intrinsically unstructured proteins  <cit>  . the characteristic structural feature of natively unfolded proteins is a combination of low mean hydrophobicity and relatively high proportion of charged residues at physiological ph  <cit> . proteins with such open structure possess a peculiar aggregative behaviour and are prone to interact with their specific ligand in vivo. the caseins, however, do not fulfil these two criteria since they present relatively high hydrophobicities.

first interactions between caseins obviously take place in the endoplasmic reticulum . in all species for which the primary sequence has been determined, κ-casein contains at least one cysteine in its n-terminal domain  <cit> . hence, it can form dimers via disulphide bond linkage, a post-translational modification that occurs in the er. it has been shown that native bovine κ-casein forms dimers and multimers  <cit> , whereas rodent milk κ-casein is seemingly only present as dimers  <cit> . depending on the species, cysteine residues are also found in other casein sequences, notably in αs2-casein. an extreme case is the rat, in which all caseins contain one cysteine  and are dimeric in milk  <cit> . disulphide bond formation, which is one of the first steps in protein maturation, could therefore play a key role in casein aggregation and in the elaboration and stability of the casein micelle structure.

while studying the impact of the polymorphism at the csn1s <dig> locus on goat milk secretion, we showed that, in the absence of αs1-casein, other caseins accumulate in the er  <cit> . kinetic analysis revealed that the efficiency of casein transport from the er to the golgi apparatus was strongly affected in this context. our data suggested that interaction of caseins in a yet to be identified structure including αs1-casein is required for efficient transport of these proteins to the golgi apparatus. during their traffic through the golgi cisternae, all caseins are phosphorylated to various extents and κ-casein is o-glycosylated. phosphorylation allows calcium phosphate binding and further interactions between caseins, a key step in the formation of casein micelles. notably, the phosphorylation of β-casein seems delayed compared to that of αs1-casein  <cit> . this suggests that strong interaction of this protein with casein polymers might be postponed until it is trafficked to trans golgi cisternae. consistent with these results, premicellar aggregates have been observed by electron microscopy in the lumen of the golgi cisternae. there is a drastic rearrangement of the micellar structure during formation of secretory vesicles at the trans side of the golgi apparatus and their transport to the apical plasma membrane for exocytosis  <cit> . in newly formed transport vesicles, caseins are under the form of long loose linear aggregates  <cit> . these progressively self-associate, become bigger and denser, and structures with the characteristic honeycomb texture of casein micelles are found in distal secretory vesicles. these structures are similar, if not identical, to those observed in the lumen of the acini.

this biochemical and morphological information suggests that casein aggregation is initiated in the er and gradually proceeds during their transport to the apical surface. we believe we must exploit the spatio-temporal dimension of casein micelle biogenesis and study their formation within the secretory pathway of mecs to obtain new insights into casein micelle structure. with this aim, we investigated primary steps of casein interaction in the rough er.

RESULTS
to study the state of aggregation of the caseins in the secretory pathway of mecs we chose the rat mammary gland. rat milk contains a high concentration of milk proteins, including  <dig> mg/ml of caseins  <cit> . rat casein micelles are easily pelletable and there are no detectable non-micellar caseins in milk, as is observed in certain species. we have previously identified casein dimers in rat milk  <cit> , as all rat caseins contain at least one cysteine. finally, we have characterised the various molecular forms of rat αs1- and β-casein. these include the immature er forms, which are not yet phosphorylated, and the mature phosphorylated forms, which occur as from the golgi apparatus  <cit> .

properties of the rough microsomal fraction
the rough er microsomal fraction from rat mammary gland cells was obtained by differential centrifugation followed by sucrose density gradient, essentially as described by paiement et al.  <cit> . some modifications of the original protocol were necessary to adapt the method to mammary gland tissue and to eliminate some contaminants such as mitochondria and, more importantly, casein micelles derived from the milk contained in the acini and ducts of the tissue. morphological observation indicated that the rough er microsomal fraction was almost pure . the insert shows that, as expected, most if not all microsomes were associated with numerous electron-dense ribosomal particles. quantitative analysis revealed that the size of the microsomes was heterogeneous, with a mean diameter of  <dig>  ±  <dig>  μm and diameters ranging from  <dig>  to  <dig>  μm. these results were in agreement with those observed by lavoie et al.  <cit>  using rat liver. purification of the rough er-derived membrane-bounded vesicles in the heavy microsomal fraction was further studied by immunoblotting. figure 1b shows that several er resident proteins, namely immunoglobulin heavy chain binding protein , protein disulphide isomerase , calnexin  and calreticulin , were enriched in the heavy microsomal fraction, as compared to the post-nuclear supernatant . in contrast, vesicle-associated membrane protein  <dig>  and gm <dig> , two markers of the golgi apparatus, were not detected in these membranes.

analysis of the distribution of the mature and immature forms of caseins in the various fractions collected during subcellular fractionation confirmed the purification of the rough er-derived vesicles . the relative proportion of the immature forms of αs1- and β-casein was greatly increased in the microsomal fraction. densitometric analysis indicated that immature forms were 2- <dig> times more abundant in the microsomal pellet than in the pns. altogether, these data demonstrated the high enrichment of rough er-derived vesicles in the heavy microsomal fraction.

caseins primarily interact via disulphide bonds in the rough er
since we had previously established that cysteine-containing caseins, notably rat caseins, form disulphide bonds and are dimeric in milk, it was important to determine whether such dimers exist in the er of rat mecs. aliquots of rough er microsomes were analyzed by immunoblotting under reducing or non-reducing conditions and the milk protein patterns were compared to those obtained with caseins from rat milk. as previously reported  <cit> , in the absence of β-mercaptoethanol, mature monomeric forms of αs1- and β-casein in a casein pellet prepared from skim milk disappeared, and these proteins were detected at much higher mr than in reducing conditions . accordingly, when microsomes were analyzed in non-reducing conditions, the amount of immature monomeric forms of αs1- and β-casein was decreased  and several bands appeared at the top of the gel. these data indicated that a substantial part of the caseins were in dimeric forms in the er of rat mecs.

αs1-casein remains in permeabilised rough er microsomes after incubation in conservative conditions
to further determine the types of interactions that exist between caseins in the er, we chose to permeabilise microsomal membranes with saponin to gain access to the lumen, as was previously reported for golgi and secretory granule membranes  <cit> . since the cholesterol concentration in the er is quite low  <cit> , we had to use twice as much saponin  to efficiently release soluble er proteins. membrane permeabilisation was in conditions believed either to conserve or not to conserve the aggregated state of the caseins. it is well known that micelle stability is highly dependent on several physico-chemical parameters  <cit>  including temperature, salt and calcium concentrations, and ph. thus, non-conservative conditions were a slightly basic ph , the presence of a calcium chelator  and salts , plus a small quantity of detergent  and of a reducing agent . in conservative conditions all of these destabilizing agents were omitted and only a low ionic strength buffer was used .

first, we tested these conditions on casein micelles from milk. negative staining in electron microscopy showed that, after dilution and incubation in conservative buffer, the casein micelle structure was preserved . in contrast, incubation in non-conservative conditions resulted in the disappearance of the typical spherical aspect of the micelle and to a high decrease in the electron density of the sample. in line with these morphological results, when casein micelles were diluted and incubated in conservative conditions, they were recovered in the pellet after centrifugation whereas all caseins were found in the supernatant when non-conservative conditions were used . analysis of rat milk caseins incubated in conservative conditions plus  <dig> mm nacl using negative staining or sedimentation on a linear sucrose gradient confirmed that salt was deleterious . we concluded that the conservative and non-conservative conditions were effective in preserving or destroying the micellar structure, respectively.

we then wished to expose the caseins present within the er lumen to the conditions used above by means of saponin permeabilisation of the heavy microsomal membranes. however, we first tested whether saponin has deleterious effects on casein aggregates, by analyzing its effect on casein micelles from milk in conservative conditions. both negative staining and differential centrifugation of diluted milk showed that the standard concentration of saponin used in our experiments had no detectable impact on casein micelle structures . we also verified that saponin did not solubilize the microsomal membranes. it should be noted that for analysis of casein aggregates in the er we use ph  <dig>  for conservative conditions, which is the ph believed to exist in the er lumen  <cit> . aliquots of the microsomal fraction were incubated in conservative conditions in the absence or in the presence of saponin, centrifuged and processed for electron microscopy. morphological analysis revealed that rough er microsomes lost their spherical shape in the presence of saponin but that the detergent did not destroy the microsomal membranes . after thawing and incubation of microsomal membranes in conservative conditions and subsequent centrifugation, a very small amount of protein was detected in the supernatant . when saponin  was added to the conservative buffer, most of the proteins were still associated with the membrane pellet but several proteins were found in substantial amounts in the supernatant. certain of these proteins, notably those migrating between ≈  <dig>  and ≈  <dig> , most likely corresponded to soluble er-resident proteins . when non-conservative conditions were used, the amounts of some of these proteins were slightly increased and additional bands were recovered in the supernatant. we tried to identify these proteins by mass spectrometry . however, definitive identification of the proteins contained in the gel slices was hampered by the high quantity of proteins present in each gel slice . to further characterise this experimental system, we studied several well-known er markers by immunoblotting . in the absence of saponin, all of these er-resident proteins were indeed recovered in the pellet. permeabilisation of microsomal membranes in both conservative and non-conservative conditions induced the complete release of pdi and calreticulin, two soluble er proteins. in striking contrast, calnexin was only found in the pellet in both conditions, in agreement with the fact that this er marker has a transmembrane domain. these results, together with our morphological observations, demonstrated that  <dig> % saponin allows for the efficient permeabilisation of microsomal membranes and for the release of soluble proteins.

the levels of solubility of immature caseins were therefore studied after saponin permeabilisation of microsomal membranes. most of the αs1-casein  was found in the pellet in conservative conditions . in contrast, only  <dig> % of β-casein remained in the pellet in these conditions. in non-conservative conditions, which are expected to disorganize potential casein aggregates in the er lumen, the vast majority of the caseins were indeed released from permeabilised er vesicles and recovered in the supernatant. it should be noted, however, that a substantial amount of αs1-casein remained associated with the membrane pellet . from these data we concluded that most αs1-casein appeared to be aggregated in the lumen of the microsomes. moreover, our results suggest that a part of the αs1-casein was associated with the er membranes.

αs1-casein is present in a membrane-associated form
to investigate this possibility we further characterised the molecular form of αs1-casein that remained associated with the er membranes. when microsomes were permeabilised in non-conservative conditions or after carbonate extraction at ph  <dig> with saponin, all in the presence of dtt, a similar if not identical proportion of αs1-casein  was recovered with the membranous fractions . in the absence of dtt the amount of αs1-casein in the pellet was higher, its quantity being superior in samples treated with carbonate at ph  <dig> . it should be noted that the vast majority of β-casein  was found in the soluble fraction in both sets of experiments . to further prove that the αs1-casein found in the membrane fraction was truly associated with membrane and not co-pelleting casein aggregates, extracted membranes were subjected to flotation using linear sucrose gradient . after centrifugation at equilibrium, a small proportion of αs1-casein was recovered in the load and the large majority floated in the bottom fractions of the linear sucrose gradient. as attested by co-fractionation with calnexin, these fractions contained the extracted membranes. both αs1-casein and calnexin had a similar behaviour in the absence of dtt . these data demonstrated that a fraction of αs1-casein exists as a membrane-associated form within microsomal vesicles and indicated a role for disulphide bonds in the interaction of the protein with membranes.

to study the membranous form of αs1-casein in more distal compartments of the secretory pathway, aliquots of the membranes prepared from pns, and including the whole secretory pathway, were treated as described above. after incubation in conservative conditions, few proteins were found in the supernatant  and some additional bands were detected following permeabilisation by saponin. in non-conservative conditions, the proportion of these proteins in the supernatant was increased and other proteins appeared. quantification of mature αs1-casein revealed that the majority of the protein  remained associated with the membrane pellet after permeabilisation in conservative conditions. as expected, much more mature αs1-casein was released into the supernatant  in non-conservative conditions. however, compared to immature αs1-casein in heavy microsomes , the proportion of the mature protein remaining associated with the pns-derived membranes in non-conservative conditions doubled. furthermore, pns membranes were treated with carbonate buffer at ph  <dig> with saponin, in the absence or the presence of dtt. figure 6c shows that a larger fraction of mature αs1-casein was recovered in the pellet in the absence of dtt, in agreement with our results in microsomes. these data demonstrated the presence of membrane-associated mature αs1-casein in distal compartments of the secretory pathway and confirmed the importance of disulphide bonds in the behaviour of this protein toward membranes.

finally, we wished to generalize our observations to ruminants. goat was chosen because the various forms of goat caseins was previously characterised by our group  <cit> . the permeabilisation experiments and extraction procedures were applied to goat rough er microsomes. in comparison to the results in rat, we observed more mature αs1-casein in the microsomal fraction, most probably due to higher level of contamination by milk caseins contained in the goat tissue . however, as previously observed in rat, the vast majority of immature αs1-casein was recovered in the pellet after membrane permeabilisation in conservative conditions . permeabilisation in non-conservative conditions or extraction with carbonate at ph  <dig> revealed that a small proportion of immature αs1-casein  was also present in a tightly membrane-associated form in goat.

discussion
to elucidate the role of individual caseins in the aggregation process and in the secretion of the micelle, we wished to characterise the initial casein aggregate formed in the secretory pathway. in the present study, we focused on the putative aggregation events that occur in the er for several reasons. first, it is well established that secretory proteins concentrate by up to 100-200-fold between the er and the cis-golgi  <cit> , the er export machinery being selective in sorting cargo  <cit> . second, caseins that contain cysteine residues dimerise via disulphide bonds  <cit>  and the er is the presumptive site of disulphide bond formation. third, we hypothesized that caseins interact in the er because, in the absence of αs1-casein, β- and κ-casein accumulate in the er due to a drastic reduction of caseins exiting from that compartment  <cit> .

morphological and biochemical controls demonstrated that the isolated rough er fraction obtained from rat or goat mammary gland tissues was almost pure and hardly contaminated with casein micelles. in addition, focusing our analysis on the immature er forms of αs1- and β-caseins  allowed us to specifically monitor the caseins within the lumen of the er. we would have liked to obtain similar information for κ-casein, but this was hampered by the lack of relevant immunological tools for rat κ-casein. moreover, the immature form of this protein has not yet been identified. however, preliminary experiments in goat suggest that immature κ-casein behaves similarly to immature αs1-casein .

it has been reported that amphiphilic bovine β-casein has the ability to self-associate into micelles in vitro  <cit> . this aggregation into oligomers is spontaneous, reversible and dependent on various parameters including temperature, ionic strength and protein concentration  <cit> . moreover, mixed associations of β-casein with αs1-casein in conditions close to that of the er have been obtained in vitro  <cit> . the observation that only few chains of immature β-casein remained in the microsomal membrane pellet after saponin permeabilization in conservative conditions suggested that this casein was either weakly associated with primary casein aggregates or was not prone to aggregation in the er. this, in turn, may suggest that β-casein has no specific role in the initial step of casein micelle formation. in agreement with this, kumar et al.  <cit>  showed that formation of casein micelles still occurred after knock-out of the β-casein gene in mouse, micelles lacking β-casein only having a smaller diameter than control ones. similarly, casein micelles were observed in the secretory pathway of mecs from goats that do not express β-casein . in both cases, casein transport in the secretory pathway and secretion were apparently not affected. moreover, it is also well-known that β-casein easily detaches from casein micelles, e.g. upon cooling of milk  <cit> , whereas interactions between the other caseins are much stronger. in line with this, it should be noted that our permeabilisation experiments were performed at 4°c to avoid proteolysis during incubation. notably, it has been demonstrated that the phosphorylation of β-casein occurs in a later golgi compartment than that of αs1-casein  <cit> . moreover, since bovine non-phosphorylated β-casein was shown to have a different micellisation process than the phosphorylated form  <cit> , we can hypothesise that the mature and immature forms of rat β-casein have different association properties. the observation that, after permeabilisation in conservative conditions, the proportion of the mature form of the protein in the membrane pellet derived from a pns was higher than that of the immature form in the microsomal pellet  was consistent with this hypothesis. we concluded that rat β-casein might interact efficiently with the other components of the micelle in a more distal compartment of the secretory pathway, may be after its phosphorylation when it meets high calcium concentration in late golgi cisternae and/or secretory vesicles.

in contrast to β-casein, the majority of immature αs1-casein was found in the membrane pellet after permeabilisation in conservative conditions, in both rat and goat microsomes. notably, a substantial proportion of this protein remained associated with microsomal membranes after permeabilisation in non-conservative conditions or extraction with carbonate at ph  <dig>  these results demonstrated the presence of soluble , aggregated and membrane-associated forms of αs1-casein in the rough er microsomes. consistent with this, in vitro experiments led to the conclusion that αs1-casein can self-associate  <cit> , the two hydrophobic regions of bovine αs1-casein interacting to form a polymeric chain . in addition, bovine αs1-casein was also found to prevent κ-casein aggregation and accumulation of κ-casein fibrils  <cit> , as well as to reduce β-casein aggregates in vitro  <cit> , features that might be relevant for casein micelle formation. also, bouguyon et al.  <cit>  demonstrated that mature αs1-casein from rat milk can form an intermolecular disulphide bond. finally, in vivo experiments in goat revealed that αs1-casein might interact with the other caseins in the er to facilitate the export of these proteins to the golgi apparatus  <cit> . it is therefore tempting to speculate that αs1-casein acts as an escort protein  for efficient packaging of the other caseins into er-derived transport carriers and transport to the golgi. in the absence of αs1-casein, however, casein micelles still form. altogether, these data are consistent with the fact that a large proportion of immature αs1-casein is aggregated in the rat rough er through covalent and non-covalent interactions with itself or with other caseins. we conclude that, in contrast to β-casein, αs1-casein most likely participates in a primary casein aggregate which forms in the er prior to its transport to the golgi apparatus. this differential behaviour of β-casein and αs1-casein might play a key role in the spatio-temporal dimension of casein micelle formation within the secretory pathway, delaying formation of big aggregates to the late steps of transport within secretory vesicles.

we found that a substantial proportion of αs1-casein was strongly interacting with the er membranes. we also detected a membranous form of αs1-casein in ph  <dig> extracted membranes prepared from rabbit mecs . moreover, we found αs1-casein in a proteomic analysis of rough er microsomal membranes prepared from goat . of note, the proportion of membrane-associated αs1-casein was higher in rat  than in the other mammals studied so far . however, the latter proportion is similar to those found for other secretory proteins known to interact with membranes . in rat, the structural domain of αs1-casein involved in this interaction might therefore have a higher affinity for its binding site. consistent with our observation, an in vitro study with liposomes proved interactions between bovine milk caseins  and membrane phospholipids  <cit> .

membranous forms of secretory proteins have been observed in several instances, including hormones , prohormone convertases and processing enzymes  <cit>  and members of the granin  family of regulated secretory proteins  <cit>  that are ubiquitously found in secretory granules of neuroendocrine and neuronal cells . concerning the latter proteins, it was proposed that the membranous form of these proteins is a "nucleus" for granin aggregation in the trans-golgi network , a process required for targeting of these proteins to secretory granules. the membrane-associated forms of the granins can therefore be considered sorting receptors. in the context of casein micelle formation, we also hypothesize that the membranous form of αs1-casein acts as a "nucleus" for casein association/aggregation in the er for further targeting of the other caseins to the site of cop ii vesicle formation. casein micelles are often found attached to the membranes of secretory vesicles through electron dense proteinaceous material most likely corresponding to condensates of casein molecules . consistent with this hypothesis, spherical particles are also seen in close apposition to the saccular membranes in the golgi apparatus.

we observed that dimerisation played a key role in the interaction properties of αs1-casein with rough er microsomal membranes. in line with this, we showed that rat caseins are actually dimeric in rough er microsomes, as expected since the er is the presumptive site for disulphide bond formation. from this, we can conclude that dimerisation is the first step in casein micelle formation. for, chromogranin b, a disulphide-bonded loop in its n-terminal sequence was shown to play a key role at the level of the tgn in its sorting to secretory granules  <cit> . subsequently, it has been demonstrated that the disulphide-bonded loop mediates homodimerisation of chromogranin a  <cit> , and most likely b, as well as their association with membranes  <cit> . moreover, their data strongly suggest that when the protein aggregates in the tgn, this cargo with multiple loops on its surface has a high membrane binding capacity, a feature important for efficiency of sorting to secretory granules. our experiments using total membranes from pns revealed the existence of a membranous form of mature αs1-casein and confirmed the role of disulphide bonds in the association of the protein with these membranes. this implies that αs1-casein is able to also interact with membranes of downstream compartments of the secretory pathway. our observation of a higher proportion of membrane-associated αs1-casein in pns also suggests that phosphorylation of the protein and/or lipid composition of the membranes might be involved in membrane interaction.

CONCLUSIONS
in the present study we report for the first time the existence of a membrane-associated form of a casein, specifically αs1-casein. we believe that this form of the protein may play a key role in both casein micelle formation and casein transport in the secretory pathway. first, membrane-associated αs1-casein might serve as a nucleating site for the aggregation of the caseins and growth of the micelle. second, this form might also have a function in concentration of the cargo and sorting of the caseins for packaging into copii vesicles and export from the er. the possibility that membrane-associated αs1-casein is involved in subsequent steps of casein aggregates and/or casein micelle sorting and transport in the secretory pathway remains to be studied.

