BACKGROUND
the increasing availability of complete genome sequences has spurred efforts to model biological systems on a comprehensive scale  <cit> . constraint-based modeling has emerged in the last decade as a useful approach to the integration of genomic and other high-throughput data sets with more traditional, experimental data acquired through decades of biochemical and molecular research  <cit> . to date, constraint-based modeling has been extensively applied to probe the function of intracellular metabolism, although the constraint-based framework is in principle applicable to any set of chemical transformations, including signal transduction networks  <cit>  and transcription or translation  <cit> . when combined with a specific method of analysis, e.g., flux balance analysis , constraint-based models can be used to generate quantitative predictions  and yield testable hypotheses for future experimental investigations  <cit> . this permits an iterative process of model development, hypothesis generation and testing, and further model development and refinement  <cit> . the principles and methods of building and analyzing constraint-based models have been comprehensively reviewed in the literature  <cit> . experimentally validated constraint-based models are providing integrative, systems-level views of the functioning of different metabolic networks of various organisms across a wide range of specific conditions   <cit> .

trypanosoma cruzi is a protozoan parasite of the order kinetoplastida that infects humans and a wide variety of other mammals. like other members of its order, t. cruzi is characterized by a single mitochondrion containing a complex network of dna fibrils known as the kinetoplast  <cit> . t. cruzi displays many unusual biological features: specialized intracellular compartments, such as the glycosome   <cit> , acidocalcisome  <cit> , and reservesome  <cit> ; widespread rna editing of mitochondrial transcripts  <cit> ; polycistronic transcription  <cit> ; and trans-splicing  <cit> , to name a few. its life cycle is complex, involving multiple distinct morphologic stages in both its mammalian hosts and the triatomine insect vectors  <cit> . t. cruzi is the causative agent of chagas disease, a potentially lethal condition affecting the cardiovascular, gastrointestinal, and nervous systems of the human host. the impact of chagas disease is significant; approximately  <dig> million persons are affected, primarily in latin america  <cit> , and life expectancy is reduced by  <dig> years in those patients who develop chronic symptoms  <cit> . despite decades of research, only two drugs, nifurtimox and benznidazole, have proven useful in treating this disease  <cit> . however, the efficacy of these drugs for chronic chagas disease is far below  <dig> percent  <cit>  and both are associated with significant adverse effects, such as peripheral neuropathy and central nervous system toxicity  <cit> .

to permit a systems-level understanding of this parasite and to provide a basis for detailed modeling of host-parasite interactions, we present a validated, constraint-based model of t. cruzi strain cl brener core metabolism. the model, hereafter referred to as isr <dig> , includes four compartments,  <dig> transport reactions, and  <dig> metabolic reactions covering carbohydrate, amino acid, and energy metabolism. in addition, we make use of several replicate high-throughput proteomic data sets to specifically examine metabolism of the morphological form of the parasite in the insect gut, or epimastigote stage of t. cruzi . in doing so, we demonstrate the utility of constraint-based models for integrating various sources of information  to generate testable hypotheses. previous work has used sequence analysis of the t. cruzi genome to produce improved annotations and thus extend our understanding of t. cruzi metabolism  <cit> . however the model reported here is the first constraint-based model of t. cruzi of which we are aware. it represents an approach to the systematic study of t. cruzi metabolism under a wide range of conditions and perturbations for the identification of novel chemotherapeutic targets.

RESULTS
properties of isr215
the isr <dig> network reconstruction accounts for the function of  <dig> genes and includes  <dig> reactions, of which  <dig> are metabolic reactions and  <dig> are exchange reactions . of the exchange reactions,  <dig> are input-output exchanges that allow metabolites to enter and/or leave the model system, and one is the biomass demand reaction used to drain metabolites assumed critical to the growth of t. cruzi . of the reactions in isr <dig>   <dig> are supported by both genomic and direct biochemical evidence  in t. cruzi, and  <dig> reactions are supported by genomic or literature-derived evidence in t. cruzi or related organisms. most reactions not associated with literature-based evidence are intracellular transports, reflecting the fact that little is known about such processes in t. cruzi.

defining epimastigote stage-specific metabolism
we used cultured t. cruzi epimastigotes to generate several large replicate proteomic data sets . a total of  <dig> distinct proteins were identified across  <dig> epimastigote samples. many of the identified proteins were not associated with any well-defined function . of the identified proteins that were linked to functions, the most commonly occurring functional categories were metabolic processes  and translation . some of the more commonly occurring functional subcategories of metabolic processes were: nucleobase, nucleoside, nucleotide and nucleic acid metabolic processes ; amino acid and derivative metabolic processes ; and carbohydrate metabolism . the complete proteomics results can be found in additional file 1: detailedresults.xls.

the proteomics data were used to constrain isr <dig>  to an epimastigote stage-specific model . if there was no evidence for the expression of a given protein in the epimastigote stage, the upper and lower bounds of the corresponding reaction  were constrained to zero, thereby restricting the flux of the reaction to zero. in the case of a reaction catalyzed by an enzyme complex, we allowed the reaction to occur  if any protein component of the complex was detected by the proteomics experiment.

a graphical depiction of a section of the compartmentalized reconstruction is shown in figure  <dig> . all of the reactions illustrated in the map are present in the "full" model. however, the fluxes of the reactions colored in black are constrained to zero in the "epimastigote" case, effectively removing them from the network. exchange reactions that allow metabolites to only enter the system from the surrounding environment are colored in red. further, exchange reactions that allow metabolites to only leave the system are in blue, and those reactions that allow metabolites to either enter or leave the system are colored in yellow. intracellular reactions that are colored green are associated with default constraints at the start of the simulation experiments.

graphical representations of flux distributions calculated using the genome-based full model and the epimastigote, stage-specific model are depicted as additional files . comparison of these results reveals redistribution of fluxes involving multiple areas of the metabolic map. one example is substrate level phosphorylation in the mitochondrion. in the full model, atp is generated by succinate-coa ligase  as part of a cycle involving acetate-succinate coa-transferase ; in the epimastigote model, this same reaction generates atp as part of the tca cycle. this is due to the fact that asctmr flux is constrained to zero in the epimastigote model. mitochondrial fumarate reductase  activity increases from zero flux in the full model to relatively high flux in the epimastigote model. this is likely due to the inactivity of complex i in the epimastigote, with reoxidation of nadh largely taken over by frdm. correctly accounting for stage-specific features of metabolism is an important step to more accurately modeling metabolism.

reaction lethality predictions
in silico predictions of lethality can be made at the level of genes or reactions using constraint based models. many of the reactions in isr <dig> are associated with isozymes . in these cases, in silico deletion of one gene will not result in a lethal prediction, even if the reaction itself is critical for the growth of the parasite. thus, we focus here on the set of reactions predicted to be lethal, as this provides a better view of critical points in the network, i.e., those reactions which if blocked by a chemotherapeutic would lead to the inability of the parasite to replicate .

all reactions in isr <dig> were classified as lethal or nonlethal by systematically constraining the upper and lower flux bounds of each reaction to be zero flux, and attempting fba under defined in silico medium conditions . as shown in table  <dig>  total of  <dig> reactions were predicted to be essential in the full model, and  <dig> were predicted to be essential in the epimastigote-specific model. of the  <dig> reactions with different essentialities in the full and epimastigote models, three were the result of the zero flux constraint on aldose-1-epimerase in the epimastigote model. without this capability, reactions that circumvent the inability to interconvert alpha- and beta-glucose anomers became critical. four reactions had different essentialities that resulted from the zero flux constraint on glycosomal glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase and glycerol kinase in the epimastigote model. without these activities, reactions allowing the regeneration of nad via glycosomal fumarate reductase became critical. six reactions had different essentialities between the two networks because of the zero flux constraint on threonine dehydrogenase in the epimastigote model. in the absence of this activity, reactions permitting acetyl-coa production via pyruvate became critical.

we also simulated all possible double reaction deletions, i.e., simultaneous elimination of two reactions. in total, there were  <dig> double deletions. in the full model,  <dig> of these cases proved to be lethal. most of these  were "trivial" in that the double deletion involved at least one reaction that was lethal in a single deletion. there were  <dig> non-trivial double deletions, i.e., involving reactions that, while not lethal individually, were lethal when deleted together. in the epimastigote model, there were  <dig> lethal double deletions, including  <dig> trivial and  <dig> non-trivial cases. for a complete listing of all single and non-trivial double reaction deletions, see additional file 1: detailedresults.xls. each of these predictions represents a potentially testable hypothesis. reactions that are experimentally shown to be lethal are of special interest, as these may correspond to novel chemotherapeutic targets.

validating network analysis with experimental data
as a simple check on the validity of isr <dig> network reconstruction, we used the model to determine byproducts of metabolism under aerobic and anaerobic in silico culture conditions . while there is some inconsistency in the literature, most experiments indicate that byproducts of t. cruzi metabolism include succinate  <cit> , l-alanine  <cit> , and co <dig>  <cit> . other byproducts that have been experimentally detected include acetate  <cit>  and glycine  <cit> . these general observations are reproduced by isr <dig>  in the epimastigote model, co <dig>  succinate, and l-alanine are predicted byproducts of metabolism using defined in silico conditions. we also observed secretion of acetate and glycine using the full model. it is possible that different sets of byproducts could be secreted under alternative optimal solutions. to address this possibility, we used flux variability analysis  <cit> . in fva, one seeks to find a range of flux values on specific reactions that are compatible with maximal growth. we found that the reactions draining succinate and l-alanine must have non-zero flux to achieve optimal growth in the epimastigote. in the full model, the flux on the reaction draining succinate must be non-zero. for the fluxes draining glycine and acetate, at least one of the two must have a non-zero value to achieve optimal growth.

we next sought to validate isr <dig> using available data on gene or gene product essentiality in t. cruzi or related species   <cit> . the experimental data were collected using a variety of techniques . in all,  <dig> test cases were derived based on evidence from the literature, including both the full and epimastigote models. in  <dig> of these cases, our simulations correctly reproduced the experimental results, yielding  <dig> % accuracy. all reactions that were nonlethal in published literature were correctly predicted as such in the case of the full model. there were three instances of reactions incorrectly predicted as nonessential in the full model  that were corrected by the imposition of the epimastigote constraints: 1) glycosomal triose phosphate isomerase, 2) coinhibition of fumarate reductase and succinate dehydrogenase, and 3) coinhibition of pyruvate dehydrogenase and alpha-keto glutarate dehydrogenase. three reactions were wrongly predicted to be essential in the case of the epimastigote model: 1) glycosomal fumarate reductase, 2) pyruvate dehydrogenase, and 3) pyruvate dehydrogenase and succinate dehydrogenase combined inhibition. finally, there were three cases where our predictions were incorrect in both the full and epimastigote models: 1) malic enzyme, 2) pyruvate kinase, and 3) succinate – coa ligase.

*hypothesized to be the main targets of peroxynitrite in t. cruzi

**succinate dehydrogenase is represented in the model by two reactions, sucd1rm, and sucd3-u6m; inhibition of succinate dehydrogenase simulated by inhibiting the first of these two

***one variation of compound was lethal for t. cruzi, as well

see references  <cit>  for details.

discussion
our first attempts at integrating the metabolic network reconstruction with epimastigote stage proteomic data provide a specific example of how constraint-based models can serve to help refine/interpret existing data. initially, when the additional constraints arising from the proteomic data were imposed on the genome-based reconstruction, no solution was possible by fba. by mapping these constraints on to isr <dig>  we determined that they resulted in the loss of three critical enzyme activities: fumarate hydratase, ribulose-5-phosphate 3-epimerase, and glucose-6-phosphate 1-dehydrogenase. the latter two reactions are part of the pentose phosphate pathway, leading directly to the production of key components for the biomass demand reaction. subsequently, we found biochemical evidence for the activity of these enzymes in epimastigotes  <cit> . thus, we removed the imposed constraints on ribulose-5-phosphate 3-epimerase and glucose-6-phosphate 1-dehydrogenase. fumarate hydratase was the only enzyme of the tca cycle not detected in the proteomics experiments. since the tca cycle is known to be active in t. cruzi epimastigotes  <cit> , we decided it was reasonable to remove the imposed zero flux constraint from this reaction, as well. by making these three adjustments, we obtained a positive growth rate by fba. thus, the constraint-based model helped identify three cases of probable false negative findings from the proteomics experiments. by providing a framework for the systematic consideration of the functional relationships between components, the model allowed us to make more informed judgments on the validity of the proteomic data. an algorithmic method for integrating gene expression data into analysis of constraint-based models was recently published  <cit> . approaches such as this will likely be invaluable for integrating proteomic and transcriptomic data with future iterations of isr <dig>  especially as the scope of the model increases.

our attempts to validate the model by comparing predicted and experimentally observed reaction lethality should all be interpreted in light of three caveats. first, as noted in table  <dig>  most of these comparisons are made, not to t. cruzi, but to related trypanosomatid species. all species used for our comparisons are metabolically quite similar  <cit> , but there are differences  <cit> . second, there are certain limitations that arise from the fact that isr <dig> is not a genome-scale model; these are discussed in more detail below. third, the experimental data used were collected using complex, undefined culture media that we could not reproduce in silico. the overall accuracy of our predictions  is comparable to that reported for other organisms, e.g., 83% for saccharomyces cerevesiae  <cit> , 70% for leishmania major  <cit> , 91% for escherischia coli  <cit> .

we found three instances of reactions incorrectly predicted as nonessential in the full model that were corrected by the imposition of the epimastigote constraints when compared with published literature : 1) glycosomal triose phosphate isomerase, 2) coinhibition of fumarate reductase and succinate dehydrogenase, and 3) coinhibition of pyruvate dehydrogenase and alpha-keto glutarate dehydrogenase. this observation suggests that the additional epimastigote constraints correctly eliminate certain steady state metabolisms that would otherwise be available to the parasite according to the full model. it is noteworthy that cases 1) and 2) are the only ones in which available experimental data were collected specifically in t. cruzi epimastigotes, as opposed to other morphological stages or related trypanosomatid species.

three activities were wrongly predicted to be essential in the case of the epimastigote model when compared to published data : 1) glycosomal fumarate reductase, 2) pyruvate dehydrogenase, and 3) pyruvate dehydrogenase and succinate dehydrogenase combined inhibition. of course, if pyruvate dehydrogenase is predicted to be essential, it is to be expected that inhibition of additional reactions  along with pyruvate dehydrogenase would also be predicted as essential. we left these as independent predictions since we did not know a priori whether neither, one, or both would be predicted as essential. thus 3) is incorrect because 2) is incorrect. the reason that 2) is incorrect is that without pyruvate dehyrogenase, there is no way to produce acetyl-coa in the core metabolic model . adding an additional source of acetyl-coa and sink for mitochondrial coa results in a positive-growth solution by fba. threonine dehydrogenase, which might otherwise produce acetyl-coa is inactivated in the epimastigote model. glycosomal fumarate reductase is also incorrectly predicted to be essential in the epimastigote case. the reason for this incorrect prediction is that without glycosomal fumarate reductase, there is no existing route to stoichiometrically convert nadh back to nad inside the glycosome. adding such a process back to the model results in a positive-growth solution by fba. glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase and glycerol kinase could fill this role, but they are inactivated in the epimastigote model. thus, these incorrect predictions may be either due to the incomplete nature of the model  or perhaps because of possible changes in protein expression that are not explicitly represented in the model .

finally, there were three examples in which our predictions were incorrect in both the full and epimastigote models: 1) malic enzyme, 2) pyruvate kinase, and 3) succinate – coa ligase. here again, these discrepancies are likely due to the fact that the core model remains incomplete. specifically, we have not attempted to fully account for proton gradients in t. cruzi. therefore, synthesis via oxidative phosphorylation is coupled not only to the pumping of hydrogen ions by the respiratory chain but also to the production of hydrogen ions by cytoplasmic processes. thus, the contribution of oxidative phosphorylation to total atp synthesis suggested by isr <dig> is likely to be an overestimate of the true contribution. in fact, the majority of atp synthesis in these parasites is thought to be via substrate level phosphorylation  <cit> . this explanation seems to account for the incorrect prediction in the case of succinate – coa ligase; when mitochondrial atp synthase is constrained to zero flux, the succinate – coa ligase reaction is essential. the reasons for the incorrect prediction for malic enzyme and pyruvate kinase are less clear. again, it may be a reflection of the incomplete nature of the core model, i.e., there are processes not included in isr <dig>  which are dependent on the production or consumption of metabolites that these reactions entail. overall, the accuracy of the model at this stage is encouraging.

CONCLUSIONS
we have presented the first constraint-based metabolic model and analysis of t. cruzi, the protozoan parasite responsible for chagas disease. this model accounts for central metabolic processes such as atp generation and production of key intermediate metabolites. moreover, the model includes three major intracellular compartments: the glycosome , the mitochondrion, and the cytosol. thus, many key features of trypanosomatid metabolism are represented. most reactions in the model are supported by both direct biochemical evidence from the primary literature and by the genome annotation of t. cruzi. many aspects of the cellular physiology and data concerning gene/reaction essentiality are accurately captured by isr <dig>  future work on isr <dig> will initially be focused on expanding the scope of the model to include all known t. cruzi metabolic reactions using procedures similar to those described here. previous experience suggests that as the model is expanded and refined through successive iterations, the accuracy of the essentiality predictions will improve  <cit> . we have used a wide variety of evidence in constructing this model, namely genomic, proteomic, and information drawn from primary literature. this gives us a fairly high level of confidence in what is currently included in the model.

our incorporation of several replicate high-throughput proteomic data sets illustrates the integrative capabilities of constraint-based models. this data was used to further constrain the space of possible solutions and enabled us to examine stage-specific aspects of metabolism. in the available instances where experimental confirmation was available for t. cruzi epimastigotes specifically, applying the proteomic constraints produced the correct prediction; without these additional constraints, the model prediction was incorrect. constraints reflecting data on gene expression have previously been shown to improve the accuracy of constraint-based model predictions  <cit> . our experience also indicates that constraint-based models may aid in the interpretation of such high-throughput datasets, potentially helping to identify false negative results. proteomics data are imperfect, and false negative results tend to be more of a concern than false positives. we attempted to minimize false negatives experimentally by using sub-cellular proteomics techniques . this approach proved quite useful, as the number of identified proteins increased by more than 50% over traditional shotgun-based methods . even so, there were three examples of probable false-negative findings that were revealed by considering the proteomics data in light of isr <dig> . thus, constraint-based models can provide a systematic framework for the interpretation and evaluation of findings from proteomics experiments.

our comprehensive gene and reaction deletion testing illustrates the way in which constraint based models can become tools for drug discovery. each of these predictions represents a testable hypothesis. assuming that at least some of the reactions predicted to be essential are experimentally verified, these suggest points of vulnerability in the parasite's metabolism, which could potentially be exploited to develop new, urgently needed chemotherapeutics. additionally, model-based predictions of the effect of combined environmental manipulations and specific reaction inhibitors can be generated using this model.

