BACKGROUND
knowing how native americans dispersed along the american continent is still a major challenge faced by researchers studying the biological and cultural evolution of the region  <cit> . also, how natives adapted to diverse environmental challenges such as hypoxia and cold weather in the andes  <cit>  and the tropical forest  <cit>  remain poorly understood.

when europeans arrived in south america in the 16th century, the pan-andean inca empire dominated the andean region and had a population density and levels of socioeconomic development unmatched elsewhere in south america. but the inca empire is just the tip of the iceberg of a long-term cultural and biological evolutionary process that involved the entire andean region and its adjacent pacific coast . this process began 14– <dig> thousand years bp, with the peopling of this region in the late pleistocene  <cit> , involving continuous cultural exchanges and gene flow along time, and leading to a relative genetic, cultural, and linguistic homogeneity between the populations of western south america when compared with eastern south america , where populations remained relatively more isolated  <cit>  than those in western south america. for example, only two languages still predominate across the entire andean region , whereas in eastern south america natives speak a wider spectrum of languages belonging to four different linguistic families  <cit> . also, despite some controversy about definitions and chronology, archeologists consensually recognize three temporal horizons in the andes and the pacific coast . each of the horizons corresponds to periods of material cultural dispersion involving a wide geographic area and, in the case of middle and late horizons, to the expansion of the wari-tiwanaku and inca states, respectively  <cit> .

the current knowledge about western south american prehistory derives mainly from a plethora of archeological studies  <cit> , most of which have focused on the pacific coast and andean people. however, the relationships between andeans and their culturally, linguistically, and environmentally different eastern neighbors living in the amazon yunga remain relatively neglected by archeologists, despite early investigations by lathrap  <cit>  and some subsequent studies that have been done on the subject  <cit> . notwithstanding this knowledge gap, the amazon yunga, a region hosting at least six ethnic groups, is particularly interesting because it is a transitional environment between the andes highlands and the lowland tropical forest of the amazonia. moreover, archeological research in the lowland amazonia during the last decades has changed the traditional view of the amazonian environment as incompatible with complex pre-columbian societies  <cit> . the emerging view, that has gained growing support, recognizes that the amazonian basin has hosted the earliest ceramics of south america, that endogenous agricultural societies with complex organization have developed there, and that population sizes were larger than previously thought  <cit> . in contrast, information derived from anthropological genetics is scantier, especially for amazonian and amazon yunga populations  <cit> . contributing to our poor understating of how these populations evolved is the fact that native americans are under-represented in modern genetic studies  <cit>  due to cultural issues and logistic difficulties in reaching them in the tropical forest.

cultural and commercial interactions occurring along the last millennia among the people living in the peruvian coast, the andes and the amazon yunga regions are archaeologically documented. for example, cultivated plants such as sweet potato and manioc, ceramic iconography and styles  and traditional coca chewing  <cit>  have been shared among coast, andean and amazon yunga populations. however, we ignore how the demographic evolutionary history of these populations accompanied their cultural and socioeconomic interactions. specifically, and this is the goal of this study, we aimed to investigate the demographic relationships between the shimaa population and their western andean neighbors. our study is the first to analyze a sample of the amazon yunga population at a multilocus level. here we show that the genetic diversity of the shimaa, a matsiguenga arawak-speaking population settled in and with an amazon yunga lifestyle, is a subset of the andean quechua diversity. we used a bayesian inference framework and several statistical validation tools to infer that the shimaa likely originated from an ancestral andean population less than 5300 years ago, around or after the time when complex societies in the andean region emerged.

RESULTS
we used genetic data and a population genetic model to infer the evolutionary relationships between a quechua population from the peruvian central andean highlands and an arawak matsiguenga population  from the southern peruvian amazon yunga . these populations, separated by 300 km, speak languages from different families  and have different cultures related to their high altitude andean and rainforest amazon yunga lifestyles, respectively. we sequenced  <dig> independent genomic regions for a total of ~20 kb per individual  <cit>  in  <dig> quechua and  <dig> shimaa individuals, for whom we estimated  <cit>  negligible non-native genetic contribution , based on genotyping of  <dig> ancestry informative markers  <cit> . we used a model-based bayesian approach to infer the posterior distributions of a set of demographic parameters  <cit> . the tested model considers and distinguishes the effects of genetic drift after the split of two populations and the subsequent gene flow between them in an explicit probabilistic framework . we inferred the parameters of the model using the likelihood-based method implemented in the software im. this method uses the entire information provided by the data and applies a markov chain monte carlo  computational approach  <cit> . even though this model reduces the complex history of two populations, that actually evolve together with surrounding groups, to an only-two-populations system, simulation studies have shown that inferences are robust, despite moderate violations of the model assumptions, which were simulated to mimic comparable situations often encountered in real-world scenarios  <cit> .figure  <dig> 
isolation with migration  model. the im model includes an ancestral population of effective size of n
a individuals that split t generations ago in two populations, one of size sn
a and the other of size n
a, where s ∈  <cit> . their sizes are allowed to change exponentially to their current effective sizes n
 <dig>  and n
 <dig> . over t generations, gene flow can occur between the two descendant populations at different rates in both directions .



we found that amazon yunga shimaas have a low genetic diversity that interestingly, is a subset of the higher diversity observed in the andean quechuas. in fact, more snps are found in the quechuas than in the shimaas and all the snps found in the shimaa are shared with the quechuas . the distribution of the mass probability of the divergence time posterior density  suggests that the quechua and the shimaa populations diverged recently: if the point estimate appears implausible, the upper limit of the 90% density interval excludes a divergence older than 5300 years ago. at the time of the split, individuals carrying s ≈ 96%  of the effective population size of the ancestral population founded the quechua population, while only a small fraction  founded the shimaa. this statement does not necessarily mean that the individuals that founded the shimaa were around 1/ <dig> of the ancestral population. instead, in population genetics, the definition of effective population size implies that respect to the ancestral quechua population, the ancestral shimaa population behaved as an ideal wright-fisher model population that lost diversity due to the action of the genetic drift at a pace around twenty-five times faster. therefore, the lower effective population of the shimaa may have resulted from a combination of a certainly much smaller number of individuals together with other factors known to reduce the effective population size, such as a biased sex ratio or a high variance in the number of progeny  <cit> .figure  <dig> 
posterior probabilities for the time of divergence between quechua and shimaa in its historical context. posterior probability densities for the time of divergence t  between quechua and shimaa populations, obtained by mcmc and abc, in its historical context. the period encompassing the 90% hpd  interval of the posterior probability of t, estimated by mcmc is highlighted. mcmc plot: red: three independent runs with migration rate parameters mi = 10; blue: three independent runs with migration rate parameters mi =  <dig>  abc plot: gray: model without intra-locus recombination; black: model with intra-locus recombination. below are key historical events of peruvian prehistory in four peruvian longitudinal regions: coast, andes, amazon yunga and amazonia. pottery and cultivars symbols represent the earliest archaeological record for the region. this chronology is a simplified picture of the peruvian archaeological history in which we used different dating records for its construction. to account for time uncertainties, we depicted the events in the chronology plot without clearly defined chronological borders. references for the historical events presented are specified in additional file  <dig>  lh: late horizon, lip: late intermediate period, mh: middle horizon, eip: early intermediate period, eh: early horizon, ip: initial period. *controversial geographic region of arawak origin. each step in agriculture and camelids representations shows an increase in their relative importance.
estimates of demographic parameters



demographic parameters
mcmc
abc
abc_rec
sb
population size in number of individuals and time split in years. the estimates are the mode of the posterior distribution with the 90% hpd  interval between parentheses. mcmc estimates are the averages over six runs.


awe did not specified the 90% hpd for these estimates, because the right end of the posterior distribution did not approach zero in the vertical axis before the upper boundary of the prior distribution. this implies that the 90% hpd depends on the definition of the prior distribution.


bfraction of the ancestral population that founded the quechua population.


cthis parameter did not yield an informative density.
posterior probabilities for the parameters n
a
, n
2
, and s. posterior probability densities obtained by the mcmc method and by the abc for the parameters n for ancestral effective size , n shimaa effective size , and the s parameter  population. range of prior probability distributions are in additional file 1: table s <dig>  n
i are in number of individuals. mcmc plots: red: three independent runs with migration rate parameters mi = 10; blue: three independent runs with migration rate parameters mi =  <dig>  abc plots: gray: model with no intra-locus recombination; black: model with intra-locus recombination. posterior probabilities for n quechua , m
 <dig> and m
 <dig> did not yield informative densities and are presented in additional file 1: figure s <dig> 



we validated our mcmc results by assessing the statistical convergence of multiple mcmc runs and by performing posterior predictive tests  <cit> , and both procedures confirmed our inferences . to further validate our results, and because the im model implemented in the mcmc framework  <cit>  does not consider genetic intra-locus recombination, we also inferred the model parameters  by approximate bayesian computations   <cit> , although our analyzed dataset shows almost no intra-locus recombination . while the mcmc-approach uses the complete dataset at a cost of less flexibility of the model , abc allows more flexibility , but it only uses summary statistics to compare simulated and real data. this suboptimal use by abc of the available information in analyzed datasets comes at a cost of larger credible intervals  <cit> . to analyze the consequences of considering recombination in the abc, we did one analysis with recombination  and one without recombination . the abc estimates of the ancestral population size and the relative ratio of the two population sizes at the time of the split are similar to the im estimates . we inferred an earlier population divergence, though the point estimates with abc is still within the 90% interval obtained with the mcmc approach. we found, however, that abc tended to overestimate the divergence time with our data . similar results are obtained regardless the inclusion of recombination in the abc. overall, our abc estimates confirm our mcmc results .

our results indicate that the shimaa diverged from the quechua andean population after the late pleistocene peopling of south america, and very likely, less than 5300 years ago. the 5000– <dig> years period bp was characterized by the development of complex societies in the andean region and the pacific coast, being a period of major cultural development, when large permanent communities settled, monumental architecture appeared, pottery came into use, and agriculture became the predominant source of food supply . representative settlements of that time were kotosh in the amazon yunga , la galgada in the central andes, and caral and el paraiso in the central pacific coast . the initial dispersal of the arawak, which is the language currently spoken by the shimaa, also seems to have occurred during this time  <cit> , and some authors , suggest this linguistic family has originated in the peruvian amazon yunga  <cit> . the most plausible scenario compatible with our results is that a small subpopulation  split from a larger andean population, moved toward the peruvian amazon yunga and then adapted to the different lifestyle of the amazon yunga, incorporating the culture of some of their neighbors and their language , but not a substantial amount of their genes.

CONCLUSIONS
the question about the evolutionary relationship between andean and the lower amazonian populations  is still open in american anthropology. we contributed to clarify -for the first time using multilocus data; the prehistoric demographic relationship between andeans and a population from the amazon yunga. moreover, our results offer a testable model for the peopling of this large transitional environmental region between the andes and the lower amazonia. andean populations are highly homogeneous  <cit>  which supports our assumption that the quechua sample used in this study is a fair representative of andean populations. nevertheless, further studies on the populations of the amazon yunga and the lower amazonia are necessary to show if the predominant andean biological origin of the shimaas and its pattern of adaptation to the new environment is the rule, and not the exception.

