BACKGROUND
alzheimer's disease  is a progressive neurological disease that affects millions of older individuals. distinctive pathological hallmarks associated with the disease include tau accumulations forming neuropil threads  and neurofibrillary tangles , and deposits of extracellular amyloid comprising neuritic senile plaques . in general, there are two distinct forms of alzheimer's disease, familial ad and sporadic late-onset ad. the early onset form of the disease, known commonly as familial ad, is caused by dysregulation of many processes due to genetic mutations that lead to the aforementioned pathology. for example, mutations in presenilins  <dig> and  <dig> genes and the gene responsible for amyloid-β protein precursor  result in an increased accumulation of beta-amyloid  in the brain. in late-onset sporadic ad, similar pathological accumulations occur, although without the gene mutations seen in familial ad   <cit> .

most investigations have focused on the extracellular, deposited forms of amyloid in the ad brain. the extracellular accumulations of amyloid in the brain are composed principally of amyloid β 1- <dig> and 1- <dig> and form neuritic senile plaques   <cit> . however, intracellular accumulations of amyloid, which may occur prior to extracellular deposition, also have been demonstrated  <cit> . further, aβ-derived diffusible ligands , soluble forms of amyloid, have been postulated to be a toxic form of amyloid at the synapses and are not found in typical neuropathological or histopathologic accumulations of amyloid  <cit> . since late-onset ad lacks the same mutations seen in familial ad, determination of the cause of amyloid pathology in late-onset ad remains poorly understood.

the interplay between normal processes and environmental factors, both independently and in concert with other genetic factors, may lead to late-onset ad. in particular, infections as environmental factors may have an impact on the delicate amyloid and tau balance in the brain and lead to the pathology seen in ad. a number of infectious agents have been associated with late-onset ad  <cit> . our focus has been on the obligate, intracellular bacterium chlamydia pneumoniae, which has been demonstrated to be highly prevalent in the ad brain  <cit> , as well as associated with other systemic and neurological diseases  <cit> including atherosclerosis  <cit> , stroke  <cit> , encephalitis  <cit> , and multiple sclerosis  <cit> .

various cell types found in the brain have been shown to be susceptible to infection by c. pneumoniae including endothelia, astroglia, microglia, and neurons  <cit> . once inside the cell, c. pneumoniae reside in an intracellular inclusion that resists lysosomal fusion and immune recognition. c. pneumoniae developmentally cycle from the infectious elementary body  to the metabolically active reticulate body , which divide by binary fission. this obligate intracellular pathogen both interacts with and manipulates the host by gathering energy and nutrients that are required for replication, such as sphingomyelin and cholesterol  <cit> . chlamydiae also inhibit apoptosis  <cit>  and release factors such as chlamydial lipopolysaccharide  and glycolipid protein into both the cell itself and into the surrounding milieu  <cit> . further propagation and spread of the organism may follow one or more pathways. the infectious progeny, ebs, may be released upon eventual cell death or by extrusion from the cell in a membrane bound package into the surrounding environment  <cit> . thus, c. pneumoniae and/or antigens derived from the organism may be localized both intracellularly and extracellularly at the site of infection.

due to the chronic nature of ad and the complexity of c. pneumoniae infections, establishing an association with disease pathogenesis has proved difficult. validating this association relies on a variety of detection methods for the organism. our current study focuses on the use of immunohistochemistry  with a battery of commercially available anti-chlamydia antibodies on frontal and temporal cortical sections of human ad brains. our data suggest this methodology provides a valuable insight into the interrelationship between infection and ad pathology.

RESULTS
c. pneumoniae immunolabeling in ad tissue
all available sections from the frontal and temporal cortices of ad and control brains were immunolabeled with anti-c. pneumoniae antibodies listed in table  <dig>  all ad brains were found to immunolabel with all of the anti-c. pneumoniae antibodies, although the type of labeling profile  and extent of label differed. representative labeling profiles were highlighted in figure  <dig>  an ad brain immunolabeled with no primary antibody and both an anti-mouse horseradish peroxidase  conjugated secondary and an anti-mouse alkaline phosphatase  conjugated secondary reacted with both  <dig>  3′-diaminobenzidine  and ap red illustrate the absence of non specific immunolabeling in the temporal cortex. the ad frontal cortex labelled with a mouse anti-c. pneumoniae monoclonal antibody  demonstrated both neuropil  and intracellular  immunolabeling. c. pneumoniae was present in the hippocampus and entorhinal cortex of alzheimer's disease brain . representative immunolabeling with an anti-c. pneumoniae monoclonal antibody  was observed in the dentate gyrus of the hippocampus indicated by the magenta color . c. pneumoniae immunolabeling also was observed in apparent large neurons within the entorhinal cortex  that also contained intraneuronal lipofuscin accumulations . although the chlamydia immunoreactivity was detected using all anti-chlamydia antibodies in all ad brains, the extent of the label varied with the antibody used and ad case examined. chlamydia immunolabeling was detected in the frontal and temporal cortices and appeared distributed across all  <dig> cortical layers. although the immunolabeling may appear robust in some areas, in general, the intracellular immunoreactivity was observed in less than 1% of brain cells in these regions. the cell types in the grey matter within the hippocampal formation  that were labeled intracellularly include neuroglia, large and small neurons, pyramidal neurons, although less commonly, and peri-vascular cells. similar cell types showed immunoreactivity across all frontal and temporal cortical layers. this intracellular immunoreactivity was occasionally seen in cells with granulovacuolar degeneration and tangles in these regions. additionally, the more atypical extracellular chlamydia immunoreactivity was visualized across all cortical layers with approximately 1-2% of the area in a chlamydia-positive field demonstrating immunoreactivity. this varies widely with different ad cases. further, the immunoreactivity was seen in the white matter and even the cerebellum although study of this immunolabeling was outside the scope of this report. minimal immunoreactivity was seen in the  <dig> of  <dig> non ad cases in the frontal and temporal regions, not confined to any specific layer; and there was some hippocampal involvement.

amyloid and c. pneumoniae immunolabeling in ad tissue
amyloid and c. pneumoniae immunoreactivity were detected in sections of the ad frontal  and temporal cortices . amyloid immunoreactivity was present in dense core mature plaques  using a rabbit anti-amyloid 1- <dig> antibody  , and a mouse monoclonal anti-amyloid antibody  which also demonstrated intraneuronal amyloid labeling in the temporal region of the ad brain . both the frontal and temporal cortices demonstrated c. pneumoniae intra- and extracellular immunoreactivity with multiple monoclonal antibodies . both amyloid and chlamydial immunoreactivity were visible at low magnification. interestingly, although c. pneumoniae was found in the frontal cortex in the ad cases, we observed more consistent evidence of c. pneumoniae in the temporal cortex. further, chlamydial immunoreactivity occurred in apposition with amyloid pathology in chlamydia positive areas. there was approximately 5-10% of the area immunolabeled with amyloid compared to 1-5% of the same area immunolabeled for intracellular and extracellular chlamydia. there appeared to be no consistent pattern to the area or region in which the immunolabeling occured. furthermore, in the temporal cortex for  <dig> of  <dig> non-ad cases, c. pneumoniae labeling was observed, although less prominently as compared to the ad brains. these non ad cases also demonstrated diffuse amyloid immunopositivity .

association of c. pneumoniae labeling and thioflavin s staining
to further illustrate the relationship between amyloid and chlamydia, temporal ad sections were labeled with an anti-c. pneumoniae antibody   and then stained for thioflavin s  on the same section. for this dual procedure, optimal results were obtained when immunohistochemistry  was performed prior to incubating with thioflavin s. both light and fluorescent images of the areas of interest were captured and then overlaid or merged. this approach revealed the close proximity of chlamydia with nfts and nsps, which are hallmarks of alzheimer's disease pathology .

pre-absorption of anti-c. pneumoniae antibodies with amyloid β 1- <dig> and 1- <dig> peptides
upon detection of atypical extracellular chlamydia immunoreactivity, we questioned whether anti-chlamydia antibodies could label extracellular deposits of amyloid. to address this issue, we labeled several ad brain serial sections with separate anti-c. pneumoniae antibodies that had been pre-absorbed with amyloid peptides. the immunoreactivity for c. pneumoniae was not depleted after labeling with these pre-absorbed antibodies . figure 5a demonstrated the representative extracellular and intracellular immunoreactivity of a non- pre-absorbed monoclonal anti-c. pneumoniae antibody  on frontal ad tissue. similar extracellular and intracellular immunolabeling of c. pneumoniae antigen was obtained with the antibody pre-absorbed against > <dig> molar excess sigma amyloid aβ1- <dig> peptide  and with the antibody pre-absorbed against > <dig> molar excess sigma amyloid aβ1- <dig> peptide . comparable results were obtained with two other anti-c. pneumoniae antibodies pre-absorbed in the same manner  .

discussion
intracellular and extracellular c. pneumoniae immunoreactivity was observed in the entorhinal cortex, the hippocampal formation, and the frontal cortex, regions of the brain that typically demonstrate ad pathology. clear discrimination between chlamydia immunoreactivity and age-related lipofuscin accumulation within neurons was demonstrated. serial sections of brain tissue displayed both amyloid pathology and the presence of c. pneumoniae immunoreactivity. thioflavin s staining for fibrillar amyloid and specific antibody labeling for c. pneumoniae revealed deposition of both when performed on the same section. as some c. pneumoniae labeling was extracellular, a more atypical pattern, pre-absorption studies with amyloid β 1- <dig> and 1- <dig> were performed. these studies revealed that c. pneumoniae antibodies were not cross-reacting with aβ. collectively, these data demonstrate that evidence of c. pneumoniae infection is present in brain tissues in areas of amyloid pathology, thereby suggesting that an interrelationship exists between these entities in the pathogenesis of sporadic late-onset ad.

immunolabeling for chlamydia may be overlooked in brain tissues, as it is different from what is observed in cellular infections in vitro. in all ad samples analyzed in this study, both typical intracellular perinuclear chlamydia immunoreactivity and atypical extracellular labeling were observed. intracellular labeling demonstrated punctate elementary bodies and membrane bound inclusions similar to that of in vitro studies . this specific labeling was differentiated from lipofuscin by using red chromogens, either alkaline phosphatase red or ap magenta, as the substrate to denote c. pneumoniae immunoreactivity. horseradish peroxidase labeling with  <dig>  3′-diaminobenzidine , a brown chromogen, was not used as this labeling may be confused with the golden brown lipofuscin found in neurons of aged brains.

two distinct extracellular patterns of chlamydia immunoreactivity were observed: one, a punctate pattern signifying the elementary body form of the bacteria, which can be extruded from infected cells into the surrounding milieu  <cit> , and two, an amorphous foci pattern most likely indicating secreted chlamydial factors such as lipopolysaccharide  <cit> . these patterns in the cerebrum will require further study although similar profiles of chlamydia labeling in situ have been demonstrated in a different organ  <cit> . furthermore, our data demonstrated that c. pneumoniae extracellular immunoreactivity was not reflective of cross-reactivity with extracellular amyloid β 1- <dig> or 1- <dig>  however, c. pneumoniae extracellular organism and related antigens may interact with extracellular proteins and lipids in the brain. although not always in direct overlap with amyloid plaque deposits, chlamydial antigens may interact with soluble oligomeric forms of amyloid, such as addls, that are less likely to be found in mature plaques due to their soluble nature  <cit> . these intriguing findings and their implications require further understanding of the possible relationship between amyloid and chlamydia in the same cortical regions of the brain. this relationship will vary with each individual ad patient. each ad patient has different levels of pathology and may have corresponding variability in extent and distribution of c. pneumoniae infection in the cerebrum. following further studies into this variability, the relationship between pathology and infection can be more thoroughly evaluated.

although c. pneumoniae is principally a respiratory pathogen, infection of the brain has been shown following intranasal and lung infection  <cit> . in this regard, monocytes infected with c. pneumoniae in the lungs may spread the infection via the peripheral circulation to the brain through the blood brain barrier or circumventricular organs  <cit> . alternatively, a more direct and insidious route of infection may follow the olfactory pathways. as such, the infection becomes established in the olfactory nasal neuroepithelia, progresses to the olfactory bulbs, and eventually infects brain structures such as the entorhinal cortex and hippocampus. the olfactory structures, the entorhinal cortex, and the hippocampal formation are the most vulnerable and the earliest regions affected in the onset of ad  <cit> . our current study highlights c. pneumoniae detection in the frontal and temporal cortices, including the entorhinal cortex and the hippocampal formation. thus, infection of these regions in the brain may have great impact on the development of ad pathology.

previous studies have demonstrated c. pneumoniae in both human and animal olfactory bulbs  <cit> . in both cell culture and animal studies, c. pneumoniae has been shown to infect nasal neuroepithelial cells  <cit> . in the animal studies, infection appeared to spread centrifugally from the vulnerable neuronal cells in the olfactory bulb into the brain  <cit> . further, chlamydia isolated from ad brains in a prior study was shown to have more commonalities with chlamydia respiratory strains than with chlamydia strains from atherosclerosis with the suggestion that the organism itself may have a tropism for specific cell types in the cns  <cit> . upon consideration of these data and our current data, a rationale for the selective vulnerability of specific brain regions to infection and resultant pathology emerges.

notably, histopathological amyloid plaques and tangles are used to define the stage of ad, but the correlation with the pathology of the disease and the clinical manifestations of the disease are not always clear  <cit> . some individuals who have massive pathology have little to no symptoms. on the other hand, some symptomatic individuals may show little pathology upon post-mortem histopathological examination. as such, there are many variations in the amount and type of damage evident in ad  <cit> . the variability of correlation between the symptomology and histopathology suggests other events and/or ingredients may be missing in the pathobiology of ad.

the response in the brain to infection may determine the extent of pathology and symptomatology that may arise. in this regard, c. pneumoniae infection characteristically promotes an inflammatory response whereby cytokines such as il-1β and tnf-α are secreted and may initiate cellular damage  <cit> . these cytokine responses to infection parallel similar responses to amyloid accumulation  <cit> . additionally, another cellular response to c. pneumoniae infection in culture is the production and processing of amyloid peptides. labeling of infected cells in culture for amyloid β 1- <dig> often reveals intracellular immunoreactivity at early post-infection times . interestingly, our earlier study demonstrated intracellular and extracellular amyloid deposits in the brains of non-transgenic balb/c mice following intranasal c. pneumoniae infection  <cit> . our current study showed a similar relationship in which we demonstrated both amyloid and chlamydia immunoreactivity in the temporal cortex of the ad brain.

further evaluation is required to specifically demonstrate how amyloid and c. pneumoniae, both intracellular and extracellular, are interrelated. in addition, future studies are required to further characterize the atypical extracellular chlamydial immunolabeling profiles. others have demonstrated evidence for an association of infection and amyloid in ad  <cit> . hsv <dig> viral dna was shown to specifically associate with ad amyloid plaques  <cit> . previous hypotheses have even suggested that amyloid in the ad brain may act as an antiviral agent  <cit>  or an entrapping agent for infection  <cit> . intriguingly, a recent study suggests that amyloid has anti-microbial properties, and may arise in response to brain infection in ad  <cit> . as  <dig> of  <dig> non-ad cases in our current study showed occasional chlamydia immunoreactivity and diffuse amyloid deposition, future analysis must also include mild cognitive impairment cases, as well as non-ad cases, as infection may be a prodromal event leading to eventual ad pathology.

CONCLUSIONS
the exact consequences of infection that correlate best with the stage and subtype of alzheimer's disease require ongoing investigation. this is true especially with regard to the hallmarks of the disease such as amyloid plaques and tau tangles. alzheimer's disease is manifest with multifactorial aspects of pathology and with potentially multiple associated environmental factors, including infectious agents  <cit> . further, our chlamydia pneumoniae data suggest that the areas of the brain involved with olfaction are important to study as infection in these regions, as well as in the olfactory neuroepithelia and olfactory bulbs, may be a precursor to the pathology associated with ad. identification and localization of infectious agents, such as chlamydia pneumoniae, in specifically vulnerable areas and cell types in the brain is paramount. this determination may be a missing link in the current strategy of associating symptomatology to disease pathogenesis in sporadic late-onset alzheimer's disease.

