BACKGROUND
oomycetes or water molds form a diverse group of eukaryotic micro-organisms that have originally been classified as fungi because of their similarity in growth morphology, propagation through spores and weaponry to infect host organisms  <cit> . furthermore, they occupy similar ecological niches and share many cell wall degrading enzymes to weaken host tissues  <cit> . however, biochemical and molecular data have shown that oomycetes have little affinity with "true" fungi but are instead more closely related to heterokont algae and diatoms  <cit> , belonging to the assemblage chromalveolates, which also include organisms such as ciliates, apicomplexans and dinoflagellates  <cit> . also in contrast to fungi, oomycetes are diploid organisms that lack a free haploid life stage.

members of the genus phytophthora cause devastating diseases on a wide range of plants, and are the most important pathogens of dicots. for instance, phytophthora infestans, responsible for severe damage in the food production worldwide by infecting tomato and potato  <cit> , was the infective agent of the so-called potato blight that caused the irish famine between  <dig> and  <dig>  during which approximately one million people died and another million emigrated  <cit> . another species, p. sojae, causes root and stem rot in soybean resulting in huge annual production losses  <cit> .

so far, three phytophthora species have been fully sequenced and annotated, namely p. sojae, p. ramorum and p. infestans. breakouts of the 'sudden oak death' disease caused by p. ramorum led to the first phytophthora genome project. since there were no close relatives sequenced yet, a second genome, the one of phytophthora sojae, was sequenced simultaneously. p. sojae and p. ramorum have a genome size of  <dig> mb and  <dig> mb, respectively  <cit> . p. infestans, of which the genome sequence has been determined recently as well, has an estimated genome size of  <dig> mb  <cit> . in comparison to other plant pathogens, the phytophthora genomes are quite large. bacterial genomes are often smaller than  <dig> mb and fungal genomes rarely exceed  <dig> mb  <cit> . the larger size of the p. sojae genome compared to p. ramorum is not only because of the higher number of predicted genes  but also because of larger intergenic regions and different retrotransposon expansion patterns  <cit> . in p. infestans, which has  <dig>  predicted genes  <cit> , the intergenic regions are even larger than in p. sojae and the number of different types of transposons is overwhelming  <cit> . the p. infestans genome is by far the largest chromalveolate genome sequenced and haas and colleagues  have shown that its expansion results from a proliferation of repetitive dna accounting for ~74% of the genome  <cit> . comparison of the three phytophthora genomes also revealed an unusual genome organization; i.e. regions with conserved gene order, high gene density and lower repeat content are separated by regions with non-conserved gene order, low gene density and high repeat content  <cit> .

in a previous study, we observed that phytophthora species have many more genes than most other chromalveolate species for which the complete genome sequence has been determined  <cit> . also the average gene family size is larger than for the other chromalveolates, except for the ciliates paramecium tetraurelia, which has undergone three whole genome duplication events  <cit>  and tetrahymena thermophila, which has undergone an extensive number of tandem duplications  <cit> . furthermore, in particular genes important for the interaction with their hosts, such as genes encoding cell wall degrading enzymes, often seem to have been duplicated in phytophthora species  <cit> . here, we have tried to unravel the duplication past of the three phytophthora species and conclude that many of the duplicated genes are likely the result of a shared ancient large-scale or even whole genome duplication event.

RESULTS
duplicated regions in the phytophthora genome
if an organism has undergone a large-scale or whole genome duplication  in its evolutionary past, there is a reasonable chance to find remnants of this event. for instance, such remnants can be detected by the identification of genomic segments sharing a set of homologous genes  <cit> . when also the order of the homologous genes  on the chromosomes is still conserved, the evidence for a block duplication is strengthened. to define homologous gene pairs within each of the phytophthora species and reference organisms, the proteomes were grouped into gene families based on sequence similarity and markov clustering . gene families with more than  <dig> members were omitted from the analysis since these gene families are often artefacts of the gene family clustering methods, i.e. artificial clustering of different families into superfamilies. also gene pairs with a ks-value lower than  <dig>  and/or lying on a small scaffold  were omitted from the analysis .

using our previously developed software i-adhore  <cit> , we identified blocks of homologous genes in the phytophthora genomes. in brief, the i-adhore algorithm detects homologous  regions in a genome by identifying diagonals in a gene homology matrix, after which the longest diagonal or duplicated region is reported. the whole procedure is controlled by a set of parameters including gap size, which describes the maximal number of intervening, non-homologous genes tolerated between two homologous genes within a collinear segment, and a parameter determining to what extent the elements of a cluster fit on a diagonal line. because of its specific development and implementation, the algorithm can only detect clusters of at least three homologous gene pairs  <cit> .

to our surprise, the large majority of duplicated blocks in p. infestans consist of only three homologous gene pairs . the same is observed for both other phytophthora species, namely p. sojae and p. ramorum . for all duplicated blocks, we also counted the number of intervening  genes. strikingly, the average number of intervening genes is extremely small and in most cases the duplicated genes in these small blocks are located directly next to each other.

the fact that phytophthora species, especially p. infestans and p. sojae, have a large number of genes and many multicopy gene families  <cit> , as well as many duplicated blocks of three homologs, raised the question whether these blocks could be the remnants of a large-scale gene or even entire genome duplication event. furthermore, the presence of a high number of very small duplicated blocks could point to an ancient duplication event followed by a large number of genome rearrangements breaking up larger blocks. if this were true, we would expect to find even more blocks with only two homologous genes.

finding small duplicated blocks of genes
since i-adhore and most other methods for duplicated block detection have been developed specifically to report large homologous segments between or within genomes  <cit> , we developed a new approach to detect small duplicated blocks of only two or three homologous genes, referred to as 2hom and 3hom blocks, respectively . as can be seen in figure  <dig> , 2hom blocks can be part of a 3hom block, which is different from for example i-adhore or related software reporting only the longest blocks. similarly, our 3hom blocks can be part of a block with more than three homologous genes. a genome that has been recently duplicated and did not undergo extensive genome rearrangements will have almost no blocks of only two or three anchor points using the i-adhore approach because most of them will be part of a larger block. however, in our new strategy such a genome will count numerous 2hom and 3hom blocks, indicative of a large-scale duplication event. in this respect, we can compare the distribution of 2hom and 3hom blocks between duplicated and non-duplicated genomes, trying to reduce the effect of genome rearrangements and the breaking up of larger duplicated blocks. it should be noted that blocks comprised of gene families with more than  <dig> members were discarded from all further analyses.

because we are looking at very small duplicated blocks, the possibility of finding some of those by chance is greater than for larger blocks. therefore, in our block detection method, we have chosen to be more stringent by not allowing any intervening genes. moreover, to compare our observation with what could be expected by chance, we ran  <dig> simulations for every genome, i.e. every genome was shuffled  <dig> times and for each random genome the number of 2hom and 3hom blocks was counted. the results for the 2hom block detection in the three different phytophthora species are shown in figure 2a, where the pink triangle shows the number of blocks found in the real genome, while the distributions shown in blue represent the results for random data, i.e. the output of the  <dig> simulations. if the number of blocks found in the real data is clearly different from the number of blocks found in the randomizations, the number of blocks in this species is highly significant, meaning that we find more blocks than we would expect by chance alone. as can be seen in figure 2a, the number of 2hom blocks detected in all three phytophthora species is significantly different from what would be expected by chance alone. the same is true for the 3hom blocks , where we can also see that 3hom blocks without intervening genes are extremely rare in randomized genomes. moreover, as expected, in all three phytophthora genomes the number of 2hom blocks is much higher than the number of 3hom blocks .

because the number of small duplicated blocks in phytophthora genomes seems unexpectedly high, we compared them with the number of blocks found in other genomes, which we will further refer to as the reference genomes. we distinguished three types of reference genomes, i.e. those of organisms that  underwent at least one wgd in their evolutionary past ,  underwent segmental duplications ,  most likely have not been duplicated . for all organisms, we applied the same detection strategy. the results for the detection of 2hom and 3hom blocks are shown in table  <dig> 

there is no evidence that the genome of c. elegans has been duplicated. however, it has been shown that this genome has undergone segmental duplication  <cit> , which explains its relatively large number of 2- and 3hom blocks. to investigate whether many small blocks in the phytophthora genomes could also be explained by a few segmental or chromosomal duplications, we calculated the percentage of genomic scaffolds containing at least one small duplicated block. after removal of large gene families,  <dig>   <dig> and 61% of the p. infestans, p. sojae and p. ramorum scaffolds, respectively, contain at least one block. when we count the number of scaffolds with two up to  <dig> duplicated blocks, the number of scaffolds in all three phytophthora species gradually decreases when the number of detected blocks increases . moreover, we observed that the number of blocks detected on a scaffold is linearly correlated with the size of the scaffold, expressed in the number of genes . finally, in order to make sure that the small duplicated blocks are not operon-like structures, we considered functional clustering and intergenic distances within the duplicated blocks . the results of these analyses rejected the operon-hypothesis .

dating the block duplications
the identification of many segmental duplications is usually considered strong evidence for a wgd, although it is hard to rule out that they are the result of many independent segmental duplications. however, if one can show that most gene duplicates have been created at about the same time, this provides additional evidence for a single duplication event  <cit> . therefore, we have tried to date the phytophthora paranomes based on third codon or synonymous substitution rates . because most substitutions in third-codon positions do not result in amino-acid replacements, the rate of fixation of these substitutions is expected to be relatively constant in different protein-coding genes  <cit>  and, therefore, to reflect the overall mutation rate  <cit> .

as can be seen in figure  <dig> , the most recent speciation event is the divergence between p. ramorum and p. sojae. prior to this event, p. infestans diverged from the common ancestor of p. sojae and p. ramorum , which is in accordance with phylogenetic data  <cit> . because of the fact that we only find small duplicated blocks, possibly because of many genome rearrangements , many paralogs that arose through this large-scale duplication event will no longer lie in duplicated blocks. therefore, we not only dated the homologous gene pairs still residing in duplicated blocks , but also dated the whole paranome of the three species . as shown in figure  <dig>  both distributions have the same shape . it is clear that in all three species there is a peak around ks-values of  <dig> - <dig> . although we are aware that higher values of ks should be interpreted with caution due to saturation effects, it is clear that many paralogs arose around the same time in the three species and prior to two speciation events, and must thus have occurred in their common ancestor. this is also confirmed by the fact that p. sojae and p. ramorum still share  <dig> 2hom blocks . p. sojae and p. ramorum also share  <dig>  resp.  <dig>  of their 2hom blocks with p. infestans.

gene orientation conservation in the duplicated blocks
we also studied gene orientation conservation in the phytophthora and reference genomes. to this end, we have applied the strategy shown in figure  <dig> . in panel c, the possible situations are shown where the orientation of the genes in 2hom blocks is completely conserved. since it is possible that during a wgd whole regions are being inverted, the different possibilities shown in panel d are also considered conserved. all the other cases, where only one gene is inverted and the other one not etc., we define as the orientation not to be conserved. we have applied this strategy to all the genomes in our dataset and again ran  <dig> simulations for every species. as can be seen in figure 2c, 77% of the 2hom blocks in p. infestans have a conserved gene orientation , whereas the conserved orientation in the reshuffled genomes is much smaller . in p. sojae and p. ramorum the conservation percentage is slightly lower, but still higher than in random data. in a. thaliana, t. nigroviridis and h. sapiens, again the situation is similar as in phytophthora, although in human and tetraodon the percentages are a bit higher . in c. elegans and d. melanogaster the conservation percentages are just below  <dig> and at the tail of the simulation curve. also in a. gambiae the conservation percentage is at the tail of the random curve. for the other genomes it is difficult to conclude anything because there are too few data points. this is also the reason why this simulation analysis was not performed on the 3hom blocks.

the fact that the blocks in the phytophthora species have a conserved orientation provides further support for the homologous gene pairs to have been duplicated in concert. if the homologous gene pairs would have been duplicated separately and afterwards assembled into gene clusters for example, then the genes within the block could have easily been inverted, resulting in a non-conserved gene orientation within the block. also cavalcanti and colleagues showed that in yeast the number of blocks with the same gene order was similar to the number of blocks with the same gene order and gene orientation, while in c. elegans the number of blocks dropped substantially after imposing the orientation criterion  <cit> .

gene retention following duplication in phytophthora
besides block duplicates, also the number of tandem duplicates is large in the phytophthora genomes. in pathogenic species, it is well-known that genes related to pathogenesis are often located in tandem arrays  for both the tandem and block duplicate datasets. table  <dig> shows the go slim labels that are significantly  enriched in  tandem duplicates,  block duplicates, and  in both tandem and duplicates.

both p-value and q-value for the go-labels shown are lower than  <dig> .

*td = tandem duplicates; bd = block duplicates

as expected, and previously shown  <cit> , tandem duplicates are enriched in genes related to pathogenesis, such as genes involved in symbiosis and genes with specific kinase activity. moreover, 25% of all genes annotated with the go-term "symbiosis" are part of tandem gene clusters . when we consider the go-tree cellular component , we observe that tandem genes are often expressed in lysosomes, vacuoles, the external encapsulating structures, the cell wall and the extracellular region, which refers to the outermost structure of a cell .

the block duplicates are specifically enriched in the processes cell communication and signal transduction and in the functions actin binding and calcium ion binding, signal transducer activity, transcription regulator activity and receptor activity. many of these functions, such as signal transduction and transcription but also calcium binding have been shown in several studies to be preferentially retained after a whole genome duplication because of gene dosage and gene balance effects  <cit> . therefore, the specific retention of these genes in the small duplicated blocks in phytophthora provides additional evidence for a wgd, rather than individual segmental duplications, where we would expect the opposite  <cit> . additionally, the retention of calcium binding, signal transduction and cell communication proteins may also have been important in the infection process of the plant pathogen. it has been shown that the plant pathogen phytophthora parasitica forms, at the site of infection, biofilms that contribute to disease development  <cit> . these biofilms protect the pathogen against plant defence responses and fungicidal treatments and use cell-cell communication to promote the exchange of signals and nutrients between, among others, sessile and planktonic zoospores  <cit> . calcium, for example, is one of the candidate substances responsible for the chemotaxis of zoospores toward previously encysted zoospores  <cit> . furthermore, the encystment of zoospores and the germination of cysts to form hyphae is also stimulated by nutrients and calcium . regarding the go-tree cellular component, we see no preference of expression in the extracellular regions.

it is clear that both tandem and block duplicates are enriched in genes that play a role in pathogenesis. additionally, both types of duplicates are enriched in genes that are important in the response to external, biotic and abiotic stimulus and stress. also genes with hydrolase, transporter and catalytic activity, of which many are linked to pathogenesis, are enriched in both categories of duplicates. for example, genes of the glycosyl hydrolase family encode extracellular enzymes capable of hydrolyzing the xyloglucan component of the host cell wall, thereby facilitating the pathogen physical penetration process  <cit> . although the large majority of these well-known pathogenicity genes  <cit>  have clearly evolved through a continuous process of tandem duplications, we have now identified some of them as remainders of an older large-scale duplication event.

discussion
all three phytophthora genomes contain many more small duplicated blocks than would be expected by chance alone. furthermore, when we compare the number of duplicated blocks with those of organisms that have most probably not undergone large scale duplication events , the difference is obvious . moreover, we also observed a clear difference with organisms that did undergo some segmental duplications, but no wgd. for example, plasmodium falciparum, the causative agent of severe human malaria, carries multiple segmental duplications in the otherwise highly variable subtelomeres of its chromosomes  <cit> . however, the number of 2hom and 3hom blocks detected is still much smaller than in phytophthora. also in k. lactis, a yeast species that has not undergone a wgd, but for which eight segmental duplications have been documented, on top of some segmental duplications at the subtelomeres  <cit> , the number of detected small duplicated blocks is much less than in phytophthora  <cit> . on the other hand, the number of 2hom blocks in c. elegans, which has undergone a few segmental duplications  <cit> , is higher than in p. ramorum, but still considerably lower than in p. infestans and p. sojae. the number of 3hom blocks on the other hand is higher than in p. ramorum and p. sojae but still lower than in p. infestans. however, it should be noted that the large number of 2hom and 3hom blocks in c. elegans is mainly due to a few larger segmental duplications involving between  <dig> and  <dig> genes  <cit> . it is also important to note that the duplicated blocks in all three phytophthora species are spread over more than  <dig> percent of the number of scaffolds and we did not observe a bias to certain scaffolds, only a correlation between the size of the scaffold and the number of duplicated blocks, something we would expect for a wgd event. on the other hand, in c. elegans, 70% of the segmental duplications are intrachromosomal  <cit> .

because the number of blocks is directly correlated with, among other things,  the number of genes,  the extent of genome rearrangements, and  the quality of the genome assembly, we have to take these issues into account. for example, as stated before, the number of blocks in the paleopolyploid s. cerevisiae was lower than expected. however, this is explained by the fact that, compared to the other genomes used in this study, yeast has much fewer genes. on top of that, s. cerevisiae has undergone many rearrangements  <cit> . figure 3b shows the percentage of 2hom blocks for the different genomes analyzed, taking into account the number of blocks that theoretically can be found if the whole genome would have been duplicated and there would have been no genome rearrangements . in practice, if a complete chromosome  with x genes has been duplicated, we would expect to find  2hom and  3hom blocks, provided none of the duplicated genes would have been translocated or lost nor other genes inserted. by dividing the number of identified blocks by the number of possible blocks, we obtain the relative number of duplicated blocks for all genomes . regarding 2hom blocks, all genomes that have not undergone a large-scale duplication event, have values below  <dig> %. the same is true for plasmodium falciparum and kluyveromyces lactis, which have only undergone some segmental duplications. for the other species, except s. cerevisiae, which are known to have undergone at least one genome duplication, the percentages are all >  <dig> %, including p. infestans  and p. sojae . p. ramorum is just <  <dig> % , but there are no non-duplicated or segmentally duplicated genomes with a value larger than 1%. it should also be noted that, when taking the number of genes into account, the difference in the number of 2hom blocks between s. cerevisiae and the non-duplicated organisms becomes larger. also the percentage of blocks in all three phytophthora species is now greater than in c. elegans. moreover, the relative number of blocks in h. sapiens is smaller than in p. infestans and p. sojae, and similar to p. ramorum. both tetraodon and arabidopsis still have the highest relative number of blocks.

for the 3hom blocks, the difference between organisms that have undergone large-scale duplications and those that have not is even more pronounced . for all non-duplicated genomes, the percentages are below  <dig> %. when we consider the other genomes, the relative number of 3hom blocks in p. infestans is the highest. for p. sojae and p. ramorum however, the percentages are lower than for arabidopsis and tetraodon, similar to s. cerevisiae, h. sapiens and c. elegans, and higher than for the other reference organisms.

it is important to realize that the genomes of all three phytophthora's still consist of scaffolds, whereas most other genomes discussed here have already been assembled into chromosomes. if the majority of scaffolds are rather small, it is obvious that it is much harder to detect large duplicated regions than for genomes that are well assembled . therefore, we considered the distribution of scaffold sizes  in the different phytophthora species and compared them with the diatom phaeodactylum tricornutum, a genome that is also not yet assembled into chromosomes . for every size bin, we counted the percentage of genes of the corresponding genome located on a scaffold of that size. in p. ramorum , we observed that the percentage of genes lying on a small scaffold  is greater than for the other genomes. also when we consider the cumulative percentage , we see that all genes  are found on scaffolds with a size smaller than  <dig> genes, whereas in phaeodactylum we have scaffolds with more than  <dig> genes and in p. infestans with more than  <dig> genes. the situation in p. sojae is similar to that of p. ramorum, although slightly better. in phaeodactylum, the number of genes on small scaffolds is the lowest. therefore because in phaeodactylum the average scaffold sizes are larger, it should be easier to detect larger duplicated blocks. the fact that we could hardly find any duplicated blocks in phaeodactylum tricornutum , whereas we do find many in p. infestans and a considerable number in p. ramorum and p. sojae again provides support for phytophthora species having undergone a large-scale or even entire genome duplication event. in addition, since the number of blocks found in the three species is linearly correlated with the assembly quality, it is likely that in p. ramorum and p. sojae the duplication signal would be more similar to p. infestans after improving the genome assembly.

CONCLUSIONS
analyses of the phytophthora genomes seem to suggest that these organisms have undergone a large-scale gene duplication or wgd in their evolutionary past. likely, this event has been shared by all three phytophthora species, p. infestans, p. ramorum, and p. sojae and thus occurred before their speciation. although we cannot exclude that the many small duplicated blocks have been created through many independent small block duplications, we do consider this less likely. first, when we calculate the age of the duplicated blocks a large fraction seems to have originated at the same time and they seem to be very old. if the many small blocks observed in the different phytophthora genomes would have been created by a continuous mode of segmental duplications, we would expect to see an exponential decrease when plotting the age of the duplicated blocks against their frequency , which is not what we observe  <cit> . it could still be that a majority of segmental duplications occurred in a short time interval in the common ancestor of all three phytophthora species, but this scenario is certainly much less parsimonious than a single wgd. furthermore, the specific enrichment of regulatory genes in the duplicated blocks provides additional support for a wgd, rather than many smaller segmental duplication events, after which where we would expect strong selection against retention of such genes  <cit> .

second, polyploids have already been identified within several species of phytophthora  <cit>  and other oomycetes  <cit>  providing additional support that p. infestans could indeed be an ancient polyploid . the findings of sansome  suggested that p. infestans may exist in nature in the tetraploid condition and that this tetraploid might be better adapted, for instance to cooler conditions  <cit> . the author also claimed that the discovery of many pathogenic races of p. infestans  <cit>  may be related to polyploidy in p. infestans  <cit> . the fact that we also find many genes related to pathogenesis in our set of retained duplicates might actually confirm this hypothesis.

therefore, we conclude that phytophthora is most likely an ancient polyploid. the fact that many small blocks are found suggests that its genome has been heavily rearranged following the duplication event. furthermore, the observation that the phytophthora genomes have a high repeat content, and that the gene order conservation between the genomes drops when the repeat content increases  <cit> , further suggests that those repeats have played an important role in the rearrangement process. haas and colleagues  also suggested that the high rate of transposon activity must have occurred more recently  <cit> , supporting our hypothesis that the wgd event has preceded the rearrangement processes. as a consequence, after tens of millions of years of evolution, and in particular for fast evolving genomes of pathogens, the paucity of a considerable number of retained homologous gene pairs in close proximity makes it almost impossible to detect statistically significant collinear regions. this might explain why no evidence has been found previously for wgd or large-scale segmental duplications in the phytophthora species  <cit> . however, our newly developed strategy to look for large numbers of small duplicated blocks and compare these with genomes of other organisms for which the duplication past is better known, might still unveil ancient polyploidy events.

