BACKGROUND
the interpretation of microarray data is facilitated by combining the data, or results of data analysis, with prior contextual knowledge, e.g., ontologies  <cit> , pathways  <cit>  and other annotation groups of interest  <cit> . by using prior knowledge about pathways, we aim at inferring cellular signaling pathway activity from tumor microarray data, on a sample-by-sample basis. furthermore, we examine whether the pathway activity of individual samples is associated with clinical classifications of the samples. our approach is in sharp contrast to establishing pathways from gene expression data . what we do here is to project gene expresson data onto prior knowledge, in this case established pathway databases.

signaling pathway activity scoring is a more direct measurement of biological processes than ontology mapping, which aims at finding over-representation of genes in various groups of contextual annotation. a cellular signaling pathway  is composed of a series of signaling molecules that convey information, typically from the outside of the cell to the nucleus. the initial step consists of extracellular signaling molecules, ligands, that activate receptors of the cell. these receptors then initiate intracellular signaling events, which eventually regulate the activity of various transcription factors. these transcription factors, in turn, regulate the expression levels of various genes, termed downstream targets of the pathway.

to characterize pathway activity, it would be desirable to have both proteomic and gene expression data. gene expression data alone is not sufficient for assessing protein concentrations  <cit>  and post-translational modifications of proteins. in the absence of proteomic data, one is thus forced to rely on aspects of the pathway that are detectable at the mrna level. the foremost candidate for this is the downstream targets, which we will focus on here. it is of course also possible that the mrna levels of effector proteins in a pathway change due to altered pathway activity. however, such effects are outside the scope of this paper. a further complication is that many pathways overlap, both in terms of having common transcription factors, and in terms of distinct transcription factors having common downstream targets. our methods will not be able to distinguish very similar pathways, and in some sense this problem can be seen as a result of the ambiguities that follow when the full protein network is partitioned into separate pathways.

cellular signaling pathways are subject to intense research, and current knowledge is compiled into databases such as stke  <cit> , transpath  <cit>  and transfac  <cit> . these databases do not yet account for all pathways or transcription factors, but develop over time. most pathway information utilized in this work is collected from transpath/transfac, where information about transcription factors and downstream targets is readily available. the only exception is the estrogen receptor pathway, which is taken from  <cit> . we analyze three microarray data sets in this study: two breast cancer data sets  <cit> , and one leukemia data set  <cit> .

for the three data sets, we assess pathway activity from two related, but different, points of view. the first is to examine which pathways behave in a coherent way across the entire data set, i.e., which pathways have significantly co-expressed downstream targets. this is done both with and without accounting for the fact that downstream targets of a single transcription factor are correlated irrespective of pathway behavior. the second point of view is to assess pathway activity of individual samples, relative to the other samples in the same experiment, yielding an active or inactive status for each pathway in each sample. finally, we relate the sample-wise pathway activity to clinical classifications of samples by way of contingency tables. several pathways are found to be highly predictive of the clinical classifications.

RESULTS
in this section we assess variation in transcription factor and pathway activity across the samples. we then proceed to probe pathway activity in individual samples. finally, we study the association between pathway activity and the clinical classifications of the samples.

co-expression of the downstream targets of a transcription factor
as a prelude to the study of pathways, we quantified the degree of correlation among downstream targets of single transcription factors. for this purpose we used the group correlation score defined in methods. the p-values were calculated using random reshuffling of the genes. table  <dig> shows the most significant transcription factors in the van 't veer data set. we see, as expected, that several transcription factors have significantly correlated downstream targets. for the data set of sotiriou et al.,  <dig> out of  <dig> transcription factors have a p-value below  <dig> , and for the golub et al. data set, the corresponding numbers are  <dig> out of  <dig>  among these three data sets, the p-values are noticeably better for data sets with more samples and genes. with this in mind we conclude that the downstream targets of transcription factors are co-expressed in the these data sets, albeit not to a high degree. the full lists for all  <dig> data sets can be found in additional file  <dig> 

co-expression of the downstream targets of a pathway
here we use the same group correlation score as above, applied to the downstream targets of entire pathways rather than those of individual transcription factors. table  <dig> shows the results for the van 't veer data set, where  <dig> out of  <dig> pathways have a p-value below  <dig> , which is significantly more than expected by chance. however, many of the downstream targets have common transcription factors, which might be the major cause of the co-expression. to eliminate such a contribution we used theexclusive group correlation score, which considers only pairs of downstream targets lacking common transcription factors. the p-values for the exclusive group correlation score are also shown in table  <dig>  although these p-values are larger, they are still significant; out of  <dig> pathways with more than one transcription factor,  <dig> have a exclusive group correlation score p-value below  <dig> , which is still more than expected by chance. we conclude that the co-expression of downstream targets in a pathway can only in part be explained by the genes having common transcription factors. this co-expression at the pathway level justifies the view of pathways as functional units. similar tables for the two other data sets are shown in additional file  <dig>  both data sets have smaller p-values than expected by chance, albeit not as convincingly as the van 't veer data set.

pathway assignments for individual samples
after having established that downstream target genes are co-expressed in some pathways, we proceeded to study the status of pathway activity in individual samples. to this end we employed the group sample score, which for each pathway designates every sample in a data set as either active or inactive, with an associated p-value.

in figures  <dig> and  <dig>  we show heatmaps for two of the pathways, er-induced and tnf-α respectively. these two examples are illustrative; there is a substantial fraction of genes that are clearly upregulated in the active samples and downregulated in the inactive samples, as seen by the red upper right corner and green upper left corner. there are also many genes in the pathway that do not seem to be regulated, and even a few which act oppositely. the latter ones are possibly genes, that are repressed by the pathway. similar figures for the entire genome  do not show large red or green upper corners, confirming the statistical analysis.

association between sample-wise pathway activity and clinical classifications
we analyzed the association between sample-wise pathway activity and clinical classifications using contingency tables. for every pathway and data set, we divided the samples into three groups: samples where the pathway was active at a 5% significance level, samples where it was inactive at a 5% significance level, and insignificant samples referred to as undecided. for each data set, contingency tables of pathway activity versus clinical classifications were created, and χ <dig> p-values were calculated.

in the data set of golub et al., the only available clinical classification is tumor type, i.e., all or aml. table  <dig> shows the contingencies for the insulin pathway and the i1- <dig> pathway. seven out of  <dig> pathways have contingency tables with a χ <dig> p-value below  <dig> .

for the breast cancer data set of van 't veer et al., we investigated six clinical classifications: metastasis status , estrogen receptor status , progesterone receptor status , lymph node status , brca mutations  and histological grade . the numbers in parentheses refer to the number of significant contingency tables at the  <dig>  level. the total number of pathways was again  <dig>  for metastasis status, only  <dig> out of the  <dig> samples were labeled in the original data set, and this may contribute to the low degree of association between this clinical classification and pathway activity. however, similar results were obtained for the data set of sotiriou et al., which indicates that it may be difficult to obtain any association between the pathways analyzed in this work and breast cancer metastasis status. table  <dig> shows the contingency between estrogen receptor status and the er-induced pathway. as expected, there is a strong association between presence of the estrogen receptor protein, and the activity status of the er-induced pathway. somewhat more surprisingly, there are also strong associations between er status and many other pathways. similar results are obtained for the data set of sotiriou et al., but with fewer significant associations.

a general tendency of the contingency table analysis is illustrated in table  <dig>  lowering the pathway activity p-value cutoff makes the association to clinical classifications more specific but less sensitive. the complete set of contingency tables for all three data sets can be found in additional file  <dig> 

CONCLUSIONS
we have shown that downstream target genes of signal transduction pathways behave coherently in gene expression tumor data sets. first, we confirmed that downstream targets of transcription factors are correlated across samples. we then demonstrated that the same holds true for downstream targets of an entire pathway, even after discounting the correlations due to genes having a common transcription factor. the correlations for entire pathways were found to be more significant than those for individual transcription factors.

the presence of significant correlations confirms the expectation that gene expression is controlled by the activity of pathways. however, these correlations do not tell us in which samples a pathway is active or inactive. to reveal this, we devised the group sample score. with this score we classified the samples into those where the pathway was significantly active, significantly inactive or undecided, respectively. as seen in table  <dig>  the number of significant samples is, for most pathways, much higher than the random expectation.

in many cases, the active/inactive pathway status was highly correlated with independent clinical classifications. this confirms the relevance of pathways for understanding of the underlying biology. furthermore, the activity status of one or more pathways may be used to subdivide the samples into groups with distinct biological characteristics. such a subdivision is feasible if, for instance, tumors of a certain clinical diagnosis are an agglomerate of several subtypes.

the group sample score is natural if a pathway either induces all its downstream targets, or represses them. however, in most pathways some downstream genes are induced, while others are repressed. to account for a mixture of induction and repression, one should include a sign, or more generally a weight, to each term in the sum. such a weight might even depend on the type of tissue and the environment. since this information was not readily available for the studied pathways, all genes were weighted equally. nevertheless, we obtained significant results, indicative of a dominant trend among the downstream genes. for the estrogen receptor  pathway, we did have information about the sign, but instead of introducing a more general score for this pathway alone, we split the er pathway into two parts, with induced and repressed genes, respectively. in the breast cancer data set of van 't veer et al.  <cit> , there were  <dig> genes in the induced part and  <dig> in the repressed. as seen in tables  <dig> and  <dig>  the er-induced pathway was highly significant, whereas the repressed pathway was not. the full pathway was also highly significant, although to a lesser extent. the significance of the full pathway is thus due to the induced genes, which constitute a majority of the downstream targets. the situation is similar for other pathways and data sets.

it should be stressed that correlations, and the pathway activity status observed in a sample, are only defined relative to the other samples in the same data set. if a pathway were active in all samples, it would not show up in our significance test. the status of a pathway, as we define it, is given by the downstream genes, and the connection to ligands, receptors and other pathway components cannot be inferred from this analysis.

our current knowledge of pathways, and of downstream targets of transcription factors, is far from complete. however, we find that the results presented herein constitute a proof of concept for analyzing microarray gene expression in the context of signal transduction pathways.

