BACKGROUND
a central objective of the analysis of complex systems is localization of function, that is, determining which task is executed by each element or, more precisely, assessing how much each element contributes to the execution of specific tasks. for example, one can ask, for a given cell, which gene-products are responsible for energy metabolism, and which are involved in cell cycle and cell fate decisions. many of the analysis techniques that are aimed at identifying the functional role of elements in biological systems, such as gene expression microarrays, are based on studying correlations in the data. however, establishing causal relationships in the data is not possible using purely correlational measures  <cit>  without utilizing a randomized experimental framework  <cit> . for example, when observing a gene whose over-expression is coupled with a phenotypic phenomenon, one cannot ascertain whether the over expression is the direct cause of this phenomenon or an epiphenomenon of the activation of other genes.

these observations naturally lead to the notion of perturbations or knockouts: to understand what a specific element  does, lesion it and observe the functional consequences. a classical example is studying the effects of systematic deletions of genes on an organism's viability, with the resulting causal categorization of essential genes  <cit> . these classical knockout studies are however based on single-perturbations: in each experiment, a single element in the system is perturbed, and the resulting phenotype is used to identify its function. yet, such single-perturbations will fail to reveal the functional organization of systems in which there is no one-to-one correspondence between elements and functions. for example, in a system with two redundant elements backing each other's function, the removal of any of the two will have no phenotypic effect, leading to the false conclusion that both elements are superfluous. indeed, in a recent in-silico multiple-knockouts study of the robustness of the yeast's metabolic network  <cit> , 74% of the genes were attributed some functional contribution, as opposed to only 13% found to be essential using single knockouts. there are a number of recent in-silico studies on the robustness against double and multiple knockouts .

such considerations and findings suggest that understanding even moderately-complex biological systems requires the use of multiple concurrent perturbations. on the other hand, the vast majority of gene knockout studies employ only single knockouts. how detrimental is this gap? to what extent can we rely on the large body of observations that have been made using single knockout studies in biology?

the first obvious step toward addressing this question lies in double knockout perturbations. as the simplest conceivable genetic interaction is that of full overlap or redundancy , one can set out to experimentally test the phenotype of all double concurrent perturbations, in search of gene pairs whose deletion is lethal  or damaging. in fact, a large scale experiment looking for such gene pairs in s. cerevisiae  <cit>  tested some  <dig>  gene pairs and found ~ <dig> synthetic lethal pairs, at  <dig> % frequency. these included ~ <dig> individual genes , encompassing about 16% of the genome. two recent papers performed all double knockouts of yeast and the bacterium helicobacter pylori metabolic genes using in-silico models  <cit> .

these numbers offer a bipolar view on the importance of genetic interactions, and hence multiple-perturbations analysis, in functional genomics. on the one hand, one may convincingly argue that genes with complete or partial backups are in fact less important to the functioning of the organism, as each can be removed with small effect, and the probability of random mutations damaging both copies is very low. the rarity of synthetic lethal pairs is a further possible argument against the importance of multiple perturbations as a tool for localizing function. on the other hand, as only 20–30% of the yeast genes were found to be essential or partially contributing to growth , a multiple-knockouts analysis may expand considerably the effective size of the network of genes with significant functional contribution. in addition, more complex forms of redundancy and interactions are not necessarily manifested in synthetically lethal gene pairs. finally, the functional annotations gained from single perturbations alone might be seriously lacking.

travelling down this path of thought, the next obvious step is to experimentally test triple knockouts, and then quadruple and more. as these experiments are difficult and costly, the key question is whether these multiple-knockouts data will enhance our understanding of the system, and if so – to what extent. in a previous work  <cit> , we have applied multiple concurrent knockouts to a widely accepted large scale in-silico model of the metabolism of s. cerevisiae, and enumerated synthetic lethal pairs and larger lethal groups termed essential sets. in this paper, we start by estimating the extent of multiple-lethality phenomena in s. cerevisiae using the same model, in a manner analogous to the experimental results cited. while useful in its own sake, we will see that this brute force approach leads to serious technical and conceptual scaling problems. tackling these difficulties, we utilize a novel approach for quantitative rigorous multiple-knockouts analysis, the multiple-perturbations shapley value analysis , a methodology introduced at  <cit> . this method borrows fundamental concepts and analytical approaches from the field of game theory, which have already been used in many diverse fields  <cit> .

the msa utilizes perturbation  experiments for assigning each element of a system a numerical contribution score  to a specific given task. given such contributions we can address questions regarding the functional role of elements, the identification of submodules in the system, the quantification of localization/distribution of specific tasks, etc. the msa is the first method providing a unique, axiomatically correct and scalable attribution of contributions to the system's elements, in the context of multiple-perturbations experiments. it was previously applied to brain networks, genetic networks and artificial neurocontrollers  <cit> . using the msa, we further analyze the yeast's metabolism to get more insight into the localization of metabolic function, and quantify how misleading the picture arising from classical single-perturbation analysis is in comparison.

RESULTS
a computational study of synthetic lethality
our first jab at the question of the necessity of multiple perturbations is an obvious one. we wish to estimate the extent of multiple-lethality phenomena in similar lines to the experiments of tong et al.  <cit> , that systematically crossed mutations in ~ <dig> different query genes into a set of ~ <dig> viable gene yeast deletion mutants and identified synthetically lethal or sick interactions. to this end we employ the large scale in-silico constraint-based modelling approach of  <cit> .

we have used the in-silico flux balance analysis  model of  <cit>  to predict the viability of s. cerevisiae under single knockouts of all genes included in the model, finding  <dig> essential genes comprising 16% of the  <dig> genes involved in the metabolic network modelled . limited only by computing power, we have proceeded to measure the viability of the yeast in the model under all double knockouts of non-essential genes, and under random samples of triple and quadruple knockouts. figure  <dig> shows the observed frequency and count of lethal interactions per group size .

note the good agreement of the model statistics with the experimental data for the single and double knockouts: for knockout depths  <dig> and  <dig>  the predicted lethal frequencies are 13% and 28%, respectively, lower than the empirical frequencies, a fairly small bias that might stem from the inherent optimism of the fba predictions. similarly, the statistics of three and four concurrent knockout experiments probably bound the expected true experimental frequencies from below, and probably not tightly so.

both experimental and model data suggest that some important knowledge can be mined only from the multiple-perturbations experiments. unfortunately, figure  <dig> also points at two serious problems with this straightforward approach of measuring the amount of lethal interactions. first, it does not scale: on the one hand, as we use more concurrent perturbations, there is an increasing number of lethal interactions that we should aim to find. on the other hand, their frequency among all potential gene combinations is decreasing, because the number of such potential combinations grows even faster. thus, even the switch to in-silico simulations, while accelerating the process over in-vivo experiments by many orders of magnitude, cannot provide a brute force complete answer to the multiple-perturbations problem. the second problem is a conceptual issue. given the results of figure  <dig>  is it important to execute a multiple-perturbations analysis? is the amount of interactions found small or large? how should one interpret the  <dig>  four-dimensional interactions found in the metabolic network?

more specifically, as we use more concurrent perturbations two main problems potentially hinder the execution of the multiple-perturbations analysis:  without prior knowledge about the groups of elements involved in important interactions, the analysis requires the collection of an exponentially large  set of costly multiple-knockouts experiments; and  it necessitates an accepted definition of importance for the analysis of the resulting large data set. in the following, we utilize the multiple-perturbations shapley value analysis  method  to overcome these issues.

msa analysis of the yeast metabolic network
applying multiple concurrent perturbations to the metabolic network, we utilize msa to assess the increase in information gained in the process. msa, explained in more detail under methods below, tackles the problem of quantifying the relative contributions of system elements  to a given task. the contribution is computed by measuring the effect of removing an element  not only in the fully functional system – as is done in classic single knockouts, but also after already removing one or more other elements. thus, interactions between elements can be revealed. this basic idea was already employed, e.g., to identify synthetic lethal gene pairs  <cit>  – but msa introduced the computational and theoretical framework allowing the combination of many multiple knockout tests into a concise contribution score per element . in out case, the elements perturbed are the genes coding for enzymes catalyzing the metabolic pathways. perturbations are defined as complete knockouts of genes. the network's performance is the optimal solution found using fba.

general analysis: the growth task
initially, we use the classic biomass production as the objective function in the fba modelling. the biomass production target has proved successful in predicting experimental results in wild-type strains and mutants in several organisms  <cit> . it is also the objective function that best fits the experimental flux data among several functions tested in  <cit> . although it is not necessarily the true single objective of the organism  <cit> , maximization of growth is a good in-silico measure of the potential of growth of the organism.

to compare the picture of function localization arising from a single perturbations analysis with that of the full msa, we track  <dig> measures:  the number of genes involved in the task ;  the cumulative contribution of the essential  genes, i.e. the sum of their cvs; and  the mean relative error in the cvs computed using single-perturbations versus their true axiomatic value, as computed by an msa of the multiple-perturbations data. additionally, we record the number of essential genes for every task. here we use the usual definition of essentiality, i.e., a gene is essential if its single-perturbation is lethal.

 number of genes implicated as involved in the task. in the multiple case, we only count genes with a statistically significant cv ;  total contribution of the essential genes;  mean relative error of cvs; mre=1|i|⋅∑i∈i|γi−γiγi| averaging only for the involved genes i;  number of essential genes.

from the results presented in table  <dig>  one can derive two main conclusions regarding the localization of the general growth task:  the classic single-perturbation analysis misses some 33% of the genes found to have a statistically non-negligible contribution by the msa. since we used a conservative statistical estimation of the number of involved genes, this percentage might be even higher in the real organism.  yet, the genes found by single knockout analysis contribute up to 96% of the cumulative sum of contributions to growth, while the many genes missed by the single-perturbation analysis end up having a very minor overall contribution in the msa.

production of biomass constituents
we turn to a detailed localization of function, measuring the metabolic network's ability to individually produce the different biomass constituents. to this end we used an array of objective functions, each corresponding to the maximization of the production of a single biomass constituent, including the various amino acids, nucleotides, carbohydrates and lipids. we thus measure the contribution of genes to the potential production capability of each biomass constituent individually, in an isolated manner.

hence, a multiple-knockouts analysis finds many more significant genes when examining individual tasks, than a single-knockout analysis. figure  <dig> plots the genes  participating in every task  in both cases. the multiple-knockouts analysis provides a very large enrichment of the genes participating in each task and vice versa. for example, the single-knockout analysis functionally annotates only  <dig> genes by finding them important in one or more tasks ), while the multiple-knockouts analysis annotates  <dig> genes with a total of more than  <dig> annotations. in other words, according to the multiple-knockouts analysis, each gene participates in many more tasks and one obtains a much richer, "soft" annotation of the functional roles of the gene products in the system. this conceptual picture conforms intuitively much better with the numerous annotations that genes may be ascribed to in standard annotation systems like go, than the very sparse, "hard" annotation obtained with the single-lesion analysis.

to address the question whether the richer, multiple-knockouts annotation actually carries more valid biological information than the single-knockout analogue, we perform a hierarchical clustering of tasks, represented by their gene annotation vectors given in the data presented in figure  <dig>  the resulting cluster hierarchies in both the single and multiple knockouts cases are shown in figure  <dig>  both clusterings successfully identify a few of the primary classes of the metabolic tasks . however, as evident, multiple-knockouts annotation produces a superior clustering, e.g., grouping correctly the amino acids and the pyrimidines to separate categories, while the single-knockout clustering fails to do so.

discussion and 
CONCLUSIONS
we present a large-scale study of function localization in a metabolic network model of the yeast. first, let us address our main question whether multiple knockouts are necessary to correctly localize function in simple organisms. we find that the essential elements revealed by the single-perturbations analysis of general growth span most of the total contribution values . yet, this analysis completely misses a large number  of functionally relevant elements whose contribution, though small, is non-negligible and depends on the status of other elements. in the individual metabolic subtasks, the picture portrayed by single-perturbations analysis is significantly lacking, and in some of these subtasks the single perturbation analysis reveals only 20% of the contributing genes, which together account for only 40% of the total cv mass. the general growth task hence appears simpler than many of the subtasks producing biomass constituents. this is likely because it is a logical and combination of the subtasks . this translates to an abundance of lethal elements in the general growth task, leaving relatively little mass  to the intricate interactions and nonlethal elements.

we began our investigation by mimicking in-silico the experimental paradigm recently introduced in-vivo, of performing a set of multiple knockouts  and assessing the amount of lethal interactions that is uncovered. remarkably, the model's results for the single and double knockouts concord fairly well with the in-vivo results. the triple and quadruple model experiments confirm the trends observed in the lower-dimensional interactions – that is, as the dimension  of the interaction increases, the frequency of lethal interactions decreases and their absolute number increases by about an order of magnitude. however, we find that this approach cannot be extended in practice, even by using in-silico models, because of two main reasons: first, it is computationally intractable, and second, and perhaps more important, it is not clear how the results obtained can actually be transcribed to measures of system size or complexity, or to yield a more useful functional gene annotation. we hence turn to a more rigorous, systematic approach. using the msa to quantitatively identify the significant genes and their contribution to the different metabolic tasks, we are able to characterize the functional profile of the genes in the system in both the single and multiple knockouts cases. indeed, the multiple-knockouts analysis is shown to give a description which is both richer and conforms better with basic biological knowledge than the single knockout analysis.

in our multiple-knockouts study of the yeast metabolism, a batch of  <dig> perturbation experiments already gives a fairly accurate function localization picture for some tasks, in a system with  <dig> elements. depending on the complexity of the analyzed system, knockout depths from k =  <dig> and up to k =  <dig> are needed. given that current in-vivo experimental studies already perform tens of thousands of single perturbations  <cit>  and hundreds of thousands of double-knockout experiments  <cit> , it is not unreasonable to expect that an in-vivo multiple-perturbations analysis of large metabolic pathways, and perhaps even whole cellular systems, will become feasible in the foreseeable future.

one should note that the genes that require multiple knockouts to unravel their functional contributions are not of marginal importance and are of considerable biological significance, as already shown in previous studies:  <cit>  have provided numerous examples of genes sets discovered by high-depth knockouts and discuss their backups from a biological perspective.  <cit>  have shown that including the contributions of genes identified via double knockouts significantly extends the coverage and quality of their functional annotation in the yeast . specific examples of such genes are discussed in depth and the pathways that they compose are elucidated and further validated via auxotrophy experiments.

summarizing our findings, this paper shows two fundamental results. first, in response to our basic research question, we show, for the yeast's metabolic network, that the conventionally used single knockout analysis provides only a very partial picture of function localization. second, we show that the current experimental paradigm for probing the system's higher-order lethal interactions is both practically and conceptually limited. in turn, we demonstrate the essential value of a rigorous multiple-knockouts analysis method for accurately estimating the network's effective significant size. moreover, the identification of the significant elements might even guide the experimental search for lethal interactions in the future, and make it more efficient. the current study of functional genomics in biological systems is just the beginning of an important endeavor, and much remains to be done. furthermore, the multi-perturbation approach presented here is not necessarily limited to perturbations at the gene level. one potentially important extension is to the study of complex, combinatorial gene regulation programs, to elucidate the relative role of the different transcriptions factors and their binding sites on a given gene promoter. first steps in this direction have been recently taken by  <cit> . overall, our results strongly indicate that multiple-knockouts experimental studies are likely to drastically change the way we understand and think about function localization in biological systems.

