BACKGROUND
a major challenge faced by researchers in various fields of immunology is understanding the cellular interactions that govern a successful immunological response. a typical vertebrate immune response depends upon the highly orchestrated migration and motility of various hematopoietic compartments and their subsequent interactions that ultimately control the magnitude of the response  <cit> . current techniques used to study the cellular dynamics of such processes include intravital microscopy and tissue explant assays  <cit> . although extremely informative, both methods rely upon invasive surgical procedures and do not represent a true whole animal setting. the zebrafish is emerging as an extremely promising model system to study specific aspects of disease mechanisms  <cit> . not only is the early zebrafish embryo optically clear, it is also highly amenable to genetic manipulation and small chemical screens  <cit> . these attributes have been exploited to study aspects of immune system development  <cit> .

zebrafish, like mammals experience two separate waves of hematopoiesis. the first 'primitive wave' generates embryonic erythrocytes as well as early myeloid-derived macrophages and neutrophils from two distinct intraembryonic compartments, the caudally-located intermediate cell mass  and a rostral blood-forming region derived from cephalic mesoderm  <cit> . whether these early myeloid cell populations are specifically embryonic or persist to contribute to more adult immune cell populations is unclear. the second, 'definitive' wave, believed to initiate within the ventral wall of the dorsal aorta eventually gives rise to all adult blood lineages, including erythrocytes, macrophages, several types of granulocytes, lymphocytes and thrombocytes  <cit> . zebrafish also possess a b and t cell repertoire as part of a functional adaptive immune system; a rag-dependent system that emerged with the evolution of the jawed vertebrates  <cit> .

macrophages represent the main differentiated cell of the monocyte phagocyte system and an essential primary innate barrier to infection  <cit> . their primary function is phagocytosis and they are widely distributed throughout the organism, displaying variations in behavior and morphology  <cit> . despite these variations, most macrophages can be defined by the expression of certain enzymes, such as lysozyme and peroxidase  <cit> . in addition to phagocytosis of infectious materials, macrophages also function during host tissue repair, regulation of inflammatory events , regulation of immune responses  and are believed to influence certain aspects of neovascularization  <cit> .

in zebrafish, embryonic macrophage precursors originate from the rostral blood compartment and derive from lateral plate mesoderm  <cit> . during early somitogenesis, anterior lateral plate mesoderm converges to the midline and eventually lies just beneath the paraxial mesoderm. from this region, macrophage precursors expressing the early myeloid marker pu. <dig> migrate to initially populate the anterior yolk surface and then more posterior yolk regions  <cit> . the transcription factor pu. <dig> has been demonstrated, by whole mount in situ hybridization, to mark the myeloid lineage up to  <dig> hours post fertilization   <cit> . once on the yolk, these primitive macrophages begin to express genes encoding the actin-binding protein l-plastin and lysozyme c  <cit> . upon initiation of embryonic circulation, a subset of macrophages enter the circulation and are distributed throughout the embryonic tissues. this is in contrast to neutrophils, where appearance on the yolk is preceded by that within the posterior icm, as revealed by expression of the myeloperoxidase   <cit> , suggesting a degree of anatomical separation during embryonic monocytopoiesis and granulopoiesis.

to generate a macrophage reporter line, and facilitate direct observation of macrophage events in situ in real-time, we have generated novel transgenic lines in which the zebrafish lysc promoter was used to drive macrophage expression of egfp and dsred <dig>  lysozyme is a cationic antibacterial enzyme capable of hydrolyzing specific linkages within the bacterial cell wall  <cit> . in humans, lysozyme is synthesized within both granulocytic and monocytic cells  <cit> . regulatory regions of the mouse lysozyme m gene, one of two lysozyme genes found in mice  <cit> , have been demonstrated to be sufficient to drive myelomonocytic-specific expression of the egfp fluorescent reporter  <cit> . in zebrafish, lysc expression has been reported to specifically mark the macrophage compartment, based upon initial expression within cells on the yolk and co-localised expression with l-plastin  <cit> . we used the highly efficient tol <dig> transposon system to generate germline lysc::egfp and lysc::dsred <dig> transgenic founders  <cit> . approximately  <dig>  kb of promoter sequence was sufficient to drive reporter expression in a manner that recapitulated the endogenous expression profile of lysc and was consistent with the known ontogeny of the macrophage lineage. inflammation, bacterial infection and phagocytic assays demonstrated that these labeled cells possessed hallmark traits of the macrophage lineage while time-lapse confocal microscopy revealed their highly dynamic morphology, proliferative potential and ability to roll along vascular endothelia. within transgenic embryos, labeled cells expressed markers of the macrophage lineage, including l-plastin. some fluorescent cells also contained transcripts for myeloperoxidase , raising questions regarding the macrophage-specificity of lysc previously reported  <cit> , but consistent with the presence of lysozyme within both macrophages and granulocytes of mammals. in summary, we present the lysc::egfp and lysc::dsred <dig> reporter lines as having marked myelomonocytic compartments that will prove useful in defining the determinants of lineage commitment during myelopoiesis and in examining the contribution of innate immune cells during inflammatory events.

RESULTS
strategy to generate a zebrafish lysozyme c reporter line
the lysc promoter region was selected for generation of a reporter line, as expression of the lysc gene had been described as being specific to the zebrafish macrophage lineage  <cit> . to facilitate comparison with the lysc transgenic reporter lines generated in this work, we have included a detailed expression analysis of lysc during embryonic/larval development that extends previous studies . a zebrafish genomic bac clone was initially identified in silico as containing sequence of the ensembl-predicted lysc gene. this bac clone  was confirmed via amplification and sequence verification as containing the first coding exon of lysc. fragments corresponding to sequence upstream of the initiation codon were cloned from this bac  into egfp- and dsred2-encoding pt2kxigΔin tol2-containing vectors  <cit> . this generated the pt2k/lysc::egfp and pt2k/lysc::dsred <dig> expression vectors. to verify that these constructs could drive expression of the fluorescent reporters to simulate endogenous lysc, we injected 1-cell stage zebrafish embryos with  <dig> pg of either construct . egfp and dsred <dig> expression was first observed exclusively on the yolk surface with egfp first detectable around  <dig> hpf and dsred <dig> approximately  <dig> hours later. this is most likely due to the longer time required for proper folding of the dsred <dig> tetrameric protein . a subset of these cells entered the circulation and could be seen moving over the yolk ventrally towards the embryonic heart. this expression pattern is consistent with the endogenous expression pattern of lysc, as detected by whole mount in situ hybridization as shown here and by others  <cit>  and the ontogeny of early macrophage development  <cit> .

these constructs were then injected into 1-cell stage embryos along with capped transposase transcript to induce transposition and generate germline transgenic founders. six germline transgenic founders were identified for both the lysc::egfp and lysc::dsred <dig> lines. both lines displayed correct mendelian inheritance ratios in subsequent generations and identical reporter expression profiles of comparable intensities .

next we describe, in detail, reporter expression within stable lysc::egfp transgenic animals. it is of note that the lysc::dsred <dig> line possessed an identical expression profile throughout development , albeit commencing slightly later.

egfp expression within lysc::egfp transgenic embryos recapitulates the endogenous expression profile of lysc that traces the early development of the macrophage lineage
egfp expression within the lysc::egfp line was first detectable by fluorescence microscopy at  <dig> hpf. this expression was restricted to a small collection of weakly expressing cells located over the anterior yolk . this location is consistent with the onset of lysc expression described here  and by others  <cit> . this location also corresponds with lineage tracing of primitive macrophages using dic optics  <cit> . summed z stacks using confocal microscopy through individual egfp-positive cells within  <dig> hpf transgenic embryos revealed that these early putative macrophages could be divided into three main classes. one comprised cells possessing a rounded morphology with very few, if any, filopodia . the second class possessed a more compacted morphology with ruffled borders . cells in the third class were more elongated and possessed long filopodia . these morphologically distinct classes are consistent with previous observations made through dic imaging of similarly staged live zebrafish embryos and likely represent stages of macrophage differentiation and/or activation  <cit> . this initial domain of putative macrophage development preceded the onset of embryonic circulation. upon initiation of circulation at approximately  <dig> hpf, a subset of egfp-positive cells together with primitive erythrocytes was noted to migrate ventrally through the duct of cuvier to the embryonic heart. in comparison to erythrocytes, these labeled cells demonstrated an ability to resist blood flow, often pausing for a certain period before resuming movement. this suggests that these cells interact with the overlying epidermis and/or the underling yolk syncytial layer. this ability to interact with these surfaces and undertake environmental sensing has been observed using nomarski microscopy  <cit> . the primitive circulatory network then transported these labeled cells to the posterior of the embryo where they began to populate the posterior icm compartment. by  <dig> hpf, larger numbers of egfp-expressing cells were seen over the yolk , a subset of which migrated with erythrocytes . also at  <dig> hpf, egfp-positive cells were seen accumulating within the caudal vasculature and surrounding mesenchyme . egfp expression progressively intensified and by  <dig> hpf large numbers of strongly expressing cells were observed within the head mesenchyme and over the yolk . this developmental stage also marked a massive expansion of the posterior expression domain with large numbers of egfp-expressing cells clustered together in close vicinity to the caudal vascular plexus . summed z stacks through egfp-labeled cells within this domain demonstrated that they clustered in tight aggregates and in general did not display features of activated macrophages such as dynamic cell morphology and extended filopodia . time-lapse confocal microscopy confirmed this region to be an active proliferative domain for this marked cell population . microangiography using red fluorescent microspheres revealed that egfp-positive cells within the ventral tail region were largely excluded from the caudal vascular plexus and occupied mesenchymal tissue between the vascular endothelia . this observation supports a recent study in which this mesenchymal ventral tail domain has been termed the caudal hematopoietic tissue and represents a newly defined region of hematopoietic proliferative activity  <cit> . however, a small subset of cells were located within the tail blood vessels, and these cells were observed to navigate the caudal vascular plexus, seemingly to crawl along the endothelial walls . to image this rolling in greater detail we performed time-lapse confocal microscopy within lysc::dsred2/fli1::egfp double transgenic larvae. dsred2-expressing cells were clearly seen rolling along the interior endothelial surface of the vasculature . from  <dig> dpf, a new domain of egfp-expression commenced in the pronephric glomerulus , consistent with lysc expression . the first evidence of hematopoietic activity in the zebrafish kidney, the equivalent of mammalian bone marrow, occurs around  <dig> dpf where hematopoietic progenitors are closely associated with renal vasculature  <cit> . within  <dig> dpf transgenic larvae, egfp-positive cells were observed in close association with the pharyngeal skeleton  and clusters of egfp-expressing cells remained in the ventral trunk/tail region . microangiography revealed that these cells were still largely excluded from the trunk vasculature . by  <dig> dpf, egfp expression within cells marking the glomerulus had significantly expanded . when visualized within  <dig> dpf i-fabp::rfp larvae  <cit> , a line where the red fluorescent protein  is targeted to intestinal epithelia that express intestinal fatty acid binding protein , egfp-expressing cells were detected migrating between rfp-labeled gut epithelia within the developing intestinal wall . this evidence of early mucosal innate immune surveillance is of particular interest given that the gut exists as an externally accessible tube and is subject to microbial influence from as early as  <dig> dpf  <cit> . of note, no ectopic egfp expression was observed outside of the endogenous expression profile for lysc.

in addition to the domains described above, egfp-labeled cells were observed within the developing brain and retina . however, no colonization of the optic tectum by egfp-expressing cells was seen within the lysc::egfp line throughout embryonic/larval development. previous studies have demonstrated specific colonization of the optic tectum by l-plastin-expressing macrophages  <cit> . analysis of our lysc::egfp reporter line and the expression of lysc  suggest that these cells that mark the optic tectum represent a subset of macrophages that are lysozyme c-deficient. it is of note that within lysc::egfp animals, fewer labeled cells were detected within the developing head when compared with those revealed by l-plastin and fms expression  <cit> .

egfp-expressing cells within lysc::egfp adult fish mark the head kidney and display myelomonocytic morphology
when adult transgenic animals were analyzed by fluorescence microscopy, large numbers of egfp-expressing cells were observed migrating within the epidermal surface of the fish and fins  while others could be seen trafficking through the peripheral vasculature . transgenic adults also displayed intense egfp expression just posterior to the gills, which appeared to be continuous with expression running in a posterior direction just above the intestine . dissection to expose the kidney revealed this intense fluorescence was emitted by cells located within the head kidney and adjoining posterior kidney . to define the cell compartment expressing egfp within the kidney we performed facs analysis and sorting of dissected adult lysc::egfp kidneys. egfp-labeled cells were found almost exclusively within the myelomonocytic fraction , as defined by forward and side scatter characteristics  <cit> . approximately  <dig>  ±  <dig> %  of cells within the myelomonocytic  fraction were marked with egfp and displayed typical myelomonocytic morphology . previous facs and morphological analyses have shown monocyte/macrophage cells to constitute approximately 24% of the myelomonocytic fraction of adult zebrafish kidney  <cit> . this suggests that granulocytic cells, in addition to monocytes/macrophages, are labeled within adult kidneys of lysc::egfp animals. examination of transverse sections from adult lysc::egfp animals following immunohistochemical detection of egfp revealed that these labeled cells occupied space between the renal tubules of the kidney , a well characterized definitive hematopoietic site  <cit> . egfp-expressing cells were also clearly visible within the fish epidermis .

egfp-expressing cells are of the myeloid lineage
to confirm that these egfp-expressing cells within the lysc::egfp line were derived from hematopoietic progenitors, and more specifically were of myeloid descent, transgenic embryos were depleted of scl and gata <dig> by morpholino injection. depletion of scl, a transcription factor absolutely required in mammals for both primitive and definitive hematopoiesis  <cit> , resulted in an almost complete ablation of egfp-expressing cells . this was in contrast to gata1-depleted embryos which demonstrated marked expansion of the egfp-marked compartment  consistent with previous studies in which gata1-deficient embryos possess an expanded myeloid and diminished erythroid compartment  <cit> .

unlike erythropoiesis, which generates a single mature cell type, myelopoiesis gives rise to monocyte/macrophage cells and several different types of granulocytes. in the zebrafish, a number of markers have been used to distinguish embryonic macrophages, including l-plastin, draculin  <cit> , fms  <cit>  and lysc  <cit> , while neutrophilic granulocytes are characterized by expression of mpo  <cit> . to confirm that egfp expression was restricted to cells expressing lysc, and indirectly that the lysozyme c promoter fragments used to generate the lysc reporter lines contained the necessary enhancer elements to faithfully reproduce endogenous lysc expression, we performed immunohistological detection of egfp and whole mount in situ hybridization detection of lysc. these experiments confirmed that throughout the entire embryo, all egfp-expressing cells analyzed possessed lysc transcript . a similar result was observed when detecting egfp and the macrophage marker l-plastin  <cit> , in that all egfp-labeled cells analyzed also expressed l-plastin . however, some l-plastin-expressing cells were observed that were egfp negative within the tail  as well as the trunk and head regions  suggesting that not all macrophages express lysc. a subset of egfp-marked cells were also detected containing fms transcript . in zebrafish, in addition to marking neural crest precursors of xanthophores, expression of fms  has been demonstrated to co-localize with that of the pan-myeloid marker pu. <dig> within cells considered to be macrophage progenitors on the yolk sac  <cit> . expression of fms is also observed in more mature macrophage populations  <cit> . some labeled cells that expressed mpo were detected , raising the possibility of neutrophilic identity. although this is embryonic expression, it is consistent with the facs analysis previously described where the relative contribution of egfp-labeled cells within the adult kidney myelomonocytic compartment  exceeded that previously reported for monocytes/macrophages   <cit> . in mammals the expression patterns of lysozyme and myeloperoxidase are dynamic within the hematopoietic compartment  <cit> . in general, the monocyte/macrophage lineage appears to first synthesize lysozyme followed by myeloperoxidase while the reverse is observed in differentiating neutrophils  <cit> . in zebrafish, studies have shown specific expression of mpo only within morphologically identified granulocytic neutrophils and not within the macrophage lineage  <cit>  leading to the notion that, in zebrafish, mpo may represent a specific marker of neutrophils  <cit> . furthermore, the initial site of mpo expression, in the posterior icm compartment  <cit> , is distinct from that of the macrophage markers lysc and l-plastin that first appear over the yolk surface  <cit> . however, prior to the onset of circulation, mpo-expressing cells are also located over the yolk surface suggesting a separate anterior domain of granulopoiesis  <cit> . whether these cells represent a subset of primitive macrophages possessing myeloperoxidase activity is unclear. however, in a transgenic mpo::egfp reporter line, a distinct subset of cells expressing egfp, in low levels, were identified and have been suggested as being macrophages based upon morphology  <cit> . furthermore, co-localized expression of mpo and the macrophage marker l-plastin has been observed in a small subset of myeloid cells within the early zebrafish embryo  <cit> . bennett and colleagues reported that the frequency of these co-expressing cells diminishes during later development suggesting a transient existence.

recently a medaka transgenic line has been described in which a fugu mpo promoter fragment is reported to drive macrophage-specific expression  <cit>  illustrating an interesting difference with zebrafish where the same gene is believed to be largely neutrophil-specific  <cit> . it seems that within the embryonic myeloid compartment of zebrafish, myeloid-restricted genes are subject to dynamic temporal regulation. the expression profile of the labeled cells within lysc::egfp animals described here, in concert with their initial appearance on the yolk surface suggests that populations of macrophages and also some neutrophils are fluorescently marked.

labeled cells within transgenic larvae demonstrate a robust response to inflammation and bacterial infection
embryonic macrophages fulfill a number of roles including phagocytosing cell corpses and protecting the early embryo from bacterial infections  <cit> . macrophages are also highly mobile, possessing an ability to migrate through tissues to an inflammatory source  <cit> . a recent study in zebrafish has shown that an intact microtubule network is a prerequisite for normal macrophage chemotaxis towards a laser-induced injury on the yolk  <cit> . to address the ability of the labeled cells to migrate in response to acute inflammation, the tails of  <dig> dpf lysc::egfp larvae were transected and the response of egfp-expressing cells monitored. as early as  <dig> hpi , egfp-labeled cells had accumulated at the injury site and by  <dig> hpi a significant number of cells had assembled at the trauma region . these migratory kinetics are similar to those demonstrated previously for zebrafish leukocyte populations in response to inflammatory insults  <cit> .

to more closely characterize the wound-homing ability of marked cells, we performed time-lapse confocal microscopy within  <dig> dpf lysc::dsred2/fli1::egfp compound transgenic larvae. a small incision within the ventral fin was sufficient to generate a strong infiltration of dsred2-expressing cells to the wound . in general, migrating cells displayed rapid chemotaxis towards the injury after they had exited the caudal vein. once at the wound, labeled cells continued migrating both around and within the injured tissue. this analysis revealed three predominant migratory phenotypes. some cells rapidly migrated to the wound, then after navigating within and around the injury migrated back into the vasculature . other labeled cells, following their return to the caudal vein were observed exiting once again to revisit to the wound for a second time and subsequently return to the circulation . the third phenotype comprised cells that initially migrated towards the wound only to cease movement for a period of time before returning to the vasculature . in a similar study, marked neutrophils within mpo::gfp transgenic zebrafish larvae have been shown to demonstrate a similar retrograde chemotactic response to an induced wound, also within the ventral fin region  <cit> . this retrograde chemotaxis to the vasculature has been described as a potential mechanism that contributes to the resolution phase of inflammation. interestingly, neutrophils were observed to migrate almost immediately towards the wound followed by another cell type described morphologically as macrophages  <cit> . this result supports a macrophage identity for the inflammation-responsive cells in our assay where labeled cells were not observed at the wound until at least  <dig> minutes following wounding. these studies also support existing knowledge regarding the timing of arrival of the different leukocytic lineages during a robust inflammatory response  <cit> .

in addition to expressing a large repertoire of cytokines during infection and wound repair, macrophages are phagocytes that function to clear wounds of cellular debris  <cit> . to demonstrate that these egfp/dsred2-expressing cells were capable of phagocytosis we injected red fluorescent microspheres into  <dig> dpf lysc::egfp larvae and monitored the uptake of particles by confocal microscopy. phagocytosis has been defined as the uptake of particles greater than  <dig>  μm in diameter  <cit> . to ensure that phagocytosis was the mechanism of uptake, we selected  <dig> μm-sized microspheres. injection of these fluorescent particles, typically just posterior to the swim bladder, resulted in rapid mobilization of egfp-labeled cells to the site of injection. as early as  <dig> hours post injection, egfp-labeled cells were observed in close association with individual microspheres . red fluorescent microspheres were also observed within intracellular phagosomes , confirming their phagocytic potential. following the injection of fluorescent microspheres and the resulting inflammation, egfp-labeled cells were observed to be highly active and often physically interacted with each other following the ingestion of fluorescent particles . using dic optics in live mycobacterium marinum infection assays, infected macrophages have been observed to transfer phagocytosed bacteria via membrane tethers  <cit> .

during bacterial infections macrophages function to clear invading pathogens and also act as key modulators of both the innate and adaptive immune systems  <cit> . in zebrafish, macrophages exhibit a robust response to infection  <cit> . to examine the response of the marked cell population within the lysc reporter lines, we infected lysc::dsred <dig> zebrafish larvae with gfp-expressing salmonella enterica serovar typhimurium. following infection, a robust response was detected within the posterior extremities of the intestine . labeled cells within this region were detected containing fluorescent bacteria  confirming their contribution to the bacterial inflammatory response.

CONCLUSIONS
together, these results demonstrate that the lysc::egfp/dsred <dig> reporter lines mark populations of macrophages and likely also neutrophils. these lines should prove valuable in further dissecting the genetic determinants of lineage commitment during myelopoiesis. they will also have utility in studying the relative contributions to innate immune responses of the leukocyte compartments.

