BACKGROUND
the evolutionary origins, mode of construction, patterning, and physical properties of the molluscan shell have held the attention of scientists for centuries. however, the molecular mechanisms by which these structures are constructed are only beginning to be elucidated  <cit> . the molluscan shell is assembled extracellularly and is an ensemble of caco <dig> and organic macromolecules  which are secreted by an organ known as the mantle. the anterior edge of the mantle underlies the lip of the shell and directs the ordered biomineralization of the different structural layers of the shell and also controls the deposition of pigment features. with advances in nucleic acid sequencing technologies and proteomic methods, the close to complete shell-forming proteomes of several molluscs have now been reported  <cit> . several proteins from these collections have been more fully characterized  <cit> . however, the vast majority of these previous studies are focused on marine species. while pavat et al.  <cit>  recently reported the biochemical properties of the shell forming proteome of the pulmonate helix aspersa maxima, the lack of any transcriptome or genome data for this species limited their proteomic analyses. they were able to characterize nine distinct 2d spots, of which seven returned a total of  <dig> peptides ranging in length from  <dig> –  <dig> residues. a full proteome-scale dataset from a pulmonate gastropod would efficiently highlight the conserved and lineage specific molecular mechanisms of molluscan shell formation, and would provide deep insight into how these proteomes evolve. this is because marine and terrestrial shell-forming molluscs have adapted to significantly different environments that would fundamentally affect both the process of shell formation, and the stability of the secreted composite biomineral; e.g. the abundance and biological availability of calcium, environmental ph, temperature, uv radiation, humidity and so on. while proteins involved in the process of shell formation in different molluscan lineages could be expected to have evolved in response to these different selective pressures, the signature of an ancestral shell-forming program may still be recognizable.

the common grove snail, cepaea nemoralis , has long been studied by ecologists and population geneticists  <cit> . key insights were gained during the 1950’s and 1960’s when it was demonstrated that variation in pigmented shell traits of cepaea are inherited in a mendelian fashion  <cit> . furthermore, the frequencies of these morphotypes have been suggested to be influenced by two agents of natural selection: predation by birds  <cit> , and climatic conditions  <cit> . despite this long history of research concerning the variable pigmentation of the cepaea shell, there is only one study that has aimed to specifically identify the genes that control this morphological variety  <cit> . using rad-seq  richards et al. recently identified  <dig> anonymous markers putatively linked to loci that control the shell ground color and the presence or absence of dark brown bands on the cepaea shell. yet despite the association of carotenoids, porphyrins, carbohydrates and polyenes with some molluscan shell pigments  <cit> , there exists no example of a complete molecular understanding of any shell pigmentation mechanism in any mollusc. in one case, the molecular basis of a molluscan shell pigment been partially elucidated. one of us previously demonstrated that the protein sometsuke is directly associated with the blue and red pigmentation of the juvenile shell of the tropical abalone haliotis asinina <cit> . this previous finding motivated us to search for proteins associated with the various pigments within the c. nemoralis shell using high throughput transcriptomic and proteomic methods. this effort has allowed us to assemble a dataset that is likely to represent the majority of the shell forming proteome of c. nemoralis. this in-depth proteome is the first to be reported from a pulmonate gastropod, and also allows us to conduct comparisons between it and several others recently reported shell-forming proteomes from marine species.

RESULTS
general character of the c. nemoralis shell-forming proteome
we were able to retrieve a total of  <dig> proteins/protein groups from the shell proteome of c. nemoralis using two different preparative techniques . shell material that had not been washed yielded  <dig> proteins, while shell material washed with sodium hypochlorite and sonication yielded  <dig> proteins.  <dig> proteins were present in both of these datasets. a list of accepted identifications is provided in additional file  <dig>  the maxquant output files containing relevant parameters, such as scores, sequence coverage and number of peptides are provided for proteins/protein groups in additional file  <dig>  and additional file  <dig> . additional file  <dig>  and additional file  <dig>  contain the maxquant output files for peptides. all maxquant output files also contain proteins rejected after manual validation of the results, and are therefore not included in the list of accepted identifications in additional file  <dig>  an ibaq estimate of protein abundance suggests that  <dig> proteins/protein groups constitute more than 93% of the total cepaea shell proteome . this is a conservative collection of proteins and peptides that met or exceeded stringent bioinformatic and statistical criteria . with further work  this estimate will likely increase. it has been reported for corals that in order to reduce the presence of contaminating non-biomineralizing proteins, an extensive sodium hypochlorite cleaning step must be performed on the finely powdered coral biomineral  <cit> . if this is not done then abundant cytoskeletal proteins such as actins, tubulins and myosins  will carry through into the final biomineralization dataset  <cit> . while we observed subtle differences in the lds-page profiles of proteins derived from c. nemoralis shell material prepared with and without a hypochlorite pre-treatment , the proteomic data generated by the two methods were not fundamentally different.

1
all proteins listed here were found in all pigment fractions  with the exception of isotig_ <dig> which was only found in yellow and orange fractions. proteins and peptides are listed in order of abundance expressed as a percentage of the shell total proteome that we can identify.

1the percentages of particularly abundant amino acid residues are given in brackets. “sp” indicates the presence of a signal peptide, “tm” indicates a likely trans-membrane protein.

the overall composition of the c. nemoralis shell proteome is dominated by uncharacterized and/or novel proteins . indeed the four most abundant proteins of the identifiable c. nemoralis proteome  did not share significant similarity with any entries in uniprot . furthermore,  <dig> out of the  <dig> distinct proteins  did not return hits against uniprot. this largely unique proteome reflects the situation for the majority of previously reported molluscan shell forming proteomes, and highlights the need for the development of reliable and repeatable in vivo functional assays in these systems. the most abundant protein in the c. nemoralis shell, accounting for more than 25% of the total identifiable proteinaceous material, was isotig_ <dig> . this gly- and pro-rich sequence did not share any blastp similarity with proteins in uniprot or refseq, and no domains could be identified by pfam or hmm searches. the two most abundant c. nemoralis shell proteins to share similarity with other proteins were isotig_ <dig> and isotig_ <dig> . c. nemoralis isotig_ <dig>  shares significant similarity with a human poly-domain protein named sel-ob/svep <dig>  this human protein is present in osteogenic tissues and plays roles in cell adhesion  <cit> . isotig_ <dig> possesses a chitin-binding peritrophin-a domain, and shares similarity with several other molluscan proteins including bsmp  from p. vulgata and a large multi-domain containing protein from c. gigas . conspicuous in their abundance were several other c. nemoralis proteins that also possessed other recognizable chitin-interacting domains , suggesting that chitin is an important organic component of the c. nemoralis shell.

many of the proteins identified in our proteomic analysis possess unusually high proportions of certain amino acids. these types of proteins are often found in molluscan biominerals  <cit> . for example, lustrin  contains a 272-residue domain rich in gly  and ser  residues. this domain has been suggested to act as an extensor molecule and to impart fracture resistance to the abalone shell  <cit> . however, it must pointed out that this function is yet to be experimentally verified. while we cannot assign functions to any of the various c. nemoralis proteins that contain domains rich in amino acids such as gln, asp, pro, gly and met, their abundance and diversity in this dataset hints at the important role they must play in shell formation. interestingly, one of these proteins , which consists of 13% ala and 11% gln, also contains a whey acidic protein , which is also present in the abalone lustrin proteins  <cit> . wap domains are thought to possess protease inhibitor activity due to the presence of 4-disulphide core  residues, which serine protease inhibitors also possess  <cit> . a diversity of protease inhibitor domain-containing proteins has been observed in other molluscan shell forming proteomes  <cit> . the presence of protease inhibitors in an external structure such as the molluscan shell may provide the shell with an ability to resist the digestive enzymes secreted by fouling organisms and predators that would dissolve and bore through the shell, for example natacid gastropods  <cit>  polydorid annelids  <cit>  and sponges  <cit> .

we also detected a neurofilament protein  present in the c. nemoralis shell. while this may at first be considered a non-biomineral associated contaminant, a similar protein was reported from the shells of helix aspersa <cit> , and we also note the presence of such a protein in the shell proteome of l. gigantea . the presence of such presumably intra-cellular proteins in extra-cellular structures such as the molluscan shell are difficult to reconcile with our current understanding of how such biominerals are formed, and serve to highlight how far we are from a complete understanding of these processes. while a conventional model of shell formation would account for the presence of such proteins through the non-specific occlusion of cells and cellular debris into a growing face of a biomineral, there are alternative models that should perhaps be considered. the biophysical properties of filament proteins have been well studied, and they are known to be able to reversibly deform to several times their own length  <cit> . the fracture resistance properties of the molluscan shell, which exceeds that of pure caco <dig> by several orders of magnitude, is imparted to the biomineral by the organic components of the shell. a non-canonical secretory pathway for filament proteins, or the specific integration of filament-rich cells into the growing shell may be a mechanism by which the shell acquires such biomechanical properties. however, such hypotheses require further experimental investigation.

a previously described molluscan shell matrix protein, dermatopontin, was suggested to be the major proteinaceous component of the shell of the freshwater snail biomphalaria glabrata <cit> . dermatopontin was also reported from the shells of other gastropods  <cit> , and bivalves, where it is thought to play a role in nacre formation  <cit> , and can also be found in taxa ranging from bacteria to humans. interestingly, we did not detect dermatopontin in the shell of c. nemoralis. to investigate this further we constructed an hmm profile of molluscan dermatopontin proteins and used a local installation of hmmsearch  <cit>  to query this against our translated c. nemoralis transcriptome. this search returned two significant hits . these contigs contain clear dermatopontin domains, with contig_ <dig> also possessing a signal sequence. this discrepancy between the presence of dermatopontin transcripts in the c. nemoralis mantle transcriptome, and the absence of dermatopontin proteins in the shell-proteome may be a technical artifact, or a biological reality. while the diverse technical challenges of working with samples such as biominerals make the first possibility likely, the second scenario should also be considered in light of the apparent evolvability of molluscan shell forming secretomes  <cit> . shell-forming genes under recent negative selection pressures could conceivably still be transcribed, but not translated or actively involved in shell formation. however, such a scenario requires additional investigation.

while a high proportion of the  <dig> proteins identified in the shell of c. nemoralis did not share any blast similarity with proteins in uniprot, some of them did contain domains that could be recognized by hmm searches. these are indicated in column  <dig> of table  <dig>  many of these were hits were against “uncharacterized” domains or proteins of unknown function. in some cases trans-membrane  regions could be identified. such a finding is interesting as it leads to the question of how could such membrane-embedded proteins be located within the mature biomineral. such a finding was also recently reported in a dataset of coral biomineralizing proteins  <cit>  and several other studies  <cit> . in the coral study of ramos-silva et al. the majority of the ms peptides identified in the biomineral could only be matched against the extra-cellular regions of trans-membrane proteins, suggesting that these extra-cellular domains are specifically cleaved from the trans-membrane portions of tm proteins. we observe a similar phenomenon in our c. nemoralis data. seventy-two peptides were observed in the ms data for isotig_ <dig>  of these  <dig> were located in the putative extra-cellular domain of the protein . the role that trans-membrane proteins play in molluscan shell-formation has thus far received little attention.

pigmentation of the c. nemoralis shell is not directly associated with a proteinaceous component
previously, one of us described the sometsuke protein from the shell of haliotis asinina <cit> . this protein is most likely coupled to a chromophore, which is involved in imparting both the red, and blue colors to the juvenile abalone shell , and is perhaps the currently best understood molluscan shell-pigmentation mechanism at the genetic level. one of our primary motivations for the current work was to determine whether c. nemoralis also uses a protein-associated pigmentation mechanism to pattern its shell, and if so, to identify those proteins. multiple protein extractions from a variety of c. nemoralis shells, including protocols without the potentially destructive washing with hypochlorite, suggested that this was not the case. pigmented lds-page bands  were never observed . a dark brown material, which consistently accompanied extractions from dark brown shell fractions, remained predominantly in the page sample buffer-insoluble material that was removed by centrifugation before electrophoresis in order to obtain clear and comparable lds-page electropherograms. while it could be argued that an insoluble c. nemoralis pigment-associated protein would need to be rendered soluble in order for it to be visualized on a gel, we point out that the denaturation treatments applied to the c. nemoralis samples  were more than adequate to solubilize the water-insoluble sometsuke protein .

unfortunately we were unable to relatively quantify the proteins associated with each of the three pigment classes using a maxquant-implementation of label-free quantitation  due to the significantly different solubility behavior of the protein extracts . however, a second line of evidence suggests that c. nemoralis shell pigments are not associated with proteins. a qualitative assessment of the  <dig> proteins extracted from the shell  reveals that  <dig> were present in all three pigment fractions. these  <dig> proteins  account for >93% of the identifiable proteome. if we assume that a c. nemoralis pigment-associated protein would be at least moderately differentially abundant between the three pigment fractions  and green algae  to hemichordates  and segmented worms . despite this conservation, there are no recognizable functional domains in the c. nemoralis orthologue of this protein. it was also relatively rare at just  <dig> % of the total identifiable proteome, suggesting that it is unlikely to be directly involved in pigmenting the shell. considering all of these points, our favored interpretation is that c. nemoralis shell pigments are not associated with proteins, and most likely have no homology with the sometsuke pigmentation mechanism employed by h. asinina. if correct, this indicates that molluscan shell pigmentation mechanisms may have multiple evolutionary origins. however this scenario requires further investigation and experimental evidence.

the lds-page profiles of acid-soluble vs. acid-insoluble proteins isolated from the three different c. nemoralis shell-pigment fractions differed significantly . essentially, the profiles of soluble proteins derived from yellow and orange factions were similar to each other, and were in general more abundant and heterogeneous than the soluble proteins isolated from the dark brown fraction. in contrast, the acid-insoluble proteins isolated from the dark brown fraction were more abundant than those isolated from the yellow or orange fractions. despite this difference, the prominent bands present in yellow-soluble, orange-soluble and brown-insoluble appear to be largely similar . while we cannot explain this observation, it is clear that the biochemical properties of the proteins present in the brown fraction are qualitatively different from those in the yellow and orange fractions. this may be the result of post-translational modifications that affect the solubility of each protein fraction, such as different degrees of cross-linking. however, this idea requires further investigation.

comparisons of molluscan shell forming proteomes
with the c. nemoralis shell proteome in hand we were able to conduct broad level comparisons against five other molluscan shell forming proteomes. importantly, all six of these datasets are not transcriptome -based datasets but are primarily composed of proteins that have been isolated from the shells of the respective species , and therefore are likely to be somehow directly involved in shell formation. to our knowledge, this is the first time such a proteome level comparison of molluscan shell forming proteins has been made.

of the  <dig> proteins we isolated from the c. nemoralis shell,  <dig>  shared similarity  with one or more proteins derived from the five other molluscan shell proteomes we investigated here . interestingly only one c. nemoralis protein shared similarity with any of the 94h. asinina shell forming proteins. this single protein shares no significant similarity with any proteins in public databases and contains no identifiable conserved domains. it was previously reported that the shell forming proteome of h. asinina is highly divergent from other such molluscan proteomes, and that this could be interpreted as evidence of a rapidly evolving shell-forming secretome  <cit> . given that c. nemoralis and h. asinina share more recent common ancestry than c. nemoralis does with any of the three bivalves investigated here  the result we report here appears to support that hypothesis.

several c. nemoralis shell proteins displayed extremely high similarity with other molluscan shell forming proteins. the four c. nemoralis proteins to share the highest similarity with any other species were all shared with l. gigantea. in order of similarity these were: isotig_ <dig>  at an e-value of 4e- <dig> ; isotig_ <dig>  at an e-value of 3e- <dig> ; isotig_ <dig>  at an e-value of 2e- <dig> ; and isotig_ <dig>  at an e-value of 6e- <dig> . in order to identify deeply conserved molluscan shell forming proteins, we ordered all c. nemoralis proteins that were found in any other shell proteome according to the number of databases they were found in . this revealed two proteins that were found in four of the five molluscan shell proteomes: cnem <dig> and cnem <dig>  cnem <dig> possesses a chitin-binding periotrophin-a domain . the second protein found in four of the five molluscan shell proteomes  shared significant similarity with chitinase proteins in swissprot. these results emphasize the prominent role that chitin is likely to play in the construction of disparate molluscan shells and indeed in many metazoan biominerals  <cit> .

other conserved c. nemoralis shell forming proteins of interest include two carbonic anhydrase domain-containing proteins  and two v-atpase subunits . v-atpases have not previously been shown to play a role in molluscan shell formation , however it could be expected that their ability to transport h+ across membranes would afford them a central role in the regulation of shell formation. indeed such proton pumps are known to play roles in the calcification of a variety of metazoan biominerals  <cit> . while one of the carbonic anhydrase domain-containing isotigs  is clearly incomplete, the other  is potentially complete and encodes a protein of  <dig>  amino acids . this protein contains a signal sequence, a carbonic anhydrase domain with phylogenetic affinity to the secreted and membrane bound α-cas  and a carboxyl region of relatively low complexity . the shell-forming nacrein proteins also contain carbonic anhydrase domains and have been previously described from gastropod and bivalve shells  <cit> . interestingly the ca-domain in the c. nemoralis protein is not interrupted by the low-complexity region as it is in the nacreins, and the c. nemoralis low complexity domain is composed of gln residues rather than gly and asn residues . the hydropathy profile of all of these proteins display similar characteristics , and suggests that the low complexity domains interact with the water-soluble phases of the biomineralization processes. miyamoto et al.  <cit>  reported that a recombinant nacrein protein inhibited the precipitation of caco <dig> in in vitro calcification assays, and that removal of the repetitive low-complexity domain attenuated this inhibitory activity. while the results of such in vitro calcification assays should always be interpreted with caution, this result indicates that the low complexity domains of molluscan shell forming α-cas have a significant impact on the activity of the enzyme to which they are fused or inserted. the fact that the α-ca we have identified here has a significantly different domain of low-complexity from previously described shell-associated α-cas suggests that this gene may have a different evolutionary history.

CONCLUSIONS
the  <dig> shell-associated proteins we report here represent the largest collection of proteins from a pulmonate shell to date. the abundant proteins in this dataset either display no similarity to known proteins, or similarity to uncharacterized proteins. comparisons of this dataset with other molluscan shell-forming proteomes indicate that almost half of the c. nemoralis shell-forming proteome we describe here shares similarity with the shell-forming components of other molluscs. two lines of experimental evidence failed to identify the presence of pigment-associated proteins in the c. nemoralis shell. considering the clear association between a protein and a pigment in the juvenile haliotis shell, this finding indicates that molluscan shell pigmentation mechanisms may have diverse evolutionary origins. this dataset will serve as an important platform from which further studies aimed at the characterization of pulmonate shell forming and pigmenting genes can be performed.

