BACKGROUND
dna methylation is an epigenetic mechanism involved in transcriptional regulation and chromatin remodelling  <cit> . it occurs on cytosine residues at cpg dinucleotides, which are the target of three dna methyltransferases, dnmt <dig>  dnmt3a, and dnmt3b, which add a methyl group to form 5-methylcytosine  <cit> . genomic regions with a high cpg density are known as cpg islands   <cit> . it has been suggested that cgi methylation influences the regulation of gene expression  <cit> .

the epigenome is considered mitotically stable, meaning that cells undergoing mitosis maintain their epigenetic content  <cit> . the stability of mechanisms involved in the propagation of dna methylation during somatic cell divisions is crucial to the preservation of cellular identity and the maintenance of specific gene expression patterns for each cell type. the molecular mechanisms of dna methylation mitotic stability have not been fully elucidated, although the high affinity of the dnmt <dig> protein complex for hemi-methylated dna appears to be involved in this process  <cit> . similarly, the means by which other epigenetic marks, such as histone modifications, are preserved during cellular division is also poorly understood  <cit> .

however the epigenome shows also a good degree of flexibility. cells must be able to respond quickly and accurately to environmental changes, and epigenetic changes play a role in this adaptability. it has been demonstrated that environmental factors including nutritional factors and environmental stressors can modify the cell epigenetic status  <cit> .

differentially methylated regions  are genomic regions that show differences in dna methylation between multiple samples, including different tissues, cells, or individuals. dmrs are found in different developmental stages , across multiple tissues  and between cancer and normal cells   <cit> . when the genomic regions under analysis are cgis, the term “differentially methylated cpg islands”  can be used.

in this paper, we investigated the stability of cgi methylation during in vitro cell culture. in particular, we focused on dm-cgis found in culture replicas of the same cell line. although culture conditions, including medium composition, temperature, co2%, and cell-cell interactions, are standardized and the cell micro-environment is expected to be the same across replicas, it is likely that marginal changes happen by chance. in light of these considerations, we studied the variation in cgi methylation between replicas of  <dig> cell lines. we used publicly available data provided by the encyclopedia of dna elements  consortium  <cit> . as expected, we found that most cgis showed similar dna methylation values between the two replicas. we focused our attention on the minority of cgis with different dna methylation levels between the two replicas. the cgis showing this behaviour in a cell line were found differentially methylated also in other cell lines more frequently than expected by chance. furthermore, we found that several functional and structural specific features characterize these cgis.

RESULTS
evaluation of cpg island methylation and calculation of the correlation between replicas
for cpg island definition and localization, we used the ucsc genome browser cpg island track . cpg methylation data from  <dig> cell lines produced by the encode consortium  <cit>  were downloaded from the ucsc genome browser   <cit> . data for two replicas are available for each cell line within this repository. to compare different cell lines, we restricted our analysis to cgis in which methylation data were present in both replicas only. in order to define a reliable methylation level for a cgi we considered its cpgs with a read coverage ≥  <dig> only. these cell lines belonged to three groups: cancer transformed cells , ebv transformed cells  and normal untransformed cells . additional file 1: table s <dig> shows the list of the cells used and their features. to estimate the level of dna methylation of each cgi, we calculated the mean methylation values of all cpgs located within a cgi.

identification of inter replicas differentially methylated cpg islands
as expected, we observed a good correlation between the two replicas for each cell type using the pearson correlation . to identify cgis that were differentially methylated between two replicas of the same cell line, we have sequentially applied two methods: quantitative differentially methylated region  and hypergeometric based approach . the first is a quantitative method that identifies differentially methylated regions using an entropy-based algorithm  <cit>  . hba is a method able to test the statistical significance of possible differences in the methylation levels between two replicas of a particular genomic region. qdmr is particularly sensitive to the absolute difference in the methylation level of two replicas considered while hba is particularly sensitive to the read coverage and the amount of cpgs contained in the cgi considered .

we defined as inter replicas differentially methylated cpg islands , the cgis that were classified by both methods as differentially methylated. such conservative approach has the advantage to take simultaneously into account the read coverage and the cpg content of the considered cgi, and the difference in the methylation values measured in the two replicas.

by using sequentially these two methods we observed an average of  <dig>  irdm-cgis per cell line . no statistically significant differences were noted in the number of irdm-cgis between cancer, ebv and normal cell lines using welch’s one-way analysis of means test .

irdm-cgis are similar across different cell lines
since we expected that the same cgi be methylated to the same extent in two replicas of the same cell line, a reasonable hypothesis to explain the presence of irdm-cgis is that they occur by chance. under this null hypothesis, any cgi should have the same probability to become an irdm-cgi in different inter-replica comparisons. alternatively, it could be hypothesized that some cgis are more prone to becoming irdm-cgis than others. in this case, the same irdm-cgis should be found in all cell lines.

to distinguish between these two hypotheses, it is useful to define as “overlap degree” the number of different cell lines in which the same cgi is classified as irdm-cgi. by definition the minimal value  <dig> corresponds to a cgi that has been classified as irdm in one cell line only. figure  <dig> shows the observed overlap degree distribution. we compared such distribution with the corresponding null one derived from a series of monte carlo random assignments of the status of irdm-cgis to the cgis of the considered cell lines . a statistically significant difference  was found between the observed and simulated distributions , indicating that the same irdm-cgis are present in different cell lines more frequently than expected by chance. for the analysis reported in additional file 2: figure s <dig> only cgis belonging to the intersection have been used.

considering all the irdm-cgis analysed, we denoted those present in at least two cell lines as “common irdm-cgis”. we found that they represent more than half of the irdm-cgis. specifically,  <dig> out of  <dig> irdm-cgis were present in at least two different cell lines. in the additional file 3: table s <dig> we report for each irdm-cgi its localization, the set of cells in which it was found as irdm and its overlap degree.

overrepresentation of common irdm-cgis on chromosome x
we asked if common irdm have a specific chromosomal localization.

in figure  <dig>  the proportion of common irdm-cgis within a particular chromosome  is compared with the proportion of all considered cgis  belonging to the same chromosome. interestingly, we found a striking overrepresentation of common irdm-cgis on chromosome x. specifically,  <dig> out of all  <dig> cgis analyzed on chromosome x  were common irdm-cgis, representing ~5-fold increase of the observed versus expected values . we tested this difference using a bootstrap approach and in all monte carlo simulations no simulated frequency value higher than the observed one was observed for chromosome x. to avoid eventual biases in the following analyses from this overrepresentation, we analyzed autosomal irdm-cgis and chromosome x irdm-cgis separately.

autosomal common irdm-cgis are preferentially located in gene bodies and intergenic regions
cgis can be found in different gene regions  throughout the genome. to test whether common irdm-cgis are preferentially located in specific gene regions, we used the four classes of cpg islands described by medvedeva et al.  <cit> : 5′ cgis, intragenic cgis, 3′ cgis, and intergenic cgis.

compared with the other autosomal cgis, autosomal common irdm-cgis were less frequently located at the 5′ end of genes and were most frequently located in intragenic, 3′, and intergenic regions  . no differences in gene region localization were found for chromosome x irdm-cgis .

functional analysis of genes associated with autosomal common irdm-cgis
we next investigated whether common irdm-cgis are associated with genes sharing common functions. we searched for the overrepresentation of gene ontology  annotation terms  <cit>  in the set of genes associated with irdm-cgis. to perform this analysis we used the genomic regions enrichment of annotations tool   <cit> . concerning autosomal common irdm-cgis, we found one term that is statistically significant enriched in our sample . this term  includes genes interacting selectively with a specific sequence of dna that controls transcription .

to analyze whether autosomal irdm-cgis with higher overlap scores represent a more homogenous group inside irdm-cgis, we selected the  <dig> autosomal common irdm-cgis that were present in at least seven different inter-replica comparisons , hereafter designated “most common irdm-cgis”. the hugo gene nomenclature committee  gene families analysis, performed by great, showed that this subset of irdm-cgis was enriched for genes belonging to the zinc fingers, c2h2-type gene family  , with  <dig> out of  <dig> being located in genomic regions containing znf genes . furthermore, analysis of the mouse genome informatics  phenotype ontology  <cit>  by great showed that this subset of autosomal common irdm-cgis is enriched for genes involved in genetic imprinting . no enrichments were found for chromosome x irdm-cgis .

autosomal common irdm-cgis have a low g + c content
as a next step, we searched for structural features of common irdm-cgis. we found that autosomal common irdm-cgis had a lower g + c content compared with the autosomal not irdm-cgis using the t-test . moreover, the g + c content was very similar to that obtained from chromosome x cgis . this last finding is not unexpected, since it is known that chromosome x has a low g + c content compared with autosomal regions  <cit> . we also found significant differences in mean length and cpg percentage of common irdm-cgis compared with autosomal not irdm-cgis, namely  <dig> bp vs.  <dig> bp  and  <dig>  vs.  <dig>   respectively.

autosomal irdm-cgis are enriched among inter cell line differentially methylated cgis
since the  <dig> cell lines analyzed belong to different tissues and to different categories , we expected that, when we search for dm-cgis among these cell lines, many genomic regions differ in their methylation status.

we tested the hypothesis that the set of autosomal irdm-cgis were related with the set of cgis differentially methylated among the different cell lines . to this aim we firstly identified, by qdmr, the cgis that were differentially methylated among different cell lines . we identified  <dig> icdm-cgis out of  <dig>  then we determined the degree of overlap between irdm-cgis and icdm-cgis. we found a significant enrichment of irdm-cgis in the icdm set. about 70% of all considered irdm-cgis are icdm-cgis as well . analogous enrichments were found restricting the analysis to common and most common irdm-cgis .

discussion
several pieces of evidence suggest that somatic cells modify their dna methylation status more often than once thought. it has been hypothesized that variations in dna methylation can occur in response to environmental stimuli  <cit> . it has also been hypothesized that several changes can occur only by chance. the term “epigenetic drift” is used to indicate small faults in transmitting epigenetic information through successive cell divisions, or preserving it in differentiated cells. accumulation of these epigenetic defects is probably associated with the aging process  <cit> .

previous studies revealed different epigenetic modifications that occurred during cell culture  <cit> . in this study, we tested the hypothesis that several genomic regions are more prone to undergoing epigenetic remodelling than others. we used a genome-wide approach, evaluating the differences in methylation of the same cgis between replicas of the same cell line. our working hypothesis was that minimal stochastic changes, which are likely to happen in cell culture, could slightly modify the extent of dna methylation of several genomic regions, unmasking cgis that are more prone to modifying their methylation states in response to small environmental stimuli.

overall, we found a good correlation among methylation values of the same cgis between two replicas of the same cell line. this finding was expected, and confirmed the well-known notion that the epigenome is mitotically stable. major epigenetic changes during mitosis of somatic cells could be catastrophic for the organism, and we did not expect dramatic modifications. nevertheless, we found that some cgis escape this general rule, showing slightly different methylation values between the two replicas. a possible explanation for this phenomenon is that it happens only by chance. in this case, the prediction would have been that these cgis are typically different in each comparison. on the contrary we found that, frequently, the same irdm-cgi was present in different comparisons performed between different cell pairs. the overlaps between irdm-cgis sets extracted from different pair comparisons were very large, and statistical tests suggested that this was very unlikely to have occurred by chance. thus, a limited number of cgis appear to be differentially methylated between replicas, in a way that is independent from the type of analyzed cell line as the  <dig> cell lines used in this study belong to different groups in terms of tissue origin and transformation status. therefore, our data suggest that irdm-cgis are prone to being differentially methylated for their intrinsic characteristics that are independent of the cell environment.

further evidence in support of the observed phenomenon not being caused by chance alone is the strong enrichment of irdm-cgis located on chromosome x. we found that most chromosomes x cgis were differentially methylated between replicas. it is well known that chromosome x undergoes a specific form of epigenetic modification, as x-inactivation  <cit> , and that it has a low g + c content compared with autosomes  <cit> .

autosomal common irdm-cgis were found to be preferentially located in intragenic, 3′ and intergenic regions. while the role of dna methylation of cgis located in 5′ promoters is well established  <cit> , the effect of dna methylation on gene bodies and intergenic regions is less clear. nevertheless, intragenic methylation plays a role in regulating alternative promoters in gene bodies  <cit> . it has also been reported that imprinted genes contain a higher proportion of intragenic cpg islands  <cit>  and that inter and intragenic cgis are more susceptible to methylation  <cit> .

furthermore, our results demonstrated that regions near autosomal irdm-cgis are enriched in genes involved in dna binding, development and embryonic morphogenesis. illingworth et al.  <cit>  noted that differentially methylated cgis preferentially include genes that play central roles in development, such as homeobox  genes, paired box  genes and their relatives  <cit> .

developmental genes show distinctive epigenetic features. dna binding factors and other development-related genes show a bimodal distribution of cpg usage, in methylated genomes only, and are noticeably overrepresented in or near clusters of three or more cgis. the expansion of distinct chromatin blocks was found to selectively affect developmental genes in fibroblasts compared with human embryonic stem cells   <cit> . in addition, heyn et al. recently described the differences in dna methylation between newborns and centenarians  <cit> . their search for go enrichments in these differentially methylated genes led to the conclusion that age-related hyper-methylated cpg sites are located preferentially in developmental and morphogenesis-related genes. a similar age-related enrichment was also found in the mouse  <cit> . it is possible that the increased susceptibility to dna methylation changes we observed in cell culture could be related to those dna methylation changes that occur during a lifetime.

we also analyzed the most common irdm-cgis  and found a strong enrichment for znf genes. previous findings suggest that znf genes represent a separate epigenetic group  <cit>  that is characterized by h3k9me <dig> and h3k36me <dig> dual occupation and low cpg density in the gene bodies. these features were also associated with a group of genes found to be activated in conditions of dnmt deficiency  <cit> .

we did not expect that the differences in dna methylation that we found between replicas correspond to relevant changes in gene expression, since this could be catastrophic for the maintenance of the cell differentiation. to roughly evaluate possible transcriptional effects related to irdm-cgis, we analyzed between-replicas differences in the expression of the same mrna. we could study only the subset of  <dig> cell lines whose expression data were available in the ucsc encode exon array tracks . by using great, we grouped mrnas according to their proximity to irdm-cgis or to not irdm-cgis . we calculated, for each transcript, the absolute value of the relative difference of mrna levels between the two replicas and we denoted it as dr . then, we evaluated if dr was differently distributed in irdm-cgis vs. not irdm-cgis related genes and we did not find significant differences . this finding seems to suggest that the difference in dna methylation that we found does not affect mrna transcription. nevertheless we are aware of the limits of such approach, which can only provide a rough estimation of the mrna differences between the replicas and that is not able to exclude that minimal changes in mrna expression exist.

we found a significant overlap between cgis that are differentially methylated between replicas and those that are differentially methylated among different cell lines. it is possible to speculate that proneness of irdm-cgis to change their methylation status also not having a relevant functional impact between replicas , but it could facilitate methylation changes during cell differentiation and/or transformation.

CONCLUSIONS
dna methylation in cultured cell lines is subject to small modifications, probably from minimal stochastic changes in culture conditions. here, we describe the characterization of differently methylated cgis from  <dig> replicas of three different cell types. our results show that irdm-cgi sets are similar in different cell types and are characterized by several functional and structural specific features. we speculate that they represent a specific subset of cgis that are more prone to undergoing differential methylation because of their intrinsic characteristics. however, our study is only a preliminary exploration and further studies are required to confirm that cgis differ in their innate susceptibility to methylation.

