BACKGROUND
kinetoplastids are single-celled protists, some of which are free-living, while trypanosoma cruzi and others cause significant plant, animal, and human diseases. decades after surviving the potentially deadly acute phase of chagas disease, a human infected with t. cruzi may develop fatal damage to cardiac and smooth muscle tissue in approximately 30% of cases. chagas disease may be caused by tissue destruction caused by the parasite, errant autoimmune responses or some combination of the two  <cit> . chagas disease affects millions in south and central america, and there are no predictive tests for disease outcome.

among eukaryotes that possess mitochondrial genomes, there is a remarkable diversity of genome structure ranging from single circular chromosomes to extremely complex arrangements with multiple chromosomes found in organisms like amoebidium parasiticum  <cit> . the mitochondrial dna  of the kinetoplastids is a unique structure comprised of dozens of ~25-mb maxicircles and thousands of  <dig> -kb minicircles linked together in a dense network called the kinetoplast. each maxicircle copy is thought to be nearly identical, although this assumption may be incorrect  <cit> , and the number of minicircle sequence classes ranges from one to over a hundred depending on the kinetoplastid. this structural behemoth belies a functional complexity whereby messages transcribed from maxicircles must be decrypted by means of a uridine insertion/deletion rna editing process  <cit> . following the hybridization of the 5'-anchor region of a guide rna  to the 3' end of its target message, sequential base pairing directs u insertion and deletion in a processive enzyme cascade  <cit> . non-canonical g-u base pairs are permissible in these rna-rna interactions, conferring transition tolerance to the grna sequence, with a staggering number of potential guides directing identical editing events. editing events cannot be predicted based solely on a grna sequence, nor visa versa. the primary repository of grnas are the minicircles  <cit> , with a handful of grnas found on maxicircles  <cit> .

in t. cruzi the kinetoplast dna has two tantalizing links to disease. minicircles can integrate into the host genome  <cit>  potentially persisting long after an active infection has been cleared. this example of horizontal dna transfer has implications for the autoimmune characteristics seen in the clinics. parasite integration events have been localized to host line- <dig> retrotransposable elements, thus conferring mobility upon the parasite sequences as hundreds of thousands of these elements exist per genome  <cit> . maxicircles may also play a role in pathology, as a lesion discovered in a parasite mitochondrial gene was correlated with disease presentation  <cit> . the extensively edited nadh dehydrogenase  <dig>  gene harbours a deletion that would compromise the electron transport chain, a defect found exclusively in t. cruzi strains isolated from asymptomatic patients. this and other related loci may provide the first functional linkage between parasite genotype and disease manifestation. the minicircle and maxicircle phenomena are not mutually exclusive. the potential association of these events with chagas pathology makes understanding the structure and function of mitochondrial dna particularly relevant in t. cruzi.

t. cruzi is divided into several strains, each with distinct geographic distributions, host preferences and disease severity  <cit> . these 'discrete typing units'  delineate six subtypes . dtus iib and i represent the ancestral t. cruzi lineages. genetic recombination in t. cruzi occurs through a loosely-defined, whole-cell fusion mechanism  <cit> . the extant population structure can be derived from two discrete fusion events  <cit> . a fusion of dtus i and iib generated a hybrid ancestor to dtus iia and iic that has shared elements of recombination and homozygosity and have since diverged from one another. a more recent dtu iic/iib fusion gave rise to the largely heterozygous dtus iid and iie subtypes. the cl brener strain chosen for genome sequencing  <cit>  belongs to dtu iie, and esmeraldo strain was sequenced to a lesser degree as a representative of dtu iib. the maxicircle genomes fall into three distinct clades that are partitioned in among dtu i, dtu iib, and dtus iia/iic/iid/iie  <cit> . the cl brener and esmeraldo maxicircles have been assembled in their entirety  <cit> .

this report details the isolation of minicircle sequences from the whole genome shotgun  reads from the cl brener and esmeraldo strains of t. cruzi generated as a by-blow of the genome sequence project  <cit> . in combination with the predicted or actual sequences of edited messages, a thorough characterization of all available t. cruzi minicircle data is presented. the features of the assigned grnas were then used to generate a selection scheme for grna genes in the absence of known editing events. minicircles were assembled from the genome project sequence reads, revealing two instances of apparent minicircle recombination.

RESULTS
intragenomic conservation of conserved sequence blocks
a typical t. cruzi minicircle is approximately  <dig> -kb and contains four conserved sequence regions, each followed by a variable region containing a grna. each conserved region is composed of three individual conserved sequence blocks  each of which are broadly conserved  <cit> . numerous minicircle sequences with csbs were found in the cl brener and esmeraldo strain wgs reads. multicopy sequences can have extensive variability in kinetoplastids  <cit> , so to be certain of isolating the greatest number of minicircle sequences, the intragenomic diversity of individual csb sequences was first assessed by examining the conserved regions of all extracted t. cruzi minicircle sequences using a two-tag method to capture native variability of the intermediate sequence .

remarkable conservation was observed among the dozens of conserved region sequences identified . less than 1% of sequences contained variations at each position within the csbs, and the conservation for each strain extended well beyond the basic consensus. the base csb- <dig> sequence was expanded from  <dig> nt to  <dig> nt common to cl brener and esmeraldo minicircles, with a strong 24-nt stretch in cl brener. the g-rich, 8-bp csb- <dig> element is expanded into a 26-nt purine-rich region in both t. cruzi strains, with a  <dig> nt length in cl brener. the 12-nt csb- <dig> was extended to  <dig> nt in both strains. these extended csbs likely reflect species-specificity and could prove useful for taxonomic distinctions.

the conserved regions of the minicircles represent tags that can be used to pull minicircle sequences from the wgs reads while being confident that few, if any, sequences are missed due to intragenomic variation.

minicircle sequences extracted from t. cruzi wgs reads
the areas of complete csb conservation were used as tags to extract as many minicircle reads as possible. a sorting script extracted  <dig> cl brener and  <dig> esmeraldo sequence reads. if a sequence was found to contain minicircle sequence, then the read from that same clone in the opposite direction was also extracted from the database, and if the 'mate pair' sequences overlapped they were joined. in this manner  <dig> contiguous sequences were assembled. dozens of the reads contained several complete variable regions, with each variable region potentially carrying a grna. the structural linkages between variable regions were recorded to determine if recombination occurred between minicircle sequence classes and if any correlation existed between editing target and minicircle neighbours.

each variable region was expected to encode a single grna, thus for the task of grna prediction the sequences were broken into individual units of the upstream csb- <dig> plus one variable region plus its downstream csb. a spectrogram alignment of unique units revealed striking regions of nucleotide preference in several places within the variable regions . an enrichment of g residues was evident adjacent to the csbs, while the central portion of the variable region indicated a bias toward as and cs. this pattern held true for both cl brener and esmeraldo strains.

the minicircle variable regions displayed specific nucleotide preferences over their length, potentially reflecting the sequence bias of the grna genes. we next sought to correlate the putative grna genes with rna editing events, however as many of these sequences are undetermined, some creative sequence manipulation was required in order to proceed.

editing in t. cruzi
one of the major goals of this analysis is to predict grnas. the current local alignment method of predicting grnas  <cit>  requires knowledge of the sequence for the fully edited target genes that for the most part are not yet known for t. cruzi, atpase  <dig>  <cit>  and coii  <cit>  being the only exceptions. we have initiated the experimental determination of t. cruzi editing events, but in the meantime used predictions to facilitate our minicircle study.

predicted edited sequences  were generated by manually inserting or deleting us in the unedited message sequence following the known sequences of the corresponding t. brucei edited mrnas, while preserving conservation of the resulting amino acid sequence. predicted sequences were generated for: cyb, cr <dig>  cr <dig>  murf <dig>  nd <dig>  nd <dig>  nd <dig>  nd <dig>  nd <dig>  and rps <dig>  concurrently, the edited sequence of coiii was obtained by rt-pcr for cl brener: when compared with our in silico prediction, the true coiii sequence differed from the predicted version such that two of the estimated  <dig> grnas would have been missed . for this reason, sizeable portions of the other predicted sequences were expected to yield many useful grna predictions. additional confidence was gained for segments of predicted sequence where high-scoring matches with putative grnas were found.

a combination of actual and predicted mrna sequences was used for exploring the grna assignments to specific genes. this method is not perfect due to the potential for error in our predictions, but these areas will be clarified as the edited sequences are obtained at the bench.

t. cruzi grnas identified in minicircle and maxicircle sequences
potential grnas were identified among minicircle sequences from the genome project and in genbank using a three-part process : the single greatest smith-waterman local alignment score for a variable region was most likely to represent the overlap of the grna and target mrna region. a permutation test was performed to determine the probability of a given 'best overlap', and then a false discovery rate  control was used to determine whether a hybridization with a given probability was significant . this statistic provided the criterion used to identify  <dig> potential grnas from  <dig> minicircle variable regions obtained from genbank  <cit> , cl brener and esmeraldo wgs reads . the predicted minicircle grnas are positioned consistently within the variable region, providing more evidence that these highly scoring alignments represent regions of grna hybridization to target mrnas.

the predicted maps of rna editing for t. cruzi  showed that while the final edited mrna was conserved due to the required amino acid composition of the resulting proteins the grnas that perform the editing were variable from one strain to the next; this variability was not restricted to transition mutations. the inexact line-up of grnas from different strains on certain regions of the coiii map , for example, demonstrated that the start and stop positions of hybridization can drift from strain to strain, and that grna heterogeneity may occur within isolates.

in addition to grnas identified from minicircle sequences, two grnas were predicted by local alignments with high confidence to reside within cl brener maxicircles. both maxicircle grnas are on the opposite strand of nearby protein-coding genes, with an nd <dig> grna placed 95-bp downstream of nd <dig> and approximately 500-bp upstream of the repetitive region, and a murf  <dig> grna located 66-bp downstream of the cr <dig> gene overlapping the start codon of nd <dig>  the previously-described coii grna lies immediately downstream of the coii gene on the same coding strand  <cit> .

areas of nucleotide preference within minicircle variable regions
the spectrograms of full minicircle units  revealed areas of conserved nucleotide preference within the variable region . to explore this further, the sequences with identified grnas were aligned as follows: regions upstream of the grnas were aligned to their 3' ends, grnas were all aligned at + <dig>  5' to 3' of predicted hybridization, and regions downstream of the grnas were aligned by their 5' ends.

the resulting spectrogram revealed nucleotide preferences with respect to these orientations . as might be expected to promote annealing to the target message, the 5'-anchor region of the grnas had a higher than background preference for cs , and the entire grna had a slightly higher t to a skew  with a spike centred approximately  <dig> nt into the predicted grna hybridization. while the areas immediately around the grnas were more t-rich  than the grnas themselves, the most clear transition occurred approximately 50-nt downstream of the grna where the preference for as and ts dropped sharply and the region became more g-rich .

given that the precise switch was dictated more by distance from the end of predicted hybridization than relative to the csbs, these observations may have implications for the transcription and maturation of grnas. note that the 5' ends of these grnas have not been physically mapped, and that corrections in the predicted editing events may either extend or decrease the 5' and 3' ends of the actual grna.

guide rnas predicted using a simple hidden markov model
although dozens of grnas were predicted using local alignments, approximately half of the minicircle sequences still lacked a statistically significant grna-mrna match. because the nucleotide preferences observed for assigned grnas had a direct correlation to the position of the gene within the minicircle sequence, landmarks for independent grna predictions in the absence of known editing events were derived. to do so required a statistical model and a method of finding the optimum path of a sequence through that model. in this case the viterbi algorithm was used to find the best path through a hidden markov model  for each known t. cruzi minicircle sequence .

the  <dig> minicircle reads carrying grnas predicted by local alignments were first used to test the ability of this method to correctly predict those grnas. although the 5' and 3' ends show differences with those predicted by local alignments, 85% of hmm-predicted grnas overlapped the local alignment predictions by at least  <dig> nt . the remaining 15% contained very little or no overlap with the local alignment prediction. this method was then applied to all known t. cruzi minicircle sequences to predict the grnas  and their locations within each minicircle sequence .

compared to the local alignment placements , the nucleotide preferences surrounding the hmm predictions were even more visually pronounced . while this was to be expected given the neutrality of the local alignment method to nucleotide usage and the reliance of the hmm on context-dependent usage, there was not enough empirical evidence regarding t. cruzi grnas to characterize the accuracy of each prediction method. the validity of these predictions will be determined with further experimental editing information. some of these sequences may also represent pseudogenes.

recombination of minicircle sequence classes
each variable region class was assigned a unique identifier. a single t. cruzi minicircle read could contain a string of up to four such class numbers. in general the functional target mrna of a grna had no bearing on its structural location relative to other grnas on a minicircle sequence, similar to the situation in t. brucei. recombination among minicircles had not been documented, so this linkage information inherent within the sequence reads was examined for apparently contradictory links between sequence classes.

two examples of discontinuity were found. reads claro12tf and tcga393tf contain identical downstream variable regions, but the upstream variable regions, separated by the intermediate csbs, are completely different . the same was true for clones claos <dig> and cmcbv <dig>  these alternate linkages were evidence of recombination among minicircles.

the minicircle sequences presented represent a fraction of minicircle sequence and as two of  <dig> cl brener reads bore evidence of recombination extrapolated to a level of 4% recombinants in the overall minicircle population. however, the minicircle reads presented do not represent complete coverage, and few reads contain three, let alone all four, linked variable regions. this incomplete linkage information is likely to compound the already limited scope of the data, and for these reasons 4% represents a conservative and imprecise estimate for the percentage of minicircle recombinants.

discussion
we present here a population study of the minicircles of t. cruzi using the identification of  <dig> minicircle sequences from wgs reads for the cl brener and esmeraldo strains of t. cruzi, some of which carried evidence of recombination among minicircles. these  <dig> minicircle sequences, in combination with previously published minicircle and maxicircle sequences, were used to predict  <dig> total grnas using smith-waterman local alignments. the positions of these putative grnas within the variable region revealed clear nucleotide preferences within and around the grnas that were used to create a simple hmm capable of predicting grnas from primary minicircle sequence alone. the predicted grnas were mapped onto the predicted or experimentally determined sequences of fully edited mitochondrial mrnas.

the remarkable csb conservation observed across kinetoplastids  <cit>  is consistent with the observation that there is little intragenomic variability among these sequences. the observation of specific regions of nucleotide preference within the variable region, in particular the ~50-bp relatively 'at'-rich  region immediately downstream of all predicted grnas from minicircle sequences, was unexpected. given the less linear appearance of this preference when aligned by csbs, this feature appears to be dependent on grna position within the variable region and may be important for some aspect of grna transcription or maturation. although some interesting features of minicircles in other kinetoplastids have been observed, almost nothing is known about the transcription or maturation of grnas in any kinetoplastid  <cit> . if the nucleotide preferences were involved in maturation one would also expect to see them surrounding grnas discovered on the maxicircle, but this is not the case. this suggests that these sequences are involved rather in minicircle-specific process, although it cannot be excluded that they have no biological importance, merely reflecting the common ancestry of all minicircle sequences. if these sequences are involved in grna transcription, it would suggest that maxicircle and minicircle transcription occurs in different manners, using different cis signals. the maxicircle grnas discovered, specifically the overlap of the murf <dig> grna with the nd <dig> start codon, provide additional evidence that both strands of the maxicircle are transcribed and that the mechanisms of mitochondrial gene expression are likely to be more complex than our current understanding  <cit> .

because g-u base pairs in complementary rna strands impart transition tolerance into the editing process, current methods of identifying grnas are limited to situations where the fully edited mrna is known  <cit>  or predicted. the use of permutation tests and false discovery rate control extends the use of local alignments, enabling the robust and systematic identification of grnas. the local alignment method used here can tolerate mismatches and gaps that might arise as a result of errant mrna sequence predictions. it also allows the discovery of pseudo-grnas that contain mismatches and have, therefore, lost their functionality. given the characteristic nucleotide preferences found around the grnas, it was possible to develop a method of grna prediction that requires no prior knowledge of mrna sequence.

in addition to many other uses, hmms have been used to predict genes and alternate splice sites  <cit> . using the characteristic nucleotide probabilities found at specific distances from grnas, an hmm was constructed, representing the first attempt to predict grnas independent of known editing events. although offering useful overlap, these predictions do not always or match exactly the local alignment predictions and how either of these predictions match the actual rna sequences of the molecules these predictions represent is unclear. in the case of local alignments, only areas of hybridization are detected while other potentially transcribed regions are ignored or areas that are not transcribed are included. while it appears that the hmm is 'missing' or 'adding' sequence compared to the local alignment used to train it, if the transcription or maturation of grnas depends on local nucleotide preferences in some way, then the hmm predictions may turn out to be closer than the local alignment predictions. the hmm employed here is extremely simple and with more experimental evidence about grnas in t. cruzi this model could be further articulated, yielding more accurate predictions. our hmm is specific to t. cruzi, but examinations of leishmania minicircles reveal distinct species-specific regions of nucleotide preference that also align with grna position . useful models for these and other kinetoplastids could also be constructed.

minicircle based assays have been used as markers for t. cruzi diversity  <cit> . based on the grna maps, although the resulting protein encoded by the message is highly conserved, the position and sequence of certain grnas can be strain-specific. restriction fragment length polymorphisms could be developed to distinguish these differences, providing another rapid method of determining from which subtype a given dna sample is from. further cataloguing and comparison of matching grna genes from different strains and dtus will provide useful information regarding the kinetoplast molecular clock and functional transition tolerance within the grnas.

from this minimal dataset two examples of minicircle recombination were identified. recombination may occur relatively frequently among minicircles, as it does within the dna of animal mitochondria  <cit> . the presence of thousands of molecules sharing four conserved sequence regions may enhance even low-level homologous recombination. computer simulations of minicircle evolution in leishmania show that random segregation can account for the plasticity and frequency of minicircle sequence classes  <cit> , however leishmania minicircles contain only one grna each, thereby minimizing the effects of any possible recombination. with evidence of recombination among minicircles, this new dynamic must be incorporated into future models of minicircle evolution in t. cruzi  <cit> . active recombination may serve as a mechanism to weed out pseudogenes.

roughly half of all extracted minicircle reads contained a predicted grna, and several likely explanations exist for this observation, the first of which is that the predicted editing of t. cruzi genes is likely to be incorrect in places, preventing detection of grnas that edit those regions. certainly, the maps for known sequences like atpase  <dig> and coiii are more complete than those of other genes. guide rnas with small hybridization footprints may also be lost in the statistical noise. the most biologically relevant possibility is that there are probably many variable regions that contain pseudo-guides that once performed a role in editing but have subsequently lost that function. the future sequencing of the edited rnas for all t. cruzi maxicircle genes will aid grna identification and validation, add to the incomplete maps presented here, and give insight into the prevalence of defunct variable regions in t. cruzi minicircles.

CONCLUSIONS
incidentally sequenced minicircles were identified among the wgs reads, serving as a reminder that high-throughput data can often have uses beyond that for which the collection methods are designed, and that public availability of this data allows these uses to be discovered. we used these 'contaminants' to glean information about the minicircle population in t. cruzi and found evidence of recombination among minicircle sequence classes that suggest a degree of plasticity not explicitly accounted for in many models of minicircle evolution. together with previously published minicircle sequences, grnas were systematically identified, generating maps of rna editing for many t. cruzi maxicircle genes. although by their nature incomplete, these maps represent a starting point from which to completely characterize the extent of rna editing in t. cruzi. the large number of identified genes allowed the design of a minicircle grna prediction model that can locate grna genes in the absence of specific mrna editing information.

