BACKGROUND
the transcriptional landscape of human cells is tightly linked to chromatin structure. by modulating chromatin, transcription factors  and chromatin modifying enzymes decides which transcripts, and the amount of each that are produced by a cell  <cit> . deciphering the most common modes by which chromatin regulates transcription, and how this is related to cellular status and processes, represents an ongoing endeavor towards our understanding of human cellular biology. however, the diversity of the transcriptional landscapes among different cell types in the human organism, and the complex mechanisms that account for this diversity are just beginning to be understood. recently two large scale efforts with the goal to map and understand the regulatory and transcriptional landscape of human cells and tissues have been undertaken. using single molecule cap analysis of gene expression  technology to profile  <dig> human tissues, cell lines and primary cells, the fantom <dig> consortium has generated a comprehensive map of transcription start sites  and their relative expression across the human genome  <cit>  the amount of tss data produced by this consortium have been condensed into a global set of 184  <dig> defined robust clusters of transcription start sites  throughout the human genome. a robust cluster is defined as groups of tsss which are in close proximity of each other in the genome, have the same direction of transcription, share a similar global expression pattern across all cells and tissues, and have sufficient support in the number of cage sequence tags  <cit> . the encode project  <cit>  has generated data on a huge amount of features that participate in the regulation of gene expression in human cell lines. among the several approaches taken by encode to investigate the different aspects of transcript regulation, the mapping of chromatin modifications and transcription factor binding sites in selected human cell lines using chip-seq  <cit>  is probably the most comprehensive. to facilitate comparison and utilize the efforts made by both projects, the four cell lines k <dig>  gm <dig>  hela-s <dig> and hepg <dig> used by encode where specifically subjected to cage in fantom <dig> 

one of the important findings in the encode project was the impact on gene expression by different combinations of chromatin modifications at regulatory elements throughout the genome. chromatin modifications are post-translational chemical modifications, most commonly methylations and acetylations, on the n-terminal tails of the eight histone proteins constituting the nucleosome core. these modifications affect the interaction between the core and the dna wrapped around it, as well as interactions with chromatin-binding proteins, resulting in configurations of open and closed chromatin  <cit> . in addition, variants of the histone proteins and modifications to the dna itself also impact the chromatin configuration. the general distribution of chromatin and other dna-binding proteins can be analyzed by dnase hypersensitivity   <cit> , which can identify regions of open chromatin. overall features like chromatin modifications, histone variants and open chromatin are referred to as chromatin marks. studies made by encode and others have shown that different combinations of chromatin marks can separate the chromatin landscape of the genome into states of open and closed chromatin, where closed chromatin generally corresponds to repression of transcription, and open chromatin corresponds to active transcription. active chromatin can further be separated into additional states, depending on the enrichment of various active chromatin modifications  <cit> . two examples of such states are found in promoters and enhancers, which affect transcription from proximal and distal genomic locations, respectively. other studies have shown that the actual shapes of enrichment for individual chromatin marks also differ between genomic locations. however, the functional implications of these differences have been less investigated  <cit> .

for studies of chromatin profile shapes, a crucial step is the definition of anchor points throughout the genome, which are used as reference positions for the study of shapes in the neighborhood of the anchor points. tsss of annotated genes are examples of such anchor points. however, these generally represent a too limited selection of genomic sites for general analysis, considering that a large amount of regulation takes place distal from any annotated gene tss. other strategies for anchor point definitions have thus included binding sites for clusters of transcription factors  <cit>  or for specific transcription factors, like the enhancer associated protein p <dig>  <cit> . one challenge with this approach is the lack of directionality of such data. directionality is important, because individual chromatin shapes have been shown to display asymmetry around anchor points, especially if the anchor points are transcript-producing  <cit> . another challenge is the functional heterogeneity of various transcription factors, which can make the anchor points difficult to compare. in contrast to transcription factors, rtsss as defined in fantom <dig> are both directional and represent a set of genomic sites associated with the same function, that is, activation of transcription. in addition, due to aggregation of data across multiple cell types, a lot of rtss regions will have zero expression in any individual cell type, since the general fantom <dig> rtss regions are defined over a comprehensive set of human cells and tissues. this information represents a novel opportunity to investigate chromatin marks genome-wide at locations where transcription is known to be repressed, which could previously be investigated only for tss positions of annotated genes. tsss from cage were previously used to analyze states for a single chromatin mark  in few cell lines during fantom <dig>  <cit> .

it has now become well established that the regulatory landscape of the human genome includes much more than the genomic regions surrounding the approximately 22  <dig> currently well annotated genes. the 184  <dig> globally defined transcripts from fantom <dig>  as well as the mapping of chromatin states and transcription factors in encode are both attempts to map the characteristics and diversity of these transcriptional events, and the mechanism that regulate them. in contrast to most previously known genes, the function of these novel transcripts is mostly unknown. however, several have been shown to correlate with transcriptional outputs of nearby genes  <cit> . whether this correlation is due to direct spatial interaction between regulatory elements, co-transcription from the same promoter, assisted recruitment of factors promoting transcription, or establishment of favorable chromatin domains remains to be determined  <cit> , but should nevertheless encourage the association of such non-coding transcripts to nearby genes.

the four cell lines k <dig>  gm <dig>  hela-s <dig> and hepg <dig> common to encode and fantom <dig> all include the complete set of  <dig> chromatin marks mapped by chip-seq in encode. in addition, the 184  <dig> rtsss from fantom <dig> defined globally over  <dig> human tissues, cell lines and primary cells represent an opportunity to investigate chromatin marks at rtsss repressed in the respective cell-lines, as well as the expressed ones. in this study we have used globally defined rtsss from fantom <dig> as anchor points, and investigated combinations of enrichment and shape profiles for chromatin marks around these anchor points. most rtsss are intra- or inter-genic, rather than being located at or close to currently annotated tsss. these rtsss are mostly repressed in the four cell lines studied, however, we also discovered a substantial number of such repressed inter- and intra-genic rtsss harboring activating chromatin marks and pol ii, indicative of regulatory elements poised for transcription. using a tool for ontology analysis in genomic regions, we found that these rtsss were strongly associated with immediate-early responses and cell signaling. shape profiles for chromatin marks around expressed rtsss were subjected to a two-level clustering procedure, identifying metaclusters with combinatorial characteristics of enrichment and shape. these metaclusters differed substantially in functional ontology annotations, average rtss expression, location of rtsss with respect to nearby genes, and cpg content, indicating that the clusters are biologically relevant. finally we validated the associations between rtsss within metaclusters, showing that the global expression levels of corresponding rtsss are correlated.

this work is part of the fantom <dig> project. data downloads, genomic tools and co-published manuscripts are summarized at http://fantom.gsc.riken.jp/5/.

RESULTS
globally defined rtsss are mostly located in intra- and intergenic regions, and repressed in individual cell lines
we defined a set of 179  <dig> global rtsss from the 184  <dig> rtsss produced by the fantom <dig> consortium, and used this set throughout the rest of the study . we then mapped the expression profile for these 179  <dig> rtsss in each of the four cell lines k <dig>  gm <dig>  hela-s <dig> and hepg <dig>  to get an overview of the genomic locations of the globally defined rtsss in each cell line, we divided the 179  <dig> rtsss into expressed and repressed rtsss , and then further into the following categories: i) annotated rtsss overlapping exactly with refseq tss annotations, ii) intragenic rtsss overlapping with full gene annotations, iii) intergenic rtsss having no overlap with annotated genes, and iv) proximal rtsss located at most 150 bp up- or downstream for annotated gene tsss . the last category was included to account for proximal alternative tsss for the same gene which often surrounds the annotated tsss in cage data  <cit> . comparing the fraction of expressed versus repressed rtsss within the four location categories we are considering, the intergenic and intragenic rtsss are dominated by repressed rtsss , while the annotated and proximal categories are dominated by expressed rtsss . we also observe that more rtsss are intragenic than intergenic. an overall observed trend is that the rtss density drops while the cell line specificity of the rtsss increases as one move away from annotated gene tsss. in addition, the large number of rtsss falling into the proximal compared to the annotated category is indicative of substantial alternative tss usage ±150 bp around annotated tsss of genes. the number of rtsss falling into the four categories is quite consistent for all cell lines, and the slight deviation observed for k <dig> is likely attributable to the lower number of cage tags in the k <dig> library. our observations fit with previous reports that distal regulatory elements, like enhancers, are generally more cell-type specific than regulatory elements proximal to annotated genes  <cit> , and the consistent pattern across the cell lines indicates that this is a general feature.

markers for active chromatin show enrichment at both expressed and repressed rtsss
the four cell lines used in this study were specifically mapped by cage in fantom <dig> for comparison with encode. we could therefore use the 179  <dig> globally defined rtsss as anchor points for studying enrichment and profile shapes for the  <dig> chromatin marks downloaded from encode for each of the four cell lines . we divided the rtsss into expressed and repressed, and calculated the number of overlaps for each chromatin mark in a 500 bp extension around each rtss. figure  <dig> shows results from hela-s <dig>  plots for all cell lines are in . in general, if results are similar for all cell lines, we display results from only one cell line. as expected, we observed a depletion for the transcriptional repressive marks h3k27me <dig> and h3k9me <dig> in expressed rtsss, but general enrichment for the  <dig> other marks, which are traditionally regarded as transcription activating marks  <cit> . more surprisingly, we also observed a considerable enrichment of active marks for the repressed rtsss. the actual number of repressed rtsss overlapping with active chromatin marks is comparable to expressed rtsss. however, the ratio of overlaps compared to the total number of repressed or expressed rtsss is lower for repressed, since there are more repressed rtsss than expressed. many rtsss are located close to each other in the genome, often separated by less than 100 bp, making it possible that the enrichment observed in repressed rtsss was due to confounding from neighboring expressed rtsss. to account for this possibility, we identified rtsss separated from other rtsss by at least 2kbp, which resulted in 35  <dig> isolated rtsss, and performed the same analysis on these isolated rtsss. we observed similar, and sometimes increased, enrichment of active marks in the repressed isolated rtsss compared to the full set of global rtsss , and p-values calculated for each overlap also confirmed highly significant overlaps . the enrichment was most significant for dnase hs, h2a.z, h3k4me <dig>  h3k4me <dig>  h3k4me <dig>  h3k27ac, h3k9ac and h4k20me <dig> and less significant for the transcriptional markers h3k36me <dig> and h3k79me <dig>  we thus conclude that several active chromatin marks are enriched at both expressed and repressed rtsss.

active chromatin marks at expressed and repressed rtsss show distinct chromatin profiles, and differ in nucleosome positioning at their tsss
the enrichment of active chromatin marks on a subset of repressed rtsss led us to further investigate the shapes of chromatin marks around these rtsss. we therefore collected and analyzed profiles for all chromatin marks in expressed and repressed rtsss for the 179  <dig> globally defined rtsss in each cell line . average profiles  showed that profiles around expressed rtsss had increased signal for active marks around the rtss center and transcript body, while repressed rtsss only had increased signal at the rtsss center. expressed rtsss also display a characteristic dip in the signal exactly at the rtss center, which corresponds to a nucleosome-free region commonly observed at actively transcribed tsss  <cit> . in contrast, profiles of active marks around repressed genes lack this characteristic dip, which indicates that these rtsss retain nucleosome occupancy at the rtss center. repressed rtsss also seem to display a similar symmetric profile around the rtsss for all active marks, while profiles for expressed genes are either symmetric  or show increased signal primarily in the direction of the main transcript . h3k4me <dig> display slight asymmetry, thus deviating from the other k <dig> methylation marks in this aspect. similar profiles were also observed for the isolated rtsss described above, confirming that the general observations were not due to confounding. though the repressive marks h3k27me <dig> and h3k9me <dig> were more pronounced in repressed rtsss compared to active marks, we also observed weak enrichment of repressive marks, especially h3k9me <dig>  in expressed rtsss . to further investigate the nucleosome occupancy around expressed and repressed rtsss we used nucleosome data from encode, which gives nucleosome occupancy at base pair resolution for the cell lines k <dig> and gm <dig>  nucleosome positioning in k <dig> around expressed and repressed rtss enriched for the active chromatin mark h3k4me <dig> is shown in figure  <dig>  a clear periodic nucleosome positioning pattern with a dip at tss is observed for expressed rtsss, while the repressed rtsss show no sign of ordered nucleosomes, except for an increased signal exactly at the rtss center, indicative of a well-positioned nucleosome at this location. the general presence of a nucleosome at the center of repressed rtsss was also confirmed for all chromatin marks in both cell lines using a lower resolution mapping . a well-positioned nucleosome at tss was also a general feature for all repressed rtsss, not only the ones enriched for active chromatin marks.

because expressed and repressed rtsss displayed such distinct profiles characteristics of active chromatin marks, we chose to analyze these two classes of rtsss separately throughout the rest of our study. we start with the analyses of expressed rtsss, and continue with the repressed rtsss afterwards.

clustering of chromatin profiles around expressed rtsss identifies combinatorial subsets of various asymmetric chromatin shapes
profiles for a single chromatin mark around expressed genes and active regulatory elements have been shown to display a considerable variation in asymmetric shapes within the same cell type  <cit> . to identify profile shape variations within each chromatin mark, we used the set of expressed rtsss as profile anchor points and k-means clustering to identify distinct chromatin profiles over a ±3kbp extension around expressed rtss center positions. we first performed clustering of rtss profiles on each chromatin mark in each cell line individually, and continued with a meta-clustering using a combination of correlation coefficients for each rtss towards each chromatin mark in the respective cell line . between 15  <dig> and 50  <dig> profiles for active marks and  <dig> and 15  <dig> profiles for repressive marks passed the filtering criteria for inclusion in the first individual clustering. though k-means clustering is designed to handle a large number of profiles, it requires the number of clusters to be specified prior to clustering. to investigate whether an intuitive prior number of clusters could be identified, we used principal component analysis  on each set of profiles to see if they displayed discrete profile groupings . we could not identify any distinct groups for any mark in any cell line, and the landscape of profile differences in all sets seemed to represent a continuum, rather than discrete groupings. we therefore consistently set the prior number of clusters to  <dig> for each individual clustering. this number was mainly chosen to give a manageable number of clusters for later interpretation of the meta-clusters. for the first individual clustering we calculated average subprofiles over all rtss clusters for each chromatin mark in each cell line , resulting in a total of  <dig> subprofiles  in each cell line. the same subprofiles were generally observed in all four cell lines, with active chromatin marks displaying more similarity than repressive marks. several of the identified subprofiles were comparable to profiles identified in previous studies  <cit> , showing various asymmetrical shapes around tsss. canonical average profiles for several of the chromatin marks were also visible, for example h3k79me <dig> and h4k20me <dig> had several subprofiles with reduced signal upstream of tsss and gradually increased signal in the transcript direction. in addition we also observed opposite non-canonical subprofiles for h3k79me <dig> and h4k20me <dig>  with increased signal upstream of tsss and reduced signal in the transcript direction.

having identified subprofiles for individual chromatin marks in each cell line, we next wanted to identify overrepresented combinations of subprofiles using several chromatin marks within each cell line. this was achieved by a meta-clustering approach based on pearson correlation coefficients between rtss profiles and subprofiles . the meta-clustering was applied independently in each cell line. for each chromatin mark, the pearson correlation coefficient was calculated between chromatin mark profiles for each expressed individual rtss and the  <dig> subprofiles for the respective chromatin marks, resulting in  <dig> correlation coefficients  calculated for each rtss. the matrix of all expressed rtsss and corresponding correlation coefficients was then subjected to k-means clustering with the prior number of clusters set to  <dig>  a heatmap of the cluster results together with subprofiles for all clusters for all chromatin marks are shown in figure  <dig> for k <dig> and in  for the other three cell lines. the heatmaps show characteristic subprofiles in all  <dig> metaclusters, as well as general enrichment of specific marks in each metacluster. for example metaclusters c <dig> and c <dig> are exclusively enriched for h4k20me <dig>  c <dig> is the only cluster depleted for h3k79me <dig>  while c <dig> is depleted for both h3k4me <dig> and h3k4me <dig>  metaclusters c2- <dig> are all enriched for h3k79me <dig>  however, c5-c <dig> are dominated by a different h3k79me <dig> profile than the other  <dig> metaclusters. likewise, while general h3k9ac enrichment is found in most metaclusters, c <dig> displays a dominating h3k9ac profile not characteristic for the other metaclusters. of all the chromatin marks, the elongation mark h3k79me <dig> and the two acetylations h3k27ac and h3k9ac seem to contribute most to the subprofile variations between the metaclusters. dnase hs, h2a.z and h3k4me <dig> seem to be most stable, showing similar subprofiles in many metaclusters, while profiles for the repressive marks h3k27me <dig> and h3k9me <dig>  together with h3k4me <dig>  show no specific subprofiles in any metacluster. most of the trends observed for k <dig> were also observed in the other cell lines, though some cell type specific differences were also visible. the overall conclusion for the complete clustering approach is that expressed rtsss can be clustered into distinct groups displaying different enrichment and profile shapes of various chromatin marks.

metaclusters of rtsss differ in functional associations, average expression level, localization with respect to nearby genes and enrichment of cpg-islands
the efforts made by fantom <dig>  encode and others have confirmed the huge landscape of transcriptional events existing in addition to the well-known catalogue of protein coding genes. most of this landscape consists of non-coding transcripts, whose exact functions have yet to be determined. one commonly described property of these non-coding transcripts is their tendency to affect the regulation of nearby genes. to determine the biological relevance of the defined metaclusters, we linked the metaclusters to functional annotations using the publicly available genomic regions enrichment of annotations tool   <cit> . great is a tool that assigns functionality to a set of genomic regions based on nearby genes, and is thus well suited for analyses of rtss metaclusters with an abundance of intra- and inter-genic elements. in addition, we investigated whether the metaclusters differed with respect to number of associated rtsss, average rtss expression level, localization with respect to nearby genes and cpg content.

we first observed that the metaclusters in each cell line differed in the number of associated rtsss, and average rtss expression level. the number of rtsss associated with each cluster varied from >11  <dig> for the largest clusters to 2– <dig> for the smallest, while expression levels could be separated into high, intermediate and low . average expression level did correlate with metacluster size. however, the correlation was not absolute in any cell-line. for example the three largest clusters, each containing more than 11  <dig> rtsss, were not the ones with the highest average expression in any of their respective cell lines. we also observed differences in rtss localization preferences with respect to nearby genes for the different clusters . the most prominent difference was observed between clusters with distal and proximal enrichment of rtsss relative to genes. typically  <dig> or  <dig> metaclusters in each cell line displayed a distal enrichment, and these clusters generally displayed a low average expression, and contained few rtsss. the separation of distal and proximal rtsss was expected, and in concordance with previous reports of different chromatin enrichments in gene proximal and distal elements. more unexpectedly we also observed differences between clusters with rtsss preferentially enriched upstream or downstream from the tsss of nearby genes. this property was observed for clusters in all cell lines, involved clusters with most of their rtsss located proximal to nearby genes, and was mostly observed as a considerable enrichment of rtsss in the 5 kb region either up- or downstream of their associated gene tss. finally, several clusters did not show any specific enrichment of rtsss in the proximal or distal regions.

to determine functional associations of the different metaclusters, we analyzed functional terms extracted from great for each metacluster. due to possible confounding of rtsss located close to each other in the genome, we used two strategies referred to as permissive and conservative for analysis in great . for both strategies we used the total set of rtsss in all metaclusters as background data. by doing this, we identify terms significantly over-represented in one metacluster compared to other metaclusters, rather than compared to a general genomic background. a total of  <dig> and  <dig> genes significantly related to  <dig> and  <dig> terms were retrieved from great for all metaclusters by this approach, for the permissive and conservative strategy respectively, while no significant genes or terms were retrieved for random selections of rtsss. using the permissive strategy, all metaclusters were associated with many, often related, significant terms, while this was only true for a subset of metaclusters in the conservative strategy. terms associated with individual metaclusters were considerably more different between metaclusters in the same cell line than between metaclusters in different cell lines . metaclusters with similar functional terms between the cell lines also shared individual rtsss, as well as chromatin configurations in these cell lines, showing that chromatin configurations are reproducible. both the enrichment of individual chromatin marks and the profile shape of these marks were important for separating metaclusters. for example metacluster c <dig> in k <dig> is separated from metacluster c <dig> by enrichment differences for h3k9ac, h3k36me <dig> and h3k4me3/ <dig>  while the separation from metacluster c <dig> is mainly due to differences in the profile shapes of h3k9ac, h3k27ac and h3k4me2/ <dig> 

to investigate metaclusters with corresponding functional associations between cell-lines, we performed pca on all clusters from each cell-line  using genes from the most significant terms from great for each cluster as model variables. after performing pca, a plot of the first two principal components revealed several interesting relationships between the metaclusters, and these relations between clusters were mostly conserved between a permissive and conservative strategy employed for functional associations . the pca plot indicates that the clusters can be separated into three main groups based on genes from their functional associations. interestingly, the strongest functional associations are observed among metaclusters enriched with rtsss distal to their associated genes with scores in the upper right quadrant of the pca plot. these metaclusters are also characterized by having low expression, low enrichment of cpg islands, and general enrichment for specific active marks. metaclusters in this group contain terms related to receptors and cell-signaling, with a subgroup of metaclusters  especially enriched for terms related to g-protein coupled receptor  signaling. these metaclusters all have a characteristic enrichment of the transcriptional mark h3k36me <dig>  but are depleted for nearly all other marks. strong functional associations are also observed for the metaclusters with scores in the bottom right quadrant of the pca plot. these metaclusters are characterized by low levels of transcription, intermediate enrichment of cpg islands, and have a distribution of rtsss relative to genes resembling the average rtss-to-gene distribution over all metaclusters. five of these clusters  share similar chromatin configuration, characterized by h3k9ac, h3k4me3/ <dig>  h3k79me <dig> and to a certain degree h3k27me <dig> profile shapes that deviate from profile shapes for these chromatin marks in other clusters. functional terms for these clusters were diverse, but terms related to cell cycle, circadian rhythm and certain metabolic processes like glycolysis were frequent. the third group contains the largest clusters, which generally have lower scores in the left quadrants of the pca plot. this group is characterized by high and intermediate expression levels, high enrichment of cpg islands, rtss enrichment proximal to nearby genes, generally high enrichment of many active chromatin marks, and reoccurring functional terms related to various transcriptional activities and processing of rna and dna. metaclusters in this group generally had weaker functional associations, and many metaclusters only returned significant great terms in the permissive setting. the two most prominent subclusters in this group both displayed characteristic chromatin configurations. first, the four clusters with scores leftmost in the pca plot, with one cluster from each cell line , are characterized by the non-canonical upstream enrichment of h3k79me <dig>  are also enriched for rtsss proximal and upstream of nearby genes, and contain terms related to histone proteins and nucleosome organization. second, the two metaclusters c <dig> in k <dig> and c <dig> in hepg <dig> located close together in the pca plot are the only metaclusters particularly enriched for h4k20me <dig> 

the annotation terms identified by great imply a functional association between rtsss and their nearby annotated genes. to validate that sensible rtss-to-gene interactions are represented in these associations, we used the global expression profiles over all  <dig> fantom <dig> samples and calculated intra-correlations between rtsss in windows of increasing size, anchored on annotated tsss of genes associated with rtsss through great . for each window and each cluster, we compared intra-correlation in expression profiles between rtsss present in each cluster to the correlation observed when all globally defined rtsss within the window were considered. we generally observed a higher correlation between rtsss within clusters than within all globally defined rtsss, especially in windows representing the distal rtsss. the high correlations observed in all calculations indicate that co-expression of nearby genes within clusters is substantial. overall the results supports that many of the rtss-to-gene associations identified by great are sensible, and validate that strategies such as those applied by great to attach possible functions to non-coding transcripts that currently lack functional annotations are feasible.

in general, all observations described above show that the identified metaclusters differ in several properties and associated functions, that properties, functions and chromatin states are related, and that these relations are reproducible across cell lines. all these results when taken together show that the subclusters that were identified by the different chromatin configurations through the metaclustering approach are biologically relevant.

repressed rtsss enriched for active marks are linked to immune response by gene ontology terms, and contain additional enrichment of polymerase ii
as described above, we found considerable enrichment of active chromatin marks at repressed rtsss throughout our set of 179  <dig> globally defined rtsss . because of the general profile similarity of all active marks around repressed rtsss, we pooled the profiles of all active marks around each repressed rtss, and identified a robust subset of rtsss with a general active profile for each cell line . this filtering procedure resulted in subsets of  <dig> rtsss for k <dig>   <dig> for gm <dig>   <dig> for hela-s <dig> and  <dig> for hepg <dig>  which constitutes between 4% and 6% of all repressed rtsss with significant signal in at least one chromatin mark. to separate the selected rtsss from the generally repressed rtsss, we from now on refer to the former as poised rtsss. between 15% and 30% of the poised rtsss overlapped between the cell lines. of the 13  <dig> poised rtsss selected over all four cell lines, only  <dig>  were present in all cell lines while 10  <dig>  were present in only one cell line. the poised rtsss reflect the genomic distribution of repressed rtsss in general, in that less than 20% are proximal to annotated genes, and over 80% are intra- or intergenic, the latter also being highly cell line specific.

genes responding rapidly to environmental stimuli, for example in immune response, have been shown in several studies to display only low levels of transcription, but with marks characteristic of an active chromatin state, also when the cell is unstimulated  <cit> . these genes were defined as being in a poised state, where the active chromatin poises the gene for rapid activation in response to external stimuli. similar poised states were also recently shown to exist for enhancers  <cit> . an additional common feature described in these studies was the additional enrichment of polymerase ii  in the poised genes and enhancers, where the initiating form of pol ii, but not the elongating form, was generally observed in the poised regions. the existence of initiating pol ii was shown to transform to the elongating form rapidly in response to stimuli  <cit> . as the region changed from poised to active, more pol ii was also shown to be recruited to the region. to investigate whether our selected rtsss displayed characteristics of such poised regions, we downloaded data on pol ii in all four cell lines from encode , and investigated the pol ii enrichment in our poised rtsss. indeed, we found that our poised rtsss showed enrichment of pol ii in all four cell lines . the enrichment was less than for expressed rtsss, but considerably higher than the general average over all repressed rtsss.

we also tried to investigate whether our selected regions would respond to external stimuli. for this analysis, we could only find one relevant dataset from encode. the data was for pol ii enrichment in the k <dig> cell line after stimulation with interferon alpha  and gamma . we observed similar levels of pol ii for our selected rtsss relative to pol ii levels for expressed rtsss before and after stimulation of both ifnα and ifnγ . this was in contrast to the previous studies which reported a general increase in pol ii levels after stimulation  <cit> .

to investigate possible functions of the selected poised rtsss, we again used great for go annotation . we found that our selected rtsss were highly enriched for terms related to immune response and signaling in all four cell lines, compared to randomly selected sets of rtsss . so even though the selected rtsss only partly overlap between the cell lines, they seem to be related to similar functions in all four cell lines. in addition to functional terms, great also returned lists of all the genes associated with the input genomic regions . in total the 13  <dig> poised rtsss were associated with  <dig> unique genes by great . as expected from the functional terms, the gene lists are dominated by genes typically related to early response, signaling and the immune-related processes, like fos, jun, bcl <dig>  egr-family, tnf-family, nfkb-family, map kinases, interleukins and interferons. when comparing our  <dig> genes to a compiled set of  <dig> early response genes from a study in mice  <cit> , we found exact matches for  <dig> of the  <dig> genes, while  <dig> of the remaining  <dig> matched closely related genes. as examples of the latter we found saa <dig> but not saa <dig>  arhgef <dig> but not arhgef <dig>  nos <dig> but not nos <dig> and irf <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> but not irf <dig>  the cell type specificity of affected genes is comparable to the cell type specificity of the selected rtsss, with only  <dig>  genes affected in all cell lines, and  <dig>  affected in only one cell line. similar to ubiquitously expressed genes in general, the cpg content in promoters of the  <dig> genes affected in all cell lines was significantly higher  than for promoters in the other  <dig> genes. affected genes are both repressed and  expressed in their respective cell-lines, in proportions similar to expressed and repressed genes in general. when considering only the repressed genes in the gene list, they showed higher signals for active chromatin marks compared to generally repressed genes, indicating that they may exist in a somewhat poised state as well . however, these signals were considerably less than for our selected poised rtsss. overall, genes related to immune response and cell signaling must be able to react rapidly in response to environmental cues, and it thus makes sense that response elements affecting such genes, here represented by nearby rtsss, exist in a poised state with active chromatin marks. although our set of selected rtsss did not respond to stimulation by ifnα or ifnγ, the functional associations from great, the strong association of the corresponding genes with signaling, immune and early response genes, and the enrichment of pol ii and active chromatin marks at the selected rtsss, corroborates the indication that these rtsss represents poised, mostly intra- and intergenic elements ready to be activated rapidly as a response to environmental cues. finally, as for the expressed rtsss, we observed increased correlation between global expression profiles within neighboring poised rtsss compared to neighboring rtsss in general .

discussion
several studies have now shown that the transcriptional landscape of human cells is far more diverse than previously anticipated  <cit> . in addition to the well-known protein coding transcripts, an abundance of intra- and intergenic non-coding transcripts are also produced, whose functions have yet to be determined. based on results from previously published studies, we assume that one role of these non-coding transcripts is to affect the expression of genes in their neighborhood, and have used great to assign functional relationships to these non-coding transcripts through their association with nearby genes. moreover we have assumed that transcripts sharing similar patterns of chromatin enrichment and profile shape are associated with similar functions, and have thus grouped the transcripts into distinct clusters based on chromatin features. this strategy has revealed strong non-overlapping functional associations for the different clusters, many of which are reproducible across the four studied cell lines. some of the identified clusters also display chromatin configurations which, to our knowledge, are yet uncharacterized. the two most prominent of these are clusters with a non-canonical h3k79me <dig> profile associated with cell division, nucleosome assembly and histone proteins found in all four cell lines, and clusters with sole h3k36me <dig> enrichment related to g-protein coupled receptor signaling found in three of the cell lines.

intra- and intergenic rtsss have correlated expression with nearby genes
in this study we have assumed that an important function of regulatory elements, including rtsss producing non-coding transcripts, is to affect the transcription of nearby genes. the rtsss is a subset of the general collection of regulatory elements available to a cell, which also includes enhancers and insulators, many of which do not produce their own transcripts. there are individual examples of situations where regulatory elements affect flanking genes  <cit> , and where the regulatory element and the affected gene are separated by several unaffected genes  <cit> . however, it less known how common these modes of regulation are on a global scale. some studies have found the association of regulatory elements to flanking genes to be substantial  <cit> , while other studies using 5c technology  <cit>  to identify spatial genomic interactions have concluded that the association between a distal regulatory element and its closest gene is less common  <cit> . studies of spatial genomic interactions have also revealed that a single regulatory element may affect several genes, and a gene may be affected by several regulatory elements, complicating the picture further  <cit> . however, while spatial interaction is necessary for some regulatory elements, like enhancers, to execute their function, transcript-producing regulatory elements do not necessarily need to interact directly with the genes to affect their transcription. great allows associations with both upstream and downstream genes at the same time, but not beyond the closest gene or a genomic distance limit. considering great’s dependence on closest gene associations, the strong functional relations observed in this study may seem somewhat surprising. we acknowledge that several of the individual rtss-to-gene associations identified by great may be false positives. however, we see several reasons why the functional analysis still might work. i) the analysis in great is based on statistical overrepresentation, which makes it robust against low levels of misclassification. ii) several of the clusters are enriched for rtsss that are proximal to, and often coincide with, their nearest gene. these rtss-to-gene associations are thus very likely to be true. iii) genes with similar function may have a tendency to be located in the same genomic region  <cit> . so, even if a specific rtss-to-gene association is wrong, the rtss may still be affiliated with a gene with similar function, resulting in a correct functional association. iv) validation of rtss-to-gene associations using global expression profiles shows that the correlations for rtsss within the same clusters are higher than for closely located rtsss in general, and that this improved correlation is most visible for distal rtsss. this indicates that the rtss-to-gene associations used by great are more likely to be correct than a random association between two rtsss within the same genomic region. we have not validated individual rtss-to-gene associations in this study. however, several associations are interesting candidates for further investigation. overall we have shown that clustering rtsss based on chromatin configuration, and using great for ontology annotation of each cluster, has produced functional annotations for these clusters that seem to be reasonable and are reproducible across cell lines.

inter- and intragenic rtsss enriched for active chromatin marks and pol ii are poised for activation
the investigation of average chromatin profiles around repressed and expressed rtsss has revealed a subtle relationship between open and closed chromatin, and between transcript repression and expression. especially our analyses of a selected subset of poised rtsss that are substantially enriched for active chromatin marks, but with zero expression levels, shows that chromatin state is not always directly correlated with active transcription. in addition we also observe slight enrichment of repressive marks, especially h3k9me <dig>  at expressed rtsss. possible reasons for h3k9me <dig> enrichment in gene bodies have been described previously  <cit> , but their potential effect on tsss has to our knowledge not been studied. our poised rtsss were selected by quite conservative criteria, but should still make up a representative subset for this category of rtsss. as evidence for this, an alternative selection procedure resulted in sets of poised rtsss which were highly overlapping with the sets used for these analyses. poised regulatory elements reside generally in regions of open chromatin, and are used by the cell to respond rapidly to environmental cues. because they reside in open chromatin, their function can be initiated with at most a limited degree of chromatin remodeling, and often also without any de novo production of transcription factors  <cit> , and this ensures rapid activation. we observed characteristics for our rtsss which indicate that they represent such poised regulatory elements. first we observed substantial enrichment of pol ii at the rtsss, which is a typical hallmark for poised regulatory elements. this enrichment was observed independently of the selection procedure. previous reports have discussed the role of stalled pol ii at poised regulatory elements, and it has been suggested that one role of these elements is to load pol ii onto the gene promoter through the activation of long-range spatial interactions  <cit> . in our analysis, since the rtsss actually represent transcription events, we find it more likely that pol ii initiates transcription at the respective rtsss, though we cannot exclude that at least some rtsss also function through other mechanisms. second, the selected rtsss are located in regions that are also occupied by genes associated with immune responses, cell signaling and general immediate cell responses, all of which are activated rapidly in response to environmental cues. several of the poised rtsss are located proximal to, or coincide with, the actual genes, creating quite robust rtss-to-gene associations. for the distal rtsss we again observed a higher global correlation of expression between the poised rtsss in the genomic region than for general rtsss in the same region, confirming that many of the rtss-to-gene associations are also likely to be relevant. third, common immediate response genes like fos and jun were associated with poised rtsss in all cell lines, and we observed a higher cpg content in genes associated with all cell types than genes associated with three or less cell types, in accordance with other data on subsets of immediate-early response genes  <cit> .

the predefined number of clusters reveals functional features despite lack of fine-structure in data
in our study we set the predefined number of clusters for the k-means clustering to  <dig> for clustering of individual chromatin marks, and  <dig> for the combination of marks. other studies have identified higher number of profiles, both for each chromatin mark and for combinations of marks  <cit> , where the final number of states has been determined through various optimizations of a clustering procedure. visual inspection of score plots from pca revealed no obvious separation of groups of profiles for any chromatin marks, leaving no suggestion for an initial estimation of the number of clusters. however, the variation in rtss profile shapes should still warrant that a separation into groups is meaningful. thus the number of clusters was chosen to be suitable for keeping the number of states equal for all chromatin marks and cell lines, and at a level convenient for interpretation. the numbers chosen turned out to be sufficient for producing relevant functional associations, and thus this works as a proof of principle. we anticipate that more sophisticated ways of selecting clusters will probably produce stronger and more detailed functional associations than the ones observed in this study.

the regulatory landscape governing transcription in different cell types is highly complex. however, it is also predictable, in that the same cell type responds similarly every time it is subjected to the same environmental cue, and coordinated, in that several transcriptional elements respond in the same manner to stimulation. genome wide mapping of various features, whether it is expression level measurements, tss activity level, chromatin configuration, dnase hs or transcription factor binding and activity, all leave traces of this coordinated action. thus, it is an important challenge to integrate such data and determine at what level it is meaningful to look for general patterns that are robust and predictable on a global scale, to investigate what these patterns mean in terms of function and phenotype, and what the main components that govern these patterns are. in this study we have used combinations of chromatin marks around a global set of experimentally defined tsss, and identified subsets of tsss with similar chromatin configuration, several of which have functional associations. hopefully this and related strategies, together with integration of even more genome wide features, will continue to reveal patterns of ubiquitous and cell type specific gene regulation, expression and function.

CONCLUSIONS
we have integrated chromatin data from the encode consortium with the robust set of globally defined tsss from fantom <dig> to investigate how chromatin features can be used to distinguish tsss with different properties in four cell lines analyzed by both consortia. we find that most tsss are repressed in the cell lines studied here, however, a substantial number of the repressed tsss are enriched with active chromatin marks. these tsss are strongly associated with immediate-early response processes and cell signaling. expressed tsss can be clustered into subsets based on combinations of both enrichment and profile shape of individual chromatin marks. we identified three main groups of clusters which differ in average tss expression, cpg island enrichment, tss location with respect to nearby genes and functional go terms. interestingly, groups with clusters enriched for tsss distal to nearby genes show the strongest functional associations. finally we show that nearby tsss with similar chromatin configuration show better correlation in global expression profiles than nearby tsss in general, thus validating the link between chromatin states and cellular function.

