BACKGROUND
helicobacter pylori is a helical gram-negative bacillus that was originally discovered by marshall and warren in the stomach of patients with gastritis and peptic ulceration  <cit> . h. pylori has subsequently been recognised as the major aetiological determinant of various gastroduodenal diseases. approximately half of the world's population has been estimated to be infected by h. pylori and harbours the bacterium in their upper gastrointestinal tract  <cit> . even though antibiotic-based triple therapy is still the most effective treatment for h. pylori infection, it seems that it is not feasible for large-scale control of infection, partly because of the high cost, poor compliance, and emergence of antibiotic-resistant strains. increasing rates of therapeutic treatment failure and high rates of re-infection, together with low hygiene standards in developing countries have made it imperative to develop vaccines to control infection  <cit> .

currently, most h. pylori vaccines in animal models have utilised whole-cell preparation of native or recombinant proteins from the bacterium, together with mucosal adjuvant. in general, these vaccines are designed from a natural form of the pathogen after lysis or inactivation that differs from natural epitopes  <cit> . in response to h. pylori infection, the host triggers vigorous humoral and cellular immune responses. although h. pylori-specific antibodies have been detected at high titres in inflamed gastric mucosa and in the serum, the infection can persist and/or never resolve. this suggests that h. pylori can evade the innate and adaptive immune responses, and the latter responses triggered by h. pylori via this natural approach do not elicit effective immunity  <cit> . therefore, we hypothesise that modified immunity might be achieved via the use of mimotopes that differ from natural epitopes. this approach might be able to trigger an effective immune response that is absent in natural infections and natural-immunity-based approaches.

phage display peptide libraries are usually employed to select epitopes, which mimic the epitopes of natural proteins recognised by the immune system. such mimotopes are widely used in the development of vaccines against many diseases  <cit> , the design of molecules that act as agonists or antagonists to many key biomolecules, and the development of diagnostic reagents  <cit> . it has been reported that mimotopes induce production of protective antibodies, and consequently, become candidates for the development of potential vaccines  <cit> . mimotopes selected from random peptide libraries can drive an active immune response towards the original antigen and lead to effective immunity  <cit> .

urease plays a central role in the pathogenesis of h. pylori infection and promotes colonisation of the stomach and gut. urease enzymatically hydrolyses urea to form ammonia and bicarbonate, which neutralise gastrointestinal acids and protect the bacteria against the acidic environment of the stomach. urease is composed of two major subunits, urease a and urease b, and the latter is considered to be an excellent antigen for the induction of protective immune responses  <cit> . mucosal vaccination with lactococcus lactis that expresses urease b induces the production of igg in blood and urease-b-specific faecal iga against h. pylori infection  <cit> . recently, by transformation of the gene of urease b into carrot, zhang et al. have found that transgenic carrot plants can express the protein of urease b and effectively induce immune responses in mice  <cit> . in addition, immunisation of mice with the trivalent fusion vaccine that was constructed by genetically linking heat shock protein a , h. pylori adhesion  and urease b <dig> , has been shown to protect mice from h. pylori infection  <cit> . thus, urease b appears to be an important target for the design of a prophylactic vaccine for h. pylori.

using this technique, we have already obtained the neutralising mimotopes of lpp <dig> and catalase for h. pylori  <cit> . whether such mimotopes of urease b can be exploited to elicit functional antibody responses against h. pylori has yet to be fully investigated.

in the present study, we applied the phage display technology to identify the neutralising epitope of h. pylori urease b with specific monoclonal antibody  u <dig> that has been shown to inhibit significantly urease activity. two phage-displayed libraries were immunoscreened and the selected phage clones were analysed. the mimotopes were used to immunise balb/c mice and the immune responses for the phagotopes were evaluated.

RESULTS
expression and purification of recombinant protein
genomic dna extracted from h. pylori was used as a template for pcr. to amplify the dna that encoded urease b, which included a major part of the active site, primers were designed as described in the methods. an aliquot of the pcr mixture was analysed by agarose gel electrophoresis and a dna fragment of about  <dig> bp was detected, which corresponded to the expected position of urease b. the dna sequence was submitted to genbank . expression of recombinant protein urease b-gst was harvested from escherichia coli  and analysed by sds-page. we observed a band of  <dig> kda, which corresponded to the predicted molecular size of the fusion protein . soluble urease b-gst protein was purified by glutathione sepharose  and used as the immunogen. western blotting confirmed that sera from an h. pylori-infected patient specifically recognised the recombinant urease b protein, whereas the negative sera could not .

production and characterisation of anti-urease b mabs
five hybridomas, u001-u <dig>  were obtained by cell fusion. all mabs were igg <dig>  and showed high specificity to urease b. the titre of culture supernatant and ascites fluid was 1:32-1: <dig> and 1: <dig> -1: <dig> , respectively. triple serial concentrations of the antigen and each mab were selected to construct the corresponding curves and to extrapolate the kaff values using the formula given in the methods section. the apparent ka values for the five mabs varied from 1×108/m to 1×1012/m. mab u <dig> displayed the highest affinity of ~1012/m .

inhibition and competition studies using increasing concentrations of inhibitor or competitor mabs revealed that four of the five mabs  competed significantly with each other, which indicated recognition of the same or overlapping epitopes. however, u <dig> did not compete with the other antibodies and recognised a distinct epitope.

urease b enzymatic activity was measured and the inhibitory effects of u <dig> and u <dig> were quantitated by means of an inhibition assay. the inhibition rates were calculated by comparing mab-treated and control rates for urease b activity . u <dig> possessed the strongest inhibitory effect on urease b enzymatic activity, whereas mab u <dig> had a very moderate effect.

screening of phage display peptide libraries and characterisation of recombinant phage
to map the neutralising epitopes of urease b that were recognised by mab u <dig>  the ph.d.- <dig> and ph.d.-c7c libraries were screened with this purified mab. after three rounds of biopanning, the ratio of output/input increased  and  <dig> clones  were randomly selected. when tested by elisa for their immunoreactivity with mab u <dig>   <dig> dodecapeptide clones and  <dig> heptapeptide clones gave positive signals  with bsa cross-reactivity, and sequences of  <dig> clones for each library were tested. the deduced amino acid sequences of the corresponding inserts were identified as six different sequences for the ph.d.- <dig> library and five for the ph.d.-c7c library . the deduced amino acid sequences of selected phage clones were aligned and analysed. the amino acid sequences appearing in more than three different selected clones and matched with urease b protein were grouped as the consensus residues and +summarised with bold letters . although these clones did not match the urease b protein sequence, they shared extensive homology with each other and were clustered and classified as the conformational epitopes of urease b. peptide exxxhdm from the ph.d.- <dig> library and exxxhsm from the ph.d.-c7c library showed a good match with the urease b protein at 347- <dig> aa. amino acids e, d, h, m and s are key residues of the urease b epitope.

competitive elisa was performed to confirm the specificity of the positive clones. the results showed that the recombinant phage d <dig> clone  and phage h <dig> clone  all inhibited the mab u <dig> binding to recombinant urease b protein, whereas wild-type m <dig> phage had no effect .

immune response induced by the selected phage clones
to evaluate the immune responses induced by the selected mimotopes as vaccine candidates, phage clones d <dig> and h <dig> were chosen to immunise balb/c mice by intraperitoneal injection. western blot analysis confirmed urease b recognition by the antisera . the sera from clone d <dig>  and clone h <dig>  reacted specifically with urease b protein at ~ <dig> kda, whereas the pre-immune serum , and the serum induced by wild-type m <dig> phage  or tbs  were negative. triplicate elisa measurements demonstrated significant serum responses against urease b for each sample and specific antibody responses from clone d <dig> and h <dig> were higher than others. the immune response to wild-type m <dig> phage control was very low .

alignment results from mimox
computer-based analysis was performed to define the consensus amino acid residues of the mimotopes. mimox wrapped clustalw to align a set of mimotope sequences that were analysed using an embedded version of jalview. figure  <dig> shows the resultant analysis, which identified e, h, d and m as the consensus amino acid residues in the aligned mimotopes.

discussion
investigators have demonstrated previously that peptide mimotopes obtained from phage epitope libraries or by chemical synthesis can bind antibodies raised against native structures. in fact, peptide mimotopes have been found for most, if not all, anti-carbohydrate mabs  <cit> . moreover, peptide epitopes can mimic glycosphingolipids and oligonucleotide structures  <cit> . in the case of mimotope immunisation, several studies have shown effective responses in vivo  <cit> . furthermore, protective immune responses by mimotope immunisation have been verified in many infectious diseases  <cit> .

in the field of vaccine design, the phage-displayed mimotopes have recently been shown to be possible vaccine components that do not necessarily represent the structural equivalents of the original antigen, but provide functional images that could replace the original epitopes for vaccine development  <cit> . application of phage display technology to elucidate the essential chemical features of conformational or discontinuous epitopes that are recognised by some disease-related antibodies can provide important information about the molecular mechanisms of these diseases. the selected sets of peptides might also lead to the future design of more effective reagents for therapeutic and/or diagnostic purposes. the main advantage of the phage-based approach is that it does not produce a consensus sequence of a large pool of peptides that share a common property, but rather yields a list of peptide sequences, each of which is endowed with the same property. alignment and comparison of the amino acid sequences of the selected clones can then determine one or more consensus sequences. this approach enabled us to obtain the epitope profile of h. pylori in an efficient manner. the profiles not only reveal the important roles of each antigen, but also provide the epitope structures within the antigenic protein that is involved in the induction of successful immune responses.

in this study, we first cloned and expressed urease b of h. pylori, which was then used as an immunogen to produce mabs against this recombinant antigen by hybridoma technology. we obtained two types of mab against different epitopes of urease b and observed that mab u <dig> strongly inhibited its enzymatic activity, whereas mab u <dig> did not induce this inhibitory activity. therefore, mab u <dig> could be beneficial for the prevention of bacterial growth and attachment to the gastric mucosa, thus, we identified the neutralising epitope of this mab via two phage display libraries . the two mimotopes of urease b were characterised via affinity screening, binding, competitive inhibition and dna sequencing. most clones from the ph.d.- <dig> library share the core exxxhdm sequence, therefore, we consider that exxxhdm might be a motif of urease b because clone d <dig>  competitively inhibited u <dig> binding to urease b and induced an immune response in mice. clone h <dig>  from the ph.d.-c7c library appeared at a high frequency and had the same function as clone d <dig>  the mimotopes exxxhdm and exxxhsm, which are highly homologous with urease b residues 347- <dig> aa are also adjacent to a neutralising epitope on urease b , as reported previously  <cit> . li et al. have identified a b-cell-neutralising epitope of urease b   <cit> . these observations suggest that there are predominant antigenic epitopes on the urease b protein that are effectively targeted.

the mimotopes selected from the above-mentioned phage display libraries are not completely homologous with the known amino acid sequence of urease b. many researchers have demonstrated similar results to ours using antibodies as a tool to screen phage display library mimotopes for other target protein antigens. one reason for the disparity in mimotope urease b sequences might be that the epitopes that are recognised by the generated mabs could be a linear or conformational epitope that consists of a discontinuous amino acid sequence. in the latter case, the discontinuous amino acids could be in close spatial proximity due to the folding of peptides. we therefore speculate that amino acids e, d, h, m and s are key residues for the urease b epitope. our results suggest that sequences that contain exxxhdm and exxxhsm with potential antigenicity and immunogenicity should be further studied for their use in the development of a diagnostic reagent, and vaccine that targets h. pylori urease b. it is particularly interesting that h <dig> and h <dig> screened from the ph.d.-c7c library  are exactly the same but in inverse order. unlike the ph.d.- <dig> phage display library, the randomised sequence of the ph.d-c7c library is flanked by a pair of cysteine residues. under non-reducing conditions, the cysteine residues spontaneously form a disulfide cross-link, which results in phage display of cyclized peptides. disulphide-constrained peptide libraries have previously proven useful in identification of structural epitopes. from this study, we presume that the epitope recognised by mab u <dig> is a structural epitope. amio acid s and m, which are also included in h <dig>  are the key amino acids that constitute this structural epitope.

although the immune systems in mice and humans differ, it is still informative to check the immune responses and evaluate the potential of these experimental vaccine candidates in mice. recombinant phage can display epitopes and also bear significant adjuvant activity  <cit> , therefore, we directly used phagotopes as antigens to immunise mice. our findings showed that the phage-displayed epitope was able to mimic immunological properties of the native epitope on h. pylori urease b. furthermore, using phage-displayed epitopes as antigens, we were able to detect the antibody in the sera from immunised animals. the results suggest that the phagotopes also provide a convenient and economic approach to prepare antigens, and could be applied in an elisa-based method for the rapid diagnosis of h. pylori infection.

CONCLUSIONS
we demonstrated the feasibility of identifying important mimotopes of urease b for vaccine development by screening phage-displayed random peptide libraries with mab. the results also indicate the potential application of phagotopes as alternative vaccine components. comparison of mimotopes selected from a peptide library with mab and the original antigen sequence could lead to a better understanding of the molecular mechanisms that participate in the immune response and to the design of specific peptides for diagnostic purposes and vaccine development.

