BACKGROUND
the availability of up-to-date, executable, evidence-based medical knowledge is essential for clinical applications such as quality of care, decision support, clinical information needs and hypothesis generation. traditional work in the field has focused on constructing and maintaining knowledge bases manually using expert medical resources, but it is costly and time-consuming to establish evidence-based knowledge  <cit> . additionally, because medical knowledge constantly changes, updating the knowledge is also problematic. it is, therefore, beneficial to develop automated methods to help create evidence-based knowledge and to help keep it up to date.

it is well known that much of evidence-based knowledge in biomedicine is buried in medical literature, reference websites and books, and narrative clinical reports  <cit> . in this work, we focus on narrative clinical reports. generating associations, such as drug side effects, disease-drug therapies, and disease-symptom associations, based on phenotypic and environmental information in patient records provides knowledge concerned with the practice of medicine and the disease process, and acquisition of this knowledge has become possible with advances in natural language processing and data mining. several lines of investigations have studied automated methods for creating and updating knowledge bases from narrative reports of patient records  <cit> . those studies demonstrated that automated methods involving natural language processing  and statistics can generate meaningful associations between clinical phenotypes and drugs with great efficiency. although these associations are useful, they have limitations because the specific relationships are not known but are critical. in particular, some associations are indirectly related. for example as shown in figure 1a, using association statistics based on information in the patient record, we found that a symptom shortness of breath  was associated with a disorder hypertensive disease . sob was also found to be associated with a drug metolazone , and ml was found to be associated with hd. however, the statistical method was not able to determine whether the symptom sob was directly associated with the drug ml and therefore caused by it or treated by it, or the symptom sob was just indirectly associated with ml because it was the manifestation of the disease hd that it treats, and therefore was a confounding event. characterizing the associations as 'direct' or 'indirect' would be an important feature for a medical knowledge base to have but resolving these confounding interdependencies is complicated.

statistical adjustments have been widely used in many epidemiological studies in order to infer confounding effects of variables  <cit> . for example, people who drink more coffee may also smoke more cigarettes and drink more alcohol. determining whether coffee drinking by itself increases mortality risk, and is not just a marker for some other causal factor can be approached using statistical methods  <cit> . the basic methods are to include measures of potential confounders as covariates in a regression model, or to stratify the data on these confounders. these methods are often called "statistically controlled" or "adjusted" for potential confounders.

while statistically adjusted methods provide a rich means of inferring confounding effects of variables, they still cannot characterize the associations or differentiate between those that are direct or indirect. further research would be desirable to develop sophisticated models for this purpose.

mutual information , a measure of the degree of statistical dependence between two variables, has been introduced in biomedicine for numerous applications ranging from epidemiological data to biological data  <cit> . the simplest way to use mi is to test for a significant association between two variables. here the null hypothesis is that the two variables are independent. the distribution of the mi under the null hypothesis is  that of a chi-square variable, leading to a significance test for the presence of the association  <cit> . cox used mi redundancy to detect a causal nonlinear relation between fast food consumption and risk of campylobacteriosis in women  <cit> . as a measure of degree of temperature dependence in sex determination, mi has been used to yield insights into evolutionary, environmental and ecological changes  <cit> .

in the bioinformatics field, mi has also been applied to genomics data. butte and kohane developed algorithms that reconstruct networks based on mi. the authors inferred that edges exist between gene pairs which have an mi above a certain threshold  <cit> . more recently, mi and its properties have been applied to eliminate indirect regulatory factors in genome-wide networks. margolin et al applied mi and the data processing inequality  to characterize interactions between genes  <cit> . in their work, dpi was used to determine that there was no direct path between gene <dig> and gene <dig> based on the fact that the mi between gene <dig> and gene <dig> was less than the mi between gene <dig> and gene <dig>  and also the mi between gene <dig> and gene <dig>  <cit> .

in this paper we extend our previous work  <cit> , which establishes associations between clinical entities, and propose an information theoretic approach similar to those described above, which uses mi and dpi to help differentiate between direct and indirect associations, thereby improving our understanding of them.

RESULTS
data statistics
there were  <dig>  discharge summaries from new york-presbyterian hospital  in  <dig>  after data selection and filtering, there were  <dig>  unique drug concepts,  <dig> unique symptom concepts and  <dig> unique disease concepts in the database.

qualitative evaluation
there were  <dig> pairs that were found to be associated with the two drugs  and two diseases . among them,  <dig> pairs were randomly selected for qualitative evaluation, which included  <dig> symptoms associated with the two drugs and  <dig> symptoms associated with the two diseases. the overall precision was  <dig> , where the precision was  <dig>  and  <dig>  for drug-symptom pairs and disease-symptom pairs, respectively. a subset of the results of the evaluation is shown in table  <dig>  and the full evaluation set is provided in the supplementary files .

dx: disease; rx: drug; sx: symptom; *i: indirect association; d; direct association; e: either association; ** rs: reference standard.

discussion
characterizing clinically important associations based on statistical methods that utilize clinical information extracted from narrative clinical reports is challenging because the associations could correspond to several different relationships. for example, based on clinical knowledge, a drug-symptom association may represent the following relations: 1) a 'treat' relation where the drug is used to treat the symptom ; 2) a 'cause' relation where the drug causes the symptom ; or 3) an 'indirect' relation where the drug treats a disease which is manifested by the symptom . similarly, a disease-symptom association may represent: 1) a 'direct manifestation' where the symptom is a manifestation of the disease , 2) an 'indirect manifestation' where the symptom is a manifestation of another disease which is a frequent comorbidity of the disease in the association , or 3) a 'treatment-induced' relation where the symptom is caused by a medication or other treatment procedures . by applying medical knowledge concerning the possible relations between particular types of entities along with mi and dpi, our findings demonstrated the potential of the approach for differentiating between direct and indirect associations because it achieved a precision of 81%. more interestingly, combining evidence obtained from the approach benefited our understanding of the environmental and phenotypic information in clinical settings. for example, in figure  <dig>  two sets of evidence were combined to help characterize the association between metolazone and sob by joining graphs 1c) and 1d) to generate 1e). in c), the path between metolazone and sob was eliminated as was the path between hd and sob in d). therefore, a possible path between metolazone and sob could be meditated through hd and heart failure.

upon examination of our results, it appeared that the strengths of the drug-disease/symptom associations can be used to help infer the actual type of relationship. when reviewing the associations and their strengths, we noted that the strong drug-disease/symptom associations were mainly 'treat' relations whereas the weaker drug-disease/symptom associations were either ades or 'treat' relations for drugs with broad indications. this observation makes sense clinically and would be interesting to study further using a larger dataset.

although our results showed that the information theoretic approach could improve our understanding of the associations generated from automated methods, it is, however, still a challenge to accurately identify the nature of associations from patient records, and especially to infer causal links between drug and diseases/symptoms. first, an 'indirect' link based on the dpi method only implies that a 'direct' link has not been proven from the data we have. therefore, the smallest mi in a triangle does not necessarily imply that there is no direct link. all applications of mi and dpi in characterizing the interdependencies among entities should be understood in this context. second, determining the correct temporal sequence for environmental and phenotypic events would be helpful in removing confounding relations. temporally, an ade must follow the medication event, and a drug treatment event must follow the diagnosis event or symptom event. for example, incorrect 'cause' relations between a drug and a symptom would be eliminated if it were known that the symptom preceded the drug administration. in this paper, we restricted our research to discharge summaries documenting a single hospital stay and to ades occurring during that time. we assumed that symptoms associated with a drug could be ades of the drug or manifestations of diseases/symptoms the drug treats. similarly, we assumed that symptoms associated with a disease could be manifestations of that disease or manifestations of diseases highly associated with that disease. including contextual filters consisting of the sections where the clinical information appears, as described in more detail in the method section, was important. for drug-disease/symptom associations, preliminary studies showed that a simple strategy without the contextual filters failed to find many ades, particularly rare ones. this was likely because symptoms induced by drugs appeared to be highly diluted by those associated with the diseases the drugs treated since the 'treat' relations occurred much more frequently. our strategy for estimating the temporal sequences was very naïve. we will explore development of more sophisticated temporal models and use of a more comprehensive longitudinal record including outpatient visits and pharmacy orders.

there are a number of other factors affecting precision. one factor is that some symptoms may have been correctly characterized by our method as 'ades' but were considered wrong in our evaluation because they have not been discovered yet. another factor is that another association within the dpi triangle could also be indirect thereby confounding our analysis and demonstrating that our method requires more complexity. for example, our method incorrectly determined that the association between rosiglitazone and headache was indirect because it considered the mis between rosiglitazone and diabetes, and diabetes and headache. however the latter association is also indirect. based on clinical knowledge we know that diabetes is highly associated with hypertension which includes the manifestation headache. this, however, is not due to a limitation of the method presented in this paper because adjusting all possible confounders in an analysis is beyond the scope of the current study, and is challenging for statistical and information theoretic methods in general. another problem is due to an information gap that exists in patient records because patient records are fragmented and clinicians may document certain events and ignore others.

our study had a few limitations. first, the study was restricted to discharge summaries of inpatients only. as a result, our findings should be understood in the context of a sick patient population. however, the same method could be used with outpatient reports, which would include a more balanced population. a second limitation of this investigation is that the evaluation was performed on only  <dig> associations involving only two drugs and two diseases. a third limitation is that one of the co-authors  generated the reference standard using the reference resources. a more comprehensive evaluation involving a larger sample size and more curators will be undertaken in future work.

CONCLUSIONS
the availability of up-to-date, executable, evidence-based medical knowledge is essential in biomedicine for many applications. automatic methods, which are aimed at acquiring knowledge from clinical sources, such as clinical reports, have shown promise for constructing and updating practice-based knowledge. in this study, we applied an information theoretic approach involving mi and dpi to improve our understanding of associations consisting of environmental and phenotypic entities occurring in the ehr that were obtained using nlp and statistical methods. the results achieved by the methodology demonstrate its usefulness for generating executable medical knowledge, which can be used in important clinical applications, such as pharmacovigilance.

