BACKGROUND
dna microarray technology provides a powerful tool for characterizing gene expression on a genome scale. while the technology has been widely used in discovery-based medical and basic biological research, its direct application in clinical practice and regulatory decision-making has been questioned  <cit> . a few key issues, including the reproducibility, reliability, compatibility and standardization of microarray analysis and results, must be critically addressed before any routine usage of microarrays in clinical laboratory and regulated areas. considerable effort has been dedicated to investigate these important issues, most of which focused on the compatibility across different microarray platforms, laboratories and analytical methods. however, in the absence of a "gold standard" or common reference for gene expression measurements, these evaluations and comparisons have often yield subjective and conflicting conclusions  <cit> .

real-time pcr is often referred to as the "gold standard" for gene expression measurements  <cit> , due to its advantages in detection sensitivity, sequence specificity, large dynamic range as well as its high precision and reproducible quantitation compared to other techniques . the performance capabilities and ease-of-use of taqman based real-time pcr chemistries and instrumentation has led to widespread use of this technology as a preferred method for quantifying gene expression as well as for independent validation of microarray results  <cit> . taqman® gene expression assays  utilize the 5' nuclease activity of amplitaq gold® dna polymerase to hydrolyze a target-specific probe  bound to its target amplicon during pcr . each taqman gene expression assay consists of two sequence-specific primers defining the endpoints of the amplicon and a taqman probe with a fluorescent reporter dye  and a nonfluorescent quencher moiety attached to the 5' and 3' ends. together, the primer set and the taqman probe provide two levels of sequence specificity. problems associated with dna contamination are minimized by designing primers that span at least one intron of the genomic sequence whenever possible. during each pcr extension cycle, the taq dna polymerase cleaves the reporter dye from the probe and once separated from the quencher. the reporter dye emits its characteristic fluorescence to allow measurement of pcr amplification as it occurs, cycle by cycle, during the highly reproducible exponential phase of pcr. this enables highly accurate and precise quantitation of gene expression over a large dynamic range.

the goal of this study is to construct a large data set based on taqman® gene expression assays and real-time pcr technology and use this data set as the reference set to objectively evaluate the gene expression measurements from two different commercial microarray platforms. the two representative commercial microarray platforms we evaluated are the applied biosystems human genome survey microarrays and the agilent human whole genome oligo microarrays. we chose these two platforms because:  they represent a widely used single-color array system and two-color array system, respectively;  both utilize long oligonucleotide probes  to achieve the best balanced sensitivity and specificity in gene expression measurements  <cit> ; and  both take advantage of the latest genomic information for gene coverage and probe design, which means that the cross-mapping between the two platforms is more extensive and less ambiguous than with some other platforms. table  <dig> outlines some of the key features of the two microarray platforms and taqman® gene expression assays based real-time pcr technology.

RESULTS
target selection for real-time pcr validation
in order to conduct a comprehensive and unbiased survey of the microarrays' performance, we selected the gene targets for real-time pcr validation based on the following strategies:  ensure a large enough number of validation targets to provide representative overviews of the microarray performance;  select genes with expression levels spanning a wide dynamic range;  select genes that are represented by both microarray platforms. validation targets were selected across the expression range from the  <dig>  genes cross-mapped on both platforms – the "common genes" . because single-color microarray systems, in general, represent more straightforward signal-abundance relationship than two-color microarray system which based on relative quantification, we used an existing applied biosystem data set as a reference for binning by signal. specifically, average signals from the four technical replicates of the liver sample generated by applied biosystem expression arrays were sorted and binned into  <dig> bins with each bin containing equal numbers of genes.  <dig> genes were selected randomly from each bin yielding  <dig> gene targets; another  <dig> targets were selected in the same fashion from data generated from the uhr sample. finally,  <dig> targets were chosen randomly from differentially expressed genes  across the liver, lung and brain samples based on anova analysis . as a result, a total of  <dig> genes were selected for real-time pcr validation using taqman® gene expression assays . for genes with multiple taqman assays targeting different exon or exon-exon junctions, one assay was randomly selected without efforts in matching its location to that of corresponding probe on either microarray platform.

intra-platform reproducibility
for each microarray and real-time pcr platform, parallel gene expression data were collected on each of the four total rna samples ) in quadruplet. for the two-color agilent arrays, comparative hybridization was performed using incorporation of cy <dig> for brain/lung/liver rna and cy <dig> for uhr rna . using liver tissue as a representative example, the reproducibility of technical replicates for the two microarray platforms is illustrated in figure  <dig>  all  <dig>  common genes are represented in these plots. the panel a shows the ma plots representing the pair-wise array-to-array reproducibility of each microarray platform; the panel b shows the coefficients of variation  for each array platform, as a function of signal intensity, across all four technical replicates. in order to make a more direct comparison between the two microarray platforms, only red  channel signals were used for illustrating the reproducibility of signal intensity for agilent arrays in these plots. because two-color systems, such as agilent microarrays, measure relative expression level  of a given sample vs. a common reference sample, we also generated scatter plots of the expression level of two technical replicates of liver tissue : for the applied biosystems arrays, expression levels are represented as direct signal intensities; for the agilent arrays, the expression levels are represented as relative expression level compared to the reference sample . in general, both array platforms achieve relatively good intra-platform reproducibility, in particular for the population of genes above detection threshold defined by each platform : for applied biosystems arrays,  <dig> % of the detectable genes fall within 2-fold change between technical replicates; the cv range is between  <dig> and 22%; for agilent arrays,  <dig> % of the detectable genes fall within 2-fold change between technical replicates, the cv range is from  <dig> to 18%; compared to applied biosystems expression arrays, the cv distribution of agilent arrays appears to be less dependent on signal intensity. when the intra-platform reproducibility of microarrays was compared to that of taqman gene expression assay based real-time pcr, using the  <dig> common genes with data in the three platforms, the real-time pcr data shows significantly lower in cv across the whole dynamic range compared to the two microarray platforms .

signal detection sensitivity and accuracy
the dynamic range for most of the commercial and home brewed microarray platforms usually falls into 3– <dig> orders of magnitude  <cit> , while taqman based real-time pcr can achieve 6– <dig> orders of magnitude dynamic range  <cit> . the larger dynamic range imparts taqman gene expression assays with superior detection sensitivity ; we therefore used the taqman gene expression assay data set as the reference to evaluate the performance of the two microarray platforms in terms of detection sensitivity and accuracy. first, genes that are detectable  and not detectable  were determined for each tissue according to detection thresholds defined by each manufacturer . we then constructed a contingency table, in which taqman® gene expression assays'present/absent calls were used as the "ground truth", and concordance with microarrays' present/absent calls were determined by calculating the true positives, true negatives, false positives, and false negatives . based on this matrix, the detection sensitivity and specificity for each microarray platform were determined. as listed in table  <dig>  the detection sensitivity and specificity, reflected by the true positive rate  and 1- false positive rate , are  <dig>  % and  <dig>  % for applied biosystems expression arrays, and  <dig>  % and  <dig>  % for agilent arrays, respectively.

correlation between real-time pcr and microarrays in fold change measurements of pair-wise tissues
because different gene expression platforms utilize different technology, quantitation, and normalization methods, the absolute signal values for each platform tend to be somewhat arbitrary and not suitable for correlation analysis across different platforms. we therefore evaluated the correlation between microarrays and real-time pcr in fold change measurements between different tissues. fold change metrics tend to cancel out systematic platform biases in absolute signal values: in addition, this is the most biologically meaningful metric. for fold change calculations, the median expression level of the four technical replicates measured for each tissue was used for each platform. for agilent arrays, the expression level was measured as a ratio of tissue vs. uhr. for comparison of fold change between pair-wise tissues, scatter plots were generated between log <dig> fold change determined by microarrays and by taqman gene expression assays , for every possible combination of tissue pairs, brain vs. liver, brain vs. lung and liver vs. lung, . because the uhr sample was used as the reference channel in agilent array data set, we did not include the direct fold change analysis between human tissues and uhr sample to avoid potential inconsistency caused by the two-dye bias. for each pair-wise comparison, genes were filtered based on real-time pcr detection thresholds . a robust linear regression fitting using bisquare weights for all data points, was performed for the scatter plot for each tissue. the applied biosystems data set showed better correlation with real-time pcr measurements with r <dig> values ranging from  <dig> – <dig> , while the r <dig> values for agilent arrays range from  <dig> – <dig> . in addition, the slopes of the linear regression fitting curves indicated that the applied biosystems data set has overall less ratio compression of the extent of fold change  compared to the agilent array data set . fold change compression in both microarray platforms, in particular agilent arrays, is more evident when lowess smoothing fitting was used instead of a linear regression fitting . the estimated range of fold changes , for taqman gene expression assays, is from - <dig> to  <dig>  for applied biosystems arrays is - <dig> to  <dig>  and for agilent arrays, is - <dig> to  <dig>  respectively.

correlation between real-time pcr and microarrays in expression profiles across all tissues
in addition to evaluating each pair-wise combination of tissues in turn, we also evaluated the agreement in the rank order of tissues for each gene's expression profiles across all human tissues analyzed in this study  determined by real-time pcr and microarrays. the gene expression profile for each gene across the three tissues was determined using the median expression level of the four technical replicates  and rank-ordered across the three tissues. using profiles determined by taqman gene expression assays as the standard, the spearman rank-order correlation coefficient  between each microarray platform and real-time pcr result was calculated for each gene. because the spearman's correlation can only attain a few different values with three data points, we separated genes into four groups, each representing a different level of agreement with the taqman real-time pcr reference , consistent , less consistent , and anti-correlation ). as shown in figure 5b, applied biosystems arrays showed 40%  of genes with perfect agreement and  <dig> %  genes with anti-correlation, while agilent arrays showed 34%  of genes with perfect agreement and  <dig> %  of genes with anti-correlation. it is noteworthy that we used all the genes to calculate the correlations without filtering out genes that are not differentially expressed or not detectable across the three tissues. the inherent noise in these genes may partially account for the relatively high number of genes in the less consistent and anti-correlation classes. another factor may potentially contribute to the anti-correlation is the difference in probe designs for microarrays and taqman expression assays. this factor will be discussed in more detail in the discussion session.

sensitivity and accuracy in differential expression analysis
finally, we evaluated the performance of the two microarray platforms in detecting differential expression using multiple statistical approaches. because t-statistics based statistical tests take technical variations into consideration when determining true biological differences, they have become one of the most commonly applied methods to determine differentially expressed genes from microarray results. we therefore examined the sensitivity and accuracy of this approach using the taqman real-time pcr data as the "reference" data sets. differentially expressed genes were determined between pair-wise tissues for both microarray and taqman real-time pcr reference data sets as p-value <  <dig>  based on a student's t-test. to evaluate the accuracy of using t-test to define the "true" differential expressions in the reference set, we performed power calculation  on the taqman reference data sets. our results showed that, with four technical replicates, 100% power can be achieved to detect a  <dig> -fold change, and at least 90% power can be achieved to detect a  <dig> -fold change with p-value <  <dig>  in the taqman reference data sets [see additional file 7). to control for type i errors , t-statistics was performed with or without a 5% fdr correction  and the results are shown in figure  <dig> . to dissect the accuracy of microarrays in detecting differentially expressed genes at different expression levels, we plotted the corresponding tpr  and fdr of each microarray platform as a function of the average expression levels for the three tissues. as shown in figure  <dig> , at the highest expression level, both microarray platforms displayed reasonably good sensitivities : 70–72% tpr for applied biosystems arrays and 58–65% tpr for agilent arrays; the performance drops as the expression level decreases, and at the lowest expression level, the tpr is 20–30% for applied biosystems arrays and 15–20% for agilent arrays. a more dramatic change can be seen for the fdr plots . for both microarray platforms, a relative constant level of false findings  was observed for genes with high and medium expression levels , after which fdr almost doubles  and triples  for genes at low expression levels. another approach is to forgo using a t-test to define differently expressed genes with the taqman data; but considering it the reference or gold standard data use the unfiltered fold change as the measure of differential expression. we therefore defined the differentially expressed genes in the taqman data set as genes with an average fold change >  <dig>  between pair-wise tissues, while for microarray data sets, the differently expressed genes were defined as p-value <  <dig>  and average fold change >  <dig>  between pair-wise tissues. as shown in figure  <dig>  panel c, while the distribution of the true positive rates for both microarray platforms were similar as the ones observed previously, the true positive rates appeared to improve slightly especially for genes with lower expression levels. interestingly, the false discovery rates also appeared to drop slightly as the expression level decreased. this result may be explained by the different criteria used to define the differentially expressed genes in the "reference" data sets and in the microarray data sets. since a t-test was used for microarray data sets on top of a fold change cutoff to define differentially expressed genes, fewer genes with lower expression levels and therefore higher variability will pass the t-test cutoffs. on the other hand, because the taqman reference data sets used a constant fold change cutoff without a t-test to define differentially expressed genes, more low expressed genes will potentially pass this cutoff . as a result, the true positive rate for the microarray platforms appears to increase while the false discovery rate shows a decreasing trend for genes at the low expression levels.

another interesting measure of microarrays performance is their sensitivity in detecting relatively low fold changes. to address this question, we determined the differentially expressed genes as described above and plotted the tpr for each microarray platform as a function of the fold changes determined by the real-time pcr data. as shown in figure  <dig>  the sensitivity in detecting lower fold changes  is dramatically lower for both microarray platforms: with tpr 50–65% for applied biosystems arrays and tpr 40–55% for agilent arrays; the sensitivity becomes relatively stable at higher fold changes  .

multiple testing with fdr adjustments helps to reduce false positives in t-statistics and has been widely applied in differential expression analysis of microarray data. to investigate the overall accuracy of microarrays in detecting differential expression at different fdr levels, a receiver operating characteristics  curve was constructed for each microarray platform . in this graph, a series of fdr levels  was applied to microarray data sets, while significance threshold was kept at p <  <dig>  for taqman real-time platform. at each fdr level indicated by the dashed lines, the corresponding true positive rate  was plotted against the false positive rate . as shown in figure  <dig>  when the stringency was increased for microarray platforms with increased fdr , the sensitivity of microarrays dramatically increased from 0% to 60% for applied biosystems arrays and from 0% to 47% for agilent arrays, however, the specificity of both arrays dropped in the mean time. the false positive rate increased from 0% to 42% for applied biosystems arrays and increased from 0% to 47% for agilent arrays, respectively.

geo accession
the complete data sets of this study can be accessed from gene expression omnibus   <cit> , accession id gse <dig> 

discussion
although microarrays have been extensively used as discovery tools for biological and biomedical studies, the challenge remains whether this technology can be reliably applied in clinical practice and regulatory decision making, where high precision and accuracy in performance are required. a series of studies have been reported on evaluating performance across various commercial and home-brewed microarray platforms, however, most of these studies focused on evaluating the level of concordance across different microarray platforms. while these analyses emphasized critical issues such as the compatibility across different microarray platforms, they tended to result in conflicting conclusions because the "relative to relative" nature of such approaches. what is lacking in these studies is a "gold standard" data set that allows an evaluation of different microarray platforms based on a common "ground truth". one commonly used approach for setting up such "ground truth" is by spiking in bacterial synthetic transcripts with known concentrations in series of dilutions over a large dynamic range  <cit> , however, the limitation of this approach is that the information is asserted from very limited transcripts, and it is also very prone to experimental artifacts. an alternative strategy to set up the "ground truth" is using a well accepted reference data set generated by a reliable independent technology, such as real-time pcr for gene expression measurements. in this study, we have constructed a large reference data set of gene expression measurements using taqman gene expression assays and real-time pcr technology. we also demonstrated how to use such a data set to evaluate the performance of different microarray platforms.

we first evaluated the detection sensitivity and accuracy of the two selected microarray platforms using taqman gene expression assays and real-time pcr data set as the reference. we chose to use the detection thresholds that are recommended by each manufacturer as the base line for comparison. these recommended thresholds are somewhat arbitrary and are not necessarily based on the same parameters, nevertheless, these detection thresholds are widely adopted by researchers and therefore evaluating their effect on detection sensitivity and accuracy can prove useful in further refining them and better interpreting microarray results. our results showed that both of the microarray platforms can achieve reasonably good sensitivity in signal detection, while the specificity tends to be relatively low, especially for agilent microarrays, with a ~ 50% false positive rate. it is worth noting that the differences in detection sensitivity and specificity we observed could be caused by less optimal bioinformatics/algorithms used to define the detection thresholds and do not necessarily reflect the inherent qualities or accuracies of the respective platforms. several strategies could be developed to improve the detection specificity of microarrays, including improving probe design, hybridization conditions which would minimize the effects of cross-hybridization, as well as improving image analysis software/algorithms to facilitate more accurate signal quantification and detection thresh-holding.

this study also evaluated correlation in detecting differential expression between microarray platforms and taqman real-time pcr platform . our analysis also provided a high-resolution examination of the performance of microarrays in detecting differential expression at different expression levels as well as at different fold changes. we validated that microarrays have acceptable sensitivity and accuracy in detecting differential expression, especially for genes with high and medium expression levels and for detecting > 2-fold changes. these results support the notion that microarrays, as exploratory tools for genome-wide gene expression screening, can achieve acceptable reliability in performance.

our study also characterized some of the limitations of microarrays, in particular the ratio compression phenomena as shown in figure  <dig>  a certain level of fold change compression is expected for microarray platforms due to various technical limitations, including limited dynamic range, signal saturations, and cross-hybridizations. the two-color system analyzed in this study , appears to have more severe ratio compression, which could be attributed to several factors:  the concentration of the 60mer probes on agilent microarrays depends on the coupling efficiency of the in-situ oligonucleotide synthesis, and on probe length. lower efficiency may result in low probe concentration and therefore limit the dynamic range of the platform;  two-color systems such as agilent arrays, utilize two different fluorescent dyes that have different dynamic ranges and quantum yields. these intrinsic differences may be partially adjusted by intra-array intensity-dependent normalization but may not be completely eliminated. theoretically, dye swapping experiments may help to further adjust these biases introduced by two different dyes. in reality, however, dye-swapping is not always practical due to cost and limitations in sample amount. finally, ratio compression can be also introduced by certain data-processing/normalization algorithms that aim to reduce variances . our analysis suggests that the optimal balance between the two parameters will eventually determine the overall accuracy in detection of differential expression, for a given microarray platform. other microarray limitations revealed by our study include the significant decrease in overall accuracy of differential expression detection at low expression level  and the relatively poor sensitivity in detecting small fold changes . although these limitations have been previously suspected by many, the large scale "reference" data set provided by our study provides a more quantitative view of these limitations for the first time.

lastly, it is noteworthy that although taqman gene expression assay based real-time pcr is a well accepted "gold standard" for gene expression measurements, we are aware that it has its own limitations and is also affected by experimental errors. in addition, different strategies in probe designs for microarrays  and taqman gene expression assays  may also account for a small percentage of the discordance observed between the microarrays and real-time pcr results. for example, the gene expression profiles of gene nm_ <dig> measured by both microarray platforms are highly correlated with each other but anti-correlates with the profile measured by taqman gene expression assay . nm_ <dig> is a relative long transcript with  <dig> bases and  <dig> exons. while the taqman assay was designed against the exon  <dig> and exon  <dig> junctions, which is >  <dig> kb from the 3' end, the microarray probes were usually designed close to 3' end . in this particular instance, the data suggest that the taqman gene expression assay is potentially detecting additional splice variants than the array probes. this difference in probe designs may result in quantifying different population of transcripts  by microarrays or taqman assays. these factors may change the absolute metrics ; nevertheless, they would not change the general conclusions and trends we observed. we think that most of the discrepancies between taqman based real-time pcr and microarrays are due to the sensitivity limits of a pcr based approach vs. a hybridization based approach. it is clear that at high expression levels, there is a much better correlation between the two approaches . these factors may change the absolute metrics ; nevertheless, they would not change the general conclusions and trends we observed. we think that most of the discrepancies between taqman based real-time pcr and microarrays are due to the sensitivity limits of a pcr based approach vs. a hybridization based approach. it is clear that at high expression levels, there is a much better correlation between the two approaches .

CONCLUSIONS
our study provides one of the largest "reference" data set of gene expression measurements using taqman® gene expression assay based real-time pcr technology. we also provide novel analysis approaches for evaluating different micorarray platforms as well as performing cross-platform correlations. as a result of this study, we recommend using "reference" data sets generated by real-time pcr to evaluate critical aspects of microarray platforms, including signal detection threshold, fold change correlation between pair-wise tissues, profile correlation across multiple tissues, as well as sensitivity and specificity in signal detection and differential expression. we conclude that microarrays are invaluable discovery tools with acceptable reliability for genome-wide gene expression screening. understanding the limitations of microarrays characterized by our study will help us to better apply this technology and interpret its results more cautiously.

