BACKGROUND
gibbons are a family  of ape species endemic to the rainforests of the mainland and islands of southeast asia, including the malay peninsula, sumatra, borneo, java and mentawai islands . they are the closest relatives of the great ape family  to which humans belong, and offer an interesting opportunity for comparisons. like present-day great apes, the extant gibbons comprise four genera, which feature strikingly different numbers of chromosomes and extensive rearrangement of chromosomes  <cit> . some  <dig> to  <dig> gibbon species have been recognized and classified into the genera hylobates, hoolock, nomascus, and symphalangus, indicating that gibbons consist of many more species than the seven species comprising the current day great apes  <cit> . in contrast to the geographically-discontinuous distribution of current-day great apes, gibbons now or recently live in close geographic proximity to one another. moreover, the divergence of the four extant great ape genera  apparently occurred over a time span of more than five million years  <cit> , whereas the radiation of the four gibbon genera may have occurred within less than two million years  <cit> . due to their close relationship to great apes, high taxonomic diversity and rapid diversification, gibbons have increasingly been the subject of molecular genetic analyses .

analyses of chromosomal number and structure and sequences of mitochondrial dna  and nuclear loci consistently find that all four gibbon genera are monophyletic  <cit> , although the exact phylogenetic relationships among the genera are still debated. different phylogenetic trees have been proposed, and a basal position of nomascus was indicated based on sequences of mtdna control region and cytochrome b gene  <cit>  but this result conflicts with the basal placement of the genus hoolock in studies based on sequences of mtdna nd3-nd <dig> genes  <cit> , the concatenated sequences of mtdna, y-linked and x-linked loci  <cit> , sequences of autosomal and x chromosomal regions  <cit>  and chromosomal analysis  <cit> , as well as with the basal position of the symphalangus genus in an alu-based phylogeny of gibbons  <cit> . moreover, the evolutionary relationships within the two polyspecific genera, hylobates and nomascus, have been the particular focus of research using sequence data from the mtdna and nuclear loci . mtdna cytochrome b gene sequence analyses suggested that the divergences among nomascus species accompanied a successive migration from north to south in which the two northernmost species n. hainanus and n. nasutus diverged first, followed by n. concolor and the two groups of southern species  diverged last . in contrast to the pattern found in the genus nomascus, the biogeographic scenario for the dispersal of hylobates species is still in question  <cit> . nonetheless, the phylogenetic tree inferences from several datasets of mtdna sequences  and the concatenated sequences of the mtdna, y-linked and x-linked loci  <cit>  suggest that the two northernmost mainland species  may have branched off earlier than other hylobates gibbons, although the tree inferences from other sequence datasets of mtdna cytochrome b gene and y chromosome placed h. klossii <cit> , h. moloch <cit>  or h. muelleri  as basal species in hylobates phylogeny figure  <dig> 

although sequence data have thus been utilized to elucidate the phylogenetic relationships of hylobates and nomascus gibbons, most of these data were derived from single uniparentally inherited loci such as the maternally-inherited mtdna  <cit>  or the y chromosome  <cit> . while mtdna in particular provides useful information due to its rapid rate of evolution, dna sequence data from multiple autosomal loci are needed to provide more comprehensive insights into the evolutionary relationships of species  <cit> . recent advances in sequencing technologies have facilitated the gathering of multilocus sequence data from multiple individuals with extreme efficiency and thereby it has been feasible to acquire such data to explore evolutionary questions on species or population levels, even for non-model species  <cit> . a number of analytical approaches have been developed that process multilocus data to estimate parameters in a coalescent framework with use of the bayesian markov chain monte carlo  method, which enables multilocus species tree inference in contrast to the trees inferred from single genes or concatenated sequences of multiple genes . in addition, multilocus data are suitable for the investigation of whether the divergence of closely related species was accompanied by gene flow .

these coalescent-based approaches provide an opportunity to use multilocus sequence data to re-examine the phylogenetic relationships of hylobates species and nomascus species through reconstruction of species trees as well as to investigate the role of gene flow in the evolutionary histories of these gibbons. among the hylobates species, three areas of sympatry with natural hybridization have been documented between species through the observations of wild populations: h. agilis and h. lar in the north-western part of peninsular malaysia, h. lar and h. pileatus in eastern central thailand and, h. muelleri and h. albibarbis in central borneo, respectively  <cit> . also, small areas of sympatry between n. concolor and n. leucogenys in regions of northern vietnam, northwestern laos and southern china have been reported and possible hybrid individuals between n. concolor and n. leucogenys have been identified  <cit> . a recent study of a large amount of nuclear sequence data  from a limited number of individuals detected a signal of gene flow between n. gabriellae and n. leucogenys <cit> . these findings highlighted the possibility that gene flow may occur between other pairs of co-generic gibbon species during their divergences as well.

in this study, we generated multilocus autosomal dna sequence data to investigate the evolutionary histories of gibbons. specifically, we sequenced  <dig> autosomal noncoding loci, which in previous studies were useful for elucidating evolutionary histories of great apes, from each of  <dig> gibbon individuals. we examined the levels of genetic variation and differentiation among the gibbon taxa, and further compare levels of genetic variation and patterns of genetic diversity between the gibbon and great ape families. we reconstructed evolutionary relationships among the sampled gibbon taxa using coalescent species tree analysis employed in the program *beast and we further applied the isolation-with-migration  model implemented in the program ima <dig> to assess the possibility of gene flow between closely related species.

RESULTS
levels of genetic diversity in gibbons
we amplified and sequenced a total of ~ <dig>  kb from  <dig> autosomal noncoding loci from each of  <dig> gibbon individuals . these individuals represent six hylobates, four nomascus and one symphalangus species . we observed a total of  <dig> polymorphic sites among all gibbons. the nucleotide diversity levels were generally similar among regions with relatively lower diversity levels in locus  <dig> and locus  <dig> . the average values of π and θw across all loci were calculated for genera and species . of the three sampled genera, we observed the highest diversity level in hylobates  and the lowest level in symphalangus , consistent with results based on sequence data of mtgenomes and y chromosomes , although comparison to the genus hoolock cannot be made since these data are lacking from this genus, which is not in captivity in europe and so not readily sampled by us. however, comparative sequence data from 1140 bp of the mitochondrial cytochrome b gene and from  <dig> nuclear loci , also suggested that hylobates had highest genetic diversity and symphalangus was the least diverse among the four existing gibbon genera .

l is the averaged sequence length; s is the number of polymorphic sites; π and θw are two standard diversity indices calculated across  <dig> gibbon individuals. athe chromosomal location according to the human genome; bdxy is the average pairwise divergence per site  <cit>  compared to chimpanzees  <cit> .

n is the number of chromosomes; l is the averaged sequence length; π and θw are two standard diversity indices. athe loci were aligned to the human chromosomes  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and x. bmtgenome sequences excluding the control regions from the  <dig> gibbon individuals were used for the diversity index calculation; ccytochrome b gene sequences from  <dig> gibbons were used for the diversity index calculation; dautosomal sequences of  <dig> regions from nine bonobo and  <dig> chimpanzee individuals were used for the diversity index calculation.

we next compared the diversity levels among eight extant genera of the two ape families, hominidae and hylobatidae. among great apes, sequence data from 16– <dig> autosomal loci, of which  <dig> were the same ones analyzed in this work on gibbons, found that orangutans  had the highest diversity level  as compared to the other three genera of great apes   <cit> . interestingly, we observed diversity levels in the gibbon genera nomascus  and hylobates  as high, or even higher than that seen in orangutans. the higher diversity level of hylobates than that of pongo also was observed in the sequence data of the  <dig> nuclear loci   <cit> . although there are just four genera in each of the two ape families, the high taxonomic diversity of 14– <dig> nominal gibbon species stands in contrast to the mere seven species of great apes  <cit> .

within hylobates, we observed considerable variation in the diversity levels among six hylobates species , and found within h. muelleri  a level over six times higher than that of h. pileatus . this finding of relatively higher diversity of h. muelleri, also seen from mtgenome sequences , was also evident in a study of  <dig> nuclear loci employing eight individuals representing five hylobates species    <cit> . a recent study of the mtdna cytochrome b gene, which used fairly comprehensive sampling of extant gibbon species including the recently identified h. albibarbis, provided estimates consistent with those based on mtgenome and nuclear datasets of relatively small sample sizes  and supported the inference that h. muelleri may be the most genetically diverse hylobates species  <cit> . among the four sampled nomascus species, we observed that n. gabriellae and n. leucogenys had similar diversity levels, which concurs with diversity estimates based on sequences of mtdna cytochrome b and  <dig> nuclear loci .

sequence divergence and genetic differentiation between gibbon taxa
we also investigated the patterns of inter-genus and interspecies sequence divergence and genetic differentiation between gibbons by calculating the average number of differences per site  and pairwise fst statistics, respectively, between genera . using our sequence data from  <dig> autosomal loci, we observed levels of sequence divergence and genetic differentiation between our three sampled gibbon genera  similar to levels observed based on analysis of  <dig> nuclear loci  for the same three genera   <cit> . these two estimates were slightly increased when the hoolock  was included   <cit> . we observed slightly lower sequence divergence between nomascus and symphalangus  as compared to between hylobates and nomascus  and between hylobates and symphalangus . these inter-genus sequence divergence estimates are similar to those observed between african apes of different genera  but much lower than the levels between orangutans and any of the four african ape species   <cit> . moreover, we also observed lower levels of genetic differentiation between the three gibbon genera  as compared to the levels between humans and orangutans , between human and gorillas  or between human and chimpanzees   <cit> . in sum, these results are consistent with a relatively low level of genetic differentiation among the gibbon genera as compared to among the great ape genera.

below diagonal: πb  values; above diagonal: fst values.

for the differentiation levels between species within the same genus, we found that within the genus hylobates, the πb values were higher in the species comparisons including h. pileatus  than those in other species pairs  . relatively higher fst values were consistently found in species pairs including h. pileatus  compared to those of other species pairs . the higher pairwise πb and fst values estimated between h. pileatus and other hylobates species were in general agreement with results obtained using data from  <dig> nuclear loci, in which five hylobates species  were sampled and the highest πb and fst values were observed between h. muelleri and h. pileatus  and between h. agilis and h. pileatus , respectively  <cit> . the relatively high levels of divergence and genetic differentiation between h. pileatus and other hylobates species are consistent with phylogenetic analyses suggesting that h. pileatus diverged initially from the others during hylobates evolution . moreover, although analyses using sequences of  <dig> nuclear loci found no evidence for genetic differentiation between h. moloch and h. muelleri   <cit> , our data from  <dig> autosomal loci showed a level of genetic differentiation between these two species  similar to the level between eastern and western chimpanzees   <cit> . within the genus nomascus, the levels of divergence and genetic differentiation between our four sampled nomascus species   were similar to those between bonobos and three chimpanzee subspecies   <cit> .

patterns of gibbon divergence
to elucidate the divergence processes in gibbon evolutionary histories, we analyzed our multi-locus sequence data using two coalescent-based approaches: the reconstruction of a species tree and the isolation-with-migration  model for population/species divergence. we first inferred a species tree for the sampled gibbon species using the coalescent-based bayesian mcmc method implemented in the program *beast  <cit>  and the sequence data of  <dig> autosomal loci. we found that the monophyly of the three sampled gibbon genera previously suggested was well supported  <cit>  . within the genus hylobates, our species tree of biparentally inherited multilocus data suggests that the species h. pileatus is the most basal taxon and the four species with geographic distribution restricted to the sundaic inlands  cluster together  . these results are largely consistent with those in the single locus mtdna analyses  as well in the tree generated using a concatenated dataset of mtdna, y-linked and x-linked loci  <cit> . however, our data here are insufficient to resolve the relationships among the four sundaic species while the mtgenome tree showed closer relationships of h. agilis-h. muelleri and h. klossii-h. moloch . because of a higher mutation rate, a smaller effective population and consequently a shorter coalescence time than typical autosomal loci, the uniparentally inherited mtdna is known to be conducive to resolving phylogenetic relationships of recently diverging taxa  <cit> . the divergence of the six hylobates species analyzed here was estimated to occur over a short interval of about one million years  <cit>  and thus an even shorter time for the divergence of four sundaic species could be expected. compared to the biparentally inherited autosomal loci, the mtgenome sequence data provided higher resolution for disentangling the phylogenetic relationships of the four sundaic species.

we next used a program  based on the isolation-with-migration model  <cit>  to estimate multiple demographic parameters  using mcmc simulation. since the number of loci in our dataset  was insufficient for including all five sampled hylobates species in a single ima <dig> analysis, we conducted pairwise comparisons for these species as well as for the four nomascus species studied. species pairs were chosen for analysis based upon their close phylogenetic relationships or geographical proximity and consequent potential hybridization between them. namely, ima <dig> analyses were run for comparisons of seven hylobates species pairs and for comparisons of three nomascus species pairs . the marginal posterior probability distributions of divergence time parameters showed clear peaks and bounds within the prior distribution for all pairwise comparisons except for n. gabriellae × n. siki which was tailed at the upper limit of the parameter prior space and hence returned an unreliable 95% highest posterior density  interval . for hylobates species, we found that the divergence time estimates were fairly consistent with the branching patterns of the species tree: , h. lar), h. pileatus) . in the seven comparisons involving hylobates, we found the oldest divergence time estimates between h. lar and h. pileatus  . following that, relatively younger time estimates were observed in pairwise comparisons between h. lar and the three species h. agilis, h. moloch and h. muelleri , which were older than the estimates of comparisons among the three species  clustered together in the species tree . likewise, the younger estimate of divergence between n. leucogenys and n. siki  as compared to those between n. leucogenys and n. gabriellae and between n. gabriellae and n. siki  was consistent with branching patterns showing the prior divergence of n. gabriellae and the later divergence of the clade containing n. leucogenys and n. siki in the species tree .

missing values are where the hpd of the parameters could not be reliably estimated by ima2; m <dig> is migration rate into species  <dig> from species 2; m <dig> is migration rate into species  <dig> from species 1; t is the time since the species  <dig> and  <dig> split in years; ne <dig>  ne <dig> and nea are effective population sizes for species  <dig>  species  <dig> and their ancestral population, respectively; 2n1m <dig> is population migration rate into species  <dig> from species  <dig> per generation; 2n2m <dig> is population migration rate into species  <dig> from species  <dig> per generation; athe value corresponds to the first bin of the parameter space and hence could be interpreted as zero. *asterisks indicates the estimates of migration rate that are significantly different from zero by the llr tests  <cit>  at the p <  <dig>  level and bold text indicates the significance after bonferroni correction at the p <  <dig>  level  or at the p <  <dig>  level .

our analyses suggest that h. muelleri has the largest and h. pileatus the smallest effective population sizes among the five analyzed hylobates species  . given the relatively larger inferred effective population sizes of h. muelleri in all pairwise comparison analyses and the smaller population size of h. pileatus when compared to those of their respective ancestral population sizes , we would suggest that the species h. muelleri has experienced population expansion while the h. pileatus population has decreased in size since the divergence. similarly, n. leucogenys also appears to have expanded as the current effective population size is larger than those of ancestral populations in both comparisons n. leucogenys × n. gabriellae and n. leucogenys × n. siki .

unidirectional gene flow between gibbon species
in addition to the estimations of divergence time and effective population sizes, the ima <dig> analyses also provide inferences on the extent and patterns of gene flow in the divergence processes of species. migration parameters  in the im model can be transformed to obtain the estimates of population migration rate  which is the effective number of gene migrations received by a population per generation  <cit> . we found population migration rates significantly different from zero  in the comparisons of h. lar × h. agilis, h. lar × h. moloch, h. lar × h. muelleri, h. moloch × h. agilis, and h. muelleri × h. agilis . however, after applying bonferroni correction for multiple testing, significantly nonzero population migration rates were only found in the comparisons h. lar × h. moloch and h. muelleri × h. agilis, which indicated gene flow from h. moloch to h. lar  and from h. muelleri to h. agilis  . we also detected significantly nonzero population migration rate for the gene flow from n. leucogenys to n. siki  . also notable is the asymmetry in gene flow, as we only found significant signals of gene flow in one direction but not in opposite direction in the comparisons where significantly nonzero migration rates were observed .

among the hylobates, most species are currently separated from each other by bodies of water . given these barriers, it is necessary that any signal of gene flow found between such species cannot be the consequence of recent contact. rather, lower sea levels and changes in the distributions of gibbon populations in the past may have allowed some interactions among these hylobates taxa  <cit> . furthermore, it is possible that the signals of gene flow we detected between hylobates species may underestimate the history of gene flow during hylobates divergence. our dataset was insufficient for attempting ima <dig> analyses in the multi-population model which can reveal historical gene flow involving ancestral populations  <cit> . consequently, we could only assess gene flow between two derived populations and any gene flow between the derived populations and the ancestral populations was not addressed in our pairwise comparison analyses. the importance of this consideration was shown in an analysis of bonobos and three chimpanzee subspecies in which asymmetric gene flow was detected in a pairwise analysis between allopatric central and western chimpanzees while further three- and four-population analyses suggested that there had actually been gene flow between the western chimpanzees and the ancestral population of central and eastern chimpanzees  <cit> . accordingly, that the gene flow from the western to the central chimpanzees identified in the two-population analysis likely reflects the history of gene flow from the western chimpanzees into the ancestor of central and eastern chimpanzees identified in multi-population analyses  <cit> . in the case of hylobates species, the four sundaic species  shared the same ancestral population according to phylogenetic analyses  and the gene flow suggested by our ima <dig> analyses of the comparisons among h. lar and three of these species  could reflect historical gene flow between h. lar and the ancestral population of the sundaic species. our analyses did not allow us to date the time of potential gene flow between species. however, mtdna studies have supported the monophylies of hylobates species, while y-chromosome studies are less clear on the possibility of sharing of y-haplotypes between groups . thus, it is possible that any female-mediated gene flow in hylobates may have occurred deep enough in the past to allow for mitochondrial lineage sorting, or that any more recent gene flow has been male-mediated.

among nomascus species, n. leucogenys and n. siki, who share more similarities of genetics, morphology and acoustics to each other than to other nomasacus species  <cit> , exist in adjacent distribution areas , which might allow some gene exchanges between these two species in their contact zones. we detected a significant signal of gene flow between n. leucogenys and n. siki , but cannot assess whether this may be a result of gene exchanges occurring during their divergence processes or a consequence of relatively recent secondary contact after speciation. in the case of secondary contact after speciation, the exchanged alleles may have not spread over the ranges of the two species. analyses with geographically selective sampling, where individuals would be sampled far from and in/near the contact zones, may be helpful to distinguish between the scenarios of divergence with gene flow and secondary contact, as the signal of gene flow could be reduced or eliminated when excluding particular individuals from or near contact zones . our sampling of n. leucogenys and n. siki is limited and the provenances of these individuals are unclear. the contemporary geographic distributions of nomascus species have been recently revised via vocal and genetic analyses of individuals with known geographic origins and especially those from areas of potential species boundaries, but because these noninvasively collected samples and tissue samples from museum specimens yield dna of poor quality, limiting the scope of the genetic analyses to the nomascus phylogeny based on mtdna cytochrome gene sequence data  <cit> .

gene flow between n. leucogenys and n. gabriellae with a migration rate equivalent to a rate about one migrant every two generations has also been suggested  <cit> . however, although we obtained population migration rate estimates of 2nm =  <dig>  for migration from n. gabriellae into n. leucogenys and 2nm =  <dig>  from n. leucogenys into n. gabriellae, these two estimates were not significantly different from zero , indicating no gene flow between these two species whose geographic distributions are currently discontiguous and interrupted by the distributions of n. siki and n. annamensis .

the detection of asymmetric gene flow between gibbon species is not unexpected but has also been seen for closely related taxa in other primates  and other animals . for example, more gene flow may take place from eastern to western gorillas  than western to eastern gorillas   <cit> . unidirectional patterns of gene flow apparently occurred between three mus species  <cit>  as well as between two macaque species  <cit> . in the case of macaques, the im analyses with exclusion of loci violating neutrality found that the gene flow from rhesus into cynomologus macaques was estimated as 2nm =  <dig> , while gene flow in the other direction was not significantly different from zero  <cit> . moreover, the extent of gene flow we detected here between gibbons species was similar to that estimated between other closely related taxa . however, the population genetic structure within species might lead to different inferences about the extent of gene flow between species. for example, a signal of gene flow may be underestimated or not be detected if samples are not collected from populations in potential contact zones  <cit> . the magnitude of gene flow detected between two species would also increase with decreasing distance between the sampled populations of two species  <cit> . our sample sizes of each gibbon species are limited and their geographic origins are unclear. therefore, the extent and patterns of gene flow detected here likely represent a minimum estimate and additional work is needed incorporating extensive sampling of individuals with known geographic provenance.

CONCLUSIONS
our analyses of sequence data of  <dig> autosomal loci, coupled with two coalescent-based analyses , provide inferences of species trees and the extent and patterns of gene flow among gibbon taxa. our tree , like those based upon mtdna sequences or the concatenated sequences of mtdna, y-linked and x-linked loci, shows h. pileatus as the basal hylobates taxon and groups the four sundaic species . we find evidence for unidirectional gene flow between some gibbon species; namely between h. lar and h. moloch, between h. agilis and h. muelleri and between n. leucogenys and n. siki. further insights will require the use of multi-population analyses investigating historical gene flow involving ancestral populations  <cit>  by use of a larger dataset of more loci as well as a larger set of samples of known geographic origin.

