BACKGROUND
streptococcus agalactiae  is a gram-positive bacterial pathogen of humans. gbs is best known as a pathogen of neonates, in which it is a leading cause of pneumonia, sepsis, and meningitis. in recent years, gbs has also emerged as a significant pathogen of the immunocompromised, elderly, and adults with underlying medical conditions  <cit> .

gbs infections progress rapidly, in part due to the vigorous growth of the organism in vivo. classical virulence factors such as toxins have been the predominant focus of most virulence studies; however, recent studies reflect increasing interest in the connection between bacterial growth, metabolism, and virulence  <cit> . the metabolic processes of bacteria used during in vivo growth or survival are prerequisites for virulence that have often been overlooked in pathogenesis studies  <cit> , with the notable exception of iron utilization. similar to iron, other nutrients may be scarce in vivo and may require significant metabolic adaptation for in vivo survival. because the host environment is dynamic and ill-defined in terms of available nutrients, the metabolic processes of pathogenic bacteria that are critical for in vivo survival are not easily predictable without experimentation. exploration of this understudied facet of bacterial pathogenesis may lead to novel therapies directed against bacterial metabolism  <cit> . interestingly, most currently-available antibiotics target essential fundamental bacterial processes including metabolism.

in neonatal infections, gbs has the striking ability to rapidly transition through a diverse range of host environments and exhibits vigorous growth in many of these settings, despite its very limited biosynthetic capacities  <cit> . in early-onset neonatal disease, gbs first colonizes the maternal vagina, ascends the birth canal, penetrates the placental membranes, and proliferates rapidly within the amniotic fluid. the fetus may aspirate the infected amniotic fluid during parturition, which can lead to neonatal pneumonia. gbs can then penetrate and damage cellular barriers, transcytose through cells, and enter the bloodstream. from the bloodstream, the bacterium can disseminate to multiple organs and penetrate the blood-brain barrier, leading to meningitis  <cit> .

the mechanisms underlying the ability of gbs to thrive in diverse host environments are largely uncharacterized. however, the numerous regulatory proteins encoded within the gbs genome may reflect the adaptability of the bacterium. the spectrum of genes controlled by gbs transcription factors will undoubtedly provide insight into how gbs adapts to the human host. however, compared with other pathogens such as streptococcus pyogenes, only a few global transcriptional profiling studies have been conducted to examine the function of regulatory proteins in gbs  <cit> .

the gbs mtar gene displays homology to lysr-type transcription regulators  and is required for gbs virulence in a neonatal rat model of sepsis  <cit> . an insertional inactivation of mtar resulted in a mutant displaying approximately a 1000-fold increase in ld <dig>  furthermore, coinfection experiments have shown that the mtar mutant survives very poorly in vivo, as compared with the wild-type strain  <cit> .

during the course of an infection, gbs often invades the bloodstream and induces a dangerous systemic inflammatory response that can lead to fatal sepsis. experiments using human plasma  revealed that inactivation of mtar causes a methionine-dependent growth defect in gbs. furthermore, it was also shown that the mtar mutant transported methionine poorly. thus, it was hypothesized that mtar controls a gene or gene involved in methionine transport and/or metabolism  <cit> . however, no direct experimental evidence supporting this hypothesis has been reported. interestingly, methionine is one of the least abundant amino acids in normal human blood; thus, methionine scavenging may be a critical determinant for the survival of gbs as well as other fastidious pathogens in vivo.

in this study, we performed transcriptional profiling analyses to identify mtar-regulated genes involved in methionine transport, methionine metabolism, and other processes related to gbs virulence. the findings of our study implicate a single gene cluster as encoding the mtar-controlled methionine transport system. no other genes predicted to be involved in methionine metabolism or transport were found to be affected by the mtar mutation. expression of genes implicated in a variety of other processes including systemic virulence, interaction with fibrinogen, metabolism, and transport of other amino acids were affected by the mutation of mtar. our findings reveal that mtar influences expression of a range of gbs genes and suggest that mtar may play a multifactorial role in gbs virulence.

RESULTS
establishment of bacterial growth conditions and microarray analysis
the gbs strain coh <dig>  <cit> , a clinical isolate from a case of fatal infant septicaemia belonging to the hypervirulent st- <dig> lineage  <cit>  was the reference strain for this study. an isogenic gbs mtar mutant  bearing a kanamycin-resistance cassette insertion was derived by precise allelic exchange and was utilized as the test strain. the ds <dig> strain was previously shown to exhibit a methionine transport defect when grown in chemically defined medium  at high methionine concentrations  <cit> . mutation of gbs mtar significantly attenuated growth at low methionine levels , while the wild-type strain grows normally in the presence of  <dig> μg/ml methionine . as nutritional starvation can induce mrna degradation and growth rate can modulate gene expression, we cultured the wild-type and mtar mutant strains under conditions in which the strains exhibited identical growth kinetics  .

in preparation for microarray experiments, three cultures each of coh <dig>  and ds <dig>  were grown to an od <dig> of  <dig>  in cdm containing  <dig> μg/ml methionine. rna was harvested and processed for hybridization to microarrays as described above in materials and methods. a custom oligonucleotide microarray  based on the gbs coh <dig> genomic sequence  <cit>  was utilized for microarray analysis. the entire procedure was repeated three times, giving three biological replicates for each strain.

genes were considered differentially expressed if the following three criteria were met: 1) there was a two-fold or greater difference in signal intensity for the probe set corresponding to the gene, 2) statistical analysis  yielded a p value less than  <dig> , and 3) real-time pcr  validated that the gene was differentially regulated. genes were divided into functional categories using a combination of published experimental evidence and homology searches, and the twelve genes meeting the above criteria are presented in table  <dig>  upon review of the list of differentially-expressed genes, each gene that was identified as differentially regulated according to the above criteria was found to have been assigned "present" calls by the affymetrix gcos software for both strains in all three replicate experiments. the microarray results correlated strongly with the qpcr results , indicating the validity of our data.

the differentially-regulated genes are grouped into functional categories, based on experimental evidence, protein database searches, and genome annotation. each gbs coh <dig> gene  <cit>  is indicated by its comprehensive microbial resources locus number  available on the j. craig venter institute website  and gene symbol, when applicable. fold changes in gene expression  and bayesian p values were derived using cyber-t  <cit>  analysis of data from three independent biological replicates. criteria for inclusion in this table were the following: bayesian p value <  <dig> , greater than two-fold change, and confirmation of differential expression by qpcr .

complementation analysis
the mtar mutant bears a kanamycin cassette insertion in the 5' region of the mtar derived by precise allelic replacement of the wild-type mtar allele  <cit> . the genes flanking mtar on both sides are transcribed in the opposite direction  <cit> , indicating the mutation is not polar. previous complementation analysis, performed by introducing the wild-type mtar allele into the mutant in trans  <cit> , confirmed that the mtar mutation was not polar and was responsible for the attenuation of virulence and the methionine-dependent growth defect observed in plasma. introduction of the wild-type mtar allele in trans also restored the growth of the mtar mutant in  <dig> μg/ml cdm , indicating that the mtar mutation was also responsible for the methionine-dependent growth defect in cdm.

complementation analysis was performed on six representative genes to confirm that the differential regulation resulted from the engineered mtar mutation and not from an unlikely spurious secondary mutation. we measured gene expression by qpcr in the mtar mutant  and the mtar mutant in which the wild-type mtar allele has been introduced in trans . for each strain, the results are expressed as a ratio of gene expression of the test strain to that of the wild-type strain: metq <dig>   <dig>  ,  <dig>  ; cspa,  <dig>  ,  <dig>  ; artp,  <dig>  ,  <dig>  ; artq,  <dig>  ,  <dig>  ; san_ <dig>   <dig>  ,  <dig>  . a gene, metq <dig>  that was not differentially expressed in the mutant served as a control, and its expression level  was not increased when the wild-type mtar allele was introduced to the mtar mutant: metq <dig>   <dig>  ,  <dig>  . these data indicate that in ds <dig> , expression of the differentially-expressed genes was restored to approximately wild-type levels. taken together, the complementation results strongly suggest that the mtar mutation was responsible for the differential gene regulation observed in this study.

methionine transport genes
the expression of a gene cluster   that displayed strong similarity to established methionine transport gene clusters in other gram-positive bacteria was downregulated in the mtar mutant. rt-pcr analysis revealed that the gene cluster was cotranscribed . this cluster is predicted to encode products that are highly similar to components of bacterial abc transporters. the first component of typical bacterial abc transporters consists of an atp-binding cassette , which binds and hydrolyzes atp. the second component is a permease, which forms a channel in the membrane. the third component, a substrate-binding protein, imparts specificity to the system. we identified genes predicted to encode the abc component , the permease component , and the substrate-binding component  in the cluster and found that these genes were downregulated in the mtar mutant. a gene in this cluster  is predicted to encode a peptidase from the m20/m25/m <dig> family; the cotranscription of this gene in the metq <dig> cluster may suggest the encoded protein is involved in the breakdown of peptides for nutritional purposes.

in a previous bioinformatics study, a putative gene  located elsewhere on the chromosome was predicated to encode a methionine substrate-binding protein; this gene was hypothesized to be regulated by mtar  <cit> . in our study, microarray analysis indicated that the metq <dig> gene is expressed . however, qpcr analysis revealed no statistically-significant difference in metq <dig> expression between the mtar mutant and the wild-type strain .

genes involved in arginine and carbohydrate metabolism
a putative operon  that is predicted to encode components of another abc transport system and a potential phosphomannomutase/phosphoglucomutase was also downregulated in the mtar mutant. the gbs artpq genes exhibit strongest similarity to arginine and glutamine transporters. the artpq gene products are unlikely to be involved in glutamine transport since the gbs glutamine transporter has been identified  <cit> . the manb gene, located adjacent to artq , is predicted to encode a protein with similarity to phosphomannomutases and phosphoglucomutases. the artpq and manb genes were shown to be cotranscribed via rt-pcr analysis .

two additional genes potentially involved in arginine metabolism, argg and argh, were downregulated in the mtar mutant. san_ <dig>  is predicted to encode argininosuccinate synthase. the predicted product of san_ <dig>  displayed homology to argininosuccinate lyase, which catalyzes the formation of arginine from argininosuccinate. in other bacteria, argg and argh catalyze the two terminal reactions in the biosynthesis of arginine. the argg and argh genes are clustered  and the results of our rt-pcr analysis  indicate these genes are cotranscribed.

genes encoding products involved in the gbs-fibrinogen interaction
two genes  that encode products involved in the interaction between gbs and fibrinogen were differentially expressed in the mtar mutant. expression of the virulence-associated cspa gene  <cit> , which encodes a member of the surface-localized, extracellular cell-envelope proteases   <cit> , was downregulated. the cspa gene is necessary for virulence and cleavage of fibrinogen by gbs  <cit> . heterologously-expressed cspa has been shown to cleave fibrinogen  <cit> . in addition, the expression of fsbb , which encodes a fibrinogen-binding protein, was upregulated by approximately  <dig>  fold by microarray analysis . while slightly below the criteria for inclusion in table  <dig>  qpcr confirmed that fbsb was upregulated by  <dig>  fold in the mtar mutant. moreover, a gene of unknown function that is adjacent to fbsb  was upregulated by ~ <dig> -fold  in the mtar mutant. the results of our rt-pcr analysis  indicate that fbsb and san_ <dig> are cotranscribed. taken together, these findings indicate that fbsb expression is under the control of mtar.

discussion
our findings strongly suggest that the metq1np genes encode the mtar-regulated methionine transport system. additionally, we found that the expression of four genes potentially related to arginine metabolism  were under the influence of mtar. furthermore, a gene  possibly involved in carbohydrate metabolism was found to be controlled by mtar. of note, carbohydrate metabolism has recently been linked to the pathogenesis of a number of streptococci  <cit> . in addition to modulating expression of genes involved in transport and metabolic processes, our study also indicates mtar influences the expression of genes  involved in other aspects of gbs pathogenesis. overall,  <dig> genes met the criteria for being differentially regulated. given the level of replication , there remains the possibility of false negatives; it is possible that some genes in the mtar-dependent regulon, including those with less than a two-fold change in expression, have not been revealed in this study.

methionine transport
the metq1np gene cluster was the only putative methionine transport system affected by the mtar mutation. inactivation of metq1np homologs in bacillus subtilis  <cit>  and streptococcus mutans  <cit>  abolished methionine transport. our preliminary attempts to inactivate the metq <dig> gene  were unsuccessful and appeared to arrest growth of the organism , even when the medium was supplemented with high  concentrations of methionine or peptide methionine sources. the simplest interpretation of these results is that the cluster encodes a sole gbs methionine transporter. however, because the mutation we attempted to engineer is predicted to be polar onto downstream genes, it is uncertain which of the components are essential for growth. future studies are necessary to test the hypothesis that metq1np encodes the sole gbs methionine transport system.

mtar controls genes encoding products associated with gbs-fibrinogen interaction
in addition to regulating amino acid transport and metabolism, mtar also appears to control the expression of genes involved in the interaction between gbs and fibrinogen. fibrinogen is a host protein that plays a key role in many facets of bacterial pathogenesis and is a mediator of the host defense against pathogens  <cit> . however, pathogenic bacteria can subvert fibrinogen and the associated coagulation cascade for their own purposes  <cit> . for example, fibrinogen can be used by pathogenic bacteria for adherence  <cit>  and evasion of the innate immune system  <cit> .

expression of least two genes involved or implicated in the interaction between gbs and fibrinogen were differentially expressed in the mtar mutant. in particular, the expression of fbsb was upregulated. in addition to binding fibrinogen, the encoded product  promotes gbs invasion of epithelial cells  <cit> . additionally, the cspa gene, which encodes a serine protease from the cell-envelope family of proteases   <cit> , was downregulated in the mtar mutant. all reports of ceps in pathogenic streptococci indicate that these proteins play roles in virulence  <cit> . cspa has the ability to promote cleavage of the aα subunit of fibrinogen at a single site  <cit> . however, it cleaves very few other substrates , indicating a high level of specificity. the cspa gene is not necessary for gbs growth in plasma or laboratory broth  and coh <dig> cells do not cleave the general protease substrate casein regardless of the presence or absence of a functional cspa gene  <cit> , . thus, similar to the ceps of other pathogenic streptococci, the gbs cspa protein does not appear to play a nutritional role  <cit> .

the cspa gene is required for the full virulence of gbs in a rat model of neonatal sepsis  <cit>  but the connection between the fibrinogen-cleaving activity of cspa and gbs virulence is not yet clear. however, previous studies have shown that cspa contributes to neutrophil evasion by promoting resistance to opsonophagocytic killing  <cit> . furthermore, cspa proteolyzes certain members of the cxc class of chemokines, abolishing their ability to attract neutrophils . thus, in addition to promoting gbs survival in vivo by regulating the metq1np cluster, mtar may contribute to gbs virulence by upregulating the expression of cspa.

numerous recent studies have focused on a streptococcus pyogenes cep  that is also capable of proteolyzing cxc chemokines  <cit> . this protease has been implicated in necrotizing fasciitis and contributes to the virulence of s. pyogenes in an animal model of spreading necrosis. similar to cspa of gbs, s. pyogenes spycep/scpc is thought to be a virulence factor that allows s. pyogenes to evade neutrophils. however, regulation of spycep by an mtar homolog has not been reported.

our results revealed that a gene of unknown function , whose product shares similarity with the plasminogen activators of a variety of bacteria , was found to be downregulated. plasminogen is the inactive form of a human protease that, when converted to a highly active protease , cleaves fibrin  as well as a number of other host proteins. bacterial plasminogen activators are potent virulence factors that promote invasive infections and bacterial spread  <cit> . however, it has not been determined if gbs can activate plasminogen in the absence of host factors  <cit> ; thus, the function of san_ <dig> remains unclear. due to the observation that san_ <dig> exhibits considerable strain-to-strain allelic variability, it has been speculated that its product may interact with the host  <cit> .

the met box and mtar-dependent regulation of gene expression
in a previous bioinformatics study, rodionov et al. observed that a region of two-fold rotational symmetry  precedes two gbs genes  predicted to encode products similar to bacterial methionine transport components and a gene  whose predicted product shows homology with enzymes that catalyze the conversion of homocysteine to methionine  <cit> . the met box is characterized by the tatagtttnaaactata consensus sequence  <cit> , and strongly resembles a lysr-type transcriptional regulatory protein binding site.

during the course of our studies, a report was published describing an apparent s. mutans mtar ortholog, metr, that is 80% identical to mtar  <cit> . this study identified met boxes upstream of several genes encoding components of the methionine biosynthetic pathway as well as a cluster encoding a methionine transporter  <cit> . in electrophoretic mobility shift assays, purified s. mutans metr bound to dna fragments containing met boxes; however, dna footprinting was not performed to specifically locate the metr binding site. the authors speculated that streptococcal mtar/metr homologs act specifically as regulators of methionine metabolism and activate gene expression in response to methionine starvation. however, this study did not globally examine genes influenced by metr . some genes preceded by met boxes were not subject to regulation by metr and methionine starvation. also, metr bound to some dna fragments containing met boxes but did not affect regulation of these genes. the correlation between met boxes and metr regulation was thus incomplete. it is therefore not clear if met boxes are the sole determinants of metr-dependent regulation.

in our study, despite the presence of met boxes preceding three genes potentially related to methionine transport and metabolism , only expression of the metq1np transport cluster was affected by the mtar mutation. furthermore, computerized searches of dna regions in the vicinity of other mtar-regulated genes did not reveal met boxes. these results can be explained if mtar has the ability to regulate genes by binding to sequences other than met boxes or if mtar influences expression of the differentially-regulated genes indirectly via other regulatory proteins. localization of mtar binding sites by dnase footprinting or other techniques has not yet been possible since mtar, like a number of other lttrs, has been recalcitrant to expression in an active form. however, efforts to purify mtar and definitively identify its binding site are ongoing. regardless of whether mtar influences expression of genes in a direct or indirect manner, our findings provide insight into the ability of mtar to regulate genes involved in a variety of processes in gbs.

CONCLUSIONS
to our knowledge, this is the first study to describe the spectrum of genes controlled by mtar. our findings indicate that mtar activates expression of a specific methionine transport gene cluster , which may allow the organism to efficiently scavenge methionine in vivo. genes potentially involved in other aspects of metabolism  were also identified as influenced by mtar. in addition, our findings reveal that mtar controls the expression of two previously-characterized genes  that have been implicated in other facets of gbs pathogenesis.

