BACKGROUND
schizophrenia is a chronic and serious psychiatric disorder affecting about  <dig> % of the population worldwide. several lines of evidence point towards schizophrenia as a neurodevelopmental disorder, and the involvement of myelin- and oligodendrocyte abnormalities in the pathophysiology of the disease has been suggested  <cit> . myelin is formed by oligodendroglial cells and consists mainly of cholesterol, produced de novo in the cns  <cit> . together, cholesterol and apolipoprotein e  can serve as a glial growth factor in synaptogenesis  <cit> .

antipsychotic drugs, such as haloperidol and clozapine, are used to treat and ameliorate the symptoms of schizophrenia and act, at least in part, by blockage of dopamine d2-like receptors in the brain. antipsychotics are usually classified into two main groups, namely typical  and atypical drugs . the typical antipsychotic drugs are all dopamine d2-receptor antagonists, whereas the atypical drugs generally have a more diverse receptor binding profile, suggesting that other neurotransmitters than dopamine might also be involved in mediating the antipsychotic effect  <cit> . compared to typical antipsychotics, atypical drugs usually induce less extrapyramidal side effects and may have improved therapeutic efficacy  <cit> . however, some of the atypical drugs are associated with side effects such as weight gain and other metabolic adverse  <cit> .

in a recent study, we demonstrated that haloperidol and clozapine markedly increase the expression of a cluster of fatty acid- and cholesterol biosynthetic genes in a human glioma cell line , mediated via activation of the sterol regulatory element-binding proteins   <cit> . we proposed that the srebp-mediated activation of cellular lipogenesis represents a new mechanism of psychotropic drug action, involved in both therapeutic efficacy  and the metabolic side-effects   <cit> .

srebps are produced as two isoforms; srebp <dig>  and srebp <dig>  the srebp <dig> and srebp <dig> transcription factors are synthesized as inactive  <dig> kda precursors in the endoplasmic reticulum . upon activation, these proteins are translocated to the golgi apparatus by the sterol sensing srebp-cleavage-activating-protein  where they undergo proteolytical cleavage, releasing a 60– <dig> kda fragment that is transcriptionally active and induces the expression of several lipid biosynthetic genes in the nucleus . the different srebp variants overlap in function to some extent  <cit> . in general, srebp1c controls the expression of fatty acid biosynthesis genes in various tissues  <cit> , whereas the srebp1a isoform is predominant in cell cultures, activating both cholesterol and fatty acid biosynthesis genes  <cit> . srebp <dig> mainly regulates cholesterol biosynthetic genes both in tissues and in cell culture  <cit> .

in the present study, we have extended our knowledge on lipogenic effects of psychotropic drugs by comparison of six antipsychotics with respect to their dose-related ability to activate srebp and the expression of srebp target genes in human glial gamg cells. we also examined the degree of srebp activation in three additional cns-related cell lines, including glial cell lines  and neuronal cell lines . we here report that chlorpromazine, haloperidol, clozapine, olanzapine, risperidone and ziprasidone display marked differences in their ability to stimulate srebp-controlled cellular lipogenesis, and that this effect is most pronounced in glial cells. we propose that srebp activation might represent a novel glia-mediated mechanism of action of some antipsychotic drugs.

RESULTS
cell viability tests
the effect on gamg cell viability was investigated for all six antipsychotic drugs , using a range of concentrations from  <dig> μm to  <dig> μm . olanzapine had no cell toxic effect at any of the concentrations tested. up to  <dig> μm, no statistically significant reduction in cell viability was observed for haloperidol, clozapine and risperidone. cell viability in response to chlorpromazine exposure  was decreased by about  <dig> % and  <dig> %, respectively. ziprasidone reduced cell viability by  <dig> % and  <dig> % at  <dig> μm and  <dig> μm, respectively, as compared to the control.

antipsychotic-induced activation of the srebp target genes
in an attempt to further understand antipsychotic-induced stimulation of cellular lipogenesis, we examined similarities and differences between several srebp target genes involved in various aspects of lipid homeostasis. as shown in fig. 1a, clozapine  induced a statistically significant dose-dependent transcriptional activation of all nine srebp target genes examined in cultured gamg cells. these genes are involved in cholesterol biosynthesis , cholesterol transport  and fatty acid biosynthesis . the degree of maximum activation  varied markedly between the different genes, with fold-changes ranging from  <dig>   to  <dig>   . the expression of srebp1a and - <dig> was readily detected, and the expression levels of both genes increased markedly with increasing clozapine concentrations . the transcriptional activation was most pronounced for the srebp <dig> gene. the expression of srebp1c also appeared to be significantly increased by clozapine , but due to the low expression levels , the interpretation of the data should be cautious.

comparison of different antipsychotic drugs with respect to their srebp-stimulating effect
in order to compare various drugs with regard to their ability to activate srebp-mediated gene expression, a selection of srebp target genes  was measured after exposing gamg cells to various concentrations  of chlorpromazine, haloperidol, clozapine, olanzapine, risperidone or ziprasidone . clozapine and haloperidol, and to a lesser extent olanzapine and chlorpromazine, clearly enhanced the transcription of all four srebp target genes, especially hmgcs <dig> and hmgcr. for olanzapine, the stimulating effect was most pronounced at the highest concentration , whereas chlorpromazine tended to be less effective at the same concentration, probably due to drug toxicity . interestingly, risperidone and ziprazidone demonstrated significantly lower ability to activate the expression of the srebp-controlled genes. for ziprasidone, the limited action could not be overcome by increased concentrations, since the drug then induced a marked reduction in cell viability.

the psychotropic-induced transcriptional activation of cellular lipogenesis in gamg cells is due to an increased proteolytic cleavage of the srebp transcription factors, especially srebp <dig>  <cit> . in the present study, we therefore examined the effect of the six antipsychotics on proteolytic cleavage and activation of srebp <dig> only. in western blot experiments, the semi-quantitative m/p ratio between the mature transcriptionally active 60– <dig> kda fragment  and  <dig> kda precursor protein  was used as an indicator of srebp <dig> stimulation, as measured after  <dig> hours of drug exposure in gamg cells . the degree of srebp <dig> activation was parallel to the expression level of srebp <dig> target genes for all drugs . haloperidol, chlorpromazine, and at higher non-toxic concentrations, clozapine and olanzapine, all induced srebp <dig> cleavage markedly above the control level. risperidone and ziprasidone apparently had less pronounced or no effect on srebp <dig> activation.

clozapine counteracts the repressive effect of 25-hydroxycholesterol on srebp activation
to further explore the mechanism behind the drug-induced activation of srebps, we investigated whether clozapine could interfere with the effect of 25-hydroxycholesterol , a well-known srebp repressor  <cit> . the repressive effect of 25-hydroxycholesterol is mediated by its ability to increase cholesterol transport from the cell plasma membrane to the scap sterol sensor in the er  <cit> . 25-hc  markedly reduced basal srebp <dig> activity after  <dig> hours of incubation in cultured gamg cells . co-treatment with clozapine  clearly counteracted the repressive effect of 25-hc. this opposing effect was not detectable after longer periods of co-incubation , probably due to the high potency of 25hc to repress srebp .

antipsychotic-induced srebp activation in the context of therapeutic serum concentrations
in clinical practice, the therapeutically relevant serum levels vary considerably between the different antipsychotic drugs. in order to examine the potential clinical relevance of the drug-induced srebp activation that was observed in cultured cells, the molar concentrations used in the cell culture experiment were transformed into multiples of the therapeutically relevant serum concentration for each drug . the transformed data illustrate that although all drugs stimulated hmgcr expression at some concentrations, only clozapine and chlorpromazine induced significant srebp activation in the cell cultures at concentrations rather close to their therapeutic serum levels. for the other drugs, the stimulation of gene expression occurred at concentrations far above their therapeutically relevant serum levels. the issue of cell culture concentrations, serum levels and relevant tissue  concentrations of the drugs is further outlined in the discussion section.

comparison of antipsychotic-induced activation of srebp target genes in different human cns-relevant cell lines
in order to study whether the antipsychotic-induced srebp activation is valid in more than one cns-related human cell line, we examined hmgcr expression in astrocytoma ccf-sttg <dig> cells, neuroblastoma sh-5ysy cells, and cortical neuronal hcn <dig> cells, all exposed to clozapine or haloperidol for  <dig> hours. the largest increase in gene expression was observed in the astrocytoma cells, reaching a statistically significant fold change of  <dig>  ±  <dig>  and  <dig>  ±  <dig>  with clozapine  and haloperidol , respectively . in contrast, the sh-sy5y neuroblastoma cells displayed minimal activation of the srebp transcription system upon drug exposure, with a relative increase in hmgcr expression of  <dig>  ±  <dig>  and  <dig>  ±  <dig>  by haloperidol  and clozapine , respectively . in the slow growing hcn <dig> cells, the hmgcr gene expression was activated slightly to moderately by the drugs, demonstrating that antipsychotic-induced srebp activation is not a tumor cell-specific phenomenon. in a pilot experiment , we also examined the r-hi- <dig> rat hippocampus primary cell culture, which contains both glial and neuronal cells. incubation with  <dig> μm of clozapine led to a  <dig> -fold increase in hmgcr mrna. the expression levels of hmgcs <dig> and fasn were also tested in these cells and increased  <dig> - and  <dig>  fold, respectively. the basal expression level of hmgcr was quite similar in all cell types, as measured with real-time pcr, thereby allowing comparison between different cell lines with respect to the effect of drug exposure.

discussion
in this study, we have extended our initial findings with haloperidol and clozapine by demonstrating that antipsychotic drugs in general enhance the expression of srebp-controlled lipid biosynthetic genes in a concentration-dependent manner in cultured glial cells, with less pronounced stimulation in neuroblastoma- and cortical neuronal cells. the degree of srebp activation, however, varies considerably between the different antipsychotics.

the mechanisms by which the antipsychotic drugs activate the srebp system could, in principle, involve receptor-dependent and -independent processes. all antipsychotic drugs block dopamine d2-like receptors , but with marked differences in their affinities  <cit> . in addition, they also vary widely in their antagonistic binding to other neurotransmitter receptors, e.g., 5-ht and histamine h <dig> receptors  <cit> . in the present dose-response comparison, haloperidol and clozapine were the most potent activators of srebp-controlled gene expression on the basis of their molar concentrations in the cell cultures, whereas risperidone and ziprasidone were minimally effective. chlorpromazine and olanzapine had intermediate effects. these data imply that the srebp activation is neither linked to the receptor profiles nor the therapeutic classification  of the drugs, since there is no apparent relationship between these properties and their srebp-stimulating effect.

this assumption is supported by a recent study  <cit> , in which we demonstrated that several antidepressant drugs , but not mood stabilizers , activate the srebp system in cultured glial cells in a similar manner to the antipsychotics. this fact makes is likely that the drug-induced srebp activation is related to some shared chemical property of these psychotropic compounds. due to the different receptor-binding properties of these drugs it is likely that their shared srebp-activating effect is mediated via a receptor-independent mechanism of action. all of the antipsychotics and antidepressants that we have investigated are cationic amphiphiles. such substances have previously been shown to increase the synthesis and accumulation of total cellular cholesterol levels via a mechanism involving a reduction of cholesterol levels in the endoplasmic reticulum , which is the sterol-sensing compartment in the cell  <cit> . srebp activation is controlled by the sterol-sensitive srebp-cleavage-activating-protein  that is located in the er  <cit> . when er-cholesterol is depleted, scap undergoes a conformational change that promotes translocation of the srebp/scap complex to the golgi, representing the inital step in srebp activation. both cholesterol and a hydroxylated derivative of cholesterol, 25-oh-cholesterol , inhibit the srebp system by affecting the function of the scap protein  <cit> . it is therefore interesting to note that clozapine was able to counteract the srebp-repressing effect of 25-hc, which indicates that the effect of antipsychotic drugs on scap/srebp activation is the opposite of cholesterol and 25-hc. this contrasts in vitro data from a recent study demonstrating that some cationic amphiphiles  mimic the effect of cholesterol on scap conformation  <cit> . however, in line with our results, this study could not reproduce the cholesterol-mimicking effect of cationic amphiphiles when tested in cultured cells  <cit> .

we propose that drug-induced transcriptional activation of cholesterol biosynthesis in the brain could represent a new mechanism of action for some psychotropic drugs. interestingly, the srebp-stimulating effect is shared by several different antipsychotics and antidepressants, demonstrating a common molecular mode of action. this effect cannot be related to the group-specific antipsychotic- or antidepressant properties of the drugs. instead, it might be linked to some common symptoms or deficits that are present in both schizophrenia and major affective disorders . this possibility is further underscored by the therapeutic breadth of these classes of drugs, with antipsychotic drugs frequently used in treatment of depressed patients and vice versa.

involvement of myelin- and oligodendrocyte  abnormalities has been indicated in the etiology of both schizophrenia and bipolar disorder  <cit> . the myelination process requires intact cholesterol biosynthesis  <cit> , and during cns development, the expression of cholesterol biosynthesis genes is enhanced  <cit> . furthermore, malfunction of synaptic processes, including reduced dendritic spine density, has been proposed in the pathophysiology of schizophrenia  <cit> . cholesterol, together with apoe, can act as a glia-derived growth factor supporting the formation of synapses in culture  <cit> . in line with this, cholesterol has recently been demonstrated as essential for dendrite maturation, the rate-limiting step in glia-induced synaptogenesis, and is required for continuous synapse development in cultures  <cit> . interestingly, drug-induced srebp activation was most evident in the glial-like gamg glioma- and ccf-sttg <dig> astrocytoma cell lines, and less pronounced in the hcn <dig> cortical neuron cells and in a primary cell culture from rat hippocampus. lipogenic activation was almost absent in sh-sy5y neuroblastoma cells. these data are in agreement with the fact that in the cns, the majority of cholesterol is produced de novo by glial cells  <cit> . cultured neurons have a poorly developed machinery for cholesterol biosynthesis and rely on glia-derived cholesterol for synaptogenesis  <cit> . it is thus conceivable that drug-induced srebp-controlled activation of glial cholesterol biosynthesis in the brain represents a receptor-independent therapeutic mechanism of action and provides essential building blocks to the myelination process or synaptogenesis.

a critical issue is whether the srebp-stimulating effect observed in cultured cells also occurs during drug treatment in the clinical setting. although any interpretation of the clinical relevance of cell culture data is difficult, the relationship between in vitro and in vivo  concentrations of the drugs requires special attention. the investigated drugs are clinically efficacious at highly different ranges of serum concentrations  <cit> . in an attempt to highlight the possible clinical impact of their srebp-activation, we transformed the molar concentrations of each drug  into multiples of the therapeutically relevant upper serum concentrations of the corresponding drug   <cit> . by this approach, clozapine and chlorpromazine appeared to significantly activate the srebp system in the cultured cells at concentrations that were 5–10-fold above their therapeutic serum levels. in contrast, the concentration of haloperidol necessary to induce this lipogenic effect in the cultured cells was about  <dig> times higher than the clinically relevant serum level, and ziprasidone hardly activated the srebp pathway at all. it is important to bear in mind that many psychotropic drugs are highly lipophilic, leading to enrichment in lipid-rich tissues. levels of haloperidol and clozapine have been demonstrated to be 10– <dig> times higher in the cns compared to the corresponding serum concentration  <cit> . taken together, these data indicate that srebp-activation by clozapine and chlorpromazine might occur in the brain when serum levels are within their therapeutically relevant range, whereas the srebp activation observed for haloperidol would be expected to be of minor clinical relevance. interestingly, clozapine has been described as a drug with superior therapeutic efficacy  <cit> , with positive effects in otherwise treatment-refractory patients. however, a similar supremacy has not been shown for chlorpromazine, the other apparent potent srebp-activating drug. finally, it is uncertain how large an in vivo response would need to be in order to be of any clinical relevance, since even minor changes in cellular lipid biosynthesis in vivo could have marked clinical effects. caution should always be taken when making inferences from cell cultures to the clinical setting, and further studies are indeed warranted to draw more reliable conclusions about the clinical impact of our results.

CONCLUSIONS
we here extend our initial studies with haloperidol and clozapine by demonstrating that antipsychotic drugs in general stimulate srebp-controlled gene expression in several cns-relevant cell lines, but with marked differences between the various drugs and types of cells. we have previously suggested that the psychotropic-induced srebp activation is a glial-mediated mechanism of drug action. this proposal is supported by our present results, demonstrating that the lipogenic effect is apparently more pronounced in glial than in neuronal cell lines. we hypothesize that drug-induced transcriptional activation of cholesterol biosynthesis in the brain represents a receptor-independent mechanism of therapeutic action of some antipsychotic drugs, possibly by providing essential building blocks for the myelination process and synaptogenesis. further studies on gene expression changes and lipid parameters in blood samples from drug-treated patients and brain tissue from animal models should be undertaken.

