BACKGROUND
inbreeding plays a central role in the evolution of many plant and animal populations, affecting for example effective population size  <cit> , the speed of adaptation  <cit> , or the accumulation of deleterious mutations and the resulting inbreeding depression  <cit> . much attention so far has focused on self-fertilization, the most extreme form of inbreeding, which is widespread in plant populations  <cit> , and also occurs in some hermaphroditic animals  <cit> . however, biparental inbreeding , or mating between two relatives, is also likely to occur frequently in natural populations due to small local population size  <cit> , limited dispersal causing fine-scale genetic structure  <cit>  or social structure in animals  <cit> . after ritland  <cit>  developed a relatively simple method to estimate bi using genotypes for molecular markers in progeny arrays, by comparing multi-locus vs. single-locus estimates of outcrossing rates, large datasets on bi have accumulated in plant populations. since the first analysis of such data  <cit>  bi has been demonstrated to occur frequently, albeit at low rates.

in self-compatible hermaphroditic plant populations, bi acts along with selfing to diminish the mean number of recessive deleterious mutations and the inbreeding depression maintained by a balance between mutation and selection, as it increases the inbreeding coefficient of the population, exposing recessive deleterious mutations to selection in homozygous form. several experimental observations confirm that bi can contribute to purging inbreeding depression  <cit> . the only previous theoretical treatment of the joint influence of selfing and bi on deleterious mutations  <cit>  showed that such purging by bi could facilitate the evolution of increased selfing rates. uyenoyama  <cit>  also suggested that bi could promote the maintenance of stable mixed mating systems with intermediate selfing rates when inbreeding depression is low , which would provide a general answer to the “enigma" of mixed mating systems  <cit> . however, this prediction may strongly depend on a number of simplifying assumptions regarding inbreeding depression, its genetic basis and its expression in individuals produced by bi. first, when inbreeding depression was allowed to evolve with the mating system in  <cit> , it was modelled assuming completely recessive mildly deleterious mutations. however, the distribution of fitness effects of mutations is known to be strongly bimodal , such that inbreeding depression is often caused by a combination of nearly recessive highly deleterious  mutations and moderately recessive or nearly additive mildly deleterious mutations . these two classes of mutations exhibit contrasting responses to natural selection in an inbred population  <cit> . second, stable mixed mating systems in uyenoyama’s model were only studied assuming zero inbreeding depression in offspring produced by bi and constant inbreeding depression associated with selfing, neither of which is biologically plausible based on the available empirical data .

here, we develop a more realistic genetic model to analyze how sib-mating, a relatively common form of bi, influences inbreeding depression in a population reproducing by a mixture of self-fertilization and outcrossing, a necessary first step to make predictions on the evolution of selfing rates. our model differs from  <cit>  in the genetic basis of inbreeding depression and includes the two aforementioned components. the component of inbreeding depression due to moderately recessive mildly deleterious mutations is unlikely to be purged much by inbreeding because exposure to selection depends little on inbreeding for nearly additive mutations. it was modelled as a constant, background component of inbreeding depression . the component of inbreeding depression due to highly deleterious mutations was modelled using the approach of kondrashov  <cit>  to describe evolution of deleterious mutations at a very large number of unlinked loci. we employed a simplified version of the kondrashov model for nearly recessive lethal mutations  <cit> . the kondrashov model accounts for zygotic disequilibrium  caused by a mixture of selfing and outcrossing. these models assume infinite population size and individually rare deleterious mutations, which can become homozygous only through selfing; in their original form, they therefore cannot deal with sib-mating. we extend the kondrashov model for nearly recessive lethals  <cit>  by tracking three consecutive generations  to incorporate sib-mating.

this model allows us to study the effect of realistic levels of sib-mating on the equilibrium inbreeding depression in plant populations reproducing by a mixture of selfing and outcrossing. the resulting relationship between inbreeding depression and the population selfing rate is then used to infer the evolutionarily stable selfing rates expected in a population practising sib-mating, when inbreeding depression is allowed to evolve with the mating system. this is the second major difference from the approach of uyenoyama  <cit> , who assumed constant inbreeding depression upon selfing, independent of the selfing rate in the population. we show below that for a given rate of inbreeding sib-mating is more efficient than selfing in purging inbreeding depression; sib-mating is therefore expected to promote the evolution of selfing and is unlikely to maintain stable intermediate selfing rates.

RESULTS
in a population reproducing by a mixture of self-fertilization, outcrossing between unrelated individuals and sib-mating, the model calculates the mean number of nearly recessive heteroygous lethals, with dominance coefficient h= <dig> , maintained per diploid genome at mutation-selection equilibrium under a genomic mutation to lethals u. in the following, s¯ is the population primary selfing rate, at fertilization. the total inbreeding depression δ is defined as the decrease in mean fitness of selfed offspring vs. those produced by outcrossing between unrelated parents. the distribution of heterozygous lethals, combined with a constant  background inbreeding depression d= <dig>  for selfing, produces the total inbreeding depression upon selfing. individuals produced by different types of mating are denoted using subscripts without brackets: o, s, oo, os, and ss, respectively indicating outcrossing to an unrelated individual, self-fertilization, and sib-mating involving two outcrossed parents, one outcrossed and one selfed parent, or two selfed parents . for more details, see methods.
fig.  <dig> pedigrees of types of crosses. o: outcrossing between unrelated individuals; s: selfing; oo: sib-mating between two outcrossed individuals; os: sib-mating between one outcrossed and one selfed individuals; ss: sib-mating between two selfed individuals. in the grandparental generation, letters s, d, t and q refer to the single, double, triple and quadruple grandparents



rates of bi in natural plant populations
we first tested our assumption of a low frequency of bi , which was required to neglect the probability of bi occurring in two successive generations in any given lineage in the population. we merged two existing databases compiling multilocus estimates of outcrossing rates  in natural plant populations  <cit> , retaining only species for which both multi-locus and mean single-locus  estimates were available , and we estimated the frequency of bi from tm−ts  <cit> . as expected, bi was generally rare in natural plant populations , with an average value of  <dig>  . less than  <dig> % of species have estimated rates of bi above  <dig> , and many of these are likely due to sampling error, as obviously are all the negative estimates; the highest estimate of  <dig>   <cit>  is from an agricultural population .
fig.  <dig> distribution of the estimated rates of biparental inbreeding  in natural plant populations



influence of sib-mating on mean number of lethals and total inbreeding depression
in a mixed-mating population without sib-mating, the mean number of deleterious mutations at equilibrium, and hence inbreeding depression, decreases with increased selfing rate  due to increased homozygosity exposing recessive deleterious mutations to selection  <cit> . the decrease in mean lethals and inbreeding depression is relatively smooth under small or moderate genomic mutation rates to lethals . at a high genomic mutation rate to lethals  there appears a fairly sharp purging threshold due to zygotic disequilibria and selective interference among lethals causing the secondary selfing rate to remain close to zero for primary selfing rates below the purging threshold  <cit> . the shape of the relationship between population selfing rate and the mean number of heterozygous lethals or total inbreeding depression at equilibrium remains qualitatively the same in the absence of background inbreeding depression . background inbreeding depression increases total inbreeding depression at equilibrium, and shifts the threshold selfing rates for purging recessive lethals towards higher values.
fig.  <dig> mean number of heterozygous lethals at equilibrium  and average inbreeding depression  as a function of population selfing rate, for different rates of sib-mating b and genomic mutation rates to lethals u. background inbreeding depression is d= <dig> . on panels d and f, the thin horizontal line at  <dig>  represents the automatic advantage of selfing, i.e. the threshold value for inbreeding below which evolution of increased selfing is favored



with sib-mating, the general pattern of decreased equilibrium number of lethals and inbreeding depression with increased selfing rate remains the same, but sib-mating can have a significant effect on the inbreeding depression and the purging threshold . in a completely outcrossing population, sib-mating decreases the mean number of lethals to the greatest extent for small to moderate genomic mutation rates to lethals, u; in such populations with u= <dig> ,  <dig>  or  <dig> the proportional decrease in the equilibrium number of heterozygous lethals caused by  <dig> % sib-mating is  <dig> ,  <dig>  or  <dig>  respectively. this pattern remains qualitatively the same without background inbreeding depression .

for a given rate of inbreeding, sib-mating is more efficient than selfing at purging inbreeding depression. this can be illustrated by comparing populations with identical expected inbreeding coefficient prior to selection, for example an outcrossing population with b= <dig> % half-sib  mating vs. a predominantly outcrossing population with a selfing rate of  <dig>  ; the equilibrium number of heterozygous lethals is always lower in the population with sib-mating than in the partly selfing population, and the difference increases at higher genomic mutation rates to lethals .

for the same rate of inbreeding in a population , sib-mating is more efficient than selfing at purging nearly recessive lethal mutations because the probability of producing homozygous lethals in sib-mating is smaller than under selfing, which reduces selective interference among loci  <cit> . this is reflected in the mean fitnesses of the different types of progeny. figure  <dig> shows that the progeny of all sib-mating types generally have mean fitnesses intermediate between the mean fitness of selfed and outcrossed individuals. the only exceptions are for the types of mating os and ss under a high genomic mutation rate to lethals  at selfing rates near the purging threshold .
fig.  <dig> mean fitness of offspring produced by the types of mating as a function of population selfing rate for different genomic mutation rates to lethals u , with a sib-mating rate of b= <dig>  and a background inbreeding depression of d= <dig> . the types of mating are outcrossing , selfing , and sib-mating between two outcrossed individuals , one outcrossed and one selfed individual , or two selfed individuals 



mean fitness at equilibrium also varies among types of sib-mating. in general the more inbred offspring have lower mean fitness, due mostly to the constant background component of inbreeding depression. however, with a high genomic mutation rate to lethals the difference among different kinds of sib-mating is reduced, and sometimes reversed . without background inbreeding depression, this becomes the rule: the most inbred sib-mating types always have the highest mean fitness . because selfed parents have purged a fraction of their deleterious mutations, the mean fitness of individuals produced by sib-mating is then higher when their parents are selfed vs. outcrossed. the difference is particularly large under a high genomic mutation rate to lethals  at selfing rates near the purging threshold , where biparentally inbred individuals with at least one selfed parent have higher mean fitness than outcrossed individuals, despite being inbred. near the purging threshold, an appreciable fraction of selfed zygotes survive , and purging occurs in a subset of the population. in this situation, the difference in the number of lethals between outcrossed individuals and surviving selfed  individuals is such that the overall heterozygous effects of lethals in outcrosses between unrelated individuals exceeds the  lethal effects in os and ss sib-matings.

with respect to purging recessive lethal mutations, the results of our model of inbreeding depression in mixed-mating populations practising a combination of outcrossing to unrelated individuals, selfing, and sib-mating are consistent with those of  <cit> , although this earlier study was based on a simpler, less realistic model for inbreeding depression. in both models, bi favours the purging of recessive deleterious mutations in predominantly outcrossing populations, and may therefore facilitate the evolution of selfing. in contrast to uyenoyama’s model, we incorporated zygotic disequilibrium and selective interference among loci, which are magnified under high inbreeding depression. we show that with high genomic mutation rate to recessive lethals, sib-mating lowers the threshold for purging recessive lethal mutations, thereby potentially favouring evolution of high selfing rates.

could the lower purging threshold caused by sib-mating be observed in experimental data? winn et al.  <cit>  observed a purging threshold for total inbreeding depression, with substantial inbreeding depression maintained for selfing rates up to  <dig> , but the among-species variation in the rate of bi  may be too small to allow empirical tests of whether bi affects the purging threshold for recessive lethals.

evolutionarily stable selfing rates in a population practicing sib-mating
following lande and schemske  <cit> , who showed that complete outcrossing and complete selfing were the only two evolutionarily stable equilibria maintained by the two main genetic forces driving the evolution of selfing , numerous models were proposed to explain the maintenance of stable mixed mating . uyenoyama  <cit>  suggested that bi could be one mechanism maintaining stable intermediate selfing rates under moderate inbreeding depression by generating frequency-dependent selection. at higher selfing rates, the automatic advantage of selfing decreases and bi further decreases the automatic advantage of selfing via greater transmission of the genome in the bi portion of the outcrossed matings. however, uyenoyama  <cit>  assumed no inbreeding depression associated with bi but constant inbreeding depression associated with selfing, to observe stable mixed mating.

we can use the analytical approximation of lande and schemske  <cit>  to predict the evolutionarily stable selfing rates expected in our more realistic model that includes inbreeding depression for progeny of sib-mating and that allows inbreeding depression to evolve as a function of the mating system. the approximation states that there is selection for increased selfing if the inbreeding depression is less than  <dig>  , and vice versa. here, the approximation predicts that the only evolutionarily stable selfing rates are complete outcrossing  or complete selfing . porcher and lande  <cit>  showed that this approximation predicts evolutionarily stable selfing rates accurately with a low to moderate genomic mutation rate to lethals . a full analysis of evolution of selfing is required under high mutation rate to lethals , when the approximation does not apply. however, in general, allowing purging of inbreeding depression generates a strong positive feedback on the evolution of selfing rates, which can outweigh other mechanisms that promote stable intermediate selfing rates in the absence of purging .

scope and limitations of the model
to keep the model tractable, we have assumed that the component of inbreeding depression due to nearly additive, mildly deleterious mutations could not be purged. combining two components of inbreeding depression represents a significant improvement over most theoretical studies about mating system evolution, which generally assume constant total inbreeding depression, inbreeding depression caused by a single locus, or at best model a single component. assuming a constant  background inbreeding depression is a reasonable first approximation. the contributions of mutations to inbreeding depression and their sensitivity to purging upon selfing depend primarily on their deleterious effect and dominance coefficient  <cit> . furthermore, in predominantly outcrossing species, the total inbreeding depression resulting from the classical bimodal distribution of inbred fitness is composed of comparable amounts due to nearly recessive lethal and semi-lethal mutations versus more nearly additive mildly deleterious mutations  <cit> . for these reasons, nearly-recessive lethals are expected to be most readily purged by selection with inbreeding, and to play the most important role in the coevolution of inbreeding depression and selfing rate. data from natural populations show that early-acting recessive lethals contribute a substantial fraction of inbreeding depression in outcrossing species but are mostly purged in highly selfing species  <cit> . in contrast, the component of inbreeding depression due to late-acting more nearly additive mildly deleterious mutations remains nearly constant across population selfing rates  <cit> .

estimates of the mean dominance coefficient of mildly deleterious mutations in natural populations are generally in the range of  <dig> <h< <dig>   and theoretical analyses show that for such mutations the contribution to inbreeding depression depends only weakly on the selfing rate  <cit> . however, a small fraction of mildly deleterious mutations may have smaller dominance coefficients and thereby be liable to purging. in addition, we have shown that slow inbreeding, as produced here by sib-mating, is more efficient than selfing for purging nearly recessive lethals. this may also be true for mildly deleterious mutations  <cit> . a full model of inbreeding depression, including all types of unconditionally deleterious mutations , as well as inbreeding depression due to stabilizing selection on quantitative characters  <cit> , is therefore needed for a comprehensive understanding of the joint dynamics of inbreeding depression and mating systems. the net effect of purging mildly deleterious alleles should nevertheless remain small compared to the purging of nearly-recessive, highly deleterious mutations. incorporating the purging of mildly deleterious mutations therefore should not alter the main conclusion of our model, which is that sib-mating contributes to purging inbreeding depression, thereby reinforcing the positive feedback on the evolution of selfing rate. in other words, bi, as modelled here by sib-mating, cannot produce a stable mixed-mating system.

our model also assumes infinite population size and hence cannot address the effect of sib-mating caused by small population size alone. in small populations, demography and drift may interact with mutation, selection and the mating system to alter the dynamics of inbreeding depression and the purging process. for example, fixation of mildly deleterious mutations decreases inbreeding depression  <cit> . yet our model should be valid for other mechanisms causing bi in large populations, such as geographic structuring by limited dispersal of seed and pollen , which is likely to be common in plants  <cit> . the main result of our model, that sib-mating promotes increased selfing via purging of inbreeding depression, requires that selfing efficiently purges recessive lethal mutations in finite populations. the few theoretical studies examining the joint effects of selfing rates and population size on the dynamics of inbreeding depression all show that for populations of  <dig> or more individuals, purging by self-fertilization occurs, particularly with highly deleterious mutations with a small dominance coefficient, such as recessive lethals . thus the predictions from infinite population models are consistent with those from simulations of finite populations .

CONCLUSIONS
using a realistic model of inbreeding depression incorporating the bimodal distribution of deleterious mutations and the joint evolution of mating system and inbreeding depression, we have shown that sib-mating promotes the purging of inbreeding depression, but is unlikely to maintain stable intermediate selfing rates. these results, combined with previous work, suggest that genetic mechanisms alone are therefore unlikely to provide general explanations for the maintenance of mixed mating. factors involved in pollination ecology, including pollen discounting, and pollinator behaviour, interacting with genetic mechanisms of evolving inbreeding depression, provide a more general explanation of the widespread maintenance of intermediate selfing rates in plant populations .

