BACKGROUND
hybrid proline-rich proteins  represent a typical example of a protein family characterized by well-defined sequence features but little functional knowledge besides a loosely defined role in the development or function of the plant cell wall. since a large part of the cellular molecular machinery is conserved across multiple kingdoms, characterization of truly lineage-specific gene families involved in lineage-specific biological processes or structures may provide clues for grasping the fundamentals of the current diversity of organisms. moreover, understanding molecular mechanisms of plant cell wall evolution, ontogeny, and function, is of more than purely theoretical interest. this is because cell wall properties substantially contribute to the physical properties of plant tissues, which are of central importance in almost all areas of human activity concerned with plant materials .

hyprps are characterized by the presence of two different domains: a proline-rich n-terminal repetitive domain and a hydrophobic c-terminal domain. based on the proline-rich domain and a secretory signal, hyprps belong to the group of secreted structural cell wall proline-rich proteins  <cit> . the repetitive character and high proline content of n-terminal domains resemble other proline-rich proteins, though the repeated amino acid motifs vary  <cit> . the hydrophobic c-terminal domain classifies hyprps into the group of proteins containing the  <dig> cm domain  <cit> , together with lipid transfer proteins , amylase inhibitors, 2s albumins and some other subgroups. the characteristic  <dig> cm domain usually consists of less than  <dig> amino acid residues and contains eight cysteine residues in a specific order  <cit> . tertiary structure formed by four hydrophobic helices stabilized by the conserved cysteines has been determined for several proteins of the family since the first reports on crystallographic analysis of the soybean  hydrophobic seed protein  <cit> ) and nmr analysis of wheat ltp in solution  <cit> . although no structural data are available for proteins of the hyprp subgroup, which has been, so far, analyzed only on the sequence level, we can assume that the tertiary structure of their c-terminal domains resembles other  <dig> cm proteins. however, the conserved structure does not allow any functional predictions. it apparently serves only as a scaffold carrying specific functional elements in various subgroups of the  <dig> cm family  <cit> .

multiple reports indicated variable patterns of hyprp gene expression, but the studies mostly focused on a single or a few genes. in alfalfa , expression of msprp <dig> was induced by water deficit in salt-tolerant plants  <cit> , while msacic was transcribed in cold-tolerant plants  <cit> . bnprp from brassica napus was also highly expressed at low temperature. however, low levels of the bnprp transcript were also detected at standard growth conditions  <cit> . expression of sbprp from soybean was modulated by aba, internal circadian rhythm and some stress factors. the expression was induced in response to viral infection or by salicylic acid treatment  <cit> . the transcript of crhyprp was detected in subapical stem segments of cuscuta reflexa that were sensitive to the induction of haustoria formation by cytokinins  <cit> . gene dc  <dig>  from carrot  was down regulated by auxin and its expression was detected in vascular bundles, leaves and flower discs  <cit> . the fahyprp gene from strawberry  was specifically induced in mature fruits  <cit> . mtpprd <dig> from barrel medic  was specifically expressed in the axial part of the embryo during germination and constitutively expressed in roots  <cit> . maize  zmhyprp <dig> transcript accumulated in parenchyma cells of the embryo, but was undetectable in other adult plant organs except the ovary prior to pollination  <cit> . the transcript of the celp gene family of tobacco  was specifically accumulated in flower organs  <cit> .

the expression of hyprp genes can vary even between highly similar proteins in closely related species. the gene encoding tomato  tprp-f <dig> was expressed almost exclusively in immature fruits  <cit> . however, expression of the closely related stprp from potato  was not detected in the potato berry, whereas a high transcript level was detected in roots  <cit> .

together, these data show that expression of hyprp genes is highly variable. transcripts of different genes were detected in various stages of plant development and under diverse conditions. although the hyprp genes have never been proven to play a specific role in any biological process, the genes were found in numerous screens, probably due to high absolute transcript levels under certain inductive conditions or at specific developmental stages.

in this paper, we present a comparative study of the hyprp families of potato and arabidopsis thaliana. we have compared experimentally determined expression patterns of  <dig> potato hyprp genes with publicly available expression data for their orthologs and paralogs from the arabidopsis genevestigator database  <cit> . in order to gain a better understanding of the evolutionary dynamics of the plant hyprp gene family, we have performed a detailed phylogenetic analysis of amino acid sequences of all available hyprp genes sequences from additional five seed plant species. this analysis included representatives of both closely related  and less closely related  groups.

RESULTS
inventory and expression patterns of potato hyprp genes
we initially found sequences of fourteen potato cdnas encoding hyprps  in the public sol genomics network  database . these were used to design specific primers for semiquantitative rt-pcr estimation of transcript levels in plant tissues. subsequently, we identified two additional genes  in the database and included them in the bioinformatic and phylogenetic study, although they have not been followed experimentally .

accession numbers, primer sequences  and predicted length of pcr products.

all identified potato hyprps, except st <dig> , possess an unambiguous n-terminal secretion signal. the following n-terminal domains are predominantly repetitive, with alkaline character  resulting mainly from higher content of lysine and histidine. otherwise, the n-terminal domains are highly variable with respect to size, amino acid composition and repetitive sequence motifs . however, the  <dig> cm c-terminal domains are conserved enough to allow multiple alignment construction and phylogenetic analyses. due to small size of these domains, only a few branches with reasonably high bootstrap values have been identified in trees constructed on the basis of protein sequences. the tree topology varied depending upon the method used . however, support for several clades improved dramatically when corresponding nucleotide  sequences were taken into account and all the stable clades from the protein sequence-based tree were recovered . remarkably, the sequences st <dig> and st <dig> shared not only a significant degree of similarity, but also some features of their n-terminal domains, which are very long , with a complex repetitive structure and a high content of aliphatic amino acids . we shall further refer to st <dig> and st <dig>  as "c-type"  hyprps. the majority of remaining hyprps have n-terminal domains with a very low content of aliphatic residues, usually in the context of short  proline-rich domains containing di- or tripeptide repeats . some similarities could also be identified for several other subgroups of hyprps . in particular, the n-terminal domains of st <dig>  st <dig>  st <dig>  st <dig> and st <dig>  which cluster together in the c-terminal domain-based tree, have a high content of lysine, usually present in the repetitive motif p-k. the sequences of st <dig>  st <dig> and st <dig> also form a stable branch in the tree and all of them have n-terminal domains with a relatively high content of serine and threonine.

proteins are ordered according to their position in the phylogenetic tree of c-terminal domains . domain length n , content of selected amino acids , prosite patterns of the repetitive units , and numbers of repeats . values typical for proteins from individual branches shown in bold. the sequence of st <dig> is truncated.

fourteen originally identified potato hyprp genes were analyzed with respect to their expression in vegetative organs of in vitro grown potato plants – young apical leaves, mature leaves, petioles, growing apical stems, basal stems and roots . in every organ studied, each major subgroup of hyprps was represented by at least one expressed gene. while some genes were expressed more or less exclusively in certain organs , others exhibited high expression levels in many  organs tested . divergent and, sometimes, complementary patterns of expression of closely related genes have been observed . for instance, st <dig> expression is absent in mature leaves, where st <dig> is expressed, while the opposite holds for basal stems.

comparison of the potato and arabidopsis hyprp gene families
since the potato genome is only partially sequenced, our inventory of hyprp genes is probably incomplete, although highly expressed genes are likely to be included. however, the arabidopsis genome has been completely sequenced and extensively annotated. a large set of transcriptome data is available for this model organism, providing information about at least one full set of dicotyledonous plant hyprps.

our blast searches of arabidopsis genome sequences revealed the presence of  <dig> hyprp-encoding loci . this included all  <dig> genes reported previously by josé-estanyol and colleagues  <cit> , who also already noticed that the majority of arabidopsis hyprps are encoded by genes residing in clusters of tandem duplications. we could identify five such sets of immediately or nearly immediately adjacent hyprp loci: two pairs on chromosome  <dig> , two clusters on chromosome  <dig>  and a pair on chromosome  <dig> . remaining genes are located on chromosome  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig> . a common phylogenetic analysis of arabidopsis and potato sequences encoding the conserved c-terminal domain grouped together a majority of arabidopsis sequences from chromosomal cluster 4a with each other and cluster 4b with each other, as well as the pair from chromosome  <dig> . this suggests relatively recent gene duplication events. however, the immediately neighboring sequences from pairs 1a and 1b appear to be substantially divergent, indicating either ancient gene duplication or gene conversion, i.e. exchange of a closely related gene for its distant relative. as in potato, we found several groups of genes with high bootstrap values. most notably, this was a branch of hyprps sharing not only mutually related c-terminal domains, but also long and complex n-terminal domains rich in hydrophobic amino acid sequences. this branch also contains both potato c-type hyprps , indicating that these proteins indeed deserve to be considered a specific hyprp type. as in the case of potato, we could recognize similarities in amino acid composition or common sequence motifs in the n-terminal domains of proteins located in several branches of the tree, although the n-termini are apparently less conserved than the corresponding c-terminal domains.

to our surprise, we were barely able to find clearly defined arabidopsis orthologues of most of the potato genes. besides the two c-type genes , only st <dig> had a close relative with a significant bootstrap support. moreover,  <dig> of the  <dig> potato hyprp genes clustered into three independent branches devoid of arabidopsis sequences . this indicates that major diversification of the hyprp gene family took place after separation of the lineages leading towards solanaceae and brassicaceae.

this hypothesis is also supported by analyses of the available expression data, which revealed no clear relationship between expression patterns of orthologous arabidopsis and potato genes. in contrast, paralogous genes from the arabidopsis chromosomal clusters  shared specialized expression patterns , which is also consistent with their recent origin. apparently, c-type genes are predominantly transcribed in almost all analyzed organs in both arabidopsis and potato, while expression of most of the remaining genes is limited to one or a few organs.

phylogenetic analysis of aminoacid sequences of hyprp genes from seven plant species
the above-described analysis of the  <dig> potato and  <dig> arabidopsis hyprp genes revealed unexpected differences between the two species. we therefore decided to compare these results with data from two additional dicotyledonous species, barrel medic  and tomato , another member of solanaceae family. we also carried out a comparison with representatives of monocotyledonous plants, rice , and maize  and a gymnosperm, loblolly pine . we could not find any bona fide hyprp sequences in non-seed plants . however, in all angiospermous and gymnospermous species studied, hyprps form large families. our database searches revealed  <dig> complete or nearly complete hyprp cdna sequences from tomato,  <dig> from medic,  <dig> from maize and  <dig> from pine. thirty-one well-defined hyprp-encoding loci  were found in the fully sequenced rice genome. several other genes that lacked parts of the conserved  <dig> cm domain were excluded from further analyses . most notably, some of the rice hyprp genes occurred in pairs or clusters of closely adjacent loci . this shows that rapid and recent amplification of hyprp genes is obviously not restricted to arabidopsis .

our subsequent phylogenetic study was based on a collection of  <dig> sequences . as in the cases of potato and arabidopsis, n-terminal domains of hyprps from other species are also highly variable. a multiple alignment of conserved c-terminal domains , which was used to calculate a phylogenetic tree , revealed that only relatively few amino acid residues are absolutely conserved . surprisingly, even one or two of the eight cysteines characteristic for the  <dig> cm domain have been replaced by other residues  in  <dig> hyprps;  <dig> of these were from maize. these substitutions most frequently affected cysteines  <dig> and  <dig> of the  <dig> cm motif ; however, nearly every one of the conserved cysteines was replaced by another amino acid at least in one of the sequences. chemical properties of multiple amino acids were conserved, although we could not identify any specific positions or regions within the domain that would be unique or characteristic for proteins from statistically well-supported major branches of the tree.

the overall topology of the phylogenetic tree  is similar to that obtained for potato and arabidopsis sequences . most notably, a clade containing all c-type sequences of potato and arabidopsis, together with additional hyprps from all other species studied, remains marginally statistically supported, at least in the nj tree. since many c-type sequences also share the characteristic long n-terminal domains and expression patterns between potato and arabidopsis, we believe that, despite poor support in the ml analysis, this group may be biologically relevant. also, the bootstrap support for the c-type clade dramatically improved  after removal of several outlier sequences, indicating that these sequences were obviously responsible for most of the uncertainty .

remarkably, only one hyprp from pinus taeda  clustered outside the c-type clade. within this clade, a branch containing nearly all remaining pinus taeda sequences , but no angiosperm sequences, could be distinguished. the overall topology of the c-type branch suggests a possible presence of two groups of putative orthologues of st <dig> and st <dig> genes. both groups contain sequences from all angiosperm species studied, although only one of them  has significant bootstrap support, at least in the nj analysis.

to clarify the relationship of the relatively compact group of c-type sequences to the rest of the hyprp family, we repeated the phylogenetic analysis on a representative subset of sequences from nearly all major branches. this included the arabidopsis thaliana lipid transfer protein, atltp <dig> , as an outgroup for rooting the tree . the root of the resulting tree is located in the vicinity of the rice sequence os03g <dig>  within a poorly resolved cluster of long branches outside the c-type group. this may indicate that current c-type sequences resulted either from relatively late duplications of genes encoding hyprps with long n-terminal domains, or from a strong selection pressure preventing diversification of these proteins. we prefer the latter explanation because of the presence of both angiosperm and gymnosperm hyprps within the c-type clade. all sequences with long n-terminal extensions outside the c-type cluster are highly diverged. this results in substantial erosion of the phylogenetic signal and their position remains unclear. a massive increase of bootstrap support for the c-type clade after omission of these sequences  suggests that they may even be c-type hyprps outliers.

no statistically supported branches, including genes from all angiosperm species, were found among the remaining hyprps. however, several branches contain both rice and maize sequences, but only one well-supported branch harbors sequences from all dicotyledonous species . the majority of statistically supported branches outside c-type consist of related proteins from either a single species, or two species from the same family . while closely related potato and tomato hyprps form predominantly pairs of orthologues, the corresponding gene families in maize and rice vary substantially.

all angiosperm c-type proteins possess long proline-rich domains with high content of aliphatic amino acids, but only pt <dig> and pt <dig> from pinus taeda have n-terminal domains of the same character. remaining pinus taeda proteins clustering in the c-type branch are shorter and rich in both proline and glycine together . n-terminal domains of proteins outside the c-type clade are generally more variable. to our surprise, proteins with either a very short, or no n-terminal domain at all and proteins with a glycine-rich domain  do not form separate branches of the tree, but are more or less randomly distributed.

analysis of nucleotide sequences encoding the highly variable n-terminal domains of several hyprps provides an insight into a possible mechanism of their diversification. translation of cdna sequences encoding the glycine-rich domains gives, in a reverse-reading frame, polypeptides rich in proline as a result of partial complementarity of codons for these two amino acids . interestingly, cdna sequence of le <dig> translated in a reverse reading frame encodes an amino-acid motif , which can be found in proline-rich domains of some "classical" tomato hyprps . this suggests that sequences encoding the glycine-rich regions might have arisen by inversion of the corresponding part of the gene.

discussion
diversification of hyprps in seed plant evolution
hybrid proline-rich proteins  represent a group of secreted cell wall proteins specific to seed plants. we could find bona fide homologues of hyprp genes only in database sequences derived from angio- and gymnosperm plants, while no representatives of this family were identified in non-seed plant species. in contrast, putative members of the lipid transfer protein  family, which share the conserved  <dig> cm domain with hyprps, were found even in a green alga  and in the moss physcomitrella patens . we thus hypothesize that the first hyprp gene may have been a ltp derivative that acquired a sequence encoding proline-rich n-terminal domain either by means of gene fusion or by introduction of an in-frame repetitive element. this event may have represented one of the evolutionary innovations of seed plants. this view is consistent with the previously described high flexibility and adaptability of the plant  <dig> cm domains  to diverse functional requirements and sequence contexts  <cit> .

hyprps exhibit high sequence diversity due to extremely variable n-terminal domains  and, also, diversification of the c-terminal  <dig> cm domains. for instance, the c-terminal domains of two most divergent hyprps from potato  share as little as  <dig> % of identical residues. although frequent amino acid substitutions within the  <dig> cm domain often preserve the general properties of the residues at specific positions, there is apparently little, if any, selection pressure on the presence of a specific amino acid at a specific position. this results in low overall sequence conservation. surprisingly, several hyprps even lacked some of the conserved eight cysteines characteristic for the  <dig> cm domain  <cit> , which is believed to be stabilized by disulphide bridges formed between these cysteines  <cit> . however, it remains unclear whether these proteins keep the conserved spatial structure and the resulting functional characteristics of the  <dig> cm domain. nevertheless, all these "mutant" hyprps have been found based on cdna sequences, indicating, at least, their active transcription in vivo.

in spite of this variability, c-terminal domains are conserved enough to allow reliable alignment. this is a prerequisite for phylogenetic analysis , although the analysis is limited by the small domain size  and poor sequence conservation. comparison of all available hyprps sequences from several plant species from phylogenetically distant groups of seed plants provides insight into their evolutionary history. we have identified a specific group of hyprps, referred to as c-type , that contains both gymnosperm and angiosperm proteins. these proteins often share some characteristics of their n-terminal domains, namely in terms of length and amino acid composition. c-type hyprps exhibit less divergence than the rest of the family, suggesting that their evolution is more constrained by selection. this may be related to the ubiquitous  expression pattern observed at least in two dicot species. diversification of hyprps evidently followed different paths in gymnosperms and angiosperms. in angiosperms, the present-day variability lies predominantly outside the c-type group, while only limited gene duplications occurred among c-type hyprps. however, the only gymnosperm species analyzed  possesses a large family of c-type proteins , but only one hyprp outside this group.

orthologues shared by evolutionarily distant angiosperms  could be identified only among c-type hyprps. the generally weak statistical support and presence of both long and very short branches in the rest of the tree suggests an ongoing rapid diversification. moreover, weak selection pressure apparently resulted in the accumulation of mutational changes preventing identification of ancient orthologues. the relatively recent origin of most of hyprp diversity is also suggested by the finding that significant branches outside the c-type clade predominantly consist of multiple genes from a single species or a single family .

hyprp genes are found in clusters in both monocot  and dicot  genomes. they are often relatively well conserved within the clusters in terms of sequence and, in case of arabidopsis, even conservation of expression patterns has been observed . however, there is no clear relationship between genes multiplied in rice and in arabidopsis, indicating that the gene clusters originated independently in the two species after their divergence. similar evolutionary behavior has been described for the related ltp gene family, which also exhibits significant diversity, although no substitutions of the conserved cysteines were detected in these proteins  <cit> . interestingly, at least one additional gene family containing proteins with repetitive n-terminal proline-rich domains, namely the formins , exhibits similar recent gene multiplication in arabidopsis  <cit> . this raises the possibility that presence of repetitive sequences containing the c-c-x nucleotide motif  per se might make such genes prone to tandem duplication .

multiple origins of hyprps with atypical n-terminal domains
blast searches for individual members of the hyprp family yielded not only proteins with proline-rich n-terminal domains, but also some proteins with n-terminal domains rich in glycine . in addition, proteins consisting only of a c-terminal domain attached directly to the signal sequence, as reported previously by josé-estanyol and colleagues  <cit> , were also found. although the domain composition of the latter resembles non-specific lipid transfer proteins , the c-terminal domains of these proteins cluster reliably together with the c-terminal domains of typical hyprps in a combined phylogenetic tree constructed from potato ltps and c-terminal domains of hyprps .

we have attempted to map the considerable diversity of the n-terminal domains onto the phylogenetic tree based on the conserved  <dig> cm domain. both n-terminal and c-terminal domains of c-type proteins appear to be relatively less diversified, compared to the rest of the family. all angiosperm c-type hyprps, as well as two pinus taeda proteins , possess very long proline-rich domains rich in hydrophobic and aliphatic amino acids. this suggests that the ancestor of c-type proteins had long proline-rich domains that subsequently became shorter and were occasionally replaced by glycine-rich domains. this trend is clearly visible in pinus taeda, where pt <dig> with a long proline-rich domain is located at the base of the cluster of proteins, which otherwise possess shorter n-terminal domains rich in both glycine and proline .

in angiosperms, most of the n-terminal domain variability was detected outside the c-type clade. glycine-rich proteins or proteins with no, or very short, n-terminal domains are more or less randomly distributed across different branches of the phylogenetic tree . this is in contrast to the previously published phylogeny of hyprps, where proteins with no, or very short, n-terminal domains were located in the central part of an unrooted phylogenetic tree calculated from whole protein sequences including the variable n-terminal domains  <cit> . in that study, proteins with long and short proline-rich domains formed independent branches and glycine-rich proteins defined a separate cluster within the short proline-rich domain branch. based on these results, the authors suggested a model of hyprp evolution involving repeat amplification or insertion of repetitive proline-rich regions into an ancestral protein lacking an n-terminal domain  <cit> . however, use of whole-sequence alignment for tree construction may generate artifacts in cases including significant amounts of deletions, insertions and domain rearrangements. single-domain phylogenies are generally believed to be more reliable  <cit> . based on our c-terminal domain analysis, we can deduce that hyprps with very short or no proline-rich domain  may have diverged rather recently from those with longer proline-rich domains. since these atypical hyprp representatives often share closely related c-terminal domains with typical hyprps, we believe that the loss of the proline-rich n-terminal domain or its replacement by a glycine-rich one occurred both repeatedly and independently in ancestors of different species. thus, these "anomalous" n-terminal domains appear to be of polyphyletic origin.

high variability of n-terminal domains may be associated with their repetitive character, which is typically susceptible to rearrangements. obvious duplication of a part of a proline-rich domain was previously documented for two putative orthologues from closely related species solanum brevidens and s. tuberosum  <cit> . even glycine-rich domains could, due to partial complementarity of codons for proline and glycine , have resulted from a rearrangement  of a sequence encoding a proline-rich domain. since repetitive glycine- and proline- or hydroxyproline-rich proteins form the majority of cell-wall proteinaceous mass  <cit> , this finding might have a more general evolutionary significance.

variability of hyprp expression patterns suggests functional redundancy
for members of multigene families, analysis of gene expression patterns often provides useful clues for determining gene function. however, we could find little obvious organ specificity in the expression of the whole hyprp gene family either in potato or in arabidopsis. notably, arabidopsis proteins with undisputable potato orthologs  exhibited broader organ specificity than at least some of their more divergent counterparts. this suggests that "housekeeping" hyprps may be subjected to more rigorous evolutionary constraints . the expression patterns of individual genes were complementary, overlapping or even identical . this suggests that expression data for a single or a few hyprp genes provide little, if any, useful information on possible biological role of these proteins. unfortunately, so far, there are practically no other "functional" data concerning the hyprp family , so we can only speculate on possible functional differences on the basis of hyprp sequence analyses.

simultaneous expression of genes encoding hyprps with markedly different proline-rich domains might provide multiple modes of interactions between these proteins and the cell wall matrix. lys-pro motifs may interact with acidic components of the cell wall, such as pectins  <cit> . serine and threonine residues, which are often present in sequences of proline-rich domains of hyprps, might allow hydrogen bond formation via their hydroxyl groups. proline-rich domains rich in hydrophobic and aliphatic amino acids might participate in formation of hydrophobic interactions. many hyprp genes are expressed in both growing and mature organs. this suggests a possible involvement not only in the primary cell wall synthesis, but also in cell wall rearrangements in cells of mature organs, where a wide spectrum of interactions with other wall components might contribute to "fine tuning" of cell wall modifications.

however, if the observed hyprp variability resulted from functional specialization for hypothetical interactions with other cell wall components, one would expect a relatively strong selection pressure supporting sequence conservation. this, in turn, would lead to a more robust phylogeny in respect to both the c-terminal domain tree and the distribution of variant n-terminal domains. however, this is not the case – the only stable feature of our phylogenetic tree is the presence of the apparently old group of "housekeeping" c-type hyprps, containing representatives of all analyzed species. while the rest of the family represents a diverse collection of highly variable sequences, c-type hyprps are characterized by a higher degree of sequence conservation, as well as presence of long and relatively hydrophobic n-terminal domains in all angiosperm and in two gymnosperm representatives. interestingly, while most of the diversification of angiosperm hyprps  occurred outside the c-type clade, the opposite may have happened in gymnosperms, at least as far as we can judge on the basis of a single representative genome .

sequence variability, similar to that observed for hyprps, was documented also for the related family of ltps, where only the eight cysteines of the  <dig> cm motif were absolutely conserved  <cit> . using in vitro assays, only loose substrate-binding specificity was found among different ltp family members; ltps analyzed in detail bound a wide spectrum of lipidic ligands, from c <dig> to c <dig>  <cit> . therefore, we assume that, similar to the ltps, high variability of both c- and n- terminal domains of hyprps is rather a consequence of low selection pressure, possible functional redundancy, limited degree of functional specialization and high flexibility of the  <dig> cm domain.

CONCLUSIONS
hybrid proline-rich proteins  could be viewed as a prototype of a dynamically evolving plant protein family constrained by rather limited structural requirements without specific demands for e.g. enzyme activity. this is consistent with the presumed role of these proteins as predominantly structural components of the plant cell walls. we have performed a detailed analysis of the hyprp gene family, including both bioinformatic studies and experimental characterization of gene expression patterns, in potato . the results were compared with available data for the model plant arabidopsis thaliana and several other representatives of diverse lineages of vascular plants, including two monocot species and a representative gymnosperm. we have demonstrated that the expression patterns of several genes encoding potato hyprps do not correlate with those of their arabidopsis orthologues, pointing out the limits of extrapolation of knowledge gained by experiments in model plants towards target crop species.

our bioinformatic study of data from seven plant species revealed that hyprps exhibit extraordinary variability with respect to both the sequence of their conserved  <dig> cm domain and overall domain structure . however, we were able to reconstruct a possible evolutionary scenario that may have led to the current hyprp diversity. we suggest that ancestral hyprps evolved from a lipid transfer protein  relative that had acquired a proline-rich n-terminal domain. in angiosperms, hyprps with long and relatively hydrophobic n-terminal domains retained  a housekeeping expression pattern and remained relatively well conserved. we suggest terming this "conserved" clade "c-type hyprps". in parallel, the rest of the angiosperm hyprp gene family has been undergoing continuous diversification by means of gene duplications , point mutations and rearrangements of the n-terminal domain. this resulted in repeated generation of variant  hyprps with diverse expression patterns. however, the evolutionary dynamics may have been different in the gymnosperms, where diversification took place within the clade of c-type proteins. this raises the interesting possibility that in each species, the co-existence of "dynamic" and "conserved" hyprps might provide an evolutionary advantage. it is tempting to speculate that such a selective advantage might be related to the participation of hyprps in the construction of the interface between the plant cell and its environment.

