BACKGROUND
floral scent is a key modulating factor in plant-insect interactions and thus plays a central role in successful pollination. closely related plant species that rely on different insects for pollination produce different odors  <cit> . the floral scent is of paramount importance to plant reproduction and evolution  <cit> . orchidaceae is one of the largest monocotyledon families, containing more than  <dig>  species. in orchids, large quantities of pollen are formed in masses spread by animals  and the floral scents serve as attractants for species-specific pollinators  <cit> . these pollinators have played a major role in orchid evolution. the range of odors produced by orchids is enormous, providing an inexhaustible basis for specificity. such diversity is advantageous in the evolution of an obviously successful family.

the floral scent is determined by a specific complex mixture of volatile low-molecular-mass molecules dominated by monoterpenoid, sesquiterpenoid, phenylpropanoid and benzenoid compounds and fatty acid derivatives  <cit> . although the complete pathways leading to the final products have not been characterized, common modifications such as hydroxylation, acetylation and methylation have been described  <cit> . these terpenes are synthesized from isopentenyl diphosphate by different mono and sesquiterpene synthases  <cit>  and via two alternative pathways: the mevalonate pathway from acetyl-coa, and the methylerythritol phosphate pathway from pyruvate and glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate, g3p  <cit> . recently, the chemical structures of many floral scent compounds have been determined and several investigations into their biosynthesis have been described,  <cit> . the genes encoding enzymes such as linalool synthase, benzylalcohol acetyltransferase and  <dig> methyltransferases, involved in the biosynthesis of clarkia breweri scent volatiles, have been isolated and characterized  <cit> . similar results were obtained on a methyltransferase that catalyzes methyl benzoate formation in the petals of the snapdragon, antirrhinum majus  <cit> , and sesquiterpene synthase in rose petals  <cit> . in general, expression of these genes is highest in petals and is restricted to the epidermal cell layers of floral tissues  <cit> .

recently, expressed sequence tag  has appeared as a powerful tool for genomics research. ests have developed into a useful way of discovering the genes for metabolic pathway enzymes in general  <cit> . these high-throughput technologies have therefore helped in identifying new fragrance genes in vegetative tissues and flowers, including three new genes from the deoxyxylulose-5-phosphate  pathway of isoprenoid biosynthesis in peppermint, mentha × piperita  <cit> , phenylpropene metabolism in sweet basil, ocimum basilicum  <cit> , diterpene synthesis in stevia rivaudiana of asteraceae  <cit> , terpene synthase in arabidopsis  <cit> , and rose scent-related genes  <cit> . however, the metabolic pathways of volatiles in monocotyledons have not been studied exhaustively and may differ from those in dicotyledons.

orchidaceae have sophisticated flower morphologies including two whorls of perianth segments, three sepals and three petals, one of which is highly evolved as a labellum  and serves as a landing platform for pollinators. the orchidaceae species pollinated by bees, wasps and bumble bees cover a wide range of scents, from rosy- and ionone-floral to aromatic- and spicy-floral. many volatile components have been identified in orchidaceae flowers from the american tropics, african tropics, australian tropics and parts of europe  <cit> . however, the biosynthetic pathways of orchid flower fragrance are not well understood. little is known about the enzymes and genes controlling scent production in monocotyledons such as orchids, and the problem of understanding the molecular mechanisms involved is perhaps insurmountable without genomics.

in this report, we describe the combined use of chemical analysis, genomics and bioinformatics to uncover the scent biosynthesis pathway and the relevant genes. volatiles from the flower of a scented phalaenopsis species, p. bellina, were compared with those from a scentless species by detailed chemical analysis and by identifying secondary metabolism-related genes using est. we also generated scent-related ests by data mining as well as by est filtering of the p. bellina unigenes database against those of scentless phalaenopsis, rice and arabidopsis to identify relevant genes. we characterized genes encoding enzymes in the biosynthetic pathway from pyruvate and g3p to geraniol, linalool and their derivatives. expression of the scent-related genes was confirmed using rna blot hybridization. this is the first attempt to deduce the scent biosynthesis pathway in phalaenopsis orchids through systems biology, and the results give biochemical insights into monoterpene biosynthesis in these species.

RESULTS
major classes of volatiles emitted from p. bellina and p. equestris flowers
taxonomically, the genus phalaenopsis belongs to the family orchidaceae, sub-family epidendroideae, tribe vandeae and subtribe aeridinae. the genus phalaenopsis is subdivided into five subgenera, namely proboscidioides, aphyllae, parishianae, polychilos and phalaenopsis, and comprises approximately  <dig> species according to the latest classification of christenson  <cit> . p. bellina , classified in subgenus polychilos, is native to malaysia and numerous commercial varieties have been bred because of its pleasant fragrance. it has no linesof scentless varieties, so p. equestris  was used for comparison. p. equestris, subgenus phalaenopsis, is a scentless species native to taiwan with a colorful perianth. the subgenera polychilos and phalaenopsis diverged more than  <dig> mya  <cit> .

all species of phalaenopsis display a remarkably uniform diploid chromosome number of  <dig> ; however, their chromosome sizes and centrosome positions vary considerably  <cit> . although the p. bellina karyotype shows large chromosomes with a 2c value of  <dig>  pg and that of p. equestris shows small chromosomes with a 2c value of  <dig>  pg  <cit> , the two species can be crossed to yield progeny .

qualitative and quantitative analyses of volatile compounds from p. bellina flowers were performed using gc-ms. monoterpenoids, phenylpropanoids, benzenoids and fatty acid derivatives were detected . monoterpenoids including geraniol, linalool and their derivatives  accounted for more than 80% of the total volatiles collected from the p. bellina flowers. they included geraniol, nerol,  <dig> -dimethyl-octa- <dig> -diene- <dig> -diol,  <dig> -dimethyl-octa- <dig> -diene- <dig> -diol,  <dig> -dimethyl- <dig> -octadienal, geranic acid and  <dig> -dimethyl-octa- <dig> -diene- <dig> -diol . in contrast, no monoterpenoid derivatives were emitted in the scentless p. equestris flowers; fatty acid derivatives, phenylpropanoids, and benzenoids were the major volatiles . these compounds are barely detectable by the human nose.

characterization of p. bellina floral dbest
previously, we found that the scent-emitting structures of p. bellina were mostly in its perianth but not in its column . the column of an orchid flower is a specialized organ comprising fused stamen and carpel, and many genes are involved in regulating its development. to reduce the complexity, we constructed a cdna library from p. bellina flower buds with the columns removed immediately before blooming.

a total of  <dig>  individual 5'-ests was retained for the p. bellina flower bud with an average length of  <dig> bp, and the confidence level of the sequences called using phred was  <dig>  per base. after  <dig> cdna clones were analyzed by restriction enzyme digestion, the average insert size was  <dig>  ±  <dig>  kb. for better quality annotation, the ests were first refined and then the related genes were assembled as unigenes. the assembly program, sequencher v.  <dig> . <dig>  was used to organize the redundant ests into unigenes of overlapping contigs at a stringency of 95% identity, with a minimum of  <dig> bases overlap. this process generated  <dig>  unigenes:  <dig> contigs and  <dig> singletons. in the p. bellina floral dbest,  <dig>   of the  <dig>  ests showed similarities to known sequences in the uniprot database. the sequences in the flower bud dbest were functionally characterized using a gene ontology  scheme  <cit> . details of the gene species included in each group are given in figure  <dig>  go allowed  <dig> % of the total ests to be placed in the molecular function category,  <dig> % in the biological process category and  <dig> % in the cellular component category. the remaining 34% either showed insufficient similarities to any proteins  or hit proteins without a go identifier . among the molecular functions, the categories most highly represented were the transferases , other enzymes excluding hydrolases, kinases and transferases , and hydrolases . among the biological processes, the largest proportion  of functionally assigned ests fell into cellular processes excluding signal transduction, cell organization and biogenesis and transport; other metabolic processes  accounted for  <dig> %. together, these two classes of molecular functions and biological processes accounted for  <dig> % of the assignable ests .

identification of scent biosynthesis pathway using the pathway and literature finder 
analysis of the volatiles showed that monoterpenoids, including geraniol, linalool and their derivatives, are major compounds of p. bellina flower scent , so it is reasonable to speculate that monoterpenoids are biosynthesized in these flowers. to identify candidate genes in the dxp-geraniol-linalool pathway of phalaenopsis, we developed a pathway and literature finder system  <cit> . five deoxyxylulose-5-phosphate synthase  and one deoxyxylulose-5-phosphate reductase  related ests were mapped to the methylerythritol phosphate  pathway, which was included in the biosynthesis of steroid pathway in kegg database. no ests were mapped to the terpenoid biosynthesis or monoterpenoid biosynthesis pathways in kegg. possible reasons why only two types of ests were identified corresponding to the mep pathway might include sequence diversification in different species and incompleteness of the kegg collection of pathways. to extract further ests related to the dxp-geraniol-linalool pathway, est annotations, the volatile components identified by gc-ms and the relevant pubmed literature were combined.

in the pal system, we used 'plant terpene biosynthesis pathway and linalool' or 'plant linalool compound and scent' or 'plant geraniol' as background set keywords to collect literature from pubmed, and 'geranyl diphospate synthase' as functional keywords to search est annotations. the program then connected the chosen keywords, ests and literature . other sets of keywords were also applied to repeat the process .

on this basis, we elucidated the floral scent biosynthesis pathway in p. bellina further in accordance with the gc-ms data on geraniol,  <dig> -dimethyl-octa- <dig> -dien- <dig> -diol and citronellol . we identified major steps in the pathway from pyruvate and g3p to geraniol, linalool and their derivatives . these included genes encoding deoxyxylulose-5-phosphate synthase , deoxyxylulose-5-phosphate reductase , 4-diphosphocytidyl-2-c-methyl-d-erythritol-2-phosphate cyclase , epi, gdps and cytochrome p <dig>  the biosynthetic pathway for linalool and its derivatives, including linalool oxide, was also deduced .

ests differentially expressed between the floral dbests of p. bellina and p. equestris
comparisons of the most abundant ests by calculating the enrichment factor  for different transcripts in the floral dbests of p. bellina and p. equestris  <cit>  facilitate the provisional identification of scent metabolism genes. the enrichment factor was obtained by dividing the proportion of a certain transcript in the scented species by that in the scentless species. statistical significance was determined using the simple monte carlo test . geranyl diphosphate synthase , epi, lox and diacylglycerol kinase  showed  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig> -fold enrichments, respectively . gdps was significantly differentially expressed in the scented species . gdps participates in the biosynthesis of monoterpenes in plastids  <cit>  primarily by supplying the essential precursor, suggesting that p. bellina may produce scent molecules in the plastids rather than the cytoplasm. among the ests of the p. bellina flower bud, epi  is a multi-functional protein with hydratase, dehydrogenase, epimerase and isomerase activities involved in fatty acid beta-oxidation in plant peroxisomes and glyoxysomes  <cit> . dak, enriched in the scented species , converts diacylglycerol to phosphatidic acid, which has been shown to accumulate rapidly in plant cells in response to stimuli and may function as a signal molecule  <cit> . if so, dak may serve as a signal molecule for day-fragrance in p. bellina rather than being involved in scent biosynthesis directly.

in addition, expansin showed a  <dig> -fold higher abundance in the scented species . expansin loosens plant cell walls and thereby stimulates cell enlargement  <cit> . in orchids, expansin may burst the cell walls in the epithelium to release scent components. indeed, transmission electron microscopy shows that bulges extend from the outer epidermis cell walls during flowering of p. bellina . interestingly, our results show that peroxidase  might be related to scent metabolism.

more than 2-fold increases of o-methyltransferase transcripts  and cytochrome p <dig> transcripts  were also observed in p. bellina flowers. previous research has shown that o-methyltransferase is involved in many reactions in volatile biosynthesis  <cit> . o-methyltransferase methylates a wide range of substrates such as catechols, phenylpropanoids, orcinol and isoquinoline, all of which are involved in modifying scent molecules upon induction  <cit> . cytochrome p <dig> can act as a hydroperoxide lyase and catalyze the cleavage of lipoxygenase products , forming omega-oxoacids and volatile c6- and c9-aldehydes and alcohols  <cit> . however, in some cases, fewer enzymes than expected are required to synthesize the various hydroxylated structures, such as cytochrome p <dig> mono-oxygenase in mentha species  <cit>  and geraniol 10-hydroxylase in catharanthus roseus  <cit> . molybdopterin biosynthesis cofactors  are involved in various types of oxidative metabolism, including nitrogen metabolism and phytohormone biosynthesis  <cit> .

lipoxygenase  est was the most abundant transcript in the p. bellina flower bud dbest
it has been proposed that lox may be involved in plant growth and development; biosynthesis of regulatory molecules such as jasmonic acid and traumatin; and biosynthesis of volatile compounds such as hexanal, hexenal and hexenol, which are involved in flavor, insect attraction and defense  <cit> . lox enzymes can be grouped into two types: 9-lox, which specifically forms 9- hydroperoxy derivatives of fatty acids , and 13-lox, which specifically forms 13-hpos  <cit> . interestingly, we discovered that three different kinds of 9-lox-like ests  accounted for  <dig> % of the p. bellina flower dbest . one of them  was specific to the p. bellina flower. however, no 13-lox-like ests were observed in such flowers. in contrast, only  <dig> % of the floral dbest of p. equestris encoded lox, and both 9-lox and 13-lox were detected . in addition, four cytochrome p <dig> enzymes of the cyp <dig> subfamily-related ests represented as one gene were mined in the p. bellina flower dbest. this contig comprised  <dig>  nucleotides and showed 75% similarity at the amino acid level to rice allene oxide synthase  and 72% similarity to cucumis melo 9-hydroperoxide lyase   <cit>  the high percentage of 9-lox-related ests, and the existence of ests associated with the aos or hpl pathway, together suggest that the 9-lox pathway for linoleic or linolenic acid metabolism is executed in the p. bellina flower.

identification of scent-related genes by est filtering
by adopting previous approaches, we could have identified those scent-related genes that have already been reported in the literature. however, novel scent-related genes that have not been reported, or their sequences are too divergent from known ones, would not be identified by using the pal finder. in addition, genes with low expression levels would not easily be identified by enrichment factor analysis. to detect still more scent-related genes, we performed est filtering using less stringent conditions to remove genes homologous between p. bellina and p. equestris. the  <dig>  p. bellina unigenes were filtered against the  <dig>  floral unigenes of p. equestris using tblastx at an e-value < 10- <dig>  the ests left over after filtering with the minimum acceptable threshold  could plausibly represent non-homologous transcripts in p. bellina.

the results showed that  <dig> unigenes of p. bellina did not match the p. equestris unigene database . the est filtering results revealed genes involved in the biosynthetic pathway from pyruvate and g3p to linalool, geraniol and their derivatives in floral unigenes of p. bellina, consistent with the chemical analysis results showing that no linalool and geraniol were emitted from the floral organs of p. equestris. however, the filtered results may not account only for fragrance genes; some filtered unigenes may be involved in morphogenetic networks. interestingly, p. bellina  and p. equestris  have similar color spectra, so est filtering eliminated the genes involved in the biosynthesis pathways for flower colors and reduced the complexity of analysis. indeed, the fact that no anthocyanin biosynthesis genes were identified in the est filtering results is evidence for the efficacy of est filtering.

further est filtering by use of tblastx against the collected floral unigenes of rice and arabidopsis, which both lack fragrance, removed the genes involved in morphogenesis. an e-value < 10- <dig> was applied for the tblastx program, and the matched results with fewer ribosomal proteins and housekeeping genes were accepted. unigenes with significant blast search results were classified as homologous genes among rice, arabidopsis and p. bellina. altogether,  <dig> unigenes remained unmatched and included fewer housekeeping genes at e-value < 10- <dig>  and thus were defined as p. bellina scent-related genes .

a total of  <dig> unigenes common to the above two est filtering results constituted a more refined set of scent-related genes in p. bellina . these transcripts included genes for nadphdh, epi, molybdopterin biosynthesis cofactors and gdps . concomitantly, epi and gdps were among the highly expressed transcripts, and molybdopterin biosynthesis cofactors were only expressed in the p. bellina flower buds . our results also suggest that nadphdh and cytochrome p <dig> are required for the formation of linalool and geraniol derivatives . from the chemical and bioinformatic analyses, we deduced a monoterpene biosynthesis pathway of  <dig> steps in the p. bellina flower, leading from g3p to geraniol, linalool and their derivatives. ests corresponding to  <dig> of these steps  were identified .

transcripts encoding signal transduction factors such as sensor proteins, membrane proteins and mitogen-activated protein kinase were also identified , suggesting that scent emission may be related to stimuli that elicit a series of signal transduction processes leading to gene expression and scent production. we also detected ferrochelatase, as well as myb family protein , which has been shown to regulate the biosynthesis of petunia flower fragrance  <cit> . however, we could not rule out the possibility that the ests identified by enrichment factor analysis were merely the results of incompleteness and bias in the dataset used in this analysis.

confirmation of scent-related genes by rna blot hybridization
differential expression of several of the identified scent-related genes was confirmed by rna blot hybridization. pepi <dig> was highly expressed in the scented species but rarely expressed in the scentless species . likewise, plox <dig>  pgdps and pnadphdh <dig> were expressed in the scent species. the same blot was hybridized to a probe encoding a ribosomal rna indicating that each individual lane had been loaded with the same amount of rna . these results were consistent with the bioinformatics analysis of floral ests preferentially expressed in the scent species.

discussion
in this report, we developed a pal system to facilitate the identification of literature and pathway information related to certain ests. unlike pubmed, which can only provide keyword searches without identifying the papers really related to ests of interest to the user, pal also provides an easier search platform for demonstrating which of the sequences in hand is engaged in a certain kegg pathway. in pal, blast is used for alignment in batch  and its alignment results are parsed to extract such information. thus, the pal system covers the blast function. we drew the candidate scent biosynthesis pathway manually. in addition, we recognized enriched transcripts by comparing the floral unigene databases for scent and scentless species, and by est filtering to identify other genes for scent biosynthesis and scent modification candidates. systematic collection of ests and retrieval of related research documents from public databases were highly rewarding strategies for studying these non-model plants, particularly since genomic information is limited in orchids. efficient connection of the biological components with related literature by computational methods was a useful strategy for deducing the metabolic pathways.

in this study, we were able to identify genes, including those for dxps, dxpr, dmec, gdps, epi, nadphdh and cytochrome p <dig>  all involved in the dxp-geraniol-linalool pathway, by combining est data mining with metabolic profiling and analysis of volatiles and est filtering. although comparison with scentless plant material would in principle be optimal if isogenic scentless p. bellina lines could be used, no such variants yet exist. the flowers of p. bellina and p. equestris express similar sets of genes determining the nature of the organ even though they are phenotypically different. however, their final appearance, including scent, may be determined by a relatively small number of genes expressed in a cultivar-specific manner.

all monoterpenes are formed from gdp, which is synthesized from dimethylallyl diphosphate and isopentenyl diphosphate  <cit> . the high expression level of gdps in p. bellina flowers suggests that scent biosynthesis in this species is predominately due to production of geraniol and linalool from dxp. thus, est data mining and est filtering were informative in identifying genes among different dbests from different sources and may be applicable for comparative genomics.

monoterpene synthase genes have been identified in both floral and vegetative organs of several angiosperms and gymnosperms  <cit>  of special interest in this respect are studies of terpene synthases, a large class of enzymes that appear to be responsible for most of the structural variety of terpenes  <cit> . however, terpene synthase was not identified in p. bellina in this work. we have applied an hmm based method such as interpro  <cit>  to validate whether any such protein domains were in fact present in the dataset. results showed that no any terpene synthase domains were present in the p. bellina floral est database. the low sequence-relatedness among monoterpene synthases in angiosperms  <cit>  might have added to the difficulty; thus far, few terpene synthase genes have been identified in monocotyledons. in addition, these genes may belong to families with high diversity in non-conserved regions  <cit> . a further attempt to identify them was conducted by in silico hybridization using known monoterpene synthase genes as electronic probes, but neither linalool synthase nor geraniol synthase genes were found. the pool in the p. bellina est database may be insufficient, so that not all genes in the scent biosynthesis pathway – including monoterpene synthase genes – have been identified. alternatively, there may be regulation of the scent biosynthesis at the precursor level, and the enzymes responsible for synthesis are not transcriptionally regulated. previous studies have shown that linalool synthase levels and activities in clarkia breweri remain high while linalool emission decreases, suggesting that regulation of terpenoid precursors occurs in c. breweri  <cit> .

both epi and nadphdh are multifunctional and are involved in β-oxidation and reduction reactions  <cit> . pepi <dig> showed a distinct expression profile in the scented species and thus may be correlated with scent biosynthesis via the geraniol-linalool pathway. altogether, our results suggest that epi, cytochrome p <dig> and nadphdh are related to monoterpenoid biosynthesis in orchids.

the role of the lox pathway in plant-pathogen interactions and the importance of 13-loxs and their product jasmonate in resistance against insects and pathogens have been analyzed in numerous pathosystems  <cit>  the 9-lox pathway generates a group of metabolites that are structurally related to, but distinct from, those derived from the 13-lox pathway  <cit> . in our results, a much lower level of fatty acid derivatives was observed in p. bellina flowers than in p. equestris flowers . since no 13-lox pathway genes were expressed in p. bellina, its fatty acid derivatives were produced mostly by the 9-lox pathway. however, there was a discrepancy in that 9-lox ests were the most abundant ests in p. bellina flowers, but fatty acid derivatives were at very low levels in its volatiles. these results suggest that fatty acid derivatives produced by the 9-lox pathway in p. bellina flowers are mostly not volatiles. recently, 9-hydroxy-10-oxo- <dig>  15-octadecandienoic acid  biosynthesized by 9-lox and aos were shown to have flower-inducing activity in lemna  <cit> . although the biological function of the high levels of 9-lox expression in p. bellina flowers is unclear, the expression of pblox may control the synthesis of some signal for flower scent formation or emission. in addition, many lipid bodies were observed in the petal epidermis of p. bellina by transmission electron microscopy , suggesting that the 9-loxs are involved in converting storage lipids into substrates for further oxidation to provide energy for scent emission. it will be important to demonstrate products of the 9-lox pathway in vivo and functionally characterize genes that encode 9-lox and other enzymes involved in this pathway in order to understand their relationships to floral scent formation and emission in p. bellina.

despite the popularity of phalaenopsis species in cultivation, very little is known about their ecology and distribution in nature. so far, there have been no reports indicating the kind of insects that visit p. bellina or p. equestris in the wild. flowers of phalaenopsis spp., with its colorful perianth, are pollinated by bees and produce fragrances during the day  <cit> . bumble bees are primarily attracted from a distance to visual stimuli, whereas landing depends upon both visual and olfactory cues  <cit> . the complex fragrances and vivid colors in p. bellina suggest that this species probably attracts pollinators by both olfactory and visual stimuli. in contrast, the strictly visual strategy used by p. equestris to attract pollination vectors is the presentation of the colored perianth. although p. equestris has small flowers , it produces many more flowers in a peduncle compared to p. bellina, which produces  <dig> to  <dig> larger flowers  per plant but with fragrance. it seems logical that the evolution of orchidaceae, a family that was probably already highly "pollinator-oriented" at its inception, further augmented the complexity of the pollination mechanisms  <cit> . the emission of volatiles from p. bellina flowers may have evolutionary significance and thus increase reproductive fitness in orchids.

CONCLUSIONS
in this work we have shown how est research can be usefully applied to the construction of a putative scent metabolism pathway in p. bellina and the identification of the genes encoding the enzymes involved in this pathway. for a non-model plant with a very large genome , which cannot easily be accessed for whole genome sequencing, est analysis of its transcriptome profile becomes a very efficient and informative tool. a combination of volatile analysis, est database mining with the pal finder and est filtering can be applied to deduce the scent biosynthesis pathway in p. bellina and to identify scent-related genes.

