BACKGROUND
malaria continues to take a large toll on the health and economies of some of the world’s poorest nations. drugs remain the primary option for dealing with malaria infection although there are promising clinical trials that may pave the way for the use of vaccines against the disease  <cit> . in spite of enormous progress in the fight against the disease, the emergence of drug resistance to artemisinin, the only anti-malarial drug for which clinical resistance is not yet widespread, threatens to reverse the gains  <cit> . there is an urgent need to fast-track the development of new anti-malarials. fortunately, high-throughput and phenotypic screens have provided several potential drug leads. through public and private efforts, nearly six million compounds have been screened leading to the identification of thousands of active compounds . the malaria box, an open access “pharmacological test kit” has been made freely available to malaria researchers in an effort to spur antimalarial dug development  <cit> . the malaria drug development pipeline now contains over a dozen new drugs and several new combinations of approved drugs are in various stages of pre-clinical and clinical trials  <cit> . approximately half of these new drugs have unknown mechanisms. an understanding of the mode of action  of these compounds would help prioritize and optimize them while also highlighting potential resistance mechanisms. this could help mitigate the high rate of failure in the drug development pipeline or rapid emergence of drug resistance. furthermore, even compounds with no potential to be developed into useful therapeutics are valuable as tools for probing the parasite’s biology  <cit> .

transcriptional profiling of cells exposed to small molecules has been successfully demonstrated as useful in understanding drug moa especially in human cell lines. for instance, the connectivity map   <cit> , a database of gene expression profiles from cancer cell lines exposed to multiple drugs of known moa has been used to successfully predict the moa of new drugs  <cit> . however, chemical perturbation of p. falciparum, which has been widely described as transcriptionally hard-wired , is thought to provoke little in the way of a specific response. for example, treatment of the parasite with lethal anti-folate drugs for up to 24 hrs did not reproducibly induce up-regulation of genes in the folate pathway or elsewhere in the genome  <cit> . exposure to chloroquine  was reported to have no effect on the transcript levels of genes presumed to be involved in its moa  <cit> . however, in other studies, perturbation of the parasite with a polyamine synthesis inhibitor, diflouromethylornithine- dfmo  <cit> , febrile temperatures  <cit> , artesunate  <cit>  and an inhibitor of sphingomyelin synthase  <cit>  were found to provoke transcriptional changes in the expected target biological pathways. these reports suggest that the reported lack of responsiveness to cq and anti-folate drugs cannot be generalized to all perturbations. in an earlier large-scale perturbation of malaria parasites with  <dig> drugs  <cit> , 59 % of genes responded transcriptionally to at least one. some drugs, including cq, quinine and colcichine affected fewer than  <dig> genes, while drugs like apicidin, trichostatin a and staurosporine affected more than  <dig> genes and, importantly, even for drugs that only modestly affected gene expression, the effects were highly reproducible to those in other experiments within the same study  <cit> . the ability of the parasite to respond in a reproducible way implies that the response is physiologically relevant and coordinated. except for the study by hu et al.  <cit> , transcriptional studies in the parasite have focused on only one drug at a time, making it difficult to reach general conclusions about the parasite’s capacity to mount specific transcriptional responses  <cit> . we expand on these previous reports to investigate the extent to which transcriptional responses in p. falciparum can indicate precise small molecule targets and/or broader biological effects. to do this, we devised a  <dig> step approach that involves: i) performing perturbations with  <dig> chemically and functionally diverse drugs; ii) minimizing biological variation among samples by leveraging the multiplex exon array developed in our lab; iii) generating perturbations in two genetically and phenotypically distinct lab clones; iv) exposing parasites only briefly  to small molecules to minimize secondary effects; v) minimizing non-specific perturbation effects by normalizing transcript levels relative to all other perturbations rather than to untreated controls as is typically done, and, vi) leveraging multiple independent datasets to cross-validate that transcriptional responses reflect biologically meaningful small molecule relationships.

RESULTS
overview of the study
we compiled a set of  <dig> chemically and functionally diverse small molecules associated with inhibition of biological processes involving a wide range of cellular compartments: the cell membrane , dideoxyadenosine, fenofibrate), cytoplasm , nucleus , digestive vacuole , mitochondria  and apicoplast . six compounds  lacked adequate information to be associated with any biological process or cellular compartment. detailed information for all compounds is provided in table  <dig> alongside their pubchem identification ids  for retrieving their chemical structures and additional information. the association between each of the compounds and a given biological process in p. falciparum is supported by various levels of evidence extracted from literature sources and the brenda enzyme database  <cit> . criteria utilized in selecting the small molecules include parasite growth inhibition , enzyme or functional assays, protein structures with co-crystalized compound in the protein data bank  and molecular docking simulations .table  <dig> summary of small molecule perturbations



synchronized cultures of two laboratory clones, dd <dig> and hb <dig>  were exposed for 2 h to each compound at a single developmental stage  at a concentration  obtained from literature sources or determined by our laboratory . genome-wide transcript abundances were determined for each drug perturbation by microarrays.

previous studies in p. falciparum noted only very subtle transcriptional responses, largely attributed to generalized stress responses  <cit> . therefore, we undertook additional data processing steps of rma-normalized  signal intensity data. first, for each perturbation, we averaged the signal intensity for each gene across two distinct lab clones , to enhance signal-to-noise ratio as demonstrated in the cmap project  <cit> . we further validated that averaging gene expression data across two different strains in this way strengthens the identification of drug moa . importantly, because the two clones have very different geographical and drug selection histories, they effectively serve as robustly independent replicates for each perturbation. secondly, we computed a compound-specific response index for each gene by normalizing the gene’s average transcript level following perturbations in the two clones against its average level across all perturbations within the same experimental batch  to increase signal-to-noise ratio  <cit> . this normalization procedure uses distinct biological replicates to help mitigate non-specific transcriptional responses associated with many perturbations as well as experimental batch effects. this approach differs significantly from previous studies  <cit>  in p. falciparum that relied on normalization using untreated controls for single perturbations; in this case, widespread non-specific transcriptional responses can obscure perturbation-specific responses .

global relationships in small molecule transcriptional responses relate to chemical structure
to obtain a global view of transcriptional relationships between small molecules, we computed a correlation between each pair of compounds using the genome-wide response index . the genome-wide response index for each compound is the response index for each gene following exposure to the compound. all  <dig> compounds clustered into only two broad groups , hereafter referred to as class i and ii. class i compounds are generally highly positively correlated to compounds within the class but are negatively correlated to those of class ii. similarly, class ii compounds tend to be highly positively correlated to each other but negatively correlated to those in class i . these broad groupings have not been reported before, possibly because previous studies involved only one or two drug perturbations and the largest study to date involved  <dig> drugs  <cit> .fig.  <dig> hierarchical clustering of compounds based on their genome-wide response indices for each gene across two parasite samples. the respond index for each gene in a given perturbation is obtained as the ratio between the average transcript level of the gene following a 2 h exposure to the compound in two parasite samples and the average transcript level of the same gene across all perturbations performed in the same batch of experiments. the clustering of the compounds reveals two broad groupings  in which compounds within a group are positively correlated to each other but negatively correlated to compounds in a different group



the biological response of cells to small molecules is dependent on chemical structure. small molecules with similar chemical components have similar biological effects as supported by structure activity relationships  studies and correlations between gene expression effects of drugs and their chemical structures . to better understand the role of chemical structure on the observed dichotomy , we hierarchically clustered the compounds based on their pubchem substructure fingerprints . the pubchem substructure fingerprint clusters to some extent recapitulate the transcription profile clusters . in particular,  <dig> of  <dig>  class i compounds  also cluster together purely based on substructure fingerprints  while  <dig> out  <dig>  class ii compounds are placed in a separate cluster based on substructure fingerprints . furthermore, we corroborated these observations using an independent method  to view the pairwise distances between the compounds based on their chemical features. in the 2-dimensional mds plot , class ii compounds are enriched in a distinct quadrant of the plot  demonstrating a strong association between their similarity in the chemical and transcriptional spaces. that is, small molecules that are chemically similar are also more likely to induce similar transcriptional responses.

next, we investigated whether class i and ii compounds can be differentiated by the presence/absence of a particular chemical substructure using an unbiased approach. application of the rule induction algorithm oner  <cit> ) revealed that the pubchem fingerprint ‘≥ <dig> any ring size 6’ is present in  <dig> out of  <dig>  class i compounds as compared to only  <dig> out of  <dig>  class ii compounds . this demonstrates that this substructure is enriched in class i compounds and is associated with gene expression differences between class i and class ii compounds.fig.  <dig> key substructure difference between class i and ii compounds identified using the rule induction algorithm oner. two class i compounds  and two class ii compounds  are shown as an example. the substructures are numbered from  <dig> to  <dig>  with the position of a given substructure referred to as its bit position. the bit structure represents a chemical element, group, ring structure or atom pairs based on the pubchem substructure fingerprints. the presence of a given substructure is encoded by  <dig> and the absence by a  <dig>  class i and ii compounds are largely differentiated at bit position  <dig> which encodes the substructure fingerprint ‘≥ <dig> any ring size 6’



drug relationships depend on both chemical structure and moa
correlations between small molecule transcriptional responses can arise due to two main reasons. first, small molecules that have similar chemical features are more likely to induce similar transcriptional changes . however, not all chemically similar compounds have similar biological effects  <cit> . secondly, small molecules that target the same enzyme or pathway can induce similar transcriptional changes even when their structures are unrelated  <cit> . to determine and quantify whether these two factors are at play in the observed small molecule relationships , we performed principal component analysis  on the transcriptional correlations between the compounds . we found that 65 % of the variation in correlations between the compounds is accounted for by the first dimension of variation. this dimension splits the compounds into two groups that are identical to class i and class ii groups observed in the heat map . because these two compound groups can be largely differentiated using a single chemical group , we hypothesize that chemical features account for a considerable proportion  of variation in the observed transcriptional responses, consistent with a dominant influence of chemical structure on functional similarity between drugs  <cit> . the aminoquinolones cq and tafenoquine  which target hemoglobin digestion and have related chemical structures are near each other in the first two dimensions of the pca plot , supporting the hypothesis that the transcriptional responses capture both chemical similarity and moa. however, some small molecules that differ in their structure have the same moa. for example, e <dig> is chemically distinct from the aminoquinolones  but affects the same pathway  as this class of drugs . in line with this, e <dig> is similar to cq and tq based on transcriptional effects . an exception to this is nelfinavir- another hemoglobin digestion inhibitor . because the similarity between global transcriptional changes induced by the compounds does not necessarily indicate shared moa but is heavily dependent on their chemical structure similarities  <cit> , in the next section we develop an approach for identifying biological pathways that can be directly linked to moa.fig.  <dig> principle component analysis  of transcriptional correlations between the small molecules. the first component of variation  splits the compounds into two clusters identical to those observed by hierarchical clustering of the compounds . the pca plot reveals complex drug relationships involving both chemical similarity and moa. compounds lacking a ring system  occupy the upper left quadrant of the plot in spite of their distinct moas, supporting a dominant influence of chemical structure on global small molecule relationships. an exception is e <dig> which occupies a position on the plot next to other hemoglobin digestion inhibitors . *although the moa of artemisinin is still unknown, the drug has been shown to require activation by heme released during hemoglobin digestion  <cit> 



small molecules induce transcriptional responses in expected target pathways
although some small molecules exhibit high affinity towards specific protein targets, their biological effects are rarely limited to a single target and many have multiple targets . therefore, the effect of small molecules on biological systems can be represented in terms of how they affect a spectrum of biological processes - a profile of molecular effects rather than a single moa. we performed biological function enrichment analysis on the top  <dig> up- and down-regulated genes for each small molecule perturbation . we then constructed a binary vector for each perturbation in which each element represents whether a given biological process is enriched or not among the top  <dig> genes  by the small molecule . this transformation allows small molecules’ effects to be analyzed as a bipartite network  consisting of two kinds of nodes: small molecules and enriched biological processes . in this network, a small molecule and a biological process are connected by an edge if perturbation by that small molecule results in differential expression of genes involved in the process . this representation gives a detailed view of relationships among small molecules than is attainable with correlations or lists of go enrichments .fig.  <dig> representation of small molecule transcriptional effects as binary fingerprints in which “1” encodes an enrichment of a given biological process in the top  <dig> induced genes while a “0” represents lack of enrichment of a given process. a two examples of partial small molecule-go fingerprints for chloroquine and artemisnin. b visualization of the small molecule–go fingerprints for the  <dig> compounds as a heatmap in which the enrichment of a biological process in top  <dig> up-regulated genes for each compound is represented in red and the lack of enrichment by green. c the small molecule-go fingerprints can be visualized in a bipartite network composed of small molecule nodes and biological process nodes. a focused view of the up-regulated small molecule-go relationships between rapamycin and ppmp shows that both compounds are associated with autophagy but only rapamycin is associated with protein import into nucleus and co-translational protein folding



in order to understand whether small molecules can induce transcriptional responses in their expected target pathways, we examined connections between each compound and biological processes in the small molecule-go networks . we considered the small molecule go-networks of up-regulated and down-regulated biological processes separately. for  <dig> of  <dig> compounds for which an expected target pathway could be established , at least one of its connections includes the target pathway . to evaluate the statistical significance of this, we asked whether each biological process was perturbed specifically only by the small molecule  annotated as its inhibitor . biological processes affected by many compounds or that are highly variable across conditions cannot be reliably associated with their inhibitors, in contrast to those that are affected by only a few compounds. for example, the go function ‘dna strand elongation involved in dna replication’ was enriched only in 5-fu perturbations , its expected inhibitor. transcriptional responses of  <dig> compounds  showed unique enrichment with their target pathways ; these functions were not associated with transcriptional responses of any other compounds annotated as targeting other pathways. 72 % of small molecules with known moa were correctly associated to their targets at a specificity threshold of 80 % . atovaquone- an inhibitor of the electron transport chain- resulted in down-regulation of the go category ‘respiratory electron transport chain’ but had the lowest specificity . this low specificity could be a consequence of the non-specific responsiveness of this pathway to unrelated chemical agents, even though only atovaquone and proguanil were expected to directly affect this pathway. the role of mitochondria in sensing stress and acting as a gateway to cell death or survival under various perturbations may also account for this  <cit> . we provide the specificity of each small molecule association to its expected target pathway in additional file 1: table s <dig> to allow a contextual assessment of the false positive rate for each prediction in this study.table  <dig> summary of small molecule perturbations

*in ‘red arrows’ are biological processes enriched in the top  <dig> up-regulated genes while in ‘blue arrows’ are down-regulated biological processes



the small molecule-go networks predict complex relationships between drugs and biological pathways
unlike previous work on drug-drug networks in other species  <cit> , the small molecule-go network provides hypotheses for why two drugs are biologically related. for example, the small molecule-go network confirms that the drugs cq, tq and e <dig> are related through the go process ‘proteolysis involved in cellular catabolic processes’, consistent with the effect of these drugs on hemoglobin catabolism. in contrast, curcumin and apicidin- drugs that interfere with regulation of gene expression through inhibition of histone acetylation and deactylation, respectively- are both connected to the biological process ‘regulation of gene expression’ while the drugs methotrexate and 5-fu which interfere with pyrimidine synthesis are connected to the function ‘nucleobase-containing compound metabolic process’. the connection between 5-fu and this biological function is unexpected in p. falciparum because the parasite lacks a pyrimidine salvage pathway which is required for the activation of 5-fu to an inhibitor of thymidylate synthase   <cit> . nevertheless, 5-fu is a weak competitive inhibitor of the p. falciparum orotate phosphoribosyl transferase , an essential step in pyrimidine biosynthesis  <cit> . inhibition of pfoprt could impact the synthesis of pyrimidines and provide a connection between methotrexate and 5-fu activity. to validate the connection between these two drugs, we measured dose responses to 5-fu across the dd2 × hb <dig> genetic cross  and explored potential genetic determinants of its effects through qtl. a direct apriori test of the genetic locus containing the pfoprt gene  shows that parental alleles in this locus are significantly associated with 5-fu dose response with a higher ic <dig> for progeny inheriting this locus from the dd <dig> parent . a genome-wide qtl scan demonstrates that in addition to this locus, dose response variation to the drug is associated with  <dig> other loci on chromosomes  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig> . the chromosome  <dig> qtl region includes the rad <dig> gene  encoding a dna repair protein, providing additional support for the connection between 5-fu and the go function ‘nucleobase-containing metabolic process’. thus, the small molecule-go network provides a framework for identifying drug similarities while at the same time identifying the biological processes underlying the similarities.

the network approach reveals that while some biological processes are widely perturbed or affected by many small molecules, others are only perturbed by only one or a few small molecules . for example, the biological categories ‘translocation of peptides into host’ , ‘respiratory electron transport chain’  and ‘antigenic variation’  were up-regulated by many compounds . these processes may reflect generalized stress responses that are associated with subsets of small molecules. in contrast, categories that are up-regulated by only one small molecule include: ‘protein import into nucleus’ - perturbed by rapamycin, ‘n-terminal protein amino acid acetylation’ - perturbed by mms and ‘transposition’ - perturbed by 5-fu.

transcriptional insights into artemisinin’s moa
the results above show that transcriptional responses can be used to predict drug moa and provide insights into broad biological effects. the moa of many antimalarial drugs and investigational compounds is currently unknown. artemisinin, the front line antimalarial, has been proposed to act through the generation of free radicals leading to oxidative stress and damage of proteins  <cit> . however, the drug also has been associated, controversially, with direct binding to the serca-type ca2+ atpase protein   and the ca2+ binding translationally controlled tumor protein  . to mine our data for insights into artemisinin targets, we examined the small molecule-go networks for connections involving artemisinin . at 100 % specificity, the up-regulated go connections to artemisinin are: ‘adhesion to host’ , ‘glycerol metabolic process’ , ‘cell cycle’ , ‘translation’  and ‘pyridoxine biosynthetic process’ . recently, mok et al.  <cit>  identified processes in the ‘translation’ and ‘regulation of cell cycle’ go categories as being up-regulated in parasites from southeast asia that have increased artemisinin clearance half-life. furthermore, these processes were up-regulated in parasite isolates containing genetic variants associated with artemisinin resistance in the k <dig> gene. the reported association between artemisinin and tctp  as well as with quiescence , is consistent with the enrichment of cell cycle function. tctp in other organisms is involved in a variety of processes including response to stress, cell cycle, apoptosis and calcium ion binding . in p. falciparum, the protein binds ca2+  <cit>  and artemisinin  <cit> . this binding is increased in the presence of heme  <cit> , consistent with the reported dependence between artemisinin activity and hemoglobin digestion  <cit> . the down-regulated go connections to artemisinin at 100 % specificity are ‘endocytosis’ , ‘cytokinesis’ , ‘cholesterol metabolic process’  and ‘lipid transport’ . the connection between the drug and lipid metabolism has been previously suggested  and implicated in resistance to the drug  <cit> . thus, artemisinin potentially targets the cell cycle and lipid metabolism.fig.  <dig> representation of small molecule-go network for artemisinin. go biological processes enriched in the top  <dig> up-regulated genes are shown as red nodes and down-regulated genes are shown as green nodes.



predicting moa of novel compounds by integration of qtl
public and private screening efforts have recently led to the identification of thousands of compounds with cytotoxic activity in p. falciparum  <cit> . techniques for predicting moa of these compounds will be valuable for their characterization and prioritization for further development  <cit> . among the compounds profiled in our study, five  were derived from a high-throughput screening effort by the st jude’s children’s hospital  <cit> . to ascertain the biological effects of these compounds, we determined the coherence of biological functions predicted from transcriptional perturbations with those encoded in qtl associated with dose response variation to the compounds. the small molecule-go network demonstrates that a single compound can perturb more than one biological process. however, some functions are perturbed by a single or just a few compounds and yield predictions of higher specificity. therefore, we prioritized the links between these compounds and each biological function by considering the specificity of each function.

out of  <dig> biological processes connected to sj <dig> in the up-regulated small molecule-go network, five  were unique to the compound. two go functions  were uniquely connected to this compound in the down-regulated small molecule-go network. these functions were evaluated for overlaps with qtl. sj <dig> dose response was associated with a genetic locus on chromosome  <dig> . we searched this locus for genes encoding biological processes uniquely  connected to the compound in the small molecule-go network. a biological process shared by these two approaches is ‘cell redox homeostasis’, a function that involves cytochrome genes, one of which is present in the qtl .table  <dig> prediction of moa of novel compounds from st jude using qtl and small molecule-go network



similarly, to predict potential moa of the other novel compounds, we compared the functional coherence between their unique connections in the small molecule-go network and the functions of genes located within their qtl. for each small molecule we considered qtl peaks with at least a lod score of  <dig> . the st jude compound sj <dig> had no unique biological process connections in the up-/ down-regulated small molecule-go networks; hence predictions could not be made at 100 % specificity. two functions were predicted as its targets at 94 % specificity in the up-regulated network: ‘respiratory complex iv assembly’ and ‘autophagic vacuole assembly’. qtl mapping revealed a suggestive peak on chromosome  <dig>  but we could not identify genes whose functions are coherent to those predicted in the network. for sj <dig>  a single biological process  was uniquely connected to it in the up-regulated network and no unique connections were observed in the down-regulated network. we did not find any gene with this function in the qtl region associated with variation in dose response to the compound. another compound, sj <dig>  was uniquely connected to the biological process ‘ribosomal large subunit biogenesis’ in the up-regulated network. nine processes were connected to this compound at 100 % specificity in the down-regulated network: ‘protein glycosylation’, ‘respiratory chain iv complex assembly’, ‘intein mediated protein splicing’, ‘drug transmembrane transport’, ‘phosphorylation’, ‘catabolic process’, ‘dna strand elongation involved in dna replication’, ‘signal peptide processing’ and ‘terpenoid biosynthetic pathway’. the qtl peak associated with this compound  includes the gene encoding the multi-drug resistance tansporter, pfmdr <dig> coherent with prediction connection between the drug and the go function ‘drug transmembrane transport’.

discussion
drug responses are complex: perturbation of a single protein can lead to direct effects on its multiple functions and indirect effects can be perpetuated through the cellular network. in addition, broad chemical properties of compounds, for example hydrophobicity, can affect multiple biological processes. therefore, understanding the nature of transcriptional responses to specific perturbations and filtering non-specific effects requires knowledge of how cells respond to a range of chemical perturbations. without this knowledge, it may not be possible to identify transcriptional responses specifically induced by a perturbation vs. those resulting from general stress. this may be one reason that the parasite’s transcriptional responses to perturbations have been considered to be non-specific  <cit> . our study design utilizes many small molecule perturbations in the same experiment and provides a novel way to disentangle transcriptional responses.

the results presented in this work demonstrate that transcriptional responses can point to drug moa in p. falciparum. the observation that small molecules containing similar chemical substructures also tend to show similar transcriptional responses  imply that these responses are specific to the perturbations. the clustering of the  <dig> small molecules into two broad classes  coupled with the observation that a single chemical substructure  can distinguish these classes implies that a large component of transcriptional responses are due to specific chemical features, most prominently rings . even though this study has profiled the largest set of small molecule transcriptional responses in p. falciparum to date, it is important to note that the  <dig> small molecules represent a small proportion of chemical diversity. our study provides a foundation for more extensive studies in future.

to capture the complexity of small molecule relationships, we developed a novel framework for encoding small molecule effects into binary fingerprints of biological categories that are enriched in their perturbed gene sets . we have demonstrated that this representation allows a detailed view of complex relationships that can exist between small molecules in which some biological functions are affected by multiple compounds while others are specifically affected by a smaller number of compounds . the resulting small molecule-go network has enabled us to tease apart small molecule-specific effects from non-specific responses, thereby providing a reliable approach for predicting small molecule moa . from this network, each small molecule can be queried to determine the biological processes that are uniquely connected to it as well as those that it shares with one or more other compounds . this approach can be applied in predicting drug moa, understanding cross-resistance between drugs, drug-drug interactions and off-target effects.

we observed that some small molecules perturb a wide array of functions, while others have a specific target pathway. small molecules have to cross at least one membrane to reach their expected target. broad chemical properties of small molecules such as their hydrophobicity, molecular weight, solubility and pka could indirectly interfere with multiple biological processes. once a small molecule reaches its target, the direct inhibition of a target enzyme, for example, can result in metabolic changes that stimulate downstream biological processes. furthermore, drugs that bind to distinct molecular targets within the same pathway can lead to similar biological effects. it is important to identify all these levels at which a drug can have a biological effect because the therapeutic success of a drug is determined by factors such as drug transport, metabolism and resistance that in many cases are distinct from molecular targets of the drug. most approaches for the prediction of drug moa in p. falciparum rely on the identification of single targets  <cit> . understanding the full spectrum of effects of a small molecule could aid in minimizing off-target effects and enhance the design of highly specific drugs.

our study uncovers some potential challenges of using transcriptional perturbations for predicting drug moa and reveals limitations that will need to be addressed in future studies. first, a large library of perturbations is needed in order to filter non-specific effects of small molecules. secondly, predicting the moa of small molecules that target biological processes that are non-specifically associated with numerous perturbations will pose a bigger challenge than those of small molecules that affect pathways that respond to only very few compounds. for example, the biological process “respiratory electron transport chain” was connected to  <dig> compounds in the small molecule-go network, increasing the fdr for predicting the moa of compounds affecting this process. however, as more compounds are profiled, the fdr for such compounds could be reduced. the small molecule-go network provides a way to identify these non-specific effects and is generalizable for the prediction of drug moa in other organisms.

CONCLUSIONS
we have shown the utility of transcriptional perturbations in predicting drug moa and provide novel biological insights. similarities between transcriptional responses of small molecules depend on their chemical composition and moa. in particular, small molecules containing similar chemical constituents induce similar transcriptional responses. furthermore, we determine that the presence/absence of rings in a compound dominate transcriptional similarities between compounds. we further show that small molecules with the same moa induce similar transcriptional responses. using a novel network representation , we demonstrate that some biological processes are affected by many compounds, potentially reflecting generalized stress responses, while others are affected by only one or few compounds. this network approach provides a hypothesis-testing framework for explaining similarities between any two or more small molecules based on the biological processes to which they are connected in the network. the small molecule-go network correctly identifies the moa of 72 % of compounds at a specificity of 80 %, establishing that this approach can be applied for predicting moa. the representation of transcriptional responses as a small molecule-go network is a novel approach that can be generalizable to other organisms.

