BACKGROUND
about 25% of open reading frames in fully sequenced genomes are estimated to encode membrane proteins  <cit> . however, the global analysis of these proteins has proved to be difficult. a greater effort has thus been undertaken to develop prediction methods, with reasonable success  <cit> . most of these have been devised to detect transmembrane segments with an α-helical conformation . this type of membrane segment is the most studied so far, and consequently the most represented in membrane protein databases  <cit> . alternatively, membrane proteins can be monotopic, i.e. bound to the membrane interface and thus in contact with only one of the compartments defined by the membrane. in the latter case, the membrane anchor can be made of  covalent links to a hydrophobic compound  <cit>   electrostatic binding to phospholipid head groups  <cit> ,  hydrophobic loops inserted in the membrane interface  <cit>  and  amphipathic α-helices inserted at the membrane interface, parallel to the membrane plane, so-called in-plane membrane anchors   <cit> .

ipm anchors are not uncommon. since their first discovery in  <dig>  <cit> , new examples are regularly reported in the literature. however, ipm anchors are still poorly understood and no suitable prediction method is yet widely available to the scientific community. to date, their analysis in silico mainly involves the calculation of the hydrophobic moment  <cit>  and the schiffer-edmundson projection  <cit> . these  <dig> methods are suitable for depicting amphipathic structures in proteins , but are not specifically designed for ipm anchors. in fact, they appear as highly sensitive but poorly specific in this latter case. to our knowledge, there has been only one attempt to develop a prediction method for such membrane anchors. it consists of calculating the depth-weighted inserted hydrophobicity . however, this method has only been assessed on  <dig> sequences. the main problem springs from the fact that systematic sequence analyses are still limited to a few examples of membrane proteins  <cit> . there is no exhaustive and reliable set of experimentally characterized ipm anchored proteins, making the development of a prediction method very difficult.

in this paper, we describe the first attempt to develop a prediction method for ipm anchors in monotopic proteins using experimental data. in practical terms, our method uses a set of  <dig> monotopic proteins reported as anchored in the membrane plane. this set constitutes the most exhaustive database of ipm anchored proteins to date. the method is a one-against-all classification process  based on a pattern recognition support vector machine  with a dedicated kernel. in contrast with other classically used methods, our objective was to develop a highly specific classifier. multiple alignments and a hierarchical architecture were additionally used to improve the performances of the svm. this resulted in an increase of specificity and a limited but significant increase of sensitivity. our method was naively tested on set of known membrane or soluble proteins, as a key proof of efficiency. it as been able to retrieve ipm segments in several membrane proteins while limiting the prediction of ipm anchors in soluble proteins. our method, "amphipaseek", was implemented on the nsp@ server  <cit> .

RESULTS
data set building and characterization
as detailed in methods section, the  <dig> sequences of monotopic proteins reported as ipm anchored  were submitted to an enrichment protocol resulting in a homogenous final data set of  <dig> sequences . it is important to note that in this latter set only  <dig> % of the residues are involved in an ipm anchor. their composition bias is reported in figure  <dig>  the average size of ipm anchors is  <dig> ±  <dig> residues and they are mainly predicted in helical and random coil states . most of ipm anchors include a single amphipathic α-helix, for a maximum of  <dig>  finally, ipm anchors appear indifferently located between the extremities or in the middle of the sequences.

in ipm anchors, lys, phe and trp are the most over-represented residues while cys, tyr and pro are the most under-represented. ipm anchors are more hydrophobic than solvent accessible helices from globular proteins, known to be preferentially amphipathic  <cit> . this difference is particularly marked for trp and phe, two large hydrophobic residues. as expected, ipm anchors are more hydrophilic than tm helices  <cit> . it is noticeable that trp is the only hydrophobic residue more abundant in ipm anchors than in tm helices. trp, tyr and lys, are known to be preferentially located at the membrane interface in tm proteins  <cit> . it is then not surprising to observe an over-representation of trp and lys in ipm anchors. in contrast, tyr is under-represented in this type of anchor. however, this fact is difficult to interpret without a larger data set of monotopic proteins.

sequence-to-topology svm: prediction using a single sequence
as the main characteristics of the ipm anchors are an α-helical conformation and a membrane localization, we used the levin-robson-garnier   <cit>  and phat  <cit>  substitution matrices  for the svm gaussian kernel . the lrg matrix was specifically designed for protein secondary structure prediction  while the phat matrix is built from predicted tm regions of the blocks database. the blosum matrix  <cit>  has also been tested but gives a significantly lower performance .

the optimal values of the window size, the soft margin parameter c and the kernel bandwidth 1/2σ <dig>  were determined for each matrix, with and without positional weighting . a ratio of the dual objective function over the primal objective function exceeding  <dig>  was used as the stopping criterion for the training procedure. the best results obtained are reported in table  <dig>  the results obtained with a multi-layer perceptron   <cit> , a standard connectionist architecture, are also given for comparison. performance of the svm trained with the initial set of  <dig> proteins was measured by using a standard leave-one-out procedure in order to assess the influence of the enrichment protocol. no significant difference has been observed with the svm trained with the enriched data set .

residues involved in an ipm anchor represent only  <dig> % of the total number of residues in the enriched data set. the recognition rate and specificity are consequently not very significant for assessing the quality of the prediction. we have thus used the positive predictive value , the negative predictive value  and the correlation coefficient of pearson-matthews   to better assess the classification performance. performance with respect to these latter criteria, especially sensitivity, remains low for both matrices when no positional weighting is used.

the introduction of positional weighting dramatically improves prediction accuracy. the profile associated with phat , is approximately symmetric with higher weights  at positions i- <dig>  i- <dig>  i- <dig>  i- <dig> and i+ <dig>  i+ <dig>  i+ <dig>  i+ <dig>  with i the absolute position in the sequence of the residue to be classified. the profile associated with lrg is rather asymmetric. higher weights are found in the right-hand side of the profile.

the results obtained with a positional weighting are similar for both phat and lrg. the ipm anchors are largely under-predicted. however, the sensitivity is slightly better with lrg  than with phat . in both cases, predictions are specific with a pipm of  <dig> % and  <dig> % for lrg and phat respectively. the cpm is only slightly better when using phat. these results call for improvements in the prediction method, in order to improve some measures of accuracy, especially sensitivity. several options have been investigated, among which we favored two: a hierarchical approach to prediction, with a post-processing of the output, and the introduction of additional evolutionary information.

hierarchical approach: topology-to-topology svm
the output of the sequence-to-topology svm was used as input of a second svm, implementing a classical gaussian kernel. this "topology-to-topology svm" will be said to be associated with lrg or phat, depending on the nature of the substitution matrix used by the sequence-to-topology svm. applying such a hierarchical approach to data processing provides us with the possibility of  introducing a smoothing to limit aberrant predictions, such as too short ipm segments and  taking into account additional pieces of information, for instance the predicted secondary structure. the generalization performance of the topology-to-topology svm is summarized in table  <dig> .

the sensitivity of the topology-to-topology svm is  <dig>  times higher than that obtained by the sequence-to-topology svm using the lrg matrix . the sensitivity becomes  <dig>  higher when considering the phat matrix . however pipm is divided by  <dig>  for both matrices. the cpm is consequently not significantly different between sequence-to-topology and topology-to-topology svms when considering the lrg matrix. the performance improvement is more effective with phat since the cpm is  <dig>  times higher than for the corresponding sequence-to-topology svm. the improvement of the cpm is still observed when the predicted secondary structure is included in the input of the topology-to-topology svm associated to phat and is >  <dig> . the cpm is thus intermediate between those obtained by the sequence-to-topology svm and by the topology-to-topology svm without using secondary structures. additionally, the loss of specificity is less important.

in parallel with the secondary structure, one could wonder whether the hydrophobic moment μh could be used in the input of the topology-to-topology svm, since μh is commonly calculated to characterize amphipathic helices  <cit> . in fact, μh quantifies the segregation of hydrophobic and hydrophilic residues along the main axis of an α-helix. however, our preliminary analyses highlighted the fact that high μh values are not specifically associated with ipm anchors . indeed, soluble globular proteins possess numerous amphipathic helices on their surface that do not specifically interact with membranes  <cit> . amphipathic helices of ipm anchors are thus completely included in the very abundant population of amphipathic helices from soluble proteins. this is the reason why we have not considered μh.

taking into account the evolutionary information using multiple alignments
in order to include additional evolutionary information in our method, we applied the sequence-to-topology svm to multiple alignments. more precisely, the procedure consists in performing the prediction independently for all the sequences in the alignment, then afterwards deriving a consensus prediction, using a weighted average. this procedure is similar to what was done by  <cit> . the other standard possibility, to feed the svm directly with the multiple alignments in place of the sole sequences, would also have been possible . since this work is highly time-consuming, this will be done as soon as the parallelization of the m-svm code will be completed. aligned sequences for the  <dig> base sequences were retrieved in uniprot using a previously described process  <cit> . different alignment weighting methods were applied for the average score computation: the blosum method  <cit> , a position-based method  <cit> , a voronoï method  <cit>  and a maximum entropy method  <cit> . the best results were obtained with the blosum weighting scheme .

the performance improvement is significant in both cases. sensitivity is improved by more than 10%, compared to the sequence-to-topology svm processing single sequences. the pipm is  <dig>  and  <dig>  times better for lrg and phat respectively. moreover, the cpm exceeds  <dig> . this process reduced very efficiently the number of false positives . since our objective is to build a prediction method as specific as possible, this behavior can be seen as the most satisfactory obtained so far.

performance on naively tested sequences
ipm anchors are not the only type of membrane anchors. furthermore, amphipathic helices are not systematically associated with a membrane. we have thus applied our method to  <dig> supplementary sets of sequences to test whether it tends to confuse a tm segment or a segment from a soluble protein with an ipm anchor. the first and second sets were composed of membrane proteins of known 3d structure including tm β-barrels or tm helices, respectively. the third set was made up of soluble proteins of known 3d structure that do not interact with a membrane.

our method was very efficient in distinguishing soluble proteins from membrane proteins since only  <dig> residues are predicted as "ipm" on a total of  <dig> in the set of soluble proteins . additionally, more than 80% of the predictions are limited to <  <dig> consecutive positions. the exception is the β-methylaspartase  with a predicted ipm segment of  <dig> residues, corresponding to a solvent-accessible amphipathic helix  <cit> .

prediction of ipm segments is also limited in tm β-barrel proteins. only  <dig> residues on a total of  <dig> are predicted as "ipm" in the set of tm β-barrel proteins:  <dig> of them are involved in a tm β-strand. in this case, predicted ipm anchors are limited to <  <dig> consecutives residues. very interestingly, our method predicted an ipm anchor of  <dig> consecutives residues at the n-terminal extremity of pagp . this predicted segment indeed corresponds to an amphipathic α-helix perpendicular to the β-barrel and very probably inserted in the membrane plane  <cit> .

the amount and the size of predicted ipm anchors are higher for proteins with tm α-helices:  <dig> residues on a total of  <dig> are predicted as "ipm" . 68% of these predictions have a size >  <dig> consecutive residues, and 6% a size >  <dig>  predicted ipm residues are approximately equally distributed between the tm and non-tm parts of the proteins. in fact, most of the predictions of ipm anchors outside a tm helix very likely correspond to effective ipm segments. for example, the  <dig> c-terminal residues of the subunit l of the photosynthetic reaction center from rhodopseudomonas viridis  are predicted as "ipm". analysis of the structure reveals that it indeed corresponds to an amphipathic α-helix perpendicular to a tm α-helix and very likely inserted in the membrane plane . nevertheless, predicted ipm anchors very often overlap the ends of tm α-helices. this problem is not really surprising since the composition biases of the interfacial parts of tm helices and ipm helices appear to be close .

additionally, the  <dig> sets of proteins were submitted to the svm trained with the initial set of  <dig> proteins. specificity is lower in this case than for the svm trained with the enriched set . in fact, the svm trained with the initial set tends to confuse a segment of soluble protein or a tm α-helix with a ipm anchor more often than the svm trained with the enriched set. in fact, the svm trained with the initial set tends to be more sensitive and less specific, contrasting with our aim to develop a very specific prediction method.

discussion and 
CONCLUSIONS
in this paper, we have introduced a prediction method for ipm anchors based on a support vector machine. our objective was to develop a highly specific classifier in contrast with other methods used to predict this kind of membrane segment .

training was performed using a set of  <dig> experimentally characterized ipm anchored proteins. the retrieved proteins are involved in various biochemical functions and organisms: viral replication, hormone synthesis in mammals, etc.

our initial set of proteins was enriched using experimental and bioinformatic methods. the final data set contains  <dig> sequences. this enrichment has allowed us to take into account the important sequence variability between ipm anchors of homologous proteins . the composition bias of the ipm segments shows an over-representation of lys and trp, known to be preferentially located at the membrane interface  <cit> . surprisingly, tyr, also known to be an interfacial residue, is one of the most under-represented residues in ipm anchors. this difference is difficult to interpret because of the limited number of examples reported in the literature. interestingly, tyr seems to be preferentially in ipm anchors with low amount of trp. thus, tyr might be also an important membrane determinant, at least for some ipm anchors.

the enriched set was used to train a bi-class svm, distinguishing the residues involved in an ipm from the other ones. the kernel of this svm  is a gaussian function which incorporates an amino acid substitution matrix and a positional weighting vector. two substitution matrices have been tested: lrg, developed for secondary structure prediction, and phat, developed for tm helices prediction. the performance obtained with the  <dig> matrices is similar: the resulting classifier can be considered as lowly sensitive but specific.

several possibilities were investigated to improve the prediction accuracy of this classifier. first, its output was used in the input of a second svm , both alone and in conjunction with a prediction of the corresponding secondary structure. this post-processing improves significantly the sensitivity, especially when the sequence-to-topology svm uses the phat matrix. however, the drawback is that the specificity is significantly reduced.

to benefit from the additional evolutionary information in our method, we have used multiple alignments in order to compute average predictions from the sequence-to-topology svm results. in accordance with our objective, the resulting classifier was very specific. furthermore, the sensitivity is better than when the prediction is based on the sequences only. multiple alignments were also used in the two-step approach . however, this did not lead to any significant improvement. this is probably due to an overfitting of the topology-to-topology svm. the implementation of a stacked generalization procedure  <cit>  appears as the natural solution to this problem. this will be done after the completion of the svm parallelization.

given the experimental results summarized above, the configuration we eventually selected for our prediction method consists of a sequence-to-topology svm processing multiple alignments. in accordance with our objective, the method is highly specific , with a cpm of  <dig> . the low sensitivity is difficult to overcome since it is, at least partially, due to the imbalance between the amounts of ipm  and non-ipm  residues. the imbalance could be influenced by trp, a residue over-represented in the data set and associated with high scores in substitution matrices. trp is thus associated with low values in the matrix of dot products between amino acids. consequently, the classifier could underestimate the "ipm" category in trp poor sequences.

unfortunately, our classification method cannot be compared readily with the only other prediction method of ipm anchors published so far, the dwih measurement , for two main reasons. first, the dwih algorithm is not publicly available; second, its reported efficiency has been measured on  <dig> sequences only. however, our method has been naively tested on  <dig> sets of proteins made up of soluble proteins, proteins with tm β-barrels or proteins with tm α-helices. the prediction of ipm anchors is limited in soluble proteins and proteins with tm β-barrels, as expected. in the case of membrane proteins with tm helices, predicted ipm anchors tend to overlap the ends of the tm segments. this is very probably due to the composition bias of these parts of tm helices, rather close to the one of ipm anchors . in fact, defining the limit between a tm and an ipm segment in transmembrane proteins is not a trivial problem, even when a 3d structure is available. including tm proteins in the training set will probably partially solve the problem. however, this will require the systematic annotation of the tm and ipm segments in transmembrane proteins, a long and difficult task. as preliminary tests, we included some well-defined cases of transmembrane proteins with ipm anchors in the training set , which gave satisfactory results.

as a final proof of efficacy, our method has been able to retrieve several ipm anchors in transmembrane proteins . in fact, it would be interesting to turn to a multi-class problem by introducing additional categories, e.g. a "tm" category. note that this would not generate any technical problem since our svm software is actually a multi-class one. additionally, it will be interesting to further investigate the choice of the kernel; for example, it is possible to combine several kernels  into a single one  and to adapt the gaussian kernel to directly deal with multiple alignments. in any case, a regular update of the initial data set used in our method will improve the performance. finally, our method, "amphipaseek", is available on the nps@, our protein sequence analysis server  <cit> .

