BACKGROUND
previous studies on recovery of pelvic limb function in spinal cord injured quadrupeds have focussed predominantly on assessing the extent to which generation of muscular activity in the pelvic limbs can produce appropriate movement and coordination of movement between pelvic and thoracic limbs in the sagittal plane . however, spinal cord injury  also produces a loss of the ability to place the feet in the correct positions with respect to the body's centre of mass – i.e. the accuracy of placement in the lateral plane. this loss is implicit in many reports on pelvic limb function in experimentally-spinalised animals. for instance: the recognised need for tail support  to permit sci animals to maintain walking on a treadmill belt  <cit> ; the occurrence of placement errors such as limb crossing in sci dogs with reasonable stepping ability  <cit> ; the clinically-evident tendency for individuals with an sci to lose their balance particularly when turning corners  <cit> . despite recognition of its occurrence, lateral instability has rarely been quantified in animals with sci.

whilst mechanisms to control body posture have been studied in a range of species, vertebrate neural networks have been most thoroughly described in the lamprey. lamprey body orientation is monitored in three dimensions by the vestibular system which mediates its effects on posture via the reticulospinal tract – the only well-developed descending pathway in this species  <cit> . however, in quadrupedal land animals maintenance of posture requires an integration of vestibular, visual and somatosensory  sensory inputs. the relative significance of these inputs differs between body regions; input from the vestibular system being relatively more important for maintaining head orientation and thoracic limb stability, and somatosensory information from the limbs being more important for maintaining trunk and pelvic limb stability  <cit> . additionally, experiments on decerebrate cats show that neural structures required for maintenance of body posture are located in the cerebellum, brain stem and spinal cord, since such animals are able to engage righting reflexes to correct their posture when abnormally positioned. two brainstem areas important in control of postural muscle tone are the dorsal and ventral tegmental fields, with integration between the output from these areas and other descending locomotor signals occurring in the medullary reticular formation and spinal cord  <cit> .

in previous studies the ability of quadrupeds to control limb position relative to the trunk has been studied mainly by examining the ability of an animal to maintain balance during adaption to perturbation of a static posture, usually by means of a tilting platform  <cit> . although spinalised animals are able to maintain a standing posture  they have profoundly impaired ability to respond to external perturbation of their posture. this is thought to result from lack of recruitment of flexor muscle activity for this particular purpose, which is dependent on supraspinal control mechanisms  <cit> . investigations on spinalised rabbits further suggest that ventral lesions are associated with more pronounced and lasting deficit in postural correction than either dorsal or lateral lesions  <cit> .

during locomotion, anticipatory adaptations in posture are made using more complex control than that required for making the reflex, balance-maintaining corrective responses to changes in static body posture described above. pre-emptive responses are needed when either internal or external factors affecting posture are expected, most simply between each step cycle during steady locomotion. further control is needed for maintaining balance through changes in speed, direction or terrain. abnormalities such as increased lateral trunk sway, a wide-based stance with the trunk angled to one side, and frequent stumbling have been described during treadmill locomotion in spinalised cats, all of which were exacerbated by inclining the treadmill or increasing its speed  <cit> . however these observations are subjective, implying the need to develop methods to quantify lateral instability. in a recent study, ichiyama et al   <cit> , chose the parameter of 'width of pelvic limb stance' as a means of examining paw placement in the lateral plane in their analysis of the effects of locomotor training, epidural stimulation and intraperitoneal quipazine on the gait patterns of rats after complete thoracolumbar cord transection. whilst this parameter provides valuable information on paw placement, especially in a homogenous group of laboratory rats, our previous observations had suggested the need to examine variability in lateral placement as well as absolute values of interpaw distance.

therefore in this current study we wished to extend our previous quantification of coordination of thoracic and pelvic limb in the sagittal plane to examine the variability  of pelvic limb placement in the lateral plane  in dogs that had suffered thoracolumbar spinal cord injury. therefore we used the coefficient of variation as a unitless parameter to summarise the amount of variability in the lateral positioning of the limbs of each girdle. this descriptive parameter has frequently been used to describe and analyse aspects of gait variability in humans  <cit> , notably to assess the risk of falls in elderly people  <cit> .

clinically, in both humans  <cit>  and dogs  <cit> , spinal cord injury  can be divided into 'complete' – in which there is no discernible transmission of impulses across the damaged region of the spinal cord – and 'incomplete', injuries. previously, we demonstrated loss of coordination between thoracic and pelvic sagittal limb movements in dogs that had incurred clinically complete lesions  <cit> . however, it is possible that recovery of intergirdle limb coordination in the sagittal plane could be mediated by propriospinal pathways rather than requiring instruction from motor centres in the brain. we reasoned that, since control of lateral stability is dependent upon brainstem centres , it should be possible to define two different types of coordination of pelvic limb placement after thoracolumbar sci: that defined by thoracic-pelvic limb coordination in the sagittal  plane and that defined by the positioning of the pelvic limbs in relation to the trunk in the lateral  plane .

therefore in this study we analysed stepping after clinical thoracolumbar sci in dogs to test the hypothesis that placement of the pelvic limbs in the lateral plane would be abnormally variable in all dogs with complete sci but could be normal in those with incomplete sci, depending on the severity of the lesion.

RESULTS
normal dogs
there was considerable variability in the width of support provided by the thoracic  and pelvic  limb pairs, reflecting the conformational heterogeneity in the tested sample of the domestic dog population. furthermore, there was considerable variability in the relative width of support between thoracic and pelvic limb girdles – i.e. some animals had wider base of support in the thoracic limbs and some in the pelvic limbs. we examined the possibility of a correlation between physical size and the width of support in the pelvic limbs, using the length of the tibia as a means of estimating the size of each dog. there was no significant correlation , reflecting the high diversity of dog conformation.

next we quantified the variability in foot placement by calculating the coefficient of variation  for the thoracic and pelvic limbs pairs of each dog. this calculated ratio revealed differences in the variability of limb placement between individual dogs that were of similar magnitude in thoracic  and pelvic  limbs. since we were interested in ultimately comparing the reliability of pelvic limb placement with that in the thoracic limbs we then divided the coefficient of variation for the pelvic limbs into that for the thoracic limbs, producing a figure to define the difference in foot placement variability between limbs in the two girdles. as would be expected in normal individuals, these fell within a narrow range , with a mean value close to  <dig> .

we then examined the effect of variation in treadmill speed on these parameters. in neither the thoracic , nor the pelvic  limbs was there an effect of speed on width of support. as expected, the ratio between thoracic and pelvic limb variability was also unchanged by altering the treadmill speed .

sci dogs
a) incomplete sci
incomplete sci resulted from a variety of causes in dogs included in this study; these are listed in table  <dig>  the thoracic limb base of support varied widely within this group , which is similar to the range in normal dogs. however, the base of support through the pelvic limbs  was far more variable than that found in normal animals. nevertheless, the median values for width of base support were similar in this group to those in the normal group  – perhaps reflecting the anatomical constraints on possible positions of the paw in the y-plane. there was no significant correlation between tibial length and the width of support in the pelvic limbs .

next we examined the variability in limb placement by calculating the coefficient of variation as described above. again, there were differences in this parameter between individual animals in both thoracic  and pelvic  limbs, including some notably much larger values than those calculated for normal individuals, implying an increased variability of foot placement. the calculated cv were used to compare consistency of foot placement compared amongst all groups of dogs. this demonstrated that thoracic foot placement was not significantly different between groups , but was significantly different for the pelvic limbs  including a significantly reduced consistency of placement between normal and incomplete injury cases . we considered the possibility that this result might have been a consequence of different limb lengths in this group but analysis showed that all tested groups of dog had statistically similar tibial lengths . these results confirmed that there was a significantly greater inconsistency in pelvic limb placement after incomplete sci, although the ratio of thoracic and pelvic coefficient of variation was not significantly different from that of normal animals .

tibial lengths are statistically equal amongst the three groups .

this group of dogs had incomplete injuries and their locomotor capability changed with time. using the mean diagonal coupling interval parameter we described previously  <cit>  we could divide these dogs into sub-groups with either normal or abnormal coordination in the sagittal  plane and ask the question whether there was a concomitant alteration in the variability of lateral foot placement during recovery of locomotion. there was some change in the coefficient of variability of pelvic limb placement at different stages of recovery but this was not statistically significant , implying that there was no major alteration in the ability to place the limbs correctly in the lateral  plane during recovery of intergirdle coordination. at the time at which these dogs exhibited normal x-plane coordination only two of eight animals exhibited variability of lateral foot placement within the range of the normal dogs.

b) complete sci
the causes of complete sci of dogs included in this study are listed in table  <dig>  base of support values in both the thoracic  and pelvic  limbs were variable, as in the other two groups. similarly, there was variability in the reliability of foot placement in both the thoracic and pelvic limb girdles: i) in the thoracic limbs the variability ratio varied between  <dig>  and  <dig>  – which was not significantly different from that found in either normal or incomplete sci cases ; ii) in the pelvic limbs the coefficient of variation ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig>  and was significantly different from that in normal dogs , but not from those with incomplete injuries . similar results were obtained when examining the relationship between the coefficient of variation of the thoracic and pelvic girdles; animals with complete sci had a significantly different ratio from the normal animals  but not from those with incomplete injuries.

analysis of use of support band
both groups of sci dogs could not walk unsupported on the treadmill, which may have had an effect on the degree to which lateral movements were permitted. therefore we also examined the effect of band support on the normal dogs, in case there was an effect to exacerbate the increased variability of weight support in the sci dogs. when examining normal dogs the band did not alter stepping inconsistency, as measured by the variability ratio in either the thoracic  or the pelvic  limbs.

discussion
the data presented here quantify for the first time the deficits in lateral foot placement associated with clinical spinal cord injury in dogs and confirm that there is excessive inconsistency in positioning, accounting for lateral instability during locomotion. whilst normal dogs have very limited variability in lateral foot placement during locomotion this is markedly increased after both complete and incomplete sci. this quantification is valuable since it provides an additional outcome measure by which to analyse the effects of therapeutic interventions. moreover, it is extremely robust, since it is likely that our methods include an inevitable underestimate of the lack of coordination in the lateral plane, because provision of an abdominal band support is essential to allow data to be collected at all, but inherently limits variability in lateral paw placement. furthermore, variability does not appear to be affected by changes in locomotor speed.

our data show that although it is possible for animals with clinically 'complete' thoracolumbar sci  to generate stepping movements they do not recover the ability to correctly place the feet in the lateral plane. by comparison, after complete sci untrained rats  had a similar pelvic limb stance width to unlesioned animals  <cit> ; however, that study did not examine variability of paw placement in the lateral plane. surprisingly, in our data there appeared not to be a difference in variability in lateral paw placement between complete and incomplete sci suggesting that both brainstem-spinal cord and intra-cord connectivity are disrupted to a similar degree between these two groups – at least at the stage of recovery at which the incomplete sci animals were examined. however, our data show that recovery of intergirdle limb coordination can occur in the absence of correct placement in the lateral plane. this suggests that either: i) different pathways  or, ii) a different degree of pathway integrity, is required for these two different forms of coordination. none of the dogs without normal intergirdle coordination placed the pelvic limbs correctly in the lateral plane. the converse question – whether animals that recover lateral stability always have normal coordination in the x-plane – cannot be answered here, since only one sci dog had lateral plane movements within normal limits . it is possible that lateral plane coordination represents a more advanced stage of recovery, which is dependent on brainstem-spinal cord connections and cannot occur in animals with very severe sci.

our findings confirm that two components of limb coordination – lateral stability and intergirdle limb coordination – can be individually analysed during recovery, or after interventions designed to enhance functional outcome. recognition of, and the ability to quantify, these different components of recovery of limb control after sci provides a mechanism for increased sophistication of analysis of outcome of interventions designed to promote recovery after severe sci. a recent study has shown that, in rats, pelvic limb stepping can be mediated solely through propriospinal networks caudal to a spinal cord lesion  <cit> , which suggests that evaluation of potentially useful interventions after sci should also focus on features of the gait apart from simple stepping. moreover, for human patients to derive maximum benefit from an intervention after sci it is usually assumed that there would need to be control mediated from the brain – in fact, most usefully from the cerebral cortex . although our gait analysis would not allow us to determine whether corticospinal connections can be restored by an experimental intervention, analysis of limb movements in the lateral plane provides an evaluation of brainstem-spinal connectivity and, we show here, can be quantified in dogs.

these findings also highlight the value of sci dogs in providing an enhanced analysis of the effect of interventions designed to improve the functional outcome after severe sci, since limb movements in both the sagittal and lateral planes can be examined. in contrast to rodents, dogs have a relatively high centre of mass, which facilitates analysis of limb movement in directions other than the sagittal plane, with the implication that it would be useful to analyse in clinical dog sci patients the effects of interventions that have previously proven to be of value in experimental rodent models.

CONCLUSIONS
we show here that it is possible to quantify the increased variability in lateral support that results from thoracolumbar sci and that this may recover independently of limb girdle coordination in the sagittal plane. this ability to analyse locomotor outcome in two planes  will permit greater sophistication in measurement of the effects of interventions designed to improve locomotor function.

