BACKGROUND
natural selection can lead to local adaptation, allowing individuals to have higher relative fitness in their native habitat compared to non-native individuals  <cit> . as a consequence, selection against immigrants can reduce gene flow between populations  <cit> , which can lead to divergence without physical isolation  <cit> . but evidence for local adaptation is hard to come by. it usually requires a sound knowledge of the populations’ ecology, the prevailing selection agents, and ideally the underlying genetic basis of phenotypic adaptations. an alternative way, not requiring much preexisting knowledge, is reciprocal transplant experiments  <cit> . reciprocal transplants can also help to disentangle local adaptation  from phenotypic plasticity .

local adaptation in salmonid fishes seems to occur with high frequency  <cit>  and a recent review showed that in 55-70% of all comparisons, native populations outperformed non-natives  <cit> . even in populations separated by only small geographic distances, local adaptation has been suggested to contribute to adaptive divergence  <cit> . while these studies suggest the possibility of local adaptation, they could only weakly infer it since no reciprocal transplants were performed. experiments testing for local adaptation in salmonids in a natural setting are generally rare for practical reasons . thus, most experiments are carried out in common garden settings in hatcheries or in the laboratory  <cit> . the conclusiveness of these experiments is however limited, since the key ecological factors driving local adaptation may not be replicated in the common garden environment and domestication selection may promote genotypes performing well under laboratory or hatchery conditions but not in the wild. to our knowledge, only a few reciprocal transplant experiments in salmonids have investigated fitness  and identified traits under selection references in  <dig>   <cit> , and only three studies used the populations’ natural habitat as an egg rearing environment  <cit>  even though selection in the wild might be substantial during egg incubation and fry emergence mortality may approach 90%;  <cit> . considering the growing concern in recent years about the adaptability of temperature-dependent life history traits such as embryonic developmental rates and timing of hatching e.g.  <cit> , local adaptation of salmonids during the embryonic stage has not been sufficiently understood.

we used a 5x <dig>  reciprocal transplant experiment to test for local adaptation in the early life stages of brown trout, raising embryos in their natural streambeds. we used a network of populations inhabiting different tributaries of the rhine drainage system in switzerland . to obtain reliable estimates of average population fitness in each of the five environments, we crossed as many parental genotypes as logistically possible in a full-factorial breeding design, i.e. every male was crossed with every female within populations. artificial insemination helped us to keep the contribution of gametes of each individual balanced. we employed a ‘unique environment’ approach , i.e. we had no a priori knowledge about the environmental factors potentially acting as divergent selection agents at the five different sites. embryos were buried in the streambeds in custom-made rearing containers that were used to simulate natural salmonid spawning sites . at the point where 50% of hatching was predicted to occur , we retrieved all embryos from the five locations and recorded survival and the proportion of hatched fry.


we made two predictions with regard to survival: 1) within sites: native populations outperform non-natives; 2) across sites: populations show higher performance at ‘home’ compared to ‘away’ sites. generally, the first criterion is a better diagnostic for the presence of local adaptation because it is not confounded with differences in intrinsic habitat quality  <cit> . the first criterion directly tests for the presence of divergent selection within habitats, acting on genetic differences in relative fitness, where non-adapted immigrant genotypes are selected against. the second criterion would only be reliable if all test habitats were of the same quality, which is not usually the case .

RESULTS
population- specific performance in the laboratory
fertilization rate in laboratory-raised embryos was high across all populations , and no significant differences between populations were found. thus, any differences in survival in the streams were not caused by variation in fertilization rates between populations. survival rates until hatching in the laboratory were also high across all populations , demonstrating that, under benign conditions, embryos of all populations were capable to successfully finish embryogenesis.

number of females and males used to generate embryos, fertilization and survival rates until hatching in the lab-reared control groups, average temperature  and day degrees at each location between time of burial and retrieval, location-specific and population-specific survival rates, rates of hatching among the survivors, and rates of missing eggs at retrieval from streams . the last column shows mean population egg diameter in mm .

population- and site-specific survival in the field
overall survival rates were similar across populations, ranging from  <dig> %  to  <dig> % . between locations on the other hand, survival rates varied widely, ranging from only 4%  to  <dig> % . populations differed in average egg size  with eggs from kiese females being significantly smaller than eggs from giesse and worble females. however, population egg size was not related to mean survival .


the full glmm - using population, location, and population × location as fixed effects, and position and capsule as random effects - explained significant amounts of variance in survival . no overdispersion was found. removal of population × location did not result in a significantly worse or better fit. if local adaptation was present, mean population fitness should be systematically higher for the five native population x habitat combinations than in the remaining cases. the absence of a significant interaction effect suggests that this was not the case. removal of population, location, capsule, and position  from the model on the other hand, decreased the goodness of fit significantly. these variables were thus retained in the model. pairwise tukey-kramer comparisons between locations  showed that survival rates differed significantly between all  but two locations . in contrast, none of the pairwise tukey-kramer comparisons between populations  yielded significance, suggesting that, overall, the five populations responded similarly to the environmental conditions at each site.

 on the effects of population origin, rearing location, position in capsule, and capsule number on a) embryo survival and b) hatching rate among survivors within the locations giesse and worble only . akaikes information criterion  describes the quality of fit of each model. to evaluate the significance of fixed and random effects, alternative models without the variable of interest were compared to the full model  using likelihood ratio tests. if an alternative model had a significantly better fit , this model was subsequently compared against further reduced models.

in agreement with the above, none of the five separate glmms within location  found a native population to outperform non-native populations within location. similarly, the five glmms within population  did not find populations to generally perform better at their ‘home’ than at ‘away’ sites.

we conclude that i) there is no evidence for local adaptation in survival overall, and ii) that locations differed considerably in their quality for egg incubation, causing responses in embryo survival independent of their population origin.

population- and site-specific timing of hatching
to compensate for different rates of development caused by temperature differences between streams, we estimated the time when 50% hatching should have occurred for retrieval, taking into account local temperature regimes. however, at two sites hatching had not occurred yet , and hatching rate at the kiese was based on only  <dig> survivors. we therefore excluded these locations and used the two remaining streams  for the analysis of hatching timing. mean hatching rate across these two sites was  <dig> % . population egg size was not related to the timing of hatching .

the full glmm explained significant amounts of variance in hatching time . no overdispersion was found. again, population × location did not result in a significantly worse or better fit, i.e. there is no evidence for local differentiation in the timing of hatching. also, the vertical position of the egg within the capsule did not have a significant effect on the timing of hatching of the embryos. removal of population, location, and capsule on the other hand decreased the goodness of fit significantly and were retained. tukey-kramer comparisons between locations  showed that the timing of hatching differed significantly between the two burial sites , but only between two of the five populations .

discussion and 
CONCLUSIONS
we tested for local adaptation in early life-history traits in brown trout using a  <dig> ×  <dig> population-by-habitat transplant experiment. embryos were raised in the natural streambed at ‘home’ and at four ‘away’ sites until 50% hatching was expected to have occurred. we tested for both the ‘local vs. foreign’ criterion  and the ‘home vs. away’ criterion   <cit> .

we found neither of the two predictions confirmed. the response in embryo survival to environmental conditions was largely independent of population origin, i.e. we found no evidence for local adaptation at the embryonic stage for the trait examined.

there are several possible explanations for the absence of local adaptation. for one, the environments we chose  may have not been sufficiently different from each other. speaking against this, however, our results revealed large differences in survival between sites, ranging from 4% to almost 90%. since we applied a ‘unique environment’ approach  <cit> , we only assumed that every habitat was distinct and different in its ecological parameters, and no link was established between the prevailing ecological conditions and the phenotypes they select for. yet, the survival data suggests that sites indeed differed in habitat quality parameters that are crucial to brown trout, such as chemophysical  and ecological characteristics   <cit> . alternatively, the microclimates at the burial sites may not have been representative of the habitat conditions typically encountered by the native population and the egg containers we used may not sufficiently simulate the conditions in a natural redd. furthermore, if mothers exhibited preferences for particular characteristics of their redd, the use of artificial nests could miss aspects of offspring adaptation to the specific incubation conditions locally adapted mothers usually create for them.

in one case , conditions seemed unsuitable for egg incubation altogether. within-stream replication of burial sites would have helped to distinguish between a genuine absence of local adaptation and microclimatic effects. arguing for the importance of microclimatic conditions during egg incubation, we found strong effects of the individual egg capsules, i.e. the positioning even within one square meter of riverbed made a difference to survival. also the vertical positioning within the capsule was important, such that eggs closer to the surface had a higher chance of survival than eggs positioned deeper in the riverbed.

there are many environmental threats to an embryo developing in the riverbed. hatching has been shown to be an inducible defense mechanism in salmonid fishes, such that populations inhabiting risky habitats may hatch earlier or later to escape suboptimal conditions  <cit> . variation in the timing of hatching can be caused, for example, by desiccation, oxygen shortage, pathogens, or predation. alternatively, selection may target female spawning time, which can also affect the emergence time of the fry. whatever the selective mechanism, if populations are genetically adapted to their home site, and if sites differ in selection regimes, differences in the timing of hatching between populations within sites can be expected. indeed, timing of hatching differed significantly between locations, but all five populations responded similarly to the conditions prevailing at these sites, indicating that, in this population network, the timing of hatching depends largely on the local environmental conditions rather than on population differences.

there are more scenarios that could explain the absence of adaptation in survival and the timing of hatching. for one, maternal investment can potentially confound effects of local adaptation  <cit> . egg size provides a proxy for the quality of maternal investment  and has been shown to affect growth and survival  <cit> . although we could not statistically control for within-population variation in maternal effects since maternity was not tracked until retrieval, we used large numbers of randomly selected dams per population, which should help to obtain reliable estimate of average population fitness. although populations differed in average egg size, we found no evidence for a direct association between mean egg size and survival or hatching, suggesting that differential maternal investment is not responsible for the absence of local adaptation here.

both, high levels of gene flow and temporally varying selection can prevent local adaptation  <cit> . however, high gene flow is unlikely in this system. a recent study on brown trout in an area overlapping with our study area found substantial genotypic and phenotypic differences in locomotory and trophic morphology between geographically close populations , arguing for the presence of local adaptation or phenotypically plastic response  <cit> . another recent study on brown trout in switzerland found evidence for adaptation of brown trout to altitude  <cit> . generally, brown trout are known to have spatially restricted ranges and genetic differentiation on small geographic scales has been repeatedly reported  <cit> . one possibility is, that population differences in survival due to local adaptation only become evident at later developmental stages in this system.

although cantonal stocking policies in this area stipulate that streams can only be stocked with offspring from native individuals , domestication selection can reduce the efficacy of divergent selection and local adaptation. individuals spending their embryonic and juvenile development in hatcheries are not exposed to natural selection at their site of origin, and the alleles beneficial for survival in the wild may never come to fixation in continuously stocked populations. hansen et al. <cit>  argued that repeated introduction and admixture of wild and hatchery brown trout in denmark have led to reduced local adaptation, and hatchery strains of salmonids are often subject to domestication selection  <cit>  with the result that their fitness in the wild is decreased relative to wild fish  <cit> . some of the adults, used to generate embryos in this experiment, may have been hatchery-raised individuals released into the streams in previous years. additional file 1: table s <dig> shows the stocking effort in the five study streams over the last  <dig> years. interestingly, the worble was stocked with by far the lowest numbers of hatchery-raised fish. at the same time, embryos from the worble were the only ones performing better at their ‘home’ site than at three other locations. we agree with fraser et al. <cit>  and meier et al. <cit>  that more information is needed on how hatchery fish might affect adaptation at local and regional scales.

we conclude that there is a great need to evaluate the prevalence and spatial scales of local adaptation in the wild, and to establish the link between molecular variation and variation in fitness in local adaptation research. more integrative approaches and collaboration between disciplines will help to understand the molecular basis of local adaptation, and how it may vary with developmental stage, selection gradients, geographic scale, and demography.

