BACKGROUND
evolutionary theory predicts that animals will behave adaptively, which means that their behavioural phenotype should on average converge towards an optimum. hence, variation in behaviour has typically been interpreted as random variation around an adaptive mean or as a reflection of environmental or intrinsic constraints. however, studies on animal behaviour at the level of individuals have suggested that the observed variation can itself be adaptive  <cit> . more recently, individual differences in behaviours have been found to sometimes correlate across functionally unrelated contexts, a phenomenon termed 'behavioural syndromes', 'animal personalities' or 'animal temperaments'  <cit> .

apart from humans, behavioural syndromes have, for instance, been reported in mammals, birds, lizards, amphibians, fish, molluscs and arthropods  <cit>  suggesting they are common in animals and reflect individual differences in coping styles  <cit> . although the question why individual differences should be consistent over time has received some theoretical attention , a conceptual framework to explain the functional significance of correlations between different behaviours  is only gradually emerging  <cit> .

currently, two non-exclusive hypotheses seek to explain behavioural syndromes  <cit> . one hypothesis, which we refer to as the 'constraint hypothesis'  <cit> , proposes that behaviours are correlated due to common regulatory mechanisms, so they may not be free to evolve independently. under such conditions, a behavioural trait that is beneficial in one context  may carry over into another context, where it can be detrimental   <cit> . behavioural syndromes due to constraints may be expected when the negative fitness consequences of carry over effects are relatively small, when evolutionary stability has not yet been reached or when decoupling of traits or phenotypic plasticity would be too costly  <cit> .

a second hypothesis, which we refer to as the 'adaptive hypothesis', proposes that behavioural syndromes may be adaptive in that they functionally integrate several traits that work well together  <cit> . this may be the case when correlated ecological challenges favour combinations of traits that are in principle unrelated  <cit> , for instance, when life history tradeoffs result in polymorphic populations with regard to traits that affect several behaviours  <cit> .

cooperatively breeding species are of particular interest with regard to behavioural syndromes because in such species helpers may have two alternative life-history options which may be broadly described as  'stay', when individuals stay in the home territory and eventually inherit the territory by queuing for the breeding position  <cit>  or  'disperse', when individuals disperse to acquire a breeding position elsewhere  <cit> . as these two options involve different and specific challenges, they may correspond to within-species social niches or strategies, and should demand different sets of behavioural tendencies corresponding to those pathways. for instance, stayers may influence whether they are tolerated in the dominants' territory, by paying 'rent' in order to be allowed to stay  <cit> . under such conditions, helpers should engage in helping behaviours such as brood care and territory maintenance, but they should engage less in aggressive behaviours like territory defence, as this might carry over to within group aggression and result in conflict escalation. as stayers usually will not attempt to disperse, they should not be very explorative. in contrast, dispersers should only invest as much in helping as is required for temporary group membership. therefore, they should show little brood care and territory maintenance, but they should tend to be explorative, which would help to find a vacant territory or breeding position. as they should spend more time at the edge of the territory and in order to be able to defend an own territory soon, dispersers should also tend to be more aggressive than stayers. adopting one of both strategies should therefore involve distinct social and ecological challenges.

we studied the cooperatively breeding lake tanganyika cichlid neolamprologus pulcher to investigate a potential relationship between different behaviours that may be associated with the different life history options, to stay or to disperse. helpers in n. pulcher participate in several cooperative tasks including territory defence and maintenance, and direct brood care  <cit> . previous studies suggested that helpers differ in helping propensity  <cit> , aggression  <cit> , exploration and dispersal behaviour  <cit> . here we ask whether these individual differences are consistent over time and whether there is a specific relationship between these behaviours. we tested helpers repeatedly for exploration behaviour, and for two types of helping behaviour that serve different social functions, i.e. territory maintenance  and territory defence . in case stayers and dipersers show adaptive combinations of behavioural traits , behavioural syndromes should correspond to the challenges present when choosing one of the two life history options: stayers should tend to show high levels of territory maintenance but a small propensity to explore or engage in territory defence, whereas dispersers should display the opposite tendencies. in other words, we predict  a positive correlation between the individual tendency to engage in territory defence and exploration and  negative correlations between  territory maintenance and exploration and  territory maintenance and territory defence.

RESULTS
 consistency of behavioural traits
except for overt attacks against a conspecific intruder, the frequency of the measured behaviours was consistent within individuals between the measurements. individuals showed similar exploration tendencies between the tests  and there was no difference between the three different tests . after removing the factor 'test' from the analysis the resulting repeatability coefficient for exploration is r =  <dig>  . overt attacks were not consistent within individuals  and there was no effect of the treatment  . aggressive displays were consistent within individuals  and individuals displayed more often aggressively towards intruders when dominants were absent than when they were present . the estimated repeatability of aggressive displays corrected for treatment is r =  <dig> . digging behaviour was consistent within individuals  and individuals tended to dig more when dominants were absent than when they were present . the estimated repeatability for digging corrected for treatment is r =  <dig> .

 correlations between functionally different behaviours
if behavioural syndromes exist according to strategic specializations into dispersers and stayers, we predicted  a positive correlation between exploration behaviour and territory defence and  a negative correlation between these behaviours and territory maintenance . according to the first prediction, exploration behaviour correlated positively with aggressive displays against an intruder . contrary to the second prediction, digging behaviour was neither correlated with aggressive displays  nor with exploration behaviour . however, when performing the analysis for each treatment  separately, the frequency of digging of helpers was negatively correlated with the amount of aggressive displays towards intruders when the dominants were present ; this did not apply when the breeders were absent .

discussion
we found that the three measured behaviours of helpers in n. pulcher were consistent over time. there was a positive relationship between exploration behaviour and aggressive displays  and, when breeders were present, we found a negative relationship between territory maintenance and aggressive displays of helpers. these results suggest, that the behavioural correlations exhibited by brood care helpers of n. pulcher are components of behavioural syndromes. furthermore, our results indicate that different behavioural traits may correspond to different types of helpers with regard to how they cooperate . such 'cryptic task sharing' among helpers may only be detected when studying different helping behaviours repeatedly at an individual level .

behavioural syndromes may either indicate constraints to the independent evolution of behaviours or suites of functionally integrated behaviours favoured by selection  <cit> , i.e. coping strategies. our results are in accordance with an adaptive nature of behavioural syndromes in helpers in n. pulcher because the detected correlations of behaviours correspond to the specific challenges individuals encounter when pursuing different life history strategies. staying in the natal territory for a prolonged time period should correspond with a low inclination to be aggressive and to engage in risky exploration, but with a high tendency to engage in territory maintenance. in contrast, dispersing early should correspond to a high tendency to explore new habitats and to exhibit territory defence, but a low inclination to maintain the territory.

potential fitness consequences of behavioural syndromes in brood care helpers
although we did not measure the fitness consequences of the detected behavioural combinations in this study, information on n. pulcher is available from the field and lab about fitness consequences of each of the measured behaviours.  earlier studies suggest that exploration may facilitate between group dispersal to a nearby territory  <cit> . in case of expulsion from the group or group dissolution, explorative individuals may therefore have an advantage, as they can find shelter in the territory of another group. on the other hand, non-explorative individuals suffer a lower risk of predation  <cit> .  experiments suggest that individuals staying in the home territory need to pay by engaging in helping behaviour  <cit> . helping can therefore assure that helpers have access to a shelter  <cit>  and it may provide the opportunity to inherit the territory, thereby conferring important fitness benefits  <cit> . however, helping also involves significant costs in that it is energetically expensive  <cit> , and staying as a subordinate involves additional costs due to a strategic reduction of growth  <cit> .  individuals aggressively defend their territory against unfamiliar intraspecific intruders  <cit> , interspecific intruders and predators  <cit> , which has been shown to have positive fitness effects  <cit> . however, aggression is low within groups and between familiar individuals of neighbouring groups  <cit> . therefore, a general tendency to behave aggressively might have fitness reducing consequences, particularly when aggressiveness carries over to interactions within group members.

in summary, the available data suggest that each of the behaviours that is part of the behavioural syndromes we found, should have significant but contrasting fitness consequences when individuals indeed specialise into one of both options of staying or dispersing. the consistency in the behaviours and the correlations between the different types of behaviour may indicate strategic niche specialization  <cit>  with regards to different life history trajectories: queuing for the breeding position in the home territory or dispersing to breed independently. our data suggest, behavioural syndromes may affect how much and which type of help individual helpers in cooperative breeders will provide  <cit> . future studies should help to clarify the respective fitness consequences of the detected behavioural correlations and how behavioural syndromes may affect the type and level of cooperative behaviour in cooperative breeders and other cooperative species  <cit> .

factors influencing the correlations between behaviours
the negative relationship between digging and aggressive displays was only apparent in the presence of dominants, i.e. when subordinates have to pay for group membership  <cit> . this may suggest that the specialization becomes more expressed in the presence of dominants than when helpers dig and defend for self-serving purposes only.

notably, aggressive displays against intruders significantly decreased when dominants were present compared to when they were absent. when the dominants are absent, the helpers might compensate for the missing participation in defence by absent group members, as has been shown in an earlier study  <cit> .

interestingly, aggressive displays were consistent within individuals, whereas overt attacks were not. this may be due to the different functions of both components of territory defence. while aggressive displays serve to threaten an opponent, overt attacks involve physical contact and demonstrate escalated aggression. overt attacks might be more variable because they depend on the behaviour of the intruder whereas aggressive displays may rather reflect the 'intrinsic' aggressiveness of an individual.

the correlations between the behaviours were significant when analysing only female test scores and they remained so, also when analysing all individuals together, i.e. including the three males. however, the sample size, particularly for males, is small. therefore, future studies are needed to clarify whether sex differences may influence the correlations among exploration, territory maintenance and territory defence among helpers.

CONCLUSIONS
our study provides evidence for the hypothesis that adaptive behavioural syndromes may result from a functional integration of different behavioural traits when individuals within a species adopt different strategies to cope with certain sets of ecological and social challenges.

