BACKGROUND
one of the defining characteristics of the plant kingdom is the exceptional capacity of organs, tissues, and individual cells to de-differentiate and regenerate into complete plants; a phenomenon referred to as totipotency  <cit> . perhaps the ultimate expression of totipotency occurs during protoplast isolation and regeneration, where cells are liberated from their cell walls and can be induced to regenerate into whole plants as reported in more than  <dig> plant species  <cit> . protoplast systems offer a unique opportunity to study fundamental aspects of plant biology such as membrane physiology, cell wall metabolism and stress responses  <cit> , as well as serving a number of practical applications including the production of interspecific hybrids between sexually incompatible species  <cit> , the development of novel genetic diversity through somaclonal-protoclonal variation  <cit> , and as an alternative approach to facilitate the insertion of large pieces of dna or organelles  <cit> . while the manipulation of protoplasts has been widely achieved in many herbaceous families such as the solanaceae, progress has been much slower in the development of this technology for woody plants.

a potentially valuable application of protoplast technologies recognized over  <dig> years ago was in the case of the american elm   <cit> . this species was once one of the most common and iconic species of tree planted across north america until the population was decimated by the introduction of dutch elm disease  in the mid twentieth century. today, after more than  <dig> years of research and classical breeding, several ded tolerant cultivars have been released  <cit> . however, while these trees represent a significant advance, none are considered resistant in that they do harbour the fungus and exhibit mild symptoms. given the immense screening and breeding efforts that have occurred, it appears that the genetic resources for true ded resistance may not be present in u. americana and will need to be generated through modern transgenics or hybridization with resistant species of elm. interspecific hybridization using classical approaches has been for the most part unsuccessful because of the sexual incompatibility between american elm and other elms  <cit> . as such, attempts at protoplast isolation and regeneration with the ultimate goal of developing ded resistant somatic hybrids through somatic fusion have been attempted by various researchers as early as  <dig>  <cit> . however, despite the repeated attempts by various researchers there have been no successful reports of protoplast regeneration in american elm.

one of the major challenges in developing a protoplast regeneration system in american elm, as with many other woody species, is the difficulty in efficiently and reproducibly isolating protoplasts  <cit> . while this problem has been circumvented in some species by selecting juvenile tissues or embryogenic callus  <cit> , this approach has not facilitated protoplast regeneration of american elm. for example, redenbaugh et al.  <cit>  were not able to isolate protoplasts from young american elm leaves and when using cotyledons as the source material, less than half of their  <dig> attempts were successful. further, in the cotyledon preparations where protoplasts were obtained, the isolation frequency was generally below 10%, the cell division rate was low, and the protoplasts ultimately failed to regenerate. lange and karnosky  <cit>  were able to isolate american elm protoplasts from cotyledons, suspension culture, and callus tissues, but required long enzymatic incubation periods and the protoplasts ultimately failed to proliferate. the authors postulated that this recalcitrance may have been a consequence of toxic effects resulting from the long exposure to the enzyme solution. preliminary studies conducted by dorion et al.  <cit>  reported high protoplast yields from young greenhouse grown american elms using a  <dig> h incubation in a more active enzyme solution containing  <dig> % onozuka rs cellulase,  <dig> % driselase, and  <dig>  pectolyase y <dig>  however, these reports do not provide any indication of variability or reproducibility of the protocol, and the isolated protoplasts did not display sustained cell division. a study using similar methods reported standard deviations of protoplast yields in u. minor were often greater than 50% of the mean  <cit> , indicating that this approach was highly variable in elm or failed attempts were pooled in the data. studies conducted in our lab using young american elm leaves as described by dorion et al.  <cit>  concur with the findings of conde and santos  <cit>  in that protoplast yields from young  actively growing leaves were inconsistent regardless of the enzyme solution used, and in our experience isolations often fail completely. in order to develop protoplast regeneration and hybridization systems for american elm and other difficult woody plants it is imperative that the underlying biochemical mechanism preventing reproducible enzymatic degradation of source tissue is identified and that novel approaches are developed to facilitate reliable protoplast isolation.

some clues about the nature of this phenomenon were provided by butt  <cit> , who reported that thoroughly washing chopped leaf material in water prior to enzymatic digestion significantly increased protoplast yields in four woody plant species. further, when the washed leaves were incubated in their own wash water, the tissues regain their resistance to enzymatic digestion. together, these data suggest the cell walls are being modified by water soluble compounds that impart resistance to enzymatic degradation. two compounds putatively identified for their role in the resilience of cell walls are p-coumaric and ferulic acid. these compounds are well known for their role in cell wall structure, especially in the poaceae  <cit> . specifically, in grasses they form  <dig> ′-dihydroxytruxillic acid and other cyclodimers in the cell wall that make them more resistant to biodegradation in ruminants. further, the release of preformed phenylpropanoids and/or the up-regulation of the pathway, resulting in biochemical re-enforcement of the cell wall, are well established components of plant defence responses in many species, including dicots  <cit> . this phenomenon of cell wall modulation has been observed in whole plant systems upon wounding  <cit>  or microbial infection  <cit> , and in cell culture systems in response to a variety of elicitors  <cit> . in the case of protoplast isolation, it appears that these compounds are already present in the leaves and are released upon mechanical injury incurred during tissue preparation. thus, these compounds may modify the cell walls and inhibit cell wall degradation which can severely restrict the liberation of protoplasts.

transgenic plants that have an inhibited phenylpropanoid pathway show greater susceptibility to pathogens and have more readily digestible cell walls  <cit> . specifically, production of tyrosine decarboxylase, an enzyme thought to facilitate cell wall re-enforcement, has been found to be inversely related to cell wall digestibility and protoplast release in canola  <cit> . while transgenic technologies have helped elucidate the role of phenylpropanoids in cell wall digestability, the effects are permanent and have deleterious effects on plant fitness. as such, the current study utilized a series of competitive inhibitors of pal, the first dedicated enzyme in the phenylpropanoid pathway, to investigate the relationship between phenylpropanoid biosynthesis and cell wall digestibility. here we provide the first evidence that by preventing phenylpropanoid biosynthesis using pal inhibitors, it was possible to overcome the difficulties in cell wall degradation and dramatically broaden the applicability of protoplast technology in woody plants using the american elm as a model system.

RESULTS
initial attempts were made to isolate protoplasts from a wide range of american elm tissues including young leaves  from actively growing in vitro plants, seedlings, and greenhouse grown plants, as well as cotyledons, hypocotyls, and seedling roots. during these initial trials a number of cell wall degrading enzymes were evaluated at different concentrations and combinations, including the reportedly more active mixture used successfully in several ulmus spp. by dorion et al.  <cit>  . while protoplasts were occasionally obtained, the results were similar to what had been previously reported in that the yields were often very low  <cit>  and the success rate was inconsistent regardless of composition of the enzyme solution. sometimes high yields as described by dorion et al.  <cit>  were obtained, but this was not consistent even when the protocol was the same between isolation attempts and all reasonable precautions to use uniform plant material were taken. for example, a high yield of protoplasts was obtained from freshly emerged greenhouse leaves on march  <dig>   <dig>  but the isolation completely failed  <dig> days later on april  <dig>   <dig> under same experimental conditions using fresh leaves from the same group of trees. the lack of reproducibility with young freshly emerged leaves and long exposure to a range of enzyme mixtures was deemed insufficiently reliable to proceed with regeneration and fusion experiments and was the impetus for this study.

washing young in vitro american elm  leaf tissue with water increased protoplast yields from an average of approximately 4000/g to  <dig> 000/g. while this was a statistically significant increase in yield, it was far below the millions per gram reported for other species  <cit> , it did not work consistently between isolation attempts, and was not a large enough improvement to attempt culture and fusion. the relative ineffectiveness of this procedure for american elm may indicate that the interfering compounds were present in higher amounts, were more difficult to extract, and/or there were other factors inhibiting protoplast isolation in this species. this difference was likely responsible for the difficulties that have been encountered in isolating protoplasts from american elm compared to other species of elm and woody plants  <cit> . as such, while this simple washing technique was capable of sufficiently removing the interfering compounds from some woody plants, including ulmus glabra <cit> , it was insufficient for the more recalcitrant american elm. this study was aimed at elucidating the underlying biochemical mechanisms and developing a systematic approach to circumvent the problem.

the increase in cell wall digestibility of leaves that had been leached with water can be reversed by incubating the leaf in its own extract  <cit> . in the current study, this phenomenon was further investigated by incubating tobacco leaf tissue, a species with a readily digestible cell wall, in an aqueous extract of american elm leaves prior to enzymatic degradation. the aqueous extract effectively inhibited cell wall digestion in a dose dependent manner , supporting the hypothesis that the resistant nature of the cell wall in woody plants such as american elm was because of a water soluble chemical or group of chemicals  <cit> . this inhibiting effect could also be induced by using leachate from young leaves of in vitro american elm plants or leaf derived callus, indicating that this phenomenon occurs in vitro and was not limited to leaf tissues . these observations with tobacco indicated that there was no requirement for any specialized enzymes or a fundamental difference in cell wall composition between resistant species such as american elm and a susceptible species such as tobacco. it was likely that the presence of compounds responsible for reduced digestibility would instill this trait in the cell wall of higher plants in general.

previous evidence suggests that the resilience of the cell wall in woody plants was because of the presence of the hydroxycinnamic acids, p-coumaric and ferulic acid  <cit> . many plants are known to release or quickly synthesize hydroxycinnamic acids in response to mechanical damage or microbial attack  <cit> . these compounds serve as precursors for the formation of hydroxycinnamoyl-coas which contribute to cell wall strengthening and lignification, ultimately reducing cell wall digestibility and inhibiting microbial infection  <cit> . plant tissues are likely to accumulate these compounds throughout their existence as they are continuously exposed to various stresses, which may contribute to the observation that leaves become increasingly resistant to enzymatic degradation with age  <cit> . protoplast isolation typically depends on mechanically wounding the tissue followed by incubation in cell wall degrading enzymes purified from fungi and it was likely that this process elicits the further release or synthesis of hydroxycinnamic acids which then modify the cell wall in some species.

the addition of either p-coumaric or ferulic acid to washed leaf tissue from woody species has been shown to re-instate resistance to cell wall digestion similar to when incubated in their own leachate  <cit> . similar observations were made in the current study with tobacco where leaf tissue incubated in either compound reduced protoplast isolation in a dose dependant manner similar to american elm leaf extract . these data support previous studies that suggest hydroxycinnamic acids were involved in re-enforcing the cell walls and increasing resistance to enzymatic degradation. this study also indicates that p-coumaric and ferulic acid alone were capable of increasing cell wall resilience in a species that was typically easily digested, again suggesting that incorporation into the cell wall was not dependent upon any unique characteristics of woody plants.

an alternative approach to evaluate the role of hydroxycinnamic acids in cell wall digestibility and develop an efficient approach to isolate protoplasts from american elm was to inhibit their biosynthesis. hydroxycinnamic acids are lignin precursors produced through the phenylpropanoid pathway. while cultural factors such as light exposure, temperature, plant nutrition, and ontological development are known to influence this pathway, numerous factors were evaluated in the current study and were insufficient to facilitate a reproducible protoplast isolation protocol from american elm . a number of competitive pal inhibitors, namely 2-aminoindane-2-phosphonic acid , -2-aminooxy-3-phenylpropionic acid  and l are equal  <cit> ) and o-benzylhydroxylamine  have been shown to significantly reduce the production of phenylpropanoids in a variety of species. in a previous study with lycopersicon esculentum suspension cultures, the addition of aip to the medium effectively reduced the cells ability to accumulate wall bound phenolics when challenged with a fungal elicitor  <cit> . as such, these three inhibitors were included in the growth medium to assess their influence on cell wall digestibility and protoplast isolation frequency in american elm suspension cultures.

initial studies indicated that all three pal inhibitors were deleterious to the growth of in vitro elm plants, and insufficient leaf tissue was produced for further experiments. similar observations have been made for birch  seedlings where growth was almost completely inhibited in the presence of  <dig> μm aip  <cit> . consequently, further experiments were conducted using a two phase suspension culture system in which leaf tissue was embedded in alginate beads suspended in liquid culture medium  to produce the source callus tissue. of the three inhibitors, aip was the most effective and facilitated cell wall digestion and protoplast isolation from american elm callus in a dose dependant manner, increasing the digestion rate from  <dig> %  in the controls to  <dig> %  in callus grown in  <dig> μm aip . addition of aopp resulted in a modest increase in protoplast isolation while obha had no beneficial effect . these data support previous studies that found aip to be more effective at inhibiting pal than the other two compounds  <cit> .

the increase in cell wall digestibility with increased levels of aip was accompanied by a reduction in the flavonoid content in the tissue when stained with npr . while the flavonoid content in and of its self was unlikely to influence cell wall digestibility, flavonoids are also synthesized through the phenylpropanoid pathway and have been used as an indicator for the activity of the pathway  <cit> . while total phenol content had been used in this capacity in previous reports, aip was found to interfere with this assay at the concentrations used in this study . the callus produced in the presence of aip also remained creamy white in colour . this was in stark contrast to the brown coloration observed in the control callus , indicating that aip was inhibiting the accumulation of polyphenols. together, the inverse relationship between both flavonoid and polyphenol contents with protoplast isolation rates strongly suggests that the factor inhibiting enzymatic digestion of the cell wall in american elm was a product of the phenylpropoanoid pathway. cell wall digestibility was significantly increased by selectively inhibiting this pathway which facilitated the development of an efficient, reproducible protocol for the isolation of american elm protoplasts.

while the approach of using aip has dramatically increased our ability to consistently obtain large numbers of protoplasts from american elm, inhibiting the phenylpropanoid pathway with aip is known to reduce the accumulation of biomass in a number of species  <cit> . in order for this technology to have practical application in developing protoplast regeneration systems in difficult woody species, it was critical to examine the viability and growth potential of the resulting protoplasts. in the current study, protoplasts obtained from tissue cultured in the presence of  <dig> μm aip had a relatively high viability, typically ranging from about 80% to over 90% based on fluorescein diacetate  staining . the viability observed in the protoplasts derived from this system was comparable to the upper levels observed in other species of ulmus where protoplast regeneration has been successful  <cit> .

this relatively high viability may be a consequence of obtaining protoplasts from young actively growing callus tissue, the reduced duration of exposure to the potentially deleterious cell wall degrading enzyme solution, or a combination of these and other factors. whereas most protoplast isolation protocols in american elm require  <dig> to  <dig> h of incubation in enzyme solution  <cit> , in our system this can be reduced to 1- <dig> h. while successful protoplast isolation from american elm was generally inconsistent and often worked less than half of the time in previous attempts  <cit> , the suspension cultures grown in the presence of aip have reliably yielded viable protoplasts on a bi-weekly basis for more than  <dig> months and continue to be productive.

protoplasts isolated using this system and suspended in low melting point agarose beads cultured in liquid kao and michayluk  <cit>  medium supplemented with  <dig> μm naa and  <dig> μm ba started to re-develop cell walls within  <dig> days and showed early signs of cell division . efficient re-synthesis of the cell wall is a pre-requisite for cytokinesis in protoplasts and is influenced by the conditions used for cell wall digestion and isolation  <cit> . previous studies have reported that cell wall formation in american elm protoplasts occurs sporadically and starts later, between  <dig> and  <dig> days post-culture  <cit> . after  <dig> days of culture in the current system,  <dig> %  of the protoplasts had initiated cell division and well developed cell walls were present . this compares favourably to previous studies where american elm protoplasts had much lower division rates, as low as 1%, was only observed in some preparations, and started 9- <dig> days after initial culture  <cit> . in previous studies where cell division was observed, the cells failed to continue to divide and there has been no previous report of protoplast-derived callus regeneration in this species  <cit> . in the current system, the cells continued to divide and protoplast-derived calli were produced by day  <dig> . as such, this protocol represents the first report of callus regeneration from american elm protoplasts more than  <dig> years after the first attempt.

the consistent supply of protoplasts has also facilitated initial studies into protoplast fusion technologies to realize the long term-goal of producing interspecific elm hybrids which may exhibit resistance to ded  <cit> . thus far, we have optimized various electrofusion parameters to conduct fusion experiments with american elm protoplasts. the process of somatic fusion using electroporation can be detrimental to protoplasts, particularly those that are less viable and unable to withstand the repeated centrifugation and culture manipulations required. stable heterokaryons have been observed , putative hybrid cells remained viable after being transferred into agarose beads , and initial signs of cell division have been observed in protoplasts that have been exposed to the electrofusion procedure. while electrofusion parameters need further optimization to maximize fusion while minimizing cell lysis, these preliminary results indicate that protoplasts produced through this system were sufficiently robust to survive electrofusion and will lay the foundation to initiate somatic fusion with ded-resistant species of elm.

it was difficult to make direct comparisons between this study and previous efforts to regenerate u. americana protoplasts because of different source material, media, plating densities, and culture systems. nevertheless, sustained proliferation of protoplasts  into calli compared to previous unsuccessful attempts may be a result of the reduction of polyphenols in the source tissue, which are known to inhibit subsequent protoplast division  <cit> . as well, a shorter period of incubation with much less stress on the protoplasts may contribute to their higher growth response. regardless of the mechanisms, the reproducibility of the current system in providing regenerable protoplasts represents a significant step forward and a solid foundation to develop a protoplast manipulation system for american elm. this development could ultimately facilitate the development of ded resistant somatic hybrids, cybrids, and provide an alternate avenue to insert large segments of dna. protoplast based systems have been used to generate novel germplasm with disease or insect resistance in a range of species such as potato  <cit> , tobacco  <cit> , brassica spp.  <cit> , and citrus  <cit> . given the multigenic response involved in ded resistance, together with the long life span of u. americana relative to the rapidly evolving pathogen, protoplast technologies are particularly appealing to integrate stable disease resistance traits found in some asiatic ulmus species into u. americana <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
the significance of the current study lies in its innovative and systematic approach to develop an effective solution to a problem which has limited the progress in protoplast based genetic improvement of an important plant species for many decades. the data presented here emphasize the critical role of the phenylpropanoid pathway in modifying cell walls in american elm in such a way that inhibits enzymatic degradation and has slowed progress toward the development of protoplast culture and fusion in this species despite repeated attempts for over  <dig> years. the crucial advancement made in this study was selective inhibition of the phenylpropanoid pathway by aip, a potent phenylalanine ammonia lyase inhibitor, thereby facilitating cell wall degradation and subsequent release of protoplasts from callus tissue in large numbers and a very short period of enzymatic incubation. protoplasts isolated using this system displayed high rates of viability, initiate cell division sooner and at much higher frequencies than reported earlier, and have facilitated the first report of protoplast-derived callus in this species. this technological advance has enhanced our ongoing research to develop protoplast regeneration and fusion systems for the eventual development of ded-resistant somatic hybrids. the fundamental aspect of this technology also provides a novel approach to expand the application of inhibitors of phenylpropanoid pathway to many traditionally recalcitrant woody species in which cell wall digestion and reproducible protoplast isolation has proven to be very difficult, if not impossible. ongoing studies indicate that this approach increases protoplast isolation in other woody species including sugar maple  and hazelnut .

