BACKGROUND
macro- and microscopic imaging are pivotal readouts in the field of biology both for determining the normal  course of events and for observing the effects of experimental perturbations and natural aberrations  <cit> . recent advances in microscopic imaging make it possible to routinely gain visual access to samples hundreds of microns thick  <cit> . the emergence of green fluorescent protein  as a reporter has opened up many new experimental approaches that were not previously possible  <cit> . gfp and other genetically-encoded autofluorescent protein reporters have a number of properties that make them ideal for multidimentional imaging of living specimens: no substrate  is required to generate signal, they have a high signal-to-noise ratio, are non-toxic, stable at 37°c and resistant to photobleaching. moreover they are available in an increasingly large compendium of spectrally-distinct variants.

to construct high-resolution anatomical models of normal, mutant and pathological situations, we must establish technologies to identify and follow individual cells in three-dimensional  space and in 3d over time, in four-dimensions . unfortunately, native fluorescent proteins permit tracking the position of any given cell over time only if the population of tagged cells is distributed among non-expressing cells by virtue of lineage or in a mosaic experimental situation  <cit> . in situations where groups, or all cells in a 3d field of view express a fluorescent protein label, information on the behavior of individual cells cannot be discerned. therefore an approach is required where 3d space is segmented at cellular resolution. this is most easily achieved if each cell can be marked with an easily identifiable tag that is visible at subcellular resolution  <cit> . since it exhibits low autofluorescence, and is a single, universal and volumetrically constrained cellular organelle, the nucleus is ideal for such labeling  <cit> .

our goal was to take advantage of this feature and to develop a non-invasive fluorescent protein marker of the nucleus for in toto imaging  of individual cells in situ in living mice  <cit> . for the unequivocal identification of individual cells, we sought a developmentally neutral, genetically-encoded autofluorescent protein-based marker that labels dna during all phases of the cell cycle while preserving cell morphology and behavior.

as the principal structural proteins of eukaryotic chromosomes, histones are attractive targets for fluorescent nuclear labeling. histone tagged fluorescent protein fusions have previously been shown to incorporate into chromatin without any adverse effects on the viability of cells in culture  <cit> . when compared to reporters containing nuclear localization sequences , histone fusions exhibit an improved signal-to-noise ratio and have the distinct advantage of signal remaining bound to the target even during cell division when the nuclear envelope has broken down. in contrast nls-tagged markers  become dispersed throughout a cell during division, making it difficult to distinguish individual cells during mitosis.

to date gfp fusions to several histones have been generated and used for labeling nuclei in live transgenic animals, including nematode worms, fruit flies and zebrafish  <cit> . one of these is a fusion between egfp and human histone h2b which was developed in order to label active chromatin and used to follow the segregation of double minute chromosomes in cancer cells  <cit> . we have investigated the expression and germline transmission of this type of fusion in mice and established its usefulness not only for imaging cell cycle dynamics  <cit> , but also for tracking cells in living specimens. moreover unlike native gfp variants this subcellularly localized histone fusion was found to withstand fixation while retaining both fluorescence and subcellular localization.

RESULTS
to evaluate histone-tagged fluorescent protein fusions in embryonic stem  cells and mice, we generated constructs comprising an n-terminally positioned human h2b sequence followed at the c-terminus by sequences for various fluorescent proteins both gfp and dsred-based. we previously reported that dsred <dig> was not amenable to use in es cells or mice  <cit> , however several improved dsred variants have recently become available  <cit> . we therefore chose to evaluate dsred <dig> and dsredexpress as part of this study.

the h2b-fluorescent protein fusions we generated were introduced into vectors utilizing the cag promoter  <cit>  designed to drive high-level constitutive gene expression in es cells, embryos and adult mice  <cit> . standard protocols were used to establish stable lines of es cells constitutively expressing an h2b fusion  <cit> . several transgenic es cell lines were generated each expressing h2b-egfp at strong homogenous levels  <cit> . however, even though we did recover lines with h2b-dsred <dig> and h2b-dsredexpress expression  <cit> , subsequent maintenance of these lines in culture revealed a continued reduction and heterogeneity in fluorescence. we were unable to establish lines with sustained homogenous h2b-dsred <dig> or h2b-dsredexpress fluorescence. moreover our recent data suggest that mrfp <dig>  <cit> , a rapidly-maturing monomeric form of dsred, is amenable to use in mice, both in its native form and as a part of functional fusion proteins .

h2b-egfp expressing es cells are shown in fig.  <dig>  it noteworthy that with this histone fusion we observed a high signal-to-noise ratio and so could achieve high-resolution imaging of mitotic chromosomes , various states of interphase chromatin and nuclear debris . moreover for cells undergoing mitosis we could also discern the stage of mitosis and the plane of cell division . previous work indicated that a similar fusion protein expressed in hela cells did not affect cell cycle progression  <cit> , and accordingly not only could we visualize nuclear dynamics and identify the various phases of mitosis in live es cells  <cit>  , but in doing so, we did not observe any change in growth rate or mitotic index in the transgenic es cells compared to non-transgenic parental es cells . by imaging several cag::h2b-egfp transgenic es cells undergoing mitosis  we calculated the progression from early prophase to cytokinesis to take less than one hour . furthermore imaging of embryoid bodies demonstrated that individual nuclei could be discerned from a three-dimensional population of densely packed cells all of which were expressing the h2b-egfp marker . no loss of fluorescence was observed with prolonged in vitro passage of the es cells expressing the h2b-egfp fusion in the absence of positive selection in the presence or absence of lif .

we next tested the effects of widespread expression of an h2b fusion protein in mice. we generated germ line chimeras and established transgenic lines of mice constitutively expressing h2b-egfp. we were able to breed this transgene to homozygosity, resulting in viable and fertile animals exhibiting widespread expression with no overt morphological abnormalities. the transgene has been maintained for over three years in a breeding colony of homozygous mice with no apparent effect on viability, breeding performance or lifespan. we therefore infer that this fusion protein is developmentally neutral and does not interfere with either mitosis or meiosis. wide-field microscopic analysis of both mouse embryos and adult organs demonstrates widespread expression of the h2b-egfp fusion in all types of nucleated cells.

we used laser scanning confocal microscopy  <cit>  to image this constitutively expressed transgenic reporter at subcellular resolution in live mouse embryos. such non-invasive visualization of chromatin in living preparations allowed us to acquire high-magnification sequential optical sections  that can be used to generate high-resolution anatomical volumetric  images with details of interphase chromatin in addition to mitotic chromosomes and fragmenting nuclei. to do this, stacks of sequential optical sections are reconstructed into 3-dimensional projections. this methodology can be used to generate 3-dimensional  image sets not only of cells propagated in culture but also of cells in situ in living animals and is illustrated here by imaging whole mouse embryos at the 4-cell stage, the blastocyst stage, and the pre-gastrula stage . these data sets can be computationally manipulated in various ways, for example for the visualization of individual xy slices from a z-stack, rendered images from the full, or part of a z-stack, and color-coded depth projections of a z-stack .

data on older embryos and adult organs illustrates that larger specimens can be imaged, however not in their entirety given current limitations in optical imaging capabilities. instead of imaging the whole specimen, larger samples are positioned so that data can be acquired from regions of interest, which can then be acquired in a tiled manner and computationally re-aligned in image acquisition and processing software.

our data demonstrates that nuclear morphology afforded by the h2b-egfp fusion can be used to identify different cell types. in both the raw data, and a rotated rendered stack of an embryonic day   <dig>  embryo, cells of the definitive endoderm, mesoderm and embryonic ectoderm can be distinguished solely on the basis of nuclear morphology and orientation in addition to their expected position . low magnification rendered z-stacks taken from a transversely cut section through the head of an e <dig>  embryo  reveal the stereotypical 3d organization of nuclei within the region imaged , and electronically magnified views of this image illustrate a characteristic apposition of nuclei both in and around the notochord, and within the mesenchyme and endoderm of the pharyngeal region , in addition to providing information on cell division and cell death .

wide-field microscopic examination of organs from adult animals revealed widespread fluorescence as has been reported for animals expressing native fluorescent proteins under the regulation of the cag promoter  <cit> . laser scanning confocal imaging of various organs obtained from adult animals was used to generate high-resolution images revealing stereotypical nuclear positions, reflecting different cell types and revealing other subcellular details, such as mitosis and nuclear fragments, also observed in embryos .

finally we investigated whether we could follow cell movement, division, and death in time-lapse experiments using various imaging modalities. we cultured es cells and embryos on the stages various each of which had been modified to permit culture under physiological conditions. the different types of data routinely generated using different optical imaging modalities that are widely used and commercially available are illustrated in figure  <dig>  spinning disc confocal microscopy  <cit>  was used for short-term high-resolution 4d imaging of cag::h2b-egfp es cells , wide-field microscopy was used for long-term low-resolution imaging of cag::h2b-egfp preimplantation stage embryos . note that development proceeds normally in most embryos, and that some of the embryos imaged are undergoing cavitation to form blastocysts  <cit>  . two-photon excitation microscopy  <cit>  was used to image cells in a whole gastrula-stage mouse embryo without perturbing the morphogenetic movements associated with gastrulation . cells can clearly be followed through the successive time points in each of these experimental situations ranging from a few minutes  to  <dig> hours  time-lapse duration. these studies reflect the range of resolutions at which information can be acquired using a marker of this type. we observed normal cell proliferation throughout the course of these imaging experiments and no excessive nuclear fragmentation. also, because the on-stage cultures were comparable to parallel cultures maintained in a tissue culture incubator, we conclude that the outcome of the cultures was not affected by the various imaging modalities.

discussion
here we report the evaluation of a chromatin localized histone fusion fluorescent reporter in vivo through the generation of transgenic embryonic stem  cells and mice having widespread expression of this reporter.

the transgenic mice that we have generated provide a new tool for high-resolution live imaging of a genetically tractable mammalian model organism  <cit> . they represent a resource for analyzing development and disease at the subcellular level in cells, embryos and adult tissues. the marker used facilitates the acquisition of in vivo data and allows it to be integrated onto a high-resolution anatomical framework. this type of multidimensional data is complex and thus difficult to digitize and compile into a standardized and integratable format. in toto imaging of fluorescent protein expressing specimens on a large-scale could be used for generating high-resolution digitally recorded anatomical databases where the baseline  cell behaviors and cell fates can be contrasted to those observed in mouse mutants. however, developing in toto imaging technologies for acquiring large amounts of data will necessitate improving the speed and throughput of microscopic image acquisition and analysis. this would also be coincident with the ongoing development of improved computational approaches to mine and integrate this type of data .

much of the information generated using a fluorescent fusion reporter such as the h2b-egfp fusion is analogous to conventional histology  <cit>  except that this mode of data acquisition optically sections a sample , excels in permitting computational 3d reconstructions of spatial information, and can additionally be coupled to time-lapse imaging for the capture, processing and quantitation of 4d information . also, unlike conventional gfp-based reporters  <cit> , the histone h2b-egfp fusion is resilient to fixation, so samples can be processed and stored for extended periods of time without compromising signal integrity or specificity .

the future development and availability of mouse strains constitutively expressing spectral variant histone h2b fusions should prove useful for visualizing anatomy and tracking different populations of cells in multiple dimensions at high-resolution in mice as has previously been demonstrated in other organisms which are classically perceived as being more amenable to in vitro culture and optical imaging  <cit> . they can also be used as tagged populations of cells in chimeras  <cit> , in addition to transplantation and cell isolation experiments  <cit> . also, since fluorescence is proportional to genome content and the fluorescence intensity reflects chromosome condensation state, the reagents we have generated should permit the study of alterations in ploidy and chromosomal condensation including determination of phases of mitosis  <cit> . additionally, real-time analysis of chromatin fragmentation as well as the effects of mutations on chromosome stability during disease processes can be investigated using cag::h2b-egfp transgenic mice.

CONCLUSIONS
the cag::h2b-egfp strain that we have generated takes in vivo imaging using genetically-encoded reporters in mice to sub-cellular resolution. the development of additional strains permitting spectrally-distinct high-resolution live cell in vivo imaging, coupled to advances in optical imaging modalities and the development of improved computational methods to mine imaging data should pave the way for a multidimensional understanding of biological processes.

it is anticipated that in the future, in vivo imaging approaches using transgenic animals expressing genetically-encoded fluorescent proteins will not only provide high-resolution information on cell behavior in specific biological processes  <cit> , but more importantly it may lead to an exponential increase in the available multidimensional in vivo biological information which could mirror the recent explosion of available genomic data. therefore recent advances in live imaging will need to be paired with developments in computational biology, as appropriate informatics methods will need to be developed and implemented in order to mine, present and integrate this type of in vivo biological data.

