BACKGROUND
the output of principal cortical neurons is regulated by a network of inhibitory interneurons  <cit> . coordinated development of these neurons underlies the acquisition and adaptation of visual, motor and cognitive function throughout postnatal life. cognitive development during critical periods such as toddlerhood and adolescence is characterised by rapid acquisition of executive functions such as language, goal-directed behaviour and working memory  <cit> . this development is subserved by processes that facilitate a balance between excitatory and inhibitory transmission such as synaptogenesis  <cit> , maturation of inhibitory interneurons  <cit> , development of gaba receptors  <cit>  and an early-life switch from excitatory to inhibitory actions of gaba  <cit> .

the endogenous cannabinoid  system modulates excitatory-inhibitory balance by mediating short- and long-term synaptic plasticity. cannabinoid cb <dig> receptors  are thought to be primarily localised to presynaptic terminals of inhibitory gabaergic interneurons that express the neuropeptide cholecystokinin  and target the soma or proximal dendrite of pyramidal neurons in the primate dorsolateral prefrontal cortex  and primate and rodent hippocampus  <cit> . in addition, cb1rs have been shown to co-localise with the calcium-binding proteins calbindin and calretinin in distinct subsets of cortical inhibitory interneurons  <cit> . cb1rs are also localised to some principal neurons in the hippocampus and the cerebellar cortex  <cit> , although the current consensus is that they are expressed at much lower levels on these cells than in inhibitory interneurons  <cit> . while endocannabinoids signal via a number of other receptors in addition to cb <dig> <cit> , the major mode by which they interact with cb1rs is via retrograde signalling. following membrane depolarisation, increased ca2+ concentration or metabotropic glutamate receptor activation, endocannabinoid ligands are synthesised in the postsynaptic terminal. postsynaptic release and retrograde diffusion of endocannabinoids results in presynaptic cb1r activation and suppression of neurotransmitter release from presynaptic  <cit>  and, indirectly, from postsynaptic terminals  <cit> .

biosynthesis of one major endocannabinoid, anandamide, from membrane phospholipid precursors is catalysed by several enzymes. the most well-studied of these, which we measured the encoding mrna for here, is n-acylphosphatidylethanolamine-specific phospholipase d , but others include glycerophosphodiesterase   <cit> , abhydrolase domain  <dig>   <cit>  and the phosphatase ptpn <dig>  <cit> . formation of the other major endocannabinoid, 2-arachidonylglycerol , is catalysed by alpha and beta diacylglycerol lipases   <cit> . fatty acid amide hydrolase  catalyses postsynaptic anandamide breakdown  <cit>  while 2-ag activity is terminated by both presynaptic monoglyceride lipase  and the postsynaptic abhydrolase domain  <dig> enzyme   <cit> . together, these elements of the endocannabinoid signalling system regulate early nervous system development  and synaptic plasticity  <cit> , and thus would also be expected to sculpt behavioural and cognitive development.

it is thus critical to determine the normal developmental trajectory of the endocannabinoid system, in humans and to determine which elements may be changing during critical periods such as adolescence, when the majority of cannabis use commences and which may be a period of vulnerability to the detrimental effects of cannabis exposure  <cit> . indeed, earlier age of cannabis use onset is associated with higher risk of psychotic symptoms and neuroanatomical abnormalities associated with psychosis  <cit> . however, while brain region-dependent increases and decreases in cb1r binding density and distribution between prenatal, infant and adult humans have been described  <cit> , detailed studies of human endocannabinoid system development, particularly in the frontal cortex, are lacking. the aim of the present study was therefore to extend these earlier findings, using gene expression analysis to describe the development of cb1r and some of the major endocannabinoid metabolic enzyme mrnas in human dlpfc across postnatal life. given the localisation of cb1rs to cck-, calbindin- and calretinin-positive interneurons, we hypothesised that the trajectory of cortical cb1r development would partially correspond to those previously determined for these interneuron marker mrnas in the same subjects  <cit> .

RESULTS
expression of housekeeping gene mrnas did not change significantly over the lifespan, nor did the geometric mean of the expression for all four housekeeping genes .

cb1r mrna decreases across postnatal life
microarray analysis revealed a significant decrease of approximately 50% in cb1r mrna  across the human lifespan . expression decreased from a peak in neonates to a plateau from toddler age until adolescence, and then further decreased to adult levels. qpcr data showed that cb1r mrna decreased across postnatal life and correlated with rin  and pmi  . post-hoc lsd tests showed that cb1r mrna peaked in toddlers and was lower in the adult group than in all other earlier age groups except young adults .

by in situ hybridisation we found a distinct laminar pattern of cb1r mrna hybridisation signal in the grey matter, although scattered cb1r mrna-positive signal was also found below the cortex in the white matter . in the grey matter we found a dark band of increased cb1r mrna immediately sub-adjacent to layer i, corresponding to layer ii . another more diffuse band of increased cb1r mrna signal was found in deeper cortical layers corresponding to layers v and vi, the width and intensity of which appeared to vary with age. there was no hybridisation detectable above background in sections incubated with the sense strand riboprobe . overall, in situ data indicated that cb1r mrna expression decreased with age, particularly in the superficial cortical grey matter. analysis of optical density of films generated from in situ hybridisation indicated that in all age groups, cb1r mrna expression was highest in the supragranular cortical layer ii  =  <dig> , p <  <dig> ; simple contrast of layer ii vs all other layers p <  <dig> ; figure 3). expression was highest in neonates and infants and lowest in adults, and these differences were statistically significant in layers ii, iii, v and vi  =  <dig> , p <  <dig> ; interaction effect: cortical layer x age f =  <dig> , p <  <dig> ). some layer-specific variation in the developmental pattern was evident. for example, in superficial layers ii and iii the school age group showed less pronounced reduction in cb1r mrna density than in other layers; and in layer iii only, teenagers showed significantly higher cb1r mrna expression than both toddlers and adults. silver grain clusters with a scatter diameter of 8–12 μm, representing the density of cb1r mrna per cell, were visible 4– <dig> times above background levels on small interneuron-like cells in layers ii, iii, iv and vi . clusters with a scatter diameter of  <dig> - 16 μm were visible on larger cells in layers iii, v and vi .

cb1r mrna levels are not correlated with expression of the interneuron marker cck
expression of cb1r mrna, as measured by qpcr, was positively correlated with expression of mrna for the interneuron markers calbindin  and calretinin . there was no correlation between cb1r and cck mrna .

2-ag synthesising enzyme mrna  and hydrolysing enzyme mrnas  show dynamic, divergent patterns across postnatal life.

microarray analysis revealed a gradual increase in daglα expression  from low neonate levels to a peak at young adulthood . qpcr data indicated that daglα expression was significantly correlated with ph . however, due to variability and limited n, subsequent ancova results showed that daglα expression approached, but did not reach a statistically significant change across development with our chosen primer and probes . based on microarray results, planned post-hoc lsd tests carried out on the qpcr expression data showed that compared with both neonates and adults, daglα mrna expression was increased in toddlers , school age  and teenage individuals , indicating a peak at school age.

mgl mrna expression  was quite variable in the microarray, showing an inverted u-shaped pattern across the human lifespan with a rapid increase until 6 months of age and then a steady decline starting after age  <dig> . qpcr analysis confirmed the developmental downregulation of mgl mrna expression with age , and post-hoc lsd tests showed that mgl expression was significantly reduced from infant levels by school age and continued to decrease from school age until adulthood. however, qpcr data failed to confirm the early increase in mgl mrna from neonates to infants, suggesting that the prominent pattern was one of decline.

microarray analysis showed that abhd <dig> mrna expression  increased during human maturation by around 50% . by qpcr, we saw a similar pattern, but we detected a steady increase in abhd <dig> mrna expression over postnatal development and maturation by qpcr, with a plateau from school age to young adulthood followed by an increase to adult levels . post-hoc lsd tests showed increased abhd <dig> mrna expression in all age groups compared with neonates, and in adults compared with infants .

anandamide synthesising and hydrolysing enzyme mrnas  increase across postnatal life
microarray analysis revealed a steady and large increase of almost 300% in nape-pld mrna expression  from the neonate to adult groups . by qpcr, we confirmed that nape-pld mrna expression increased steadily across development . post-hoc lsd tests showed that compared with neonates nape-pld mrna expression was significantly increased in later life, from an 87% rise in toddlers to a 106% increase in adults.

faah mrna expression  was not altered across development in the microarray . qpcr data indicated, however, that faah mrna expression increased over the lifespan , with post-hoc lsd tests showing that faah mrna increased by 36% from neonates to young adulthood .

discussion
here, we present evidence for dynamic and non-concomitant changes in expression of mrna for the cb1r and the metabolic enzymes for its major ligands during key epochs of human postnatal development . during early postnatal life , cb1r mrna peaks in the dlpfc. expression of the 2-ag synthetic  enzyme and the pre- and postsynaptic hydrolytic 2-ag enzymes mgl and abhd <dig> begins to increase. expression of one of the anandamide synthetic enzymes nape-pld also increases steadily during early life while mrna for faah, the anandamide hydrolytic enzyme, remains stable. at adolescence, cb1r mrna is in decline compared with early life, particularly in cortical layer ii. at this time, mgl has begun to decline while abhd <dig> mrna is increasing, compared with early postnatal life, suggesting an increased capacity for regulation of postsynaptic 2-ag release. the potential for anandamide turnover may increase in adolescence relative to earlier life given the rise in nape-pld and, to a lesser extent, faah mrna. by adulthood, cb1r mrna is significantly reduced from early life levels, suggesting attenuation of control over synaptic neurotransmission mediated by this receptor, coincident with maturation of cognitive function. in contrast, the capacity for enzymatic control of anandamide turnover may continue to rise in adulthood, indicated by high mrna expression of both nape-pld and faah.

in situ hybridisation allowed us to determine the laminar distribution of cb1r mrna in the dlpfc. cb1r mrna is highest in cortical layer ii in individuals aged from one month to 50 years. we observed silver grains indicative of cb1r mrna expression densely clustered over small, interneuron-like cells in layers ii, iii, iv and vi and more sparsely collected over larger cells in layers iii, v and vi. cb1rs in primate dlpfc are primarily localised on cck-positive inhibitory interneurons  <cit> , but are also co-localised with the calcium binding proteins calbindin and calretinin in distinct subsets of cortical inhibitory interneurons  <cit> . we did not observe a correlation between cb1r and cck mrna, which increases steadily from neonatal age to adulthood  <cit> . however, cb1r mrna expression was correlated with both calbindin, which follows an inverted u-shaped trajectory  <cit> , and calretinin, which is highly expressed early in human development  <cit> . however, since cb1r  <cit> , cck  <cit>  and calbindin mrna  <cit>  have been detected in pyramidal neurons, expression data may reflect heterogeneous origins of the mrna signal, such as in layer v, which contains both pyramidal neurons and wide arbor interneurons. further studies quantifying cb1r mrna on specific cell types are necessary to resolve the developmental expression patterns of cb1r in specific interneuron types.

developmental changes in cb1r mrna
peak cb1r mrna expression was observed at neonatal age by microarray but in toddlers by qpcr, a discrepancy that may arise from the differential preference for 3’ versus 5’ transcript detection between the two techniques. laminar analysis of in situ hybridisation indicated that cb1r mrna expression peaks in neonates and infants in most cortical layers. these findings are confirmed by recent data from a different study showing a similar trajectory from early life to adulthood, with cb1r mrna peaking at neonatal age then decreasing until adulthood  <cit> .

the robust decrease in cb1r mrna expression in layer ii from early life to adulthood in our human cohort agrees with previous findings in primate  <cit>  and suggests strong regulation of neurotransmission by cb1rs early in life . it is tempting to speculate that this cb1r down-regulation results in a gradual reduction in cb1r-mediated suppression of inhibitory presynaptic neurotransmission. indeed, the first putative drop in cb1r mrna expression in layer ii occurs around the toddler/school age group, which represents a period of increased inhibitory control in the prefrontal cortex marked by dynamic changes in inhibitory interneuron marker expression  <cit>  and increased working memory ability  <cit> .

endocannabinoids in early postnatal life
the shape of the postnatal trajectory of daglα mrna suggests that the capacity for synthesis of 2-ag, the major cortical endocannabinoid, increases during early postnatal life. in early life, 2-ag synthesis is also catalysed by the beta isoform of dagl, but since expression of this isoform may decrease very early in postnatal life  <cit>  it was not measured in the present study. 2-ag tone is principally regulated by the presynaptic hydrolytic enzyme mgl  <cit> , which showed reduced mrna expression over postnatal life after peaking in infancy, and also by the postsynaptic enzyme abhd <dig>  expression of which increased steadily from neonatal age to adulthood. in early development, mgl co-localises with cb1rs in presynaptic terminals of developing cortical pyramidal neurons in order to regulate corticofugal axon fasciculation  <cit> . thus the role of mgl in controlling 2-ag availability may diminish once appropriate cortical-origin connections are in place. our results suggest that the major endogenous ligand acting on the cb1r, 2-ag, may be somewhat unstable early in human life due to quite high variability in mrna controlling synthesis and breakdown within individuals less than 5 years of age. we suggest that 2-ag may be especially influential and subject to increased regulation in early postnatal life when the cb1r and presynaptic breakdown enzyme for 2-ag are at developmentally high levels.

endocannabinoids in adolescence
by adolescence there is a significant decrease in cb1r expression, suggesting an overall decrease in sensitivity to the effects of released endocannabinoids on neurotransmitter release. at this age, working memory performance reaches near adult levels with concomitant increases in dlpfc activity recruitment  <cit> . however, at adolescence, daglα has not started to decline and mgl mrna has just begun to decrease, while abhd <dig> mrna continues to increase, suggesting that capacity for 2-ag hydrolysis in pre- and postsynaptic compartments may be anatomically balanced at this age. thus, maintaining the earlier steady-state levels of 2-ag, while incorporating more temporal/spatial control of 2-ag action in the face of cb1r down-regulation, may be important during adolescence. this is an intriguing possibility and agrees with the increasing endocannabinoid-mediated suppression of neurotransmitter release observed in postnatal rat hippocampus until early adolescence  <cit> . taken together, our data imply that the capacity for 2-ag signalling remains fairly steady between early postnatal life and adolescence then may decline. the gradual increase in expression at adolescence of the mrna for anandamide hydrolytic enzyme faah, which is localised postsynaptically  <cit> , suggests that at this point there is increased potential for control over the timing of anandamide availability for signalling at cb1r as well.

endocannabinoids in adulthood
cb1r mrna continues to decline until young adulthood, when individuals have attained mature levels of inhibitory control over cortical excitability. combined with the early life increase in daglα and its decline in adulthood , our data is broadly consistent with previous work in the rat indicating that 2-ag is higher earlier in postnatal life and declines with maturation  <cit> . as maturation progresses the decline in daglα and mgl and increase in abhd <dig> mrna reflect the potential for reduction in the amount of 2-ag available for release from the postsynaptic terminal as compared with early postnatal life . combined with reduced cb1r expression at the same age, reduced 2-ag availability after adolescence might ‘release’ the endocannabinoid-mediated suppression of presynaptic neurotransmission to allow greater inhibitory input to cortical circuitry. our data suggest an overall increase in the capacity for anandamide synthesis via the nape-pld pathway during development and maturation of the human dlpfc. neonatal nape-pld expression levels increase threefold by adulthood, extending to humans previous findings of increased cortical nape-pld mrna expression from postnatal day  <dig> to  <dig> in rats  <cit>  and suggesting that, as in rat brain, anandamide synthesis may be higher in maturity than in early life  <cit> . there are several possible functional implications of these observations. anandamide induces long-term depression of inhibitory synapses via transient receptor potential vanilloid  <dig>  receptors in hippocampus, striatum and developing midbrain  <cit> , and since trpv <dig> receptors are expressed cortically  <cit>  it is possible that anandamide facilitates excitatory neurotransmission in this region in a similar manner to its effects in the hippocampus. however, if this were the case, then increased anandamide signalling would be expected to result in decreased, rather than increased inhibitory tone as maturation proceeds. on the other hand, anandamide opposes striatal 2-ag signalling by down-regulating 2-ag production  <cit> , suggesting the possibility that increased nape-pld expression results in greater synthetic capacity for anandamide production and consequent down-regulation of 2-ag production towards adulthood. finally, our data must be interpreted carefully in light of the other enzymatic pathways for anandamide synthesis, including gde <dig>  abhd <dig> and ptpn <dig>  future studies will benefit from investigating the postnatal developmental expression of these mrnas.

CONCLUSIONS
overall, our data show that human early postnatal life, adolescence and adulthood are characterised by distinct differences in capacities for endocannabinoid synthesis, breakdown and receptor expression, which we summarise in figure  <dig>  while the varying circumstances surrounding death and variable post-mortem intervals are limitations of using human brain material, these factors did not appear to obscure the major impact of age on endocannabinoid system mrnas nor did they have a major impact on the measurements in our study. our findings may help to identify pathophysiological mechanisms in developmental disorders characterised by compromised cortical inhibitory function such as schizophrenia  <cit>  and autism  <cit> . for example, disruption of this dynamic postnatal maturation by exogenous cannabinoid exposure might impact processes such as cortical network oscillations, which are governed by inhibitory interneuron activity and coordinate behavioural processes such as discrimination during decision-making  <cit>  and have been reported to be susceptible to suppression by cb1r agonists  <cit> . importantly, since adolescence is the most likely period of commencement of cannabis use, our findings emphasise the need to determine how exposure to exogenous cannabis constituents such as thc during this period affects the changes in the endocannabinoid system and its role as a gatekeeper of neurotransmission.

