BACKGROUND
drought stress adversely affects plant growth and productivity worldwide. it is estimated that about 40% of all croplands are affected by moderate to extreme water stress . moreover, agro-ecological conditions expected to deteriorate, due to foreseen global climatic changes, towards reduced availability and increased variability of water resources. the ever-increasing human population that is expected to exceed  <dig> billion people by  <dig>  together with the loss of agricultural land, poses serious challenges to agricultural plant research. thus, developing drought-resistance crop-plants with enhanced productivity and improved water-use efficiency is the most promising solution for alleviating future threats to food security.

plants have evolved various adaptive mechanisms to cope with drought stress at multiple levels such as molecular, cellular, tissue, anatomical, morphological and whole-plant physiological level  <cit> . transcriptional profiling analyses, in various species, have been widely used to identify drought-related genes . these experiments resulted in condition- and/or genotype-specific genes with little overlaps across studies .

meta-analysis is a powerful strategy to exploit the potential of transcriptome studies  <cit> . the combination of multiple studies, addressing similar experimental setups, enhances the reliability of the results by increasing the statistical power to reveal a more valid and precise set of differentially expressed genes   <cit> . moreover, combining gene expression information across species can improve the ability to identify core gene sets with high evolutionary conservation. these genes are conserved in both sequence and expression across multiple species and are thus key components of the biological responses being studied  <cit> . in animals, microarray meta-analyses have been extensively used for gene discovery . however, only few microarray meta-analyses were reported in plants, with the majority conducted in arabidopsis   <cit> . even fewer studies involved more than one plant species . to date, an extensive amount of transcriptome data, from various plant species, developmental stages, tissues and experimental conditions, are publicly available. thus, re-analyzing published data using a meta-analysis and a cross-species approach could promote detection of conserved key genes and pathways that were overlooked using other analytical approaches and facilitate prediction of functional drought responses in non-model species.

in the current study, we developed a novel cross-species meta-analysis of progressive drought stress at the reproductive stage , using arabidopsis, rice, wheat and barley microarray studies. based on this dataset we identified shared key genes and metabolic pathways involved in whole plant adaptation to progressive drought stress across-species. we further evaluated the level of sequence conservation between shared and species-specific degs and detected common regulatory cis-acting elements in their promoters. finally, based on transcriptional and morpho-physiological analyses, we validated the universal nature and functional conservation of selected shared degs in a fifth species, brachypodium distachyon.

RESULTS
meta-analysis of microarray progressive drought stress studies
a schematic workflow, summarizing each step of the csa:drought strategy is described in figure  <dig>  a wide survey of deposited drought related microarray studies, in various plant and crop species, was conducted. focus was given to studies involving progressive drought stress at the reproductive stage. most of the microarray studies found in databases  were conducted in arabidopsis , with only  <dig> studies involving drought stress at the reproductive stage. among other plant species, only rice , wheat  and barley  included more than one drought stress experiment at the reproductive stage. altogether,  <dig> studies, conducted at the reproductive stage, from four different plant species, were found in our survey. to further homogenize the experimental setup, only affymetrix genechip platform and aboveground tissues of soil grown wild type  plants were included. it is worth noted that all selected arabidopsis experiments used col- <dig> ecotype, while, for other plants, different genotypes were included, due to low number of studies from the same genetic background . following a hierarchical clustering analysis to assess the quality of the studies, additional eight arrays were removed due to inconsistent expression profile across biological replicates within the same experiment . in total,  <dig> arrays corresponding to  <dig> progressive drought stress studies, from four different plant species, were included in the csa:drought pipeline .figure  <dig> a schematic overview of the cross-species meta-analysis of progressive drought stress at the reproductive stage  approach. following selection of relevant microarray drought stress studies, raw data, from each species, was integrated into separate datasets using rank product analysis. this statistical method generated lists of up- and down-regulated genes based on their expression  across the individual experiments within each species. significantly differentially expressed genes , were used for intra-species analysis to retrieve enriched gene ontology  terms and to classify genes into functional pathways. next, degs within each species were transformed to rice orthologs and the penalized fisher method was used to combine p-value distributions across species meta-analysis. finally, the shared drought-adaptive degs were characterized and their universal nature was validated in a fifth species that was not included in the meta-analysis.
overall summary of within species microarray meta-analysis



plant species
clade
studies
a
arrays
probe-sets
b
degs
c
gos
d

arabidopsis

rice

wheat

barley

a. details of the individual microarray studies that were included in the csa:drought is given in additional file 1: table s <dig> 


b. affymetrix genechip® microarray of arabidopsis, rice, wheat and barley.


c. differentially expressed genes, false-positive prediction  ≤  <dig> .


d. enriched gene ontology biological processes .



microarray data from each species was integrated into a comparable meta-analysis platform using the rank product approach. the number of significant degs detected for arabidopsis , rice , wheat  and barley   was not affected by the array size . however, the number of studies integrated in the meta-analysis affected the number of significant degs detected in each species . this effect is inherent to meta-analysis and was previously reported . despite the negative effect of less overlapping degs when increasing number of studies, the improved statistical power and augmented stringency further supported the inclusion of more studies over the cost of false negative calls. the percentage of degs  highlighted arabidopsis as the most drought-responsive species , followed by rice and barley . wheat had the lowest percentage  of degs, which may be to the outcome of partial representation of transcripts on the affymetrix array. completion of the wheat genome sequence will facilitate the discovery of additional and novel drought-adaptive degs. notably, the percentages of the identified degs were not associated with the different number of studies , and therefore reflect true differences between species.figure  <dig> within species microarray meta-analysis.  expression profiles of significantly differentially expressed genes in each species based on the rank product analysis. length of heatmap is proportional to number of probe-sets. unique and common  up- and  down-regulated gene ontology biological processes  based on significantly differentially expressed genes within each species. unique and common  up- and  down-regulated orthologs .



gene ontology characterization in each species
the significant degs, in each species, were subjected to gene ontology  enrichment analysis for functional characterization of their biological processes . the highest number of significantly enriched biological-processes was found in arabidopsis , followed by rice , wheat  and barley  . strikingly, 81% of the biological-processes detected in arabidopsis were species-specific while rice, wheat and barley had only 48%, 34% and 7% of species-specific enriched biological-processes, respectively . the substantial differences in the number and uniqueness of the go biological-processes in each species may reflect the considerable lag in research and gene annotations that characterizes crop-plants.

to test the ability of the meta-analysis to identify new biological processes, we compared arabidopsis go list, obtained by the meta-analysis, with a subset of three original go lists, obtained from wt arabidopsis studies included in the meta-analysis. interestingly, only 34% similarity was observed , and all common biological-processes, found among the three individual lists, were also detected by the meta-analysis approach. the ability of the meta-analysis approach to detect additional 66% biological-processes demonstrates its analytic power to reveal new pathways that have been overlooked by individual studies.

identification of drought-adaptive genes using cross-species meta-analysis
a comparative platform across-species was developed by combining the fold-change scores obtained for each gene in the meta-analysis. to accomplish this, an injective  orthology relationship was defined, using the model genome interrogator  and predicted orthologs among the four species were identified. the rice database was used as a reference for all species due to the high number of orthologs detected compared with arabidopsis . the transformation to rice orthologs reduced dramatically the number of detected genes. from a total of  <dig>  detected genes across the four species in the meta-analysis ,  <dig>  orthologs remained , of which  <dig>  orthologs belong to rice. a prominent reduction in gene number was observed for arabidopsis and wheat  followed by barley  and rice . the reduced number of wheat orthologs could result from an incomplete database, which may explain the substantial difference between the number of orthologs common to rice and barley  compared with the number of orthologs common to rice and wheat . it may also account for the low number of orthologs  present in all three monocots . in arabidopsis, the reduced number of orthologs could also be explained by the high evolutionary distance from rice .

another analytical challenge in combining datasets of various species is to overcome species-specific residual variation in fold-change and substantial differences in database size. penalized fisher method was used to combine p-value distributions from each species meta-analysis. significant cross-species degs were detected using adjusted p-value cutoff of  <dig>  without setting a cross-species fold-change threshold. the advantage of this analytical setup is its improved ability to detect genes with consistent expression differences across taxa, which may have been overlooked due to their mild expression change. this approach resulted in identification of  <dig> degs across-species, comprised of  <dig> up-regulated  and  <dig> down-regulated  shared orthologs .table  <dig> 
functional classification of the shared drought-adaptive degs across-species



general category
main functional category
rice genes and their arabidopsis orthologs as predicted by mapman and blast2go

up-regulated
down-regulated

regulatory functions

response to stimulus

localization & organization

energy

metabolic processes

unclassified


to compare the csa:drought results to the original experiments included in the meta-analysis we examined two case studies using arabidopsis and wheat experiments . among the  <dig> shared degs, only five genes  were also reported among all three arabidopsis studies  <cit> . the majority  of the shared drought-adaptive degs were not reported in any of these experiments . this pattern was even more prominent among wheat studies  <cit> , where none of the shared degs was detected by all three individual studies. moreover, 82% of the shared degs were not reported in any of the three wheat studies . remarkably, a higher number of overlapping genes was detected among the three individual arabidopsis experiments . these common degs may imply arabidopsis specific adaptations to drought stress rather than general plant drought adaptations.

metabolic pathway analysis of shared drought-adaptive degs
the 225-shared drought-adaptive degs were further analyzed for their associated go biological-process terms and functional categories. gos describe gene products in a species-independent manner  <cit> , making it a useful functional classification for cross-species comparisons. revigo clustering highlighted response to abiotic stimulus and carbohydrate metabolism among up-regulated biological processes, whereas, metabolism of amines and aromatic compounds, and transport were included among down-regulated biological processes  . to complement this approach, the 225-shared drought-adaptive degs were analyzed for their corresponding functional categories based on the species-specific mapman annotations. additional effort to minimize the number of degs with unknown function or classification was undertaken using the blast2go program .figure  <dig> functional classification of shared drought-adaptive degs based on mapman and blast2go annotations.



the largest functional group  of degs was associated with metabolic processes , suggesting a considerable rearrangement in plant metabolism as part of progressive drought adaptation. thirty-five of these genes were involved in carbohydrate and amino acid metabolism . several of these genes were shown to be involved in synthesis of osmoprotectants, which ameliorate the detrimental effects of drought . up to 29% of the shared degs were involved in putative regulatory functions . the expression of genes involved in abscisic acid transduction and synthesis was found to be up-regulated, whereas genes associated with gibberellin biosynthesis and regulation exhibited down-regulation. additional functional group of genes associated with response to stimulus  was largely up-regulated . up-regulation of heat stress responsive genes was in accordance with up-regulation of heat-shock transcription factors. it is noteworthy, that 8% of the shared degs remained unclassified. these unassigned genes are intriguing since they hold the potential to contribute to drought adaptation and hence are novel drought-adaptive genes .

promoter analysis of shared degs
to test whether putative regulatory regions, spanning deg promoters, are enriched with cis-acting elements, across-species, deg promoter motif enrichment analysis was conducted. motif enrichment was limited to arabidopsis and rice due to insufficient database support for wheat and barley. significant motif enrichment was found only for the putative promoters of up-regulated degs. in arabidopsis, three putative enriched motifs , found in  <dig> out of the  <dig> deg promoters, are highly similar to the cacgtg core g-box motif . g-box was suggested to regulate gene expression in response to phytohormones and abiotic stimuli  <cit> . g-box motif can also be part of the aba-responsive element , to which the two latter putative motifs are highly similar. in rice, three putative enriched motifs were identified  in  <dig> out of the  <dig> deg promoters. the first motif  is highly similar to a rice motif  that was enriched among dehydration inducible promoters  <cit> . the other two motifs contain the core sequence of xenobiotic response element , which was found in promoters of animal genes, encoding xenobiotic metabolic enzymes  <cit> , as well as in promoters of plant genes  <cit> .

conservation analysis of drought-adaptive degs
functional and sequence conservation of the drought-adaptive degs across-species were further investigated by comparing the expression profiles and sequences of the identified degs. due to substantial differences among species, only genes for which orthology could be determined in all four species were included in the analysis. a hierarchal clustering of pair-wise distance matrix, based on the expression fold-change in ortholog genes across species, recapitulated the known plant phylogeny . sequence conservation in shared versus species-specific degs was evaluated by comparing the corresponding sequences between the rice ortholog and each species . for both shared and species-specific degs, higher sequence conservation was found among rice-barley and rice-wheat than for rice-arabidopsis comparison . both functional and sequence conservation patterns found among species further support the csa:drought detection of cross-species degs. significantly higher sequence conservation level of shared degs compared with species-specific degs, was found for barley  and wheat  . the non-significant difference found in arabidopsis, is presumably the consequence of the ample genetic distance between monocots and eudicots, indicated by a general lower sequence similarity and resolution.figure  <dig> conservation analysis.  hierarchal clustering of pair-wise distance matrix based on expression profile of orthologs in each species. bootstrap scores supporting the consensus tree  are indicated at each node.  sequence conservation of shared degs versus species-specific degs. for each species, the bit score, obtained from the permutated blastn analysis, was compared between shared degs and species-specific degs. bold horizontal bars indicate the average, boxes indicate the upper and lower  <dig>  quartile, dashed bars indicate the max/min scores , circles indicate the extremes, and notch overlaps indicate non-significant differences .



a case study of drought-adaptive genes in brachypodium distachyon
to validate the identified shared degs and evaluate their universality, we used the model grass b. distachyon  <cit>  as a case study. morpho-physiological characterization of plant adaptation to drought stress resulted in dramatic effects on plant growth , spike morphology  and root development . moreover, a significant reduction in culm length , total biomass  and yield production  was observed. under drought stress, plants exhibited significant lower chlorophyll content  based on transformed chlorophyll absorbance in reflectance index , higher osmotic potential  and a minor reduction in rwc .figure  <dig> 
brachypodium distachyon as a case study to validate the shared degs detected by csa:drought.  plants grown under control and drought conditions.  spike morphology,  roots biomass,  culm length,  total biomass,  spike weight,  transformed chlorophyll absorbance in reflectance  index,  osmotic potential, and  relative water content  under control and drought conditions. values are mean ± sd . *, ** and *** indicate significant differences between treatments at p ≤  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig> , respectively.



a subset of  <dig> drought-adaptive degs, identified in the csa:drought, with various expression patterns, was selected for qpcr validation in b. distachyon. in general, this assay showed similar expression pattern as the csa:drought , with  <dig> significant genes . these genes included carbohydrate metabolic enzymes as granule-bound starch synthase  <dig> , β-amylase  <dig> , trehalose-6-phosphate phosphatase g , alkaline/neutral invertase e  and hexokinase  <dig> . genes that encoded amino acid metabolic enzymes as homogentisate  <dig> -dioxygenase , 3-deoxy-d-arabino-heptulosonate 7-phosphate synthase , delta1-pyrroline-5-carboxylate synthetase  and aspartate kinase  <dig> . genes related to protein degradation as early responsive to dehydration  <dig>  and serine carboxypeptidase-like  <dig> . hormone metabolic enzymes and transcription factors, including abre binding factor  <dig> , snf1-related kinase  <dig>  , gibberellin  <dig> oxidase  <dig>  and nac domain containing protein  <dig> . additionally, a random set of unknown function  and unclassified  genes were also analyzed.figure  <dig> heat-map of selected drought-adaptive genes detected by csa:drought and validated by qpcr analysis in brachypodium distachyon. red and blue represent high and low relative expression when compared to the mean value of expression across all samples, respectively. scale is log <dig> of mean expression value. qpcr values, representing mean ± sd , were calculated and normalized using glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase and s-adenosylmethionine decarboxylase as internal controls and presented as fold-change .  carbohydrate metabolism: gbss <dig>  granule-bound starch synthase 1; bam <dig>  β-amylase 1; tpp, trehalose-6-phosphate phosphatase; inv-e, alkaline/neutral invertase e; hxk <dig>  hexokinase 1; gols <dig>  galactinol synthase  <dig>   amino acid metabolism: hgo, homogentisate  <dig> -dioxygenase; p5cs <dig>  delta1-pyrroline-5-carboxylate synthetase; dahps, 3-deoxy-d-arabino-heptulosonate 7-phosphate synthase; ak <dig>  aspartate kinase  <dig>   protein degradation: erd <dig>  early responsive to dehydration 1; scpl <dig>  serine carboxypeptidase-like  <dig>   hormone metabolism and transcription factors: abf <dig>  abre binding factor 4; snrk <dig> , snf1-related kinase  <dig> ; ga20ox <dig>  gibberellin  <dig> oxidase 2; nac <dig>  nac domain containing protein  <dig>   unknown and unclassified: lea <dig>  late embryogenesis abundant protein, group  <dig>  § indicates significant differences of qpcr analysis at p ≤  <dig> . fold change values and statistical analysis for each gene can be found in additional file 13: figure s <dig> 



the similar expression pattern, obtained in a fifth species that was not included in the csa:drought, reinforces the consistency of the shared degs as key genes involved in adaptation to progressive drought stress across-species .

discussion
traditionally, comparisons between two contrasting water regimes were used to identify drought-related degs. this strategy yielded hundreds to thousands of degs, depending on the selected significance threshold, however, focus was predominantly given to genes with high fold-change , overlooking functionally and biologically important genes with relative mild expression differences. moreover, in most cases very limited overlaps were found among different studies. our working hypothesis is that plant adaptation to drought stress involves combination of evolutionary conserved pathways, as well as, species-specific genes. here we developed a novel cross-species meta-analysis platform to reveal a core set of shared genes and pathways by integrating transcriptional data from arabidopsis, rice, wheat and barley into one meaningful analytical framework.

most  drought transcriptome studies have been conducted on arabidopsis under artificial and extreme conditions  for short periods  at the vegetative phase , with survival or recovery as selective traits. in addition, while functional analysis of candidate genes significantly improved drought resistance in transgenic lines under laboratory conditions, limited success was reported for transgenic crop-plants under field conditions  <cit> , where crop-plants are often exposed to longer episodes of slowly developing drought stress  <cit> . therefore, we focused our csa:drought strategy on progressive drought stress studies at the reproductive stage. this approach enabled detection of 225-shared drought-adaptive degs with enhanced functional and evolutionary conservation across-species . moreover, we were able to detect with the csa:drought approach  <dig> and  <dig> shared ortholog degs in arabidopsis and wheat, respectively, that were missed by the original studies . it is worth noted that while in arabidopsis only treatment differed between studies , in wheat both genotypes  and treatments differed, which may account for the limited overlaps compared with the shared degs. additionally, in most cases, transcriptome analyses use arbitrary fold-change thresholds combined with significance levels to reduce the number of detected degs from few hundreds/thousands to a tractable subset. such an approach highlights mostly species- and/or treatment-specific degs. in contrast, meta-analysis strategy facilitates detection of consistent and biologically important degs, which were overlooked in the original studies due to relatively low fold-change.

relatively high level of sequence conservation was found among the shared degs compared with the species-specific degs . this result should be considered in the light of the evolutionary distance between the four species and recent genetic bottlenecks involved in domestication and consciously evolution under domestication of rice, wheat and barley. it is worth notice that we cannot determine by our analysis if these genes were converged among species sometime during their separated evolutionary history. although this seems unlikely, the sample size used in this study and the experimental design used in the original studies prevent us from completely rule out this option. whether the sequence and functional similarity found among these genes is a consequence of conservation or convergence , this shows that the shared degs play fundamental roles in drought adaptation.

classification of the shared degs into functional categories suggests the involvement of various mildly expressed regulatory and metabolic pathways that jointly elicit an orchestrated drought adaptation . among the metabolic processes carbohydrate and amine metabolisms are assigned as the largest sub-category , which is involved in biosynthesis and accumulation of compatible solutes . the functional conservation of these genes was demonstrated in an additional species. a randomly selected subset of  <dig> carbohydrate and amine metabolic b. distachyon orthologs showed similar expression pattern as csa:drought. in accordance, a higher osmotic potential was measured in drought stressed compared to control b. distachyon plants. compatible solutes are small, nontoxic molecules that include sugars , sugar alcohols , amino acids  and amines  . compatible solutes are an important adaptive mechanism under drought stress as well as under additional abiotic stresses as salinity and extreme temperatures. osmoprotectants facilitate maintenance of cell turgor and cellular water potential under stress, as well as acting in membrane and macromolecules stabilization and ros scavenging . some of these osmoregulation-related shared genes have already been shown to improve drought tolerance. tppa and tppg, genes involved in trehalose synthesis, were included among up-regulated shared degs. overexpression of yeast tps-tpp in tobacco, arabidopsis, rice and alfalfa significantly improved the transgenic plant drought tolerance  <cit> . invertases mediate sucrose hydrolysis to glucose and fructose, which contributed to better osmoregulation  <cit> . accordingly, inv-e was up-regulated under drought . complex mechanisms operate in plants to coordinate the interactions between carbon assimilation and nitrogen metabolism  <cit> . carbon and nitrogen balance is a key component in plant adaptation to drought stress  <cit> . proline, synthesized via the glutamate pathway , or from ornithine   <cit> , is believed to act as a store of carbon and nitrogen, as well as in ros scavenging  <cit> . both p5cs <dig> and Δ-oat expression levels were up-regulated under drought . accordingly, several studies have shown that overexpression of either p5cs, or Δ-oat, in different plant species resulted in increased proline levels, which could contribute to enhanced stress tolerance  <cit> . remarkably, among degs reported in studies included in the meta-analysis, only  <dig> osmoregulation-related shared genes were detected, with majority of these genes  present only in one study . it is worth noted that all arabidopsis microarray experiments included in the meta-analysis overlooked the osmoregulation-related genes  <cit> , and for other species only partial results were discussed  <cit> . carbohydrate metabolism and lipid degradation may also be involved in supplying energy that is required for maintenance of drought adaptation and osmoprotectant synthesis through breakdown of energy reserves. additional large group of genes were assigned to protein regulation and metabolism. apart from its regulatory function, protein degradation during drought-induced leaf senescence results in increment of the free amino acid pool available for osmotic adjustment  <cit> .

phytohormone homeostasis is a key factor in plant drought adaptation that mediates a wide range of adaptive responses . one of the fastest responses of plants to drought stress is synthesis of aba, which induces gene expression, triggers stomata closure and eventually restricts cellular growth, leading to whole plant growth retardation. in accordance with aba effects on reproductive tissue development, through transcriptional reprogramming  <cit>  and aba gene expression regulation during drought, which is mediated by transcription factors such as abf <dig> , promoters of shared arabidopsis orthologs were enriched with the cis-acting element abre . abre involvement in aba-regulated gene expression occurs after the accumulation of aba and therefore many aba-inducible transcription factors are involved mainly in late and adaptive drought processes  <cit> . among the enriched abre genes included those involved in starch degradation and accumulation of compatible solutes  <cit> , as detected by csa:drought and validated in b. distachyon, both transcriptionally and physiologically .

interestingly, several genes that are known to regulate rapid drought-induced gene expression, were also detected by the csa:drought analysis. these genes included transcription factors as snrk <dig>  and snrk <dig> , and a protease regulatory subunit as erd <dig>  most drought-induced genes were detected under extreme drought conditions and short period assays, which might explain their annotations as early drought-responsive genes. however, the induction of these genes also during long, mild drought stress might imply on their involvement in maintenance of study-state gene expression level as part of drought adaptation. these discrepancies emphasize the importance of using physiologically oriented approach when designing stress assays.

CONCLUSIONS
our csa:drought strategy identified a set of  <dig> key drought-adaptive genes that were only partially, if at all, reported in the studies included in the meta-analysis. functional categorization of the shared degs underlined various regulatory and metabolic pathways as conserved drought-adaptive mechanisms across species. physiological and transcriptional characterization of drought stressed b. distachyon, further supported these results. additionally, we have identified and validated a group of unclassified genes  that could be further investigated of their functional prospective roles in drought adaptation mechanisms. the shared degs provide useful resource for subsequent research and can serve as a potential set of molecular biomarkers for drought experiments and as candidate genes for engineering drought-tolerant crop-plants.

