BACKGROUND
while the utility of systems biology tools and approaches are increasing within scientific research, several fundamental challenges have limited their wide-spread adoption in both the basic and translational sciences. the identification of truly relevant networks that are causatively associated with the phenotype of interest is paramount to the field of systems biology  <cit> . beyond the identification of an integrated network of interest, further analysis of the system is required to identify key target nodes that may represent novel therapeutic targets, or targets of the existing pharmacopeia. beyond discovery, it is equally important to begin to consider how our expanding knowledge of molecular interactions may be translated into clinical applications in the area of molecular diagnostics and/or targeted therapeutics. each of these areas requires the development of a more robust and systematic systems biology tool kit to permit the automated construction and further analysis of molecular networks. the publicly available molecular datasets anchored to well-characterized disease phenotypes provide an excellent framework upon which such methods can be developed and further validated.

in the typical pathway analysis, the first step is the identification of a characteristic molecule set from experimental data . the association of experimentally identified genes and/or proteins with available pathway and protein interaction data provides the foundation for further analysis. this can be accomplished with the help of integrated commercial solutions such as metacore™   <cit> , ipa  or by combining publicly available tools such as cytoscape  <cit>  with internal or public protein interaction and pathway databases. the reconstruction of condition-specific networks is often based on the fact that biological networks are highly modular. in general, network modules refer to a group of directly connected or closely located  proteins in the global network that work together to achieve a distinct biological function  <cit> .

different variations of the shortest-path algorithm often serve to extract network modules, ultimately aiming to uncover the most-affected biological processes in condition-specific pathways. the algorithms are found either as built-in network reconstruction tools within commercial software packages or as open-source plug-in modules for cytoscape. however, one fundamental issue facing this approach is the high interconnectivity seen in the biological networks due to the presence of a small number of hubs, that is, network nodes with hundreds or even thousands of connections  <cit> . in many cases, the shortest path between two nodes will logically traverse such hub. although some of these connections may be biologically meaningful, many are artifacts arising from the presence of hubs in the network. further analysis of network topology and graph statistics is needed to find pathways that are truly significant for a given molecular profile.

several attempts have been made to address the artifacts generated by the small number of hubs in the biological network. croes et al.  <cit> , for example, proposed to weight nodes in metabolic networks based on their connectivity, giving a penalty to highly connected metabolites. their results showed significant improvement in the accuracy of predicting known metabolic pathways: the authors reported up to  <dig> % accuracy for predicting known reaction steps in pathways between pairs of metabolites. another approach, implemented in metacore™, uses well-established canonical pathways as shortcuts while generating shortest paths in protein signaling networks. the algorithm gives preference to known signaling routes while reconstructing condition-specific networks. recent work by yu et. al  <cit>  shifts the emphasis from high-degree hubs to nodes that are "bottlenecks" in the network, i.e., nodes that have a disproportional number of shortest paths going through them.

these approaches have potentially severe limitations. always penalizing hubs might exclude them in situations where they play a truly important role in a condition-specific network. by the same token, always giving preference to known pathways limits the ability to generate new hypotheses in important signaling cascades. one approach to address this problem would be to consider the network topology in the context of a particular dataset , and to evaluate the statistical significance of all the shortest paths within the framework of the global connectivity map.

another fundamental issue in pathway analysis is how to use the results in guiding further laboratory research and clinical applications. the results of pathway analyses are usually sets of fairly complex networks or functional processes that are deemed relevant to the condition represented by the molecular profile. to be useful in a research or clinical laboratory, the results need to be translated to the level of testable hypotheses about individual genes and proteins within the condition of interest. systems biology has become a key component in drug and biomarker discovery, to identify both the causative targets in disease networks in addition to potential biomarkers of target disruption. in such areas, systems biology is often used to create a hypothesis about a specific condition, and identify a small number of molecules that can be further interrogated in the laboratory for clear-cut answers to confirm or refute the hypothesis.

in this work, we present a method and associated computational algorithm which addresses the fundamental issues described above. our method scores nodes in a network built from a set of experimentally derived, condition-specific genomic or proteomic profiles. the scoring is based on the role the nodes play in providing connectivity among genes or proteins of interest relative to their role in the global network. the method is therefore neutral with respect to the node's degree or centrality, i.e., the role of nodes with a high degree of physical connections is neutralized. scores for truly significant nodes are enhanced, while the scores of those that appear in the networks by chance are reduced. in addition, the output of our algorithm is a set of prioritized network nodes along with their possible regulatory effects on other genes and proteins. this output provides the researcher with a series of scored and testable hypotheses associating individual components of the identified molecular network with the phenotype of interest.

RESULTS
consistent with other systems biology methodologies, the algorithm described here starts with a set of experimentally identified network nodes. in this study, we used previously published data from a microarray study of psoriatic lesions  <cit> . in this work gene expression was assayed in four patients with psoriasis using hug95a affymetrix microarray platform. the skin samples were taken from the same area of skin before and after the lesions receded; this kept any variation in gene expression profiles not related to the disease to a minimum. a t-test of gene expression was performed to compare lesions and healthy skin. two hundred sixty-six genes were identified by the authors as being differentially expressed in psoriasis . this set of genes was mapped onto the global database of protein-protein interactions available in genego's metacore™ platform. this database is a commercially available resource containing over  <dig>  protein-protein and protein-small molecule interactions manually extracted from the literature by a group of experts. the method described can be readily applied to any of the publicly available protein-protein interaction databases such as bind  <cit> , dip  <cit> , hprd  <cit>  and intact  <cit> .

to address the issue of network hubs providing most of the shortest path connectivity in biological networks, we assessed the relative contribution of every node in a condition-specific network relative to its role in the global network . thus, the hubs which do not have any special role related to the set of differentially expressed genes were penalized, even though they may be highly connected. on the other hand, nodes that are truly relevant for providing connectivity among experimentally derived genes were highly scored regardless of the total number of interactions they have. we refer to this procedure as "topological significance scoring" because its results depend on the topology of protein network and define significance of a node with respect to providing network connectivity among the genes or proteins of interest.

initial validation with a set of publicly available data on psoriasis
we used  <dig> differentially expressed genes identified by t-test statistics  in  <cit>  as the input set and applied the algorithm described in the methods section. in the algorithm, all network nodes corresponding to genes from the input list are considered "sources" and "targets", the source node being the starting point and the target node being the endpoint of directed shortest paths connecting differentially expressed genes among themselves. the rest of the nodes that the shortest path consists of are the "internal" nodes necessary to connect the source to the target node. the resulting condition-specific shortest path network  contained  <dig>  internal nodes . each of these nodes was assigned a p-value according to the procedure described in the methods section. one hundred forty-five of the differentially expressed genes from the input set were also internal to the network and thus were assigned p-values . the rest of the differentially expressed genes were only present as sources or targets of directed pathways.

to evaluate whether or not the nodes deemed significant by our method are disease-related, we performed an automated search of abstracts in pubmed to find co-occurrence of the gene or protein name and the word "psoriasis" for all the proteins and genes that corresponded to nodes in the shortest path network . it is understood that only some papers in which the names co-occur describe a functional relationship between the protein/gene and disease. however, it is reasonable to assume that the proportion of papers describing actual gene-disease relationships is independent of the node topological significance assigned by our method. thus, co-occurrence frequency can serve as a relative measure of the algorithm's performance.

in the first test, we pooled nodes into "significance bins" according to the order of magnitude of p-values our algorithm assigned. we then evaluated the fraction of all nodes in each bin which are associated with psoriasis by literature hits. the results shown in figure 1a indicate that as many as 60% of the highest-scored nodes  co-occur in the literature with psoriasis. this compares with a mean of only 12% among the nodes whose p-value is >  <dig> . this provides a good initial indication that our method can identify disease-related network nodes.

next, we needed to verify that we are selecting genes specifically related to psoriasis rather than being generally well-studied genes that would have a high publication rate related to any disease context. figure 1b shows the number of papers in which the gene's name co-occurs with the word "psoriasis" as a fraction of total number of papers mentioning that gene. again, we see significant enrichment among highly scored nodes relative to the rest of the nodes in the set. to verify if the high-scored nodes are specifically related to psoriasis, we performed the search on the same set of genes for other diseases. we searched the number of papers in which the same genes and the world 'glaucoma' or 'cancer' co-occurs. as we expected, we did not find a positive correlation between the high scoring nodes and the number of literature hits . we also tested our algorithm on another autoimmune disease, multiple sclerosis. the scaling of the pubmed hits was not as good as it was in the case of "psoriasis", but for low p values the fraction of hits was still slightly higher. this is expected because both diseases are autoimmune and therefore they probably share some of the affected pathways . collectively, these data confirm that the algorithm assigns high scores to psoriasis-related genes using this publically available dataset. importantly, many of these high-scored network nodes are not differentially expressed in the microarray data set, but were inferred by the algorithm from the differentially expressed gene pattern and the analysis of network connectivity.

as described above, approximately half of the genes differentially expressed in association with the psoriasis phenotype were also identified within the shortest paths network and therefore assigned p-value scores based on topological significance. to further explore this subset of genes, we generated a plot similar to that in figure  <dig>  showing the number of papers in which the name of a gene and disease co-occur as a fraction of all papers written about that gene . in this case the statistics are restricted only to differentially expressed genes. genes with small p-values have a substantially higher fraction of hits with "psoriasis" than differentially expressed genes on average. the fraction of papers with "psoriasis" hits for all differentially expressed genes is on average  <dig> , while for those with p-values < 1e- <dig>  the fraction reaches  <dig> . thus, using the method of literature-based confirmation, the network topology-based algorithm is able to effectively prioritize differentially expressed genes identified from analysis of this single psoriasis data set.

functional validation of the protein prioritization algorithm
based upon the results above, it would appear that highly scored network nodes are more likely to be associated with the disease phenotype relative to all other nodes in the shortest path network and differentially expressed nodes. to investigate these results further, we conducted a thorough functional study of the highly scored nodes from our analysis of psoriasis gene expression using the standard metacore™ software suite. we loaded two sets of genes into the software. the first set contained  <dig> differentially expressed genes identified by the t-test. the second set contained genes identified as topologically significant members of the shortest path network connecting differentially expressed genes. genes were selected from the  <dig>  genes by applying false discovery rate  filtering by rank-order of their topological p-values. a total of  <dig> genes passed fdr filtering using the experiment significance level of  <dig>  . first, we computed the global functional distribution of the data, in which each dataset was mapped onto the metacore™ collection of functional pathway maps . these maps are freely available . enrichment statistics were calculated for these two data sets in the  <dig> cell signaling and metabolic function blocks in metacore™ assuming a hypergeometric distribution. the false discovery rate filter with an experiment significance level of  <dig>  was applied to account for the fact that we are testing the significance of over  <dig> maps and the result may contain some false positives. top scoring maps with detailed description were included in additional file  <dig> 

to visualize the significance level of individual maps, a histogram of -log is plotted showing each dataset separately . orange bars represent enrichment of pathways for genes highly scored by our algorithm; blue bars represent enrichment in differentially expressed genes. table  <dig> shows significant pathways for the combined dataset constructed as a union of topologically significant and differentially expressed genes. it is clear that statistically significant pathway maps have high relevance to inflammation, cell cycle, and cell adhesion processes. these results are in very good agreement with known facts regarding the role of these processes in the pathogenesis of psoriasis. the analysis of topologically high scoring nodes for down regulated genes in psoriasis resulted in similar conclusions for both the pubmed hits and functional analysis .

in the "genes" column the first figure is the number of genes from the combined dataset on each map, the second figure is the total number of genes represented on each map.

the top-scored map for the combined dataset is the ifn-gamma signaling pathway . a high level of saturation of this pathway with topologically significant nodes is in excellent agreement with the current views on the pathogenesis of psoriasis. the function of the inflammatory processes that induce the migration of interferon gamma-producing th <dig> lymphocytes into the skin is thought to be central to the development of psoriasis. these th <dig> lymphocytes are responsible for the pathologic reactions in psoriatic skin leading to keratinocyte hyperproliferation, small vessel proliferation, and neutrophilic infiltration  <cit> . interestingly, the second top-scoring map is prolactin signaling. even though the role of prolactin in psoriasis is not completely clear  <cit> , recent studies suggest that it may enhance ifn-gamma-induced cxcl <dig>  cxcl <dig>  and cxcl <dig> production in keratinocytes via activation of stat <dig>  nf-kappab, and irf- <dig> through the jak <dig> and mek/erk pathways and thus may promote type  <dig> t-cell infiltration into psoriatic lesions  <cit> .

further mechanistic investigation of the maps reveals that combining differentially expressed genes and topologically significant nodes helps to reconstruct a more complete picture of disease-related pathways, with topological scoring indentifying key elements of the pathways that are missed by gene expression profiling. figure  <dig> shows the top-scoring ifn-gamma signaling pathway map. individual sets of data are represented by small thermometer-like icons next to proteins. the set of topologically scored proteins is labeled # <dig> and the set of differentially expressed genes is # <dig>  two trends are visible on this map. first, some key genes known to be related to psoriasis are cross-validated by both high topological scores and differential expression . the examples include stat <dig>  an important element in transducing ifn-gamma signals, and p <dig>  the key regulator of apoptosis and stress response. both of these molecules are highly implicated in signaling related to the disease  <cit> . second, many important elements of the pathway are identified by topological scoring alone. these include ifn-gamma which triggers this pathway as well as irf- <dig>  pkc-delta, camk ii, cbp and other important modulators of this pathway's activity. even though these molecules were not identified as differentially expressed, their selection by the topological scoring algorithm allows reconstruction of a much more complete picture of this key pathway. while ifn-gamma  <cit> , irf- <dig>  <cit>  and cbp  <cit>  were already associated with psoriasis in independent studies, there is no direct evidence in the literature regarding involvement of pkc-delta and camkii in the disease. on the other hand, some studies indicate that other pkc isozimes  <cit>  and calcium signaling in general  <cit>  may play role in the pathogenesis of psoriasis. generally, molecules such as protein kinases are unlikely to change their expression levels in a way that is detectable by current microarray techniques. nonetheless, such molecules often play key regulatory roles in disease-affected pathways. topological scoring identifies them due to their central position in signaling cascades connecting differentially expressed genes. the proposed algorithm is capable of performing a dual task: cross validating disease target genes initially identified by gene expression and suggesting a pivotal role for new targets that could not be inferred from gene expression profiling alone.

functional hubs and "drugable" network modules
when our algorithm is applied, a network node can be assigned multiple p-values, each relating it to one of the differentially expressed genes . the p-value can be viewed as the strength of a "functional link" between the node in the shortest path and the differentially expressed gene. strong functional link  implies that the node in the shortest path plays a key role in providing connectivity between the gene and the rest of the differentially expressed set. some nodes may have many functional links with good strength. we call such nodes "functional hubs" .

we investigated topologically significant nodes and functional hubs which resulted from the analysis of psoriasis gene expression data in the context of known treatments for this disease. as the first step, all nodes with high topological scores were screened against the database of targets for drugs currently on the market or molecules in the development pipeline and were ranked based on their "drugability". from the set of  <dig> topologically significant genes for psoriasis, we identified  <dig> proteins which are drug targets based on the drug content of metacore™ . we also identified  <dig> out of the  <dig> proteins as functional hubs . a literature search of the top five proteins from the topologically significant nodes revealed that four of them were targets for drugs documented to have a positive effect on psoriasis: chondroitin sulfate  <cit> , retinoic acid  <cit> , mycophenolate mofetil  <cit> , and alclometasone dipropionate  <cit> . some drugs had multiple targets from our list. for example, retinoic acid targets were enriched in the list of topologically significant proteins. indeed, 20% of the top  <dig> proteins and 25% of the functional hubs were targets for retinoic acid, which is higher than the 10% of the set of differentially expressed genes being targets for the same drug. this is in good agreement with the fact that retinoic acid is a widely used treatment in dermatology, including psoriasis  <cit> . furthermore, although 50% of the functional hubs were targets for at least one of the above-mentioned drugs , there was only one functional hub identified as also being differentially expressed, interferon regulatory factor  <dig>  these results serve as an additional validation of our technique, showing that it is able to identify many known psoriasis drug targets while indicating that functional hubs could be used to predict likely new targets.

to gain further insight into functional hubs and their relevance to psoriasis, we built network modules consisting of sets of genes linked to hubs by upstream or downstream functional connections. the genes corresponding to these modules were mapped onto standard gene ontology and other process and disease ontologies available in metacore™  <cit> . this allowed us to prioritize functional hubs based on their relevance to psoriasis-related processes or psoriasis-related genes. we obtained  <dig> functional hubs and corresponding network modules that were enriched in genes related to skin diseases and conditions . out of  <dig> modules for divergence hubs,  <dig> were enriched in skin diseases, while out of  <dig> modules for convergence hubs,  <dig> were enriched in skin diseases. notably, this analysis allowed identification of  <dig> potential novel targets, i.e., proteins that are functional hubs with relevance to skin disease, but for which no drug information was found. these are ror-alpha, nfkbia, thombospondin  <dig>  kng, and nf-kb <dig> .

thus, the end-result of our analysis of a disease gene expression profile is a set of network modules  prioritized based on their potential functional impact and drug availability. for each module, the analysis identifies affected biological processes and disease-related genes. we call these sub-networks drugable network modules. an example of such a module is generated from interferon regulatory factor  <dig> , which is identified as one of the "divergence" hubs functionally linked to multiple downstream targets . functional links were imported into metacore™ using metalink™, a parser for interaction data. the network was analyzed with respect to the disease-related genes , and the result shows that it has high relevance to skin diseases, with about 75% of its nodes associated with this disease category .

discussion
in this study we have introduced a novel procedure for assigning topological significance scores to nodes in protein interaction networks. the scoring is based on node's role in providing the shortest paths connectivity among genes or proteins from experimentally-derived set. there are several advantages of this method which make it a powerful tool in the analysis of high-throughput molecular data such as gene expression or proteomics profiles. first, our method generates significance scores based on the input of a particular molecular profile, such as a set of differentially expressed genes. thus it finds nodes that are significant with respect to a condition or a disease represented by such profile. this can be contrasted with general topological properties of network nodes such as clustering coefficient, centrality and degree which characterize nodes independently of any condition-specific molecular data. second, it assigns scores to all nodes participating in the shortest path network, whether or not they are part of the input experimental set. therefore it allows identification of many important elements of signal transduction pathways which themselves do not come up as differentially expressed genes or proteins.

in this study we have tested the ability of our approach to identify network nodes associated with a selected disease  using the input of empirically defined differentially expressed genes, and to predict which network nodes are key mediators of the disease phenotype through the analysis of network topology. as an indication of success, nodes which are assigned high significance  by our algorithm are also several times more likely to be related to psoriasis in the literature, than nodes with low significance. the result shows that our approach can be applied as a "sorting" method for prioritizing gene and protein sets from high throughput assays. for example, many microarray studies yield hundreds of differentially expressed genes. pursuing further research on all of them is prohibitively expensive. high topological scores assigned to some of these genes could serve as additional evidence, helping to select most promising candidates for detailed investigation. topological scoring could also point to several new candidates – genes with exceptionally high topological scores that do not display differential expression. for example, our analysis assigned high significance scores to several protein kinases and transcription factors  which are not differentially expressed themselves but whose activity was inferred based on significant downstream effects reflected in the gene expression profile. as shown above, some of these proteins  were already linked to psoriasis in other independent studies, while others  may represent novel targets.

mechanistic investigation of highly scored network nodes shows that many of them play key roles in pathways for inflammation, cell cycle, and cell adhesion – all highly associated with the pathogenesis of psoriasis. these pathways are highly enriched in topologically significant nodes overall. this indicates that topologically significant nodes can be used for identifying molecular mechanisms of the disease or condition of interest. when pathway enrichment analysis is performed for both differentially expressed genes and topologically significant nodes the results are dominated by maps strongly enriched in topologically significant nodes . this is due to the fact that topologically significant nodes tend to represent key regulatory elements of signaling cascades, while differentially expressed genes are more likely to be found among target genes whose expression is regulated by these cascades. by design, expertly compiled pathway maps tend to focus on signaling cascades – bearers of core functionality. target genes which in many cases could be regulated by multiple signaling pathways tend not to be concentrated on any particular map. moreover, many key regulators have hundreds of target genes and not nearly all of them are represented on pathway maps. hence the enrichment analysis of topologically significant nodes reveals signaling pathways containing proteins that have high relevance to regulation of differentially expressed target genes as a group, even though target genes themselves are not well represented on maps for these pathways.

in addition to topological scoring, our method assigns "functional links" between differentially expressed genes and nodes in the shortest paths. nodes with multiple functional links represent "functional hubs". functional hubs are condition-specific: their functional links are determined by topological scoring procedure and defined in the context of a particular condition-specific molecular profile. many functional hubs themselves do not have large numbers of direct physical interactions with other proteins. rather they provide unique "bridges" between multiple differentially expressed genes. some functional hubs may have the majority of their links downstream while others have them upstream. the first type of hub is essentially "in control" of many functionally significant connections, while the second type is "being controlled" by a multitude of such connections. thus we suggest that these "divergence" and "convergence" hubs may play fundamentally different roles in the disease and drug response, and affecting them with a drug may have different consequences. we consider functional hubs to be priority drug targets, because of their key positions in pathways regulating multiple genes whose expression is affected in disease. since special role of functional hubs is defined with respect to a disease-specific dataset, it is quite possible that at least some of them play just a minimal role in signaling pathways under normal conditions. thus, unlike nodes with many physical interactions, targeting functional hubs with drugs is more likely to maximize impact on the disease while minimizing effects on general physiological processes.

our analysis also suggests that network modules centered on functional hubs are likely to be relevant to the disease phenotype, in this case psoriasis. importantly, such modules can be readily tested in the lab by affecting corresponding hubs by drugs or other methods, such as rna interference. this opens new possibilities in systematically predicting and validating drug targets by using the concept of drugable network modules.

CONCLUSIONS
we developed a novel statistical approach for scoring network nodes in the protein interaction network for their relevance to a disease phenotype or other condition of interest. this scoring is accomplished through a combined analysis of high throughput molecular assays and topology of the protein network. we applied our method to gene expression profiles from psoriasis patients and identified many known and several new drug targets for psoriasis and biological pathways in which they participate. these findings were in excellent agreement with the current knowledge on the pathogenesis of psoriasis. finally, we introduced the concept of functional hubs and corresponding "drugable" network modules. our analysis suggests that these modules are the most promising candidates to be targeted by drugs in order to maximize the impact on the disease. the results indicate that our approach opens new possibilities for systematic identification of the new promising drug targets and prioritizing them for further detailed investigation.

