BACKGROUND
the vertebrate mitochondrial  genome has been an important model system for studying molecular evolution, organismal phylogeny, and genome structure. despite extensive molecular studies, little is known regarding the ways in which genome architecture might affect the various aspects of genome function and evolution . nevertheless, patterns linking mt genome structure, function, and nucleotide evolution have begun to emerge  <cit> .

among the most direct demonstrated links among genome architecture, function and nucleotide evolution is that relating the asymmetrical genome replication process with gradients of transition substitutions in vertebrate mitochondrial genomes  <cit> . gradients of transition mutations, arising from deamination mutations, are observed due to the differential time regions of the mt genome spend in an asymmetric mutagenic state during genome replication . thus, gradients of transition biases are dependent upon the relative position of the functional origins of heavy and light strand replication. in vertebrate mt genomes, the origin of heavy strand replication  is thought to be within the control region , and the origin of light strand replication  in the trna cluster referred to as the wancy region . among transition classes in vertebrate mt genomes, t→c light strand substitutions at degenerate 3rd codon positions increase linearly with increasing tams and c/t nucleotide frequencies at degenerate 3rd positions are good predictors of tams  <cit> .

the mt genomes of snakes contain a number of characteristics that are unusual among vertebrates, and represent an ideal model for exploring potential links among genome structure, function, and evolution. snake mitochondrial genomes appear to have the highest evolutionary rates among vertebrates and contain truncated trnas and other shortened genes  <cit> . all snake species sampled to date, except the scolecophidian snakes leptotyphlops dulcis, ramphotyphlops australis, and typhlops murius, have a duplicated control region  between nadh dehydrogenase subunit  <dig>  and subunit  <dig> , in addition to a control region  adjacent to the 5'-end of the 12s rrna as it is in other vertebrates  <cit> . these two control regions appear to undergo concerted evolution that acts to homogenize the nucleotide sequence of each duplicate copy within a given genome  <cit> . the functionality of these two control regions in transcription and initiation of heavy strand replication is not clear, but given that the nucleotide sequence of each is nearly identical, any functional features that are not dependent on surrounding sequences should be similar. in contrast, recent evidence suggests that initiation of heavy strand replication may be distributed across a broad zone, including cytochrome b  and nadh dehydrogenase subunit  <dig>   <cit> , indicating that cr <dig> may not function as effectively in this role.

a number of interesting questions arise that might be addressed through comparative analysis, including:  does one or the other, or do both control regions function as origins of heavy strand dna synthesis?  does the altered genome structure affect patterns of snake mt genome molecular evolution?  when during snake evolution did various features arise, and were any changes synchronous?  do patterns of mt molecular evolution vary at different depths of phylogeny? and  is there any evidence or plausible rationale for selection as a causative agent in generating differences in genomic structure and molecular evolutionary patterns?

to investigate outstanding questions regarding snake mitochondrial genome evolution, structure, and function, we analyzed a dataset consisting of three new complete snake mitochondrial genomes together with all eight previously published snake mitochondrial genomes that were available at the time of this study, and  <dig> other vertebrate mitochondrial genomes for comparative purposes. the new snake genomes were obtained from one pantherophis slowinskii , and from two agkistrodon piscivorus .

RESULTS
brief summary of the new complete snake mitochondrial genomes
the gene contents of a. piscivorus and p. slowinskii mt genomes are very similar to other snakes . as in all known alethinophidian snake mt genomes, these species have a presumably duplicated control region  between nd <dig> and nd <dig>  in addition to the original control region  present in all vertebrates adjacent to the 5' end of the 12s rrna gene  <cit> . these genomes also possess the translocated trnaleu common to all alethinophidian snakes sampled thus far . in addition to an intact trnapro between cytb and cr <dig>  p. slowinskii has an apparent pseudo-trnapro gene  between nd <dig> and cr <dig> . in p. slowinskii, this Ψ-trnapro exactly matches the first  <dig> bases of trnapro. in contrast, the intact trnapro of a. piscivorus  is located between nd <dig> and cr <dig> , and there is a  <dig> bp non-coding fragment between trnathr and cr <dig>  where trnapro is usually located. in o. okinavensis, this is clearly a Ψ-trnapro, since these  <dig> bp are an exact match to the cr1-proximal end of the complete trnapro, but in a. piscivorus the homology is much less clear. these alternative positions of trnapro, Ψ-trnapro, and a previously noted  <cit>  duplication of trnaphe in o. okinavensis are the only known mt genome gene rearrangements identified within alethinophidian snakes.

within a mt genome, the two copies of the cr in each newly sequenced species are nearly identical , as is typical for alethinophidian snakes  <cit> . in p. slowinskii there is a single point mutation and four extra nucleotides at one end of cr <dig>  in api <dig> there is one indel plus  <dig> extra nucleotides on one end of cr <dig>  and in api <dig> there are seven indels and two base changes between the two control regions. between api <dig> and api <dig>  cr <dig> differs by five indels and  <dig> point mutations, whereas cr <dig> differs by three indels  and  <dig> point mutations.

comparison of agkistrodon piscivorus genomes
polymorphisms were observed between the two a. piscivorus genomes, api <dig> and api <dig>  for all protein and rrna genes and for  <dig> of  <dig> trnas . the 12s and 16s rrnas were the most conserved genes between the two a. piscivorus individuals, with 2% and 3% sequence divergence respectively . protein-coding genes differed more, up to  <dig> % for nd <dig> . most differences occurred at 3rd codon positions , as expected under predominantly neutral patterns of divergence .

within a. piscivorus, the control regions  are as similar to each other as are the rrna genes, and more similar than the protein coding genes . this is in strong contrast to the normal pattern of divergence between vertebrate species, for which control region similarity is far less than that of protein-coding or rrna genes, e.g.,  <cit> . between a. piscivorus and the other viperid, o. okinavensis, the control regions have 30% more differences  than the rrnas, and are on par with divergence in the protein-coding genes . if indels are included, the control regions of these two species are nearly as different as the average 3rd codon position . the high degree of similarity  observed between the crs of the two a. piscivorus individuals is surprising, and contrasts sharply with the high relative divergence of crs between o. okinavensis and a. piscivorus .

phylogenetics
we present the phylogenetic tree estimate obtained by ml, with nj bootstrap values  and posterior probabilities  for nodal support, which were generally high . our phylogeny estimate provides a well-resolved and, in many cases, strongly-supported amniote phylogeny that is consistent with previous molecular studies. differences between the ml topology , and the topology based on bayesian analysis  were minor, and included an alternative placement of bos taurus among mammals, and alternative placements of gallus gallus and rhea americana among birds. additionally, relationships among lizard taxa varied, with cordylus warreni estimated to be the sister lineage to all other lizards, and an alternative placement of varanus komodoensis.

all phylogenetic estimates provided an identical, well-supported topology for relationships among snakes , and a summary of results concerning snake relationships is shown in figure  <dig>  the scolecophidia , represented here by l. dulcis, formed the sister group to all remaining snakes. rather than finding support for the caenophidia , we find strong support for acrochordus as the sister lineage to the henophidia . hereafter we will therefore operationally refer to this clade including the henophidia and acrochordus as the "acro-heno" clade, and we will refer to its sister clade as the colubroidea  <cit> .

the snake and overall amniote phylogeny are strongly supported by our analysis of this dataset, and we henceforth treat this phylogeny as accurate. we wish to emphasize, however, that the consistency of the phylogenetic results do not guarantee that they are, in fact, accurate. although for simplicity we present a single nucleotide substitution model for the entire dataset we have analyzed an expanded version of this dataset  using complex partitioned models for each gene and codon position. the results of this expanded  phylogeny estimate  were essentially identical to those presented here in terms of the placement of snakes within squamates, and relationships among squamates. we provide evidence below for extremely complex non-stationary patterns of nucleotide substitution across branches and mt genome regions, and have previously identified asymmetric substitution gradients in mt genomes  <cit>  that may vary among species . these latter patterns cannot be modeled using available phylogenetic programs . we expect our phylogenetic estimates here to represent a good estimate of the relationships among mt genomes sampled, and if minor inaccuracies in the topology have occurred in our estimates, these changes should not substantially impact the qualitative conclusions of further analyses  because a majority of these later estimates are averaged over many branches of the tree, and the dynamics we concentrate on are quite dramatic and are likely to be obvious and qualitatively similar even with slight changes in the topology estimate.

nucleotide frequencies and control region functionality
in a. piscivorus and p. slowinskii mt genomes, as in other vertebrates  <cit> , nucleotides a and c are favored on the light strand, particularly at 3rd codon positions. this bias is probably related to elevated rates of deamination mutations on the heavy strand incurred during replication , and there is considerable variation in nucleotide content among individual mt genomes . variation in snakes, even at 3rd codon positions, is not exceptional compared to other groups, and there is no clear snake-specific nucleotide bias evident  or strong branch-specific, or gene-specific nucleotide bias shifts across squamate mt genomes that would explain our findings of dramatic branch-specific and gene-specific rate dynamics.

due to the simple linear relationship in most vertebrate mt genomes between c/t ratios and tams predicted based on the location of the  control region, it is of interest to determine whether there has been any clear genetic effect of the duplicated control region in alethinophidians. exclusive use of one control region or the other would be most strongly observable in nd <dig>  because it is the only protein-coding gene that would spend a substantially different amount of time in the asymmetric mutagenic state  depending on which control region is functional. since the nucleotide sequence of duplicate control regions is nearly identical within each genome, however, it is also reasonable to consider the possibility that both control regions are functional.

to test these predictions about cr <dig> functionality, we applied our mcmc analysis  <cit>  to fit alternative models of exclusive cr <dig> or cr <dig> usage, or mixed control region effect . the akaike weights for the alternative individual models provide a measure of the degree to which a control region is exclusively functional, while the weight parameter in the mixed model represents the time-averaged effect of mixed control region usage on the c/t ratios. there is evidence for at least mixed cr <dig> usage in all but one species . the evidence is good for exclusive or nearly exclusive cr <dig> functionality in two species , and for a strong cr <dig> preference in a. piscivorus. the patterns appear to be lineage-specific and evolutionarily labile , which may indicate rapid evolution of the strength of the replication-associated substitution gradient  or rapid evolution of differential usage of the two control regions. species with ambiguous control region preferences may have mixed usage, may not have a strong enough gradient to differentiate, or may have previously switched usage and thus have not reached mutational equilibrium.

negative log likelihood values and akaike weights  for individual origin of replication models and the mixed model, along with the most likely cr <dig> preference parameter in the mixed model, for alethinophidian snakes.

gene length and stability of truncated trnas in snakes
in snakes, all mt protein-coding genes , ribosomal rnas, trnas, and individual crs are shorter than their counterparts in most lizards and most other vertebrates . an exception to this is sphenodon punctatus, for which the control region, atp <dig>  and the 12s rrna are all shorter than in snakes. with the increased sampling in this study, it appears that while the trnas and proteins became shorter prior to the divergence of all snakes, the trnas became shorter still within the colubroidea . additionally, the rrnas did not become shorter in l. dulcis or the acro-heno clade, but are dramatically shorter in the colubroidea .

the shorter length of trnas in snakes results mainly from a truncated t-arm in the secondary structure . in some trnas, the d-arm is also shorter, but to a lesser extent than the t-arms. although short trnas are typically less stable than long ones, there is only a minor effect of sequence length on secondary structure stability  in snake trnas. the cloverleaf structures of most snake trnas are slightly less stable than their lizard counterparts , but two trnas  are actually more structurally stable in snakes than in other squamates with longer trnas.

spatio-temporal substitution rate dynamics across mt genes and genomic regions
to assess the difference in substitution rates among genes, we fixed the topology  and calculated branch lengths based on rrnas and on all protein-coding genes . for the rrnas, most other major amniote groups have experienced similar amounts of total evolution from their common ancestor with the amphibians , whereas the snake lineages stand out as unusual in their apparently accelerated evolution . for protein-coding genes there is much more variation across lineages , although the snake clade has the longest branches of any tetrapod group. certain snake branches  are disproportionately long compared to branch lengths based on rrnas . to evaluate this further, branch lengths were calculated for different genes and gene clusters and there was considerable variation among genes with respect to relative branch lengths in early snake lineages .

to qualitatively elucidate the spatio-temporal dynamics in rates of substitution between gene regions that occur across branches, we plotted the branch lengths derived from rrnas  versus the branch lengths of various genes and gene clusters . all gene pairs generally appear to have highly correlated branch lengths , but some branches are outside the main distribution. two branches consistently below the main distribution in most comparisons are the terminal branch leading to o. okinavensis and the branch leading to the acro-heno clade ; these two branches are also disproportionally longer in the rrna trees than in the protein trees . these branches appear to have experienced acceleration of rrna genes well beyond the mild accelerated evolution of rrna that occurred along the lineages leading to all snakes and to the alethinophidia.

to further evaluate the variation in spatio-temporal dynamics of relative rates of substitution across the mt genome, we used sliding window analyses of branch-specific and group-specific patterns of relative substitution rates. only one of these comparisons, that of the acro-heno clade terminal branches, shows little variation of standardized relative substitution rates across the genome . this suggests that the distribution of substitutions across the mt genome of terminal lineages within the acro-heno clade is nearly identical to the distribution across the mt genome of other tetrapods, and that these terminal snake lineages are not undergoing region or gene-specific selection. the plots for terminal colubroid branches are also fairly flat except for the downstream half of the 16s rrna , which may be entirely attributable to acceleration of the 16s rrna in o. okinavensis, as discussed earlier.

cross-referencing results from figures  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  we can summarize the apparent nucleotide evolutionary rate dynamics in snake mt genomes as follows . the branch leading to all extant snakes appears to have experienced accelerated evolution in the region starting near the end of cox <dig> through cox <dig>  atp <dig>  and somewhat into atp <dig>  and also in the region including the end of nd <dig>  nd <dig>  and cytb . the cox <dig>  cox <dig>  atp <dig>  and nd <dig> accelerations increased and were stronger in the branch leading to alethinophidia, while the nd <dig> acceleration decreased, and a notable acceleration of cytb also occurred. in the branch leading to the colubroidea, only the nd <dig> acceleration continued, but new rate peaks arose in nd <dig>  12s rrna, and the first part of the 16s rrna, followed by a strong dropoff in all gene-specific acceleration in terminal colubroid lineages, except in the end of 16s rrna in o. okinavensis. in the branch leading to the acro-heno clade, the accelerated rates of evolution  observed along the branch leading to the alethinophidians diminished , but new rate peaks arose in atp <dig>  cox <dig>  nd <dig>  nd4l, and the latter half of the 16s rrna. these punctuated gene-specific accelerations were followed by the complete elimination of all gene-specific signals of atypical relative rate in terminal lineages within this acro-heno clade. we find no evidence for a constant accelerated rate of snake mt genome evolution. instead, our analyses of rates and patterns of substitution underscore both the spatial  and temporal  nature of molecular evolutionary relative rate dynamics in snake mt genomes.

discussion
the three new complete snake mt genomes presented here, together with previously existing vertebrate mt genomes, provide a preliminary perspective on a complex history of potentially adaptive mt genomic change in snakes. unusual changes in gene size and nucleotide substitution rates are associated with changes in mt genomic architecture . nevertheless, the changes in substitution dynamics cannot be directly explained by the changes in mt genome architecture. snake mt genome evolution is most consistent with some type of broad selective pressure on the efficiency and function of oxidative metabolism in snakes early in their evolutionary history.

in mt genomes , the processes of replication and transcription are not entirely functionally independent, and genome structural organization plays a prominent role in both processes. the cr acts as the origin of heavy strand replication, in addition to its role as the promoter for both heavy and light strand transcription  <cit> . genome replication also depends on the processing of light strand transcripts to produce short primers required for heavy strand initiation of genome replication . the regular distribution of the trna genes throughout the mt genome is functionally significant, and these play an important role in rna processing of polycistrons to yield mature rnas, transcription initiation and termination, as well as initiation of light strand replication  <cit> . collectively, many functional ramifications are linked tightly to mt genome architecture in vertebrates.

mitochondrial genome size reduction due to gene shortening in alethinophidians is more than offset by the retention of their duplicate control regions. if size reduction is caused by selective pressure, the long term retention of dual crs suggests that having both copies provide some selective advantage. although the duplicate control region appears to function in heavy strand replication in at least some snakes, there is considerable variation in cr usage across snake lineages . thus, if the duplication has been maintained by selection, control of replication may not be the singular or primary selective driving force.

the possession of two functional control regions in most snake mt genomes might be advantageous by increasing the rate at which genome replication proceeds, and/or increasing the overall number of genome copies per mitochondrion. since the dual crs essentially flank the rrna genes, they  could also plausibly function to independently control rates of protein-coding and rrna gene transcription. across snake species, variation in the trnas flanking the crs includes the translocation of trnaleu  and the duplication/translocation/truncation of trnapro. in vertebrates, trnaleu has been shown to decouple rates of rrna and mrna transcription by acting as a terminator of ~95% of heavy strand transcripts . considering the ectothermy of snakes, transcriptional decoupling via independent control regions could provide a more direct means of countering thermodynamic depression of enzymatic rates at low temperatures.

independent cr duplications have also been identified in eels  <cit> , frogs  <cit> , birds  <cit> , and lizards  <cit> . our results  suggest that the dramatic shifts in rates and patterns of molecular evolution in snakes represent a unique phenomenon that we do not expect to be necessarily associated with cr duplication, but rather more likely associated with selection for mitochondrial function. nevertheless, these independent duplications may be useful to test the consequences of duplication on mutational processes.

concerted evolution in and around the duplicate control regions
the two control regions clearly undergo concerted evolution to maintain reciprocal homogeneity between control regions within a genome  <cit> , presumably through gene conversion. interestingly, an apparently nonfunctional partial  proline trna  in colubrid mt genomes also appears to be maintained by concerted evolution . the gene conversion process that homogenizes the control region may also occasionally pick up extra dna, making trnapro, or part of it, prone to duplication at this location. the existence of a duplicate trnaphe between cr <dig> and trnaleu in the viperid o. okinavensis  <cit>  suggests that frequent gene duplication adjacent to the crs may occur . the concerted evolution of these trnas could be explained by a tendency for gene conversion events involving the duplicate control regions to extend into the homologous flanking trna regions.

another point of interest concerning gene conversion that arises from this study is a preliminary indication of differential evolutionary processes operating on the crs within versus between species. vertebrate mitochondrial control regions typically evolve very rapidly, and this is the case in a comparison of the two viperid species  in which crs from these species are  approximately as divergent as the fastest evolving positions within the mt genome, third codon positions . in contrast, the two a. pisvicorus genomes, api <dig> and api <dig>  have surprisingly similar crs between individuals , comparable to the similarity between rrna genes, among the slowest evolving regions in the mt genome. a previous study on viperid snakes also showed slow within-species cr evolutionary rates  <cit> , and other studies have demonstrated particularly slow intra-species rates and differential rates of cr evolution operating within versus between species in birds  <cit>  and fish  <cit> .

in this study we have found a great deal of rate heterogeneity among genes, so it is certainly possible that the normally unconserved control regions have become suddenly critical and conserved in a. piscivorus. alternatively, it is plausible that the complex  process of gene conversion of crs within a genome may also alter rates of cr evolution within species through a yet unknown process of gene conversion that may involve intragenomic  recombination.

comparative rates of molecular evolution
previous studies have suggested that snake mt genomes have an accelerated rate of evolution  <cit> . our results suggest this general conclusion is an oversimplification of a much more complex scenario, and that rates of snake mt genome evolution incorporate broad temporal  and spatial  dynamics. branches early in snake evolution appear to be associated with dramatically elevated evolutionary rates and extreme relative rate dynamics across the mt genome . in contrast, terminal branches appear to have patterns of mt genome evolution that are strikingly similar to other  vertebrates.

in support of a hypothesis involving selection for overall oxidative metabolic function, the accelerated rates of molecular evolution in snakes appear to depend greatly on gene function, with most nd subunits accelerating only slightly and occasionally, while cox, atp, cytb, and rrna evolutionary accelerations are dramatic and punctuated. the roles of these proteins  in energetics via oxidative phosphorylation are well known, and it may be that a single causative agent accompanying the diversification of snakes that dramatically altered metabolic demand, or led to a fluctuation in metabolic demand, was responsible for large-scale changes in selective pressure on these proteins.

CONCLUSIONS
snake mitochondrial genomes present a rare opportunity to investigate the evolutionary interactions and ramifications that link genome architecture, molecular evolution, and multi-level molecular function. available evidence points to selective pressures acting at many hierarchical levels within snake mt genomes, and at different times during snake evolution, leading to diverse, dramatic, and broad-scale changes in the genome. interestingly, some consequences of this adaptive shift appear to have diminished over time , whereas others appear to continue in extant snakes . although the precise causes are unknown, this outstanding example of an apparent punctuated adaptive shift involving multiple aspects of genome architecture evolution provides an important comparative tool for the study of vertebrate mt genome evolution.

