BACKGROUND
the hengduan mountains  are located in southwestern china east of the qinghai-tibetan plateau  and represent one of the world’s most biodiverse regions  <cit> . many endemic vascular plant species of the h-d mountains exhibit high levels of morphological and ecological divergence from their closest, more widespread allies. thus, the endemics are often treated within their own genera. however, molecular phylogenetic studies have revealed that the some of these endemic genera are nested within the widespread ones. examples include representatives of asteraceae , brassicaceae , liliaceae , primulaceae , genetianaceae , and amaryllidaceae  . the contrasting morphological diversity and nested phylogenetic status of genera in the h-d mountains may result from extreme habitat specialization and/or hybridization events. the h-d mountains provide many unique habitats due to their topographic complexity  <cit> , while repeated phases of uplift of the mountain range may have enabled opportunities for hybridization  <cit>  via secondary contact. continued research is needed to better understand the mechanisms driving morphological diversity of vascular plants within the h-d mountains.table  <dig> morphologically distinctive plant species that are endemic to the qtp but phylogenetically indistinct  from allies




parapteropyrum
fagopyrum





the lilium-nomocharis complex represents an exceptional study system for morphological diversification and hybridization in the h-d mountains. nomocharis franchet. is endemic to the h-d mountains and adjacent qtp. nomocharis appeared somewhat similar to lilium when the former was first described in  <dig>  <cit>  but was erected as a new genus because of its highly distinctive open-plate flowers and dark-colored tepal bases with special structures  . currently, there are eight recognized species of nomocharis, of which seven are circumscribed in two traditional sections  <cit> , and one is a recently described hybrid species, n. gongshanensis y. d. gao & x. j. he  <cit> . recent molecular phylogenetic studies show strong support for nomocharis nested within lilium  <cit> . in contrast to nomocharis, lilium comprises approximately  <dig> species and is widespread throughout the northern hemisphere, including areas within the qtp and h-d mountains .fig.  <dig> pictures of nomocharis aperta in western yunnan: , population from zhongdian, yunnan showed spot variation; , population of fugong, yunnan showed variations in tepal color; , habits of n. aperta under different habitats; , anatomical pictures showed two types of n. aperta from zhongdian and fugong, as well as a comparison of outer and inner tepals

fig.  <dig> pictures from western china showing nomocharis: , n. basilissa; , n. farreri; , n. gongshanensis; , n. meleagrina




the goals of our present study are to use a molecular phylogeny as a framework to 1) determine whether the timing of morphological and ecological evolutionary events in nomocharis are consistent with phases of uplift in the h-d mountains and qtp, and 2) detect additional hybridization events with the lilium-nomocharis species of the h-d mountains and qtp.

RESULTS
phylogenetic analyses
a large its dataset confirmed the phylogentic position of nomocharis within lilium and showed no major differences compared with previous studies . our extensive sampling of nomocharis enabled us to resolve three sublclades within the genus: eunomocharis, ecristata, and the non-nomocharis lilies . the eunomocharis and ecristata subclades are congruent with traditional classifications based on morphology  <cit> . the n-n lilies are morphologically divergent from nomocharis and have characteristics more like other lilium . nomocharis and the n-n lilies are sister to a clade comprised of lilium sect. liriotypus  and that these two clades are sister to the rest of lilium .fig.  <dig> maximum credibility tree showing monophyletic clade of nomocharis and its relatives reconstructed using bayesian analysis of its data and lilium species from around the world. the position of this clade is indicated on the tree . support values shown on braches; bayesian posterior probabilities  on left and parsimony bootstrap  on right. clade names based on balfour  <cit> 



major clades of the plastid consensus trees were the same in the bayesian and mp reconstructions, so we present only the bayesian consensus . the plastid data resolved two large clusters consisting of seven major clades . cluster i  comprised two major clades of species of lilium that are primarily distributed throughout the sino-japanese forest subkingdom  <cit> . cluster ii  contained nomocharis and species of lilium that occur within the h-d mountains and adjacent himalayas.fig.  <dig> maximum credibility tree resulting from a bayesian analysis of combined plastid dna. clade names based on comber  <cit>  and liang  <cit> . distributional areas of clades indicated by color. support values shown on braches; bayesian posterior probabilities  on left and parsimony bootstrap  on right. lineages identified in network  were also marked for references. the sinomartagon i clade is highlighted for its conflicting position compared to the its result in additional file 1: figure s1



within the plastid phylogeny, nomocharis formed a poorly resolved grade with species of the sinomartagon and leucolirion clades. most of the species of sinomartagon that associated with nomocharis and the n-n lilies occur in the sinomartagon i clade in the its topology and represent all sinomartagon species that inhabit the h-d mountains and qtp  <cit> . despite poor resolution of nomocharis within the plastid phylogeny, the genus roughly comprised its traditionally recognized sections, sects. ecristata and eunomocharis. a clade of ecristata included n. aperta accessions and n. saluenensis, which have been have been historically treated in the section. the ecristata clade also contained clones n. gongshanensis, which is the hybrid species, l. nepalense, and n. meleagrina, which is morphologically similar to species of eunomocharis by having whorled leaves and has traditionally been circumscribed in that section. a grade of sect. eunomocharis also included one accession of n. aperta  e.h. and lilium yapingense, an n-n lily species.

overall, nomocharis and the n-n lilies exhibited poorly resolved relationships within cluster ii of the plastid phylogeny and did not form a monophyletic group.

statistical parsimony network
our parsimony network was complex but relatively well resolved . interior haplotypes and their descendants appear to represent eight lineages, most of which are present in the dichotomously branching plastid phylogeny . the network supported the plastid tree topology in showing that geographically proximal species have more closely related haplotypes irrespective of morphological similarities or classification in traditional subgenera. notably, the plastid tree and network also agreed in the placement of nomocharis. in the network, nomocharis was divided into two lineages, ii and iv, and separated by lineage iii in which n-n lilies were included . haplotypes of the nomocharis and the n-n lilies of lineages iii and iv exhibit a shared history with sinomartagon and leucolirion species of lineage vi and vii as well as with species of a lilium clade .fig.  <dig> parsimony network conducted by tcs  <cit>  using combined plastid dna matrix. sixty-six haplotypes were identified and clustered in eight lineages with different colors. circle sizes correspond to the number of taxa possessing the haplotype. species names are abbreviated by the generic first letter and two or three letters of the species epithet . inferred haplotypes  are depicted as black lines, and unnamed dots indicated the missing interior haplotypes. the sinomartagon i clade was highlighted for its conflict position compared to the its result in additional file 1: figure s1



divergence time estimate and biogeography inferences
we performed divergence time dating using two secondary calibration points applied to our its plastid dataset. according to dating using the plastid dataset, and we inferred that the last shared ancestor of the lilium-nomocharis occurred around  <dig>  mya and nomocharis evolved  <dig>  mya . the its dataset recovered a slightly older age of approximately  <dig> mya for the last shared ancestor of lilium-nomocharis and ca.  <dig> mya for the evolution of nomocharis . overall, the its dates for major diversification events are older than the plastid dates .fig.  <dig> ultrametric chronograms showing divergence time dating and biogeographic results based on the combined plastid dna phylogeny. scale bar at bottom indicating branch length of  <dig> mya. mean divergence age given on nodes. bars on nodes indicate the 95 % hpd for divergence ages. pie charts show probabilities of ancestral area reconstructions, colors of pie slices defined in legend. the bottom chart summarized the biogeographic event through time. the sinomartagon i clade was highlighted for its conflict position compared to the its result in additional file 1: figure s1

fig.  <dig> the ancestral state reconstructions of leaf, flower, and ecological characters. pie charts show probabilities of ancestral area reconstructions, colors of pie slices defined in legend. reconstructions of a, leaf arrangement, b, stigma:stamen ratio, c, corolla shape, d, corolla orientation with respect to the ground, and e, elevational range



the results from bayesian binary method  of biogeographic analysis show that the last shared ancestor of lilium-nomocharis arose in the h-d mountain region , while the results from the dec method in lagrange support a broader ancestral area within the h-d mountains and the adjacent sino-japanese floristic subkingdom . the results obtained from bbm and dec may not be incongruent because no significant geographic boundary separated the h-d mountains and the sjfs areas until at least late miocene , which is the earliest date postulated for the h-d mountain uplift  <cit> . lilium-nomocharis began intensive diversification in the late miocene . the three nomocharis lineages, eunomocharis, ecristata, and the n-n lilies, originated approximately between ca.  <dig> mya  and  <dig> mya  and underwent diversification during the late pliocene beginning ca. 7– <dig> mya .

ancestral state reconstruction 
we performed our ancestral state reconstructions using a reduced its dataset and they showed that floral characters were more phylogenetically dependent than vegetative ones . leaf arrangement patterns showed the greatest lability within clades . overall whorled leaves arose at least four times in lilium, including two shifts to whorled leaved within nomocharis and the n-n lilies occurring approximately  <dig> mya and  <dig>  mya, respectively . our results show that nodding flowers with recurved tepals and roughly equal stigma and stamen lengths are most likely the ancestral condition for lilium . ancestors of nomocharis had longer stigmas than stamen, and this feature also was a synapomorphy within the sympatric sinomartagon i clade . however, one species of nomocharis, n. saluenensis, experienced a reversion to the roughly equal condition about  <dig> mya . there appeared to be a correlation between floral orientation and corolla shape; namely that species with campanifolium and recurved petals have nodding flowers, and species with flat open and funnel/trumpet shaped flowers are horizon in orientation . this seems to be true among modern species and reconstructed ancestors. recurved and campanifolium petals and the nodding habit evolved in the last shared ancestor of the n-n lilies around  <dig>  mya, and distinguish them from nomocharis, which retained flat/open flowers and horizon orientation . the elevation reconstruction indicate that the ancestors of nomocharis and the n-n lilies occurred at low  elevations and that radiations into different elevations habitats occurred around  <dig>  mya in the n-n lilies and around  <dig>  mya in the ecristata clade of nomocharis .

discussion
morphological divergence and habitat specialization
traditionally, classification of lilium has focused primarily on floral morphology, especially orientation of the flowers with respect to the ground and corolla shape. thus, nodding flowers and campaniform corollas have been used to support a close relationship between the n-n lilies, which include l. nepalense, l. souliei, l. paradoxum, l. saccatum and l. yapingense , and sect. lophophorum , which shares the same floral features  <cit> . however, our its phylogeny is in contrast to traditional classification of the n-n lilies with sect. lophophorum and shows that the n-n species are nested within nomocharis, which is otherwise monophyletic . the n-n lilies share few apparent morphological traits in common with nomocharis and, in particular, lack the unique floral characters that have classically been used to delimit nomocharis from lilium.

n-n lilies and traditional nomocharis may exhibit morphological dissimilarities despite their close evolutionary relationships due to habitat specialization. the n-n lilies may have expanded their habitats into diverse elevations around  <dig>  mya that became available after the last qtp orogeny, which occurred ca.  <dig> mya  <cit>  . similarly, uplift of the h-d mountains probably provided new habitat for an ancestor of the ecristata clade of nomocharis. within the qtp, the n-n lilies tend to occupy higher elevations than the nomochrais species of the h-d mountains. differential adaptations to elevation may explain the strikingly different floral morphology of nomocharis and the n-n species  <cit> . in particular, the n-n lilies live almost exclusively in alpine meadows. thus, n-n lilies are exposed to torrential downpours in alpine meadows compared to traditional nomocharis species, which grow in the herbaceous layer beneath bamboo canopies   <cit> . the n-n lilies may have evolved nodding flowers ca.  <dig>  mya during qtp uplift and campaniform corollas as advantageous protections for their delicate reproductive structures against harsh precipitation conditions  <cit> . although the nodding, campaniform flowers probably provide protection from rainfall for the n-n lilies, they may also have reduced pollen transfer efficiency as an evolutionary trade-off  <cit> . in contrast, nomocharis species are probably not limited by the need for protection from heavy rainfall, and may experience higher pollen transfer efficiency by virtue of their horizontally arranged, plate-shaped flowers  <cit> .

the profound effects of habitat specialization within the h-d mountains and qtp regions on morphology is supported by evidence of convergent evolution among sympatric, distantly related lilium-nomocharis species. in particular, nomocharis and n-n lilies share some morphological traits in common with species of the lophophorum clade, despite their differences and with which they are sympatric in alpine areas of the qtp. shared traits especially include inner perianth-segments that have crested or fringed glandular bases  and that are sometimes anthocyanin rich . these shared morphological traits appear to represent convergent evolution. morphological convergence within qtp alpine plant genera has been noted in other plant genera including in androsace   <cit> , pseudoeriocoryne   <cit> , rheum   <cit>  and the ligularia-cremanthodium-parasenecio complex   <cit> . an alternative explanation for the shared morphology between nomocharis and lophophorum is hybridization. however, the monophyly of lophophorum is supported by both its and plastid phylogenies . thus, convergence seems to better explain the morphological similarities and supports habitat specialization of nomocharis and the n-n lilies within the h-d mountains and qtp.

detecting the environmental drivers of convergence remain beyond the scope of this study. however, it is noteworthy that many alpine plant groups exhibit floral traits that are well-adapted to the frequent but unpredictable rains experienced in alpine habitats . for example, the nodding flower orientation is thought to have evolved to avoid pollen damage and nectar dilution by rainfall  <cit> . floral orientation may also be strongly affected by niche features such as the presence and abundance of various types of pollinators. in particular, the horizontal orientation may increase the precision of pollen transfer in bilaterally symmetrical flowers  under some pollination syndromes  <cit> . however, morphological convergence among alpine plants may also be strongly affected by understudied environmental interactions, such as with the intense solar radiation experienced during the daytime in alpine areas or the cold night time temperatures  <cit> . overall, morphological convergence within the qtp and h-d mountains habitats is likely linked to the extreme morphological divergence between qtp and h-d mountains endemics and their widespread relatives. thus, morphological convergence among qtp and h-d mountains species of lilium-nomocharis and within other plant groups merits more attention in future studies.

hybridization
our its and plastid gene trees reveal several signatures of possible hybridization. in particular, the gene trees exhibit incongruence. in the its phylogeny, nomocharis and the n-n lilies form a clade in the its tree  that is sister to lilium sect. liriotypus. this is in contrast to the plastid phylogeny, which shows poor resolution of nomocharis and the n-n lilies and places them among species of sects. sinomartagon, martagon . incongruence between nuclear and plastid and nuclear gene trees is known to result from hybridization, but can also result from incomplete lineage sorting, which is common among vascular plants, and horizontal gene transfer, which is not  <cit> .

another signature of hybridization may be the strong geographic clustering observed in the plastid phylogeny  among clades, which are distantly related in the nuclear phylogeny . the sympatry of clades with closely related plastid genomes is consistent with secondary contact. moreover, hybridization in lilium-nomocharis is most likely to occur among species that occur within reasonably close proximity due to the limited dispersability of seeds  <cit>  and typically also of pollen via wind or pollinators  <cit> .

if hybridization did occur between nomocharis  and sympatric lilium, it must have occurred following the evolution of the latter, ca.  <dig> mya . if the dates in the plastid phylogeny can be taken to represent the times of contact, then hybridization events occurred in nomocharis  <dig>  mya with sinomartagon and  <dig>  mya with leucolirion species. these events seem to post-date late orogenies of the qtp ca.  <dig> mya and pre-date uplift of the h-d mountains, in the late neogene . however, 95 % cis for the dates include the orogenic periods  and may also be consistent with ecological expansion of some nomocharis species into new elevational ranges .

CONCLUSIONS
lilium-nomocharis exhibits complex phylogenetic relationships typical of a pattern in which qtp and h-d mountains endemic, morphologically and ecologically distinct vascular plant groups such as nomocharis, are included within widespread ones, such as lilium. our phylogenetic results show that nomocharis itself is paraphyletic and includes some species traditionally classified as lilium; here, the n-n clade. species of the n-n clade exhibit typical lilium morphology, which distinguishes them from the nomocharis species. features characteristic of nomocharis, such as horizon oriented and flat/open flowers are probably ancestral to the group, and evolved before the uplift of the qtp. however, such features may have enabled the invasion of the qtp and, later, the h-d mountains by nomocharis and should be the subject of future studies. despite their differences, nomocharis and the n-n clade have probably evolved some similarities due to differently timed expansions into diverse elevational habitats. our phylogenetic results also show some circumstantial evidence for hybridization in among traditional lilium and nomocharis species, and that may help to explain the complex phylogenetic relationships within the lilium-nomocharis complex.

