BACKGROUND
the last couple of years have shown an increased research interest in microalgae and cyanobacteria, especially in the field of biofuels. therefore simple and fast culture monitoring methods to determine the viability of the cells are needed.

as a simple method for the monitoring of fitness, absorption spectra give an overview of the amount of pigments and their distribution in the culture. also the chlorophyll concentration  can be used to analyze the culture condition  <cit> . nevertheless, both methods only allow the quantification of growth and viability on the culture level, giving an average over all cells, but not a quantification of the viable cells. a differentiation of viable and non-viable cells on a cell by cell level allows for a causal evaluation of cell viability in regard to changing conditions, such as stress, cell aging or respiration rate. the standard method for the determining of cell viability is plating of the culture and subsequent counting of the colonies. this method however, requires plate preparation and at least one week until colonies can be identified. an alternative method for the determination of cell viability is fluorescent staining. in a dual-fluorescence assay the autofluorescence of chlorophyll is used to identify viable cells, and the fluorescent dye sytox green is used to identify non-viable cells  <cit> . although staining is faster than plating, it is vastly more expensive, and there is still need for culture preparation. for an automation of fluorescent staining, a flow cytometric approach for microcystis has been previously reported  <cit> . the automation of the viability analysis via flow cytometry has the advantage of being less time consuming and more reliable. nevertheless staining of the sample is still required. in contrast, the method presented in this paper could be adapted for use with flow cytometry and would allow the differentiation of viable cells without any sample preparation.

the new method is a fast and simple alternative using red chlorophyll fluorescence and an unspecific green autofluorescence for the determination of cell viability. red autofluorescence of chlorophyll is only present in viable cells. for higher plants and filamentous cyanobacteria it is known, that there is a steady state between the building and degradation of chlorophyll. senescence or dying results in a switch from equilibrium  to a massive degradation of chlorophyll  <cit> . therefore the red autofluorescence fades and a green unspecific fluorescence, which can be observed at the same excitation wavelength but is superimposed by the red chlorophyll fluorescence in viable cells, becomes visible. this green fluorescence has mostly been described in higher plants and is caused by a variety of different molecules like flavonoids, flavins , cinnamic acids , betaxanthine and pyridine nucleotides . for algae this phenomenon has barely been analyzed and the molecules responsible for the green autofluorescence are mostly unidentified  <cit> .

nevertheless this effect allows one to distinguish between viable and non-viable cells  at the same excitation frequency. by the use of a long pass filter for the emission wavelength both fluorescent signals can be observed simultaneously. a direct determination of the number of viable and non-viable cells is now possible without any sample preparation.

by the use of an automated fluorescence microscope and subsequent analysis of the generated images, an automated procedure for the determination of cell viability was created. for the image analysis, a plugin was written for imagej, an open source project which allows easy expansion  <cit> . the plugin enables the determination of the total cell concentration and the number of viable and non-viable cells by counting fluorescent cells and classing them by color.

we tested the red-green fluorescence assay for synechocystis sp. pcc  <dig>  as it is a model for cyanobacteria and photoautotroph organisms in general  <cit> . the results for the automated viability analysis via imagej were validated with values obtained by plating, chlorophyll-measurement, and the analysis of the absorption spectra. furthermore a temperature stressed synechocystis culture was analyzed with the fluorescence assay and absorption spectroscopy. results were compared with those of the viable culture, to test the applicability for a vitality analysis. additionally the automated determination of the cell concentration by the plugin was investigated and compared to the optical density at  <dig> nm, which is often used to determine cell concentration for unicellular cyanobacteria.

RESULTS
samples with 5* <dig> cells per ml, but different ratios of viable to non-viable cells were created. the percentage of viable cells and the total cell count per ml was then determined with the presented fluorescence method. additionally the viable cell count via plating, chlorophyll content, the absorption spectra, and od <dig> were determined for every sample to compare them to the results obtained with the new method.

fluorescence microscopy for viability analysis
by using the autofluorescence of chlorophyll and an unspecific green autofluorescence of phototroph organisms, the proposed method allows a very easy determination of the number of viable cells of a culture. in all pictures the red fluorescent signal of the chlorophyll from viable cells showed a stronger intensity than the green signal from non-viable cells. nevertheless a good detection of all signals was possible. the overlay of the fluorescent- and the phase contrast image confirms that the red  and green  fluorescent signal originate exclusively from synechocystis cells . additionally one can clearly observe a decrease of the number of red fluorescent cells and an increase of the number of green fluorescent cells for a decreased number of viable cells in the different samples. for all samples fluorescent images of a defined volume were taken in a helber counting chamber in an automated procedure. with the subsequent analysis via imagej, the expected numbers of red  and green  cells could be determined with great accuracy .

the calculated concentration corresponded well to the adjusted cell count of 5* <dig> cells/ml for the mixed samples containing 25%, 50% and 75% of viable cells. samples containing 0% and 100% viable cells showed a significant difference to the expected cell count of 5* <dig> cells/ml and were in a range between  <dig>  *  <dig> -  <dig>  *  <dig> cells/ml .

plating
plating is the standard method to determine the number of viable cells in a culture. the different samples showed a decrease in the number of formed colonies with a decreasing number of viable cells in the mixture. a linear regression of the normalized count of colony forming cells on plates and the number of viable cells, as determined by fluorescence showed a correlation coefficient of  <dig>  .

chlorophyll
the chlorophyll concentration is often used as a measure for the viability of cyanobacteria cultures, and showed the expected decrease for the samples with decreasing number of viable cells .

absorption spectra
the determination of the absorption spectra is a conventional method to obtain an overview of the quantity and distribution of the pigments in the culture. in the sample with 100% viable cells the typical peaks for phycocyanin at  <dig> nm, chlorophyll a at  <dig> and  <dig> nm, and the carotenoids in the range of ~ 470- <dig> nm can be clearly seen . with increasing number of non-viable cells a decrease in the height of all peaks is clearly visible. for the sample with only non-viable cells no peaks at all can be detected, indicating a loss of all pigments.

od750
the determination of the optical density is a very fast method and usually correlates well to the cell count of the culture. however, even though all samples were adjusted to a cell count of  <dig> *  <dig> cells per ml, the od <dig> values showed a decrease from  <dig>  to  <dig>  with a decreasing number of viable cells .

applied vitality analysis on a cell by cell basis
absorption spectra give a good overview over the content of pigments in the culture and are therefore used to determine the vitality of cultures. nevertheless there can be different conditions of a culture that would result in the same absorption spectra. for example a culture with only stressed but viable cells could result in the same spectra as a culture that consists of a heterogeneous mix of unstressed viable and non-viable cells. therefore an experiment was performed to test if a combination of absorption spectra and the new viability assay can be used to determine how many cells are contributing to the total pigmentation measured trough absorption. thus allowing an estimation of the average pigmentation of the viable cells.

to analyze this, the number of viable cells and an absorption spectrum were determined for a temperature adapted but stressed synechocystis culture : 44°c,  <dig> μe/m2*s, ph regulated co  ; night : 26°c;  <dig> ml/min bubbled air). the analyzed number of viable cells for the temperature stressed culture was 89% . however, a comparison of the absorption spectra of both cultures showed a high difference in the total pigment content as determined by peak heights .

discussion
in this paper a new cell-viability fluorescence assay, which uses chlorophyll autofluorescence of viable cells and an unspecific green autofluorescence of non-viable cells, is presented for synechocystis. it is a very simple and fast method without sample preparation or long growing phase for an immediate and direct analysis at the cellular level. compared to staining methods it allows a more accurate analysis since contaminants  in different cultures  showed no fluorescent signal at the used excitation wavelength and are therefore not included in the analysis.

to validate the new method, results were compared to plating, chlorophyll concentration and absorption spectra, which are common methods for the determination of culture or cell viability. the strong correlation  between the percentage of viable cells as determined by the newly established autofluorescence method, and the number determined by plating confirm the results obtained with our method and show that an accurate viability analysis is possible.

the absorption spectra and chlorophyll concentration also matched the results of the viability analysis via fluorescence. the spectra for the culture, consisting only of non-viable cells, clearly shows that no photo pigments are present; therefore the green autofluorescence must be caused by other molecules. additionally the sample consisting only of viable cells showed the highest peaks in the absorption spectra and concentration for chlorophyll.

these results seem to indicate that both, absorption spectra or chlorophyll concentration, can also be used for a quantification of viable cells. the measured values however are an average of all cells in the culture; therefore there is no distinction between part of the population dying or each cell reducing its pigment content while remaining viable. during cultivation there can be a number of different factors which lead to chlorophyll decrease within each cell  <cit> . possible reasons include environmental factors such as high light stress or dying of a part of the population because of aging. therefore absorption spectra and chlorophyll concentration are not suited for the analysis of the number of viable cells. this can only be achieved by a cell based approach like the presented fluorescence assay.

as mentioned before, the absorption spectra and the chlorophyll concentration give a good quantitative overview over the total amount of pigments in the culture. a combination with the newly developed binary method seems sensible. a comparison between the absorption spectra of a temperature stressed and an unstressed culture shows a much higher pigmentation for the unstressed culture, although the new viability assay shows a difference of the number of viable cells of only 9%. this indicates that the second culture has much lower pigment content per viable cell and these viable cells are therefore less vital . these results show that a combination of the new developed method and absorption spectra allows a more accurate quantification of the level of vitality of the culture. the combination of both methods makes it possible to determine the average pigmentation of the viable cells, since one can estimate the number of cells which are contributing to the overall signal measured photometrically.

additionally cell counting results were compared to od <dig> values of the different samples. the optical density is often used to determine the cell concentration of the culture. our results however showed that although all samples had the same cell concentration, the od <dig> values decreased with a decreasing viability of the culture. for the culture containing only non-viable cells the total cell concentration was underestimated by about 30% when using only od <dig>  this is probably caused by the loss of pigmentation, which results in changed absorption and light scattering characteristics of the culture. these findings indicate that a direct determination of the concentration via cell counting should be used when exact values are needed, since the relation between optical density and concentration is limited by the pigmentation of the cells.

the analysis of the cell concentrations with the presented automated cell counting showed significant differences to the expected cell count for the samples containing only viable and non-viable cells. these discrepancies are probably due to errors in the initial cell counting used for the dilution to a cell count of  <dig> *  <dig> cells, as this counting was made by hand to allow validation of the automated method. the samples consisting of mixtures of the viable and non-viable samples, showed concentrations that corresponded well to the expected cell count.

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion the newly developed method enables a quick and accurate quantification of viable and non-viable cells for synechocystis. the method requires no staining and has virtually no costs in addition to the needed equipment. results are obtained immediately, and match those obtained by  plating. beside the quantification of viable and non-viable cells, results indicate that one also can estimate the vitality of cells  by combining this method with absorption spectra or chlorophyll concentration measurements.

an adaptation of the auto fluorescence assay to a flow cytometer should also be possible. beyond those of the possibility for an automated viability analysis of chlorophyll containing organisms without any staining, this would also allow the sorting in viable and non-viable cells . this could for example help to fasten the process of culture optimization.

