BACKGROUND
ctcf is a highly conserved and ubiquitous protein that has widespread functions in transcription regulation and chromatin architecture. it acts as a silencing and activating transcriptional factor, a chromatin insulator and a mediator of chromatin looping, and is essential for life  <cit> . binding of ctcf to dna is achieved primarily through its 11-zinc finger domain, which also facilitates protein-protein interactions  <cit> . ctcfl or boris , is a paralogue of ctcf  <cit> . boris has almost identical  <dig> zinc finger domains to ctcf, and the proteins are thought to have evolved during vertebrate development from a gene duplication event  <cit> . however, the flanking n- and c-terminal regions of boris show no homology with ctcf or any other proteins  <cit> . boris also lacks the modular substrates for specific post-translational modifications that are critical for ctcf function, suggesting divergent roles for the two proteins. indeed, boris and ctcf are expressed in a mutually exclusive manner during male germ-line development, suggesting that boris is involved in reprogramming the paternal dna-methylation patterns  <cit> . several lines of evidence suggest that boris plays a role in epigenetic regulation of gene expression. in tumour cell lines, where ctcf silences genes by dna methylation, it has been shown that expression of boris can displace ctcf at these genes leading to local demethylation and gene activation  <cit> . further epigenetic regulation is suggested by the binding of boris to the upstream binding factor , a transactivator of rna polymerase i, which is involved in the maintenance of chromatin structure  <cit> .

boris protein is readily detected in most cells and tissues  <cit> , with abnormally high expression levels reported in several tumours and cell lines  <cit> . in contrast to previous findings suggesting divergence in the roles of boris and ctcf, recent evidence has shown that both proteins are able to mediate similar growth and tumour suppressor functions and both provide a protective effect during apoptosis  <cit> . this finding warrants further characterisation of the functional properties of boris.

we previously showed that boris is present both in the cytoplasm and nucleus, and is enriched in the nucleolus, a crucial compartment for ribosomal rna and rna metabolism  <cit> . the role of boris within the cytoplasm, which represents the major pool of boris protein in testis, has not been fully explored  <cit> . here, we hypothesized that cytoplasmic boris interacts with rna, as shown for certain other zn-finger proteins  <cit> , due to the subnuclear localisation of boris to the nucleolus, which is associated with rna metabolism. to test this, we examined whether boris binds rna and if so, whether this property changes in cells as they undergo phenotypic alterations. we show boris binds to distinct sets of rna transcripts in neural stem cells and neurons and to a substantial amount of non-coding rna. the transcripts are enriched for components of certain key cellular pathways including the wnt pathway. we further find that boris is associated with actively translating ribosomes. together, our data suggest new roles for boris in the regulation of gene expression.

RESULTS
boris is an rna binding protein
association of boris with newly synthesized rna was first suggested by a run-on transcription assay on hek293t cells, which showed that boris co-localises with 5-fu in punctate foci in both the nucleus and cytoplasm . analysis of the amino acid sequence of boris revealed the presence of a putative nuclear export signal  in the c terminal region , indicating that the protein may shuttle between the nucleus and cytoplasm.

we therefore extended our investigation to determine whether boris interacts with rna in other cell types and, if so, whether the interaction changes as cells undergo phenotypic alterations. we previously showed that boris is present at similar levels in hnp <dig> neural progenitor cells  and young neurons derived from hnp <dig> using well-defined culture conditions  <cit> . gene expression arrays confirmed no significant change in expression of boris during neural differentiation . expression of boris in hnp <dig> and hek293t cells was confirmed by partial sequencing of pcr product .

to investigate if boris associates with endogenous rna in hnp <dig> cells and hnp <dig> cells differentiated to neurons over 6 days , we used oligo dt beads to precipitate mrna from cell lysates and analysed co-precipitated proteins by western blot. in both cell types, boris was precipitated , suggesting that the protein associates with mrna. similar results were obtained by oligo-dt-precipitation of protein complexes from hek293t cells transiently expressing gfp-tagged boris protein, as detected by both anti- gfp antibodies and anti-boris antibodies . no gfp was precipitated from cell lysates expressing gfp only .

we then used native rna-immunoprecipitation to isolate rnas that were associated with boris. a substantial amount of nucleic acids  was consistently immunoprecipitated from both hnp <dig> and 6dn cells. to verify that this was rna and not contaminating dna, since boris is known to bind dna  <cit> , we treated the immunoprecipitates with rnase a or dnase i and quantified the remaining nucleic acid. only rnase a treatment decreased the amount of precipitated nucleic acids, while dnase i had no effect . gel electrophoresis analysis of boris-precipitated rna revealed a prominent band migrating as 28s rrna, and a weaker band as 18s, suggesting that boris associates with ribosomes . in comparison, no detectable rna was precipitated by non-specific iggs .

next, to determine whether boris binds directly to rna, a series of  <dig> mer rna and dna homopolymers with 3’ biotin-teg was utilised in an in vitro binding assay. recombinant boris was purified from hek293t cells  and assayed for its ability to bind to the biotin-coupled homopolymers. as expected, we found that boris associates with the dna homopolymers poly, poly and poly  <cit> . in addition, boris also bound to poly and, to a lesser extent, to poly rnas, while no binding was observed to polymers of rc or ra or to the streptavidin beads alone . these experiments suggest that boris can interact directly with rna.

identification of poly rnas bound to boris
to identify which transcripts were associated with boris in hnp <dig> and 6dn cells we immunoprecipitated the protein from cellular extracts. we then isolated the rna and converted it to cdna, which was hybridized to gene expression arrays. the signals from the arrays were then compared to those obtained from total rna isolated from hnp <dig> and 6dn cells. transcripts were scored as associated with boris if the fold change was larger than two and the p-value  was less than  <dig>  . in total, we identified  <dig> and  <dig> probes representing  <dig> and  <dig> unique transcripts associated with boris in hnp <dig> and 6dn cells, respectively . of these,  <dig> transcripts were common to both hnp <dig> cells and 6dn cells . these findings were confirmed for several genes by the validation of enrichment using rt-qpcr in hnp <dig> and 6dn cells . in addition, we showed that the association of transcripts with boris did not correlate with their up- or down regulation during neural differentiation .

characterisation of boris-bound transcripts
we first used the panther protein class ontology platform  <cit>  to identify over-represented pathways in each cell type. in hnp <dig> cells, significant enrichment  was found for transcripts involved in wnt signalling, cadherin signalling and huntington disease . in 6dn cells, significant enrichment  was found for transcripts involved in wnt signalling as well as angiogenesis, inflammation mediated by chemokines and cytokine signalling, alzheimer disease-presenilin and tgf-β signalling .
p-
values for panther analysis of pathways, molecular function and biological processes of transcripts bound in  hnp <dig> and  hnp <dig> cells differentiated to neurons over 6 days 

p-
p
panther  <cit>  was then used for functional analysis of translated protein products for boris-associated transcripts. significant enrichment  was found in dna and rna-binding proteins, as well as rna splicing factor activity in both hnp <dig> and 6dn cells . panther analysis also showed that boris-associated transcripts are involved in diverse biological processes . over-represented biological processes for transcripts from hnp <dig> include metabolic process, cellular component organization, protein transport, organelle organization, and nervous system development. over-represented biological processes for transcripts from 6dn include cell cycle, primary metabolic process, cellular process, transport  and mitosis.

boris expression activates the β-catenin dependent wnt canonical pathway
in both hnp <dig> and 6dn cells, boris associates with several transcripts of the wnt pathway, including apc, tcf, lpd5/ <dig>  wnt5a and fzd5/ <dig>  . to investigate if boris can influence this key pathway, we over-expressed boris in hek293t cells and assessed the protein levels of a set of wnt pathway components. over-expression of boris caused a significant increase in the amount of tcf <dig>  and wnt5a/b  protein . whilst we observed a slight increase in nuclear β-catenin, this was not statistically significant and there was no overall increase in total cellular β-catenin protein following boris over-expression . no change in protein levels was found for lef <dig> and tcf <dig> wnt pathway components. analysis of mrna levels after boris over-expression showed no alteration for most wnt pathway components, while there was a significant decrease in expression for tcf <dig> , apc  and wnt5a  .

to determine directly if boris influences the activation of the wnt pathway, we then used a luciferase reporter assay where the luciferase expression is driven by tandem repeats of multiple copies of the consensus tcf/lef- β-catenin responsive element . licl, an inhibitor of gsk- <dig>  was used as a positive control for pathway activation  <cit> . transient over-expression of boris in hek293t cells led to a more than four-fold increase in luciferase activity compared to cells transfected with empty vector alone . this activation was dependent on β-catenin as sirna knock-down of β-catenin caused a significant reduction in the effect of boris over-expression in the tcf/lef luciferase assay .

boris associates with polysomes
the large amount of rna including ribosomal rna, bound to boris, suggested that boris interacts with the translational machinery. to investigate this directly, we performed polysome profiling on cell extracts prepared from hnp <dig> and 6dn cells and analysed the distribution of boris in the resulting gradients by western blotting. consistent with a ribosomal association, boris was present throughout the gradient, co-sedimenting with all ribosomal subunits  as well as monosomes  and polysomes . a similar sedimentation profile was observed for the ribosomal protein l <dig> . the majority of boris was detected in the light fractions at the top of the gradient, where it co-sediments with the ribosomal proteins s <dig>  the cytoplasmic but non-ribosome associated protein, gapdh, was only detected in the light fractions.

polysome profiling of hek293t cells showed a similar sedimentation profile of boris to that observed in hnp <dig> and 6dn cells . inhibition of translation in hek293t cells using puromycin, which causes premature chain termination and polysomal dissociation  <cit>  shifted boris and rpl <dig> to the first, light fractions . furthermore, both rnase a digestion and dissociation of ribosomes into subunits by 30 mm edta with the concomitant release of mrna and the 5s ribosomal protein  <cit> , also shifted the sedimentation of boris and to a lesser extent rpl <dig> towards lighter fractions . together, these findings suggest that boris associates with actively translating ribosomes in these cells.

discussion
here, we provide evidence that boris, best known for its role in dna binding and transcriptional regulation, also binds rna in vitro and associates with subsets of mrnas and with translating ribosomes in neural stem cells and young neurons. the ability to bind to both dna and rna is not unique to boris, and is a feature of certain other zinc finger containing proteins  <cit> . the zinc finger domains of boris, with which it associates with dna, are almost identical to those in ctcf and the proteins are reported to share dna binding sites in the genome  <cit> . a recent study has suggested that the zinc fingers in boris are needed for both nuclear and nucleolar localisation  <cit> . it remains to be established whether the zinc finger motifs are important for the rna-binding properties of boris, as is the case for tfiiia  <cit> , wt <dig>  <cit>  and certain other proteins  <cit> .

an interesting feature of boris is that its mrna expression is extremely low in cultured or primary cells, yet the protein levels are readily detectable. this is consistent, however, with a report that rna binding proteins tend to exhibit high protein stability and translational efficiency, yet their transcripts have a short half-life  <cit> . the authors of the report suggest that tight regulation of the levels of rna binding proteins is required since a significant change in their expression may affect many targets altering global expression levels.

although the majority of boris-associated transcripts differ between hnp <dig> and 6dn cells, similarities are observed in the pathways in which the transcripts are involved in the two cell types. for example, boris-associated transcripts in both cell types encode proteins involved in the canonical wnt pathway. wnt signalling is crucial in the regulation of a wide range of cellular processes such as apoptosis, cell proliferation, and differentiation, including that of neural stem cells  <cit> .

a role for boris in regulating wnt signalling is supported by our finding that boris increases the activity of a tcf/lef reporter following transient over-expression in hek293t cells . as the reporter activation is dependent on β-catenin , boris is unlikely to affect the tcf/lef reporter directly, but rather to have a post-transcriptional role. boris associates with several transcripts coding for regulatory components of the pathway and it is therefore conceivable that its over-expression may affect the translation of wnt pathway components. indeed, boris over-expression leads to increased tcf <dig> and wnt5a protein levels, whilst their respective transcript levels are decreased  although there are several possible explanations for this increase in protein levels, for example post-translational modifications leading to greater protein stability  <cit> , the fact that boris associates to these transcripts as well as to actively translating ribosomes  argues for a translational effect of boris on these proteins. however, further studies are required to conclusively answer this question.

the biological consequences of the association of boris with different transcripts within individual pathways in hnp <dig> and 6dn cells have yet to be determined. boris may be involved in coordinated regulation of different transcripts within certain pathways at specific time points of cell development or differentiation.

CONCLUSIONS
we show that boris can directly interact with rna in vitro and is associated with a subset of mrna and translating ribosomes in neural stem cells and young neurons. transient over-expression of boris increases the protein levels of several boris-associated transcripts without any concomitant increase in transcript levels suggesting a role for boris in translational control.

