BACKGROUND
amphibians  arise from a branch of the vertebrate evolutionary tree that is juxtaposed between aquatic fishes and more terrestrial amniotes . this phylogenetic location therefore positions amphibians to provide important comparative perspective for reconstructing character changes that have occurred during vertebrate evolution. for example, the amphibian perspective is essential for understanding molecular, developmental, and morphological changes of appendages that are associated with the transformation of obligatorily aquatic fish to terrestrial tetrapods  <cit> . in addition, because amphibians are the most basal tetrapod lineage, the amphibian perspective is essential for understanding the evolution of amniote characteristics among the "higher vertebrate" groups. although many studies have exploited the phylogenetic position of amphibians for comparative perspective, very few comparisons have been made at the genome level. here we present results from the first broad-scale comparison of genome structure between an amphibian and other representative vertebrate taxa.

one of the most fundamental structural characteristics of genomes is the order in which protein-coding genes are arranged on chromosomes. gene order is determined using one of several approaches, including physical mapping, linkage mapping, and whole genome sequencing. the most powerful approach is whole genome sequencing  <cit> , but only if the final product is a complete  genome assembly. physical mapping refers to the direct localization of a gene to a whole or partial chromosome, for example by the method of somatic cell hybridization  <cit>  or chromosome in-situ hybridization  <cit> . in comparison to these physical genome approaches, genetic linkage mapping refers to the approach of estimating recombination frequencies among loci  in a segregating cross for the purpose of ordering genes into linkage groups . ultimately, the genomic approach taken to order genes in a particular species is determined by genome characteristics and the availability of resources. for example, the extremely large genome size of some amphibians makes it difficult to justify a whole genome sequencing effort at this time  <cit> . however, genetic linkage mapping is an efficient strategy for amphibians because large numbers of offspring can be obtained from segregating crosses, thus allowing accurate estimates of map position  <cit> .

until recently, there were few amphibian gene order data available for comparative analyses of vertebrate genome structure  <cit> . much physical genome sequence has been collected recently for an anuran amphibian , but this sequence has not yielded a complete genome assembly and there are no large-scale genetic maps for xenopus that can be used in comparative studies  <cit> . the recently developed genetic linkage map for the salamander genus ambystoma, however, now provides an amphibian resource that can provide structural and evolutionary perspective at the genomic level  <cit> . here we report on the largest gene order dataset ever obtained for an amphibian. we use this dataset to describe the extent to which gene orders have been conserved between ambystoma and other representative vertebrate species with assembled physical genome maps. we also describe several examples that demonstrate the importance of the amphibian genome perspective for reconstructing gene orders of the ancestral tetrapod and amniote genomes, and for understanding the importance of gene order rearrangement in vertebrate evolution.

RESULTS
identification of putative orthologs
we searched  <dig> protein-coding marker sequences from the ambystoma genetic map against the genome sequences of human , mouse , rat , dog , chicken , zebrafish , and freshwater pufferfish  to identify presumptive orthologs. for each search, we defined orthologs as the blat hit with the highest bitscore, plus all other hits within 1% of the highest bitscore. using this definition, orthologs for  <dig>  ambystoma sequences were identified within the genome of at least one species in the reference set. alignment summaries for all presumptive ambystoma-vertebrate orthologs are provided as supplementary data . the number of ambystoma orthologs varied among species, ranging from  <dig> –  <dig>  a low proportion of ambystoma orthologs aligned to more than one presumptive ortholog in all comparisons . in general, a greater number of ambystoma orthologs were identified among amniote taxa versus fish taxa . this suggests greater conservation of orthologs among tetrapod taxa.

to gain insight into variation in genome coverage of ambystoma-vertebrate orthologies, we compared the distribution of ambystoma-human orthologies to the expected distribution under random sampling of human loci . we selected the human genome assembly for this comparison  <cit>  because the assembly is relatively complete and contains a large number of gene annotations. the observed number of orthologs on three human chromosomes  deviated significantly from the expected number . notably, all three of these chromosomes contained an excess of orthologies, rather than a deficiency. a single human chromosome  contained a marginally significant deficiency of ambystoma orthologies , however, given the large number of comparisons, a similar deviation would be expected to occur by chance. comparisons with the human genome assembly suggest that ambystoma-amniote orthologies will provide coverage of most regions of ancestral vertebrate genomes.

orthologs for a majority of ambystoma marker sequences were identified in more than one reference genome . of the  <dig> ambystoma orthologs identified from all searches,  <dig>  yielded hits to five or more genomes. a high proportion of ambystoma-amniote orthologs were identified from four or more of the amniote taxa . a lower proportion of ambystoma-fish orthologs were identified from both fish taxa . the relatively lower proportion of ambystoma-fish orthologs may reflect lineage-specific gene losses and divergence that has occurred between these fish species, or differences in completeness of their genome assemblies. below, we used ambystoma orthologies as characters to identify conserved syntenies and gene orders and reconstruct key events in the evolution of vertebrate genomes.

conservation of synteny
the association index λ describes the extent to which chromosomal assignments of loci  in one species are predictive of chromosome assignments in another species . high λ values indicate high predictability; such values are expected when few inter-chromosomal rearrangements of genes occur between two species after divergence from a common ancestor. thus, λ provides a measure of the combined effects of phylogenetic distance and lineage specific rearrangement rates on the inter-chromosomal distribution of genes. we estimated λ for pairwise comparisons between ambystoma and each of the seven reference vertebrate genomes. significant  association indices were observed for all comparisons and there was considerable variation in λ values . variable λ values for ambystoma-amniote comparisons illustrate the importance of lineage specific effects, because all amniotes share the same divergence time. in this case of λ variability among amniotes, lower λ values for ambystoma-murid rodents indicate an increased rate of genome rearrangement in the murid rodent lineage.

to obtain a more complete picture of genome similarity we calculated pairwise λ values for all possible species comparisons using two different datasets: 1) the set of all genes that showed 1: <dig> orthology in comparisons between ambystoma each of the seven reference vertebrate genomes , and 2) a smaller set of genes  in which 1: <dig> orthology was established among all species. the cumulative gene set was expected to identify a greater number of associations while the smaller set controlled for comparison-wise differences among the gene sets used to estimate λ. the cumulative gene set yielded slightly lower values of λ than the smaller set. for both gene sets, λ was inversely correlated with phylogenetic distance  . as before, we also observed that λ varied substantially among species with identical divergence times, consistent with lineage specific variation in rearrangement rates. notably, λ values for the ambystoma-chicken comparison are higher than or similar to λ values calculated between chicken and mammals, and similar to values calculated between murid rodents and non-rodent mammals, despite differences in divergence time among these comparisons on the order of 60– <dig> million years  . to better understand the effect of divergence time on variation in λ, we estimated the average rate of decrease in λ  for all pairwise comparisons. figure  <dig> shows that interchromosomal rearrangement rates are strikingly higher in murids and more variable among mammals in comparison to all other vertebrate groups. in contrast, genome rearrangements in non-mammalian vertebrate species appear to accumulate at a similar, lower rate.

conservation of segmental homology
we compared the map position of ambystoma genes to the physical positions of their presumptive orthologs in each of the seven reference genomes. these pair wise comparisons were visualized using oxford plots to show intra-chromosomal positions of orthologies between ambystoma and each of the reference genomes  . in oxford plots, conserved segmental homologies can be identified as diagonally oriented clusters of points. we compared this visual approach with a statistical approach using the program fish  <cit> . the algorithm underlying fish appears to be somewhat conservative for ambystoma-amniote comparisons because several clusters that are visually indicative of conserved segments were not identified as such, and several of the significant clusters did not always include orthologies that were very close to cluster margins. at any rate, the majority  of the  <dig> ambystoma-amniote orthologs were found within statistically significant, segmental homologies. the proportion of ambystoma orthologs that were assigned to homologous segments varied greatly among comparative maps  . a much higher percentage of ambystoma-amniote orthologs were found in significant segment homologies than ambystoma-fish orthologs. for example, the ambystoma-chicken oxford plot reveals a striking pattern of conservation of gene order . overall, fewer segmental homologies were identified between ambystoma and murid rodents vs nonrodent amniotes. however, the number of segmental homology differences among amniotes was small in comparison to the nearly 2-fold difference in λ values observed for ambystoma-murids vs. ambystoma-nonrodents . thus, although there has been greater reordering of loci among murid chromosomes during evolution, orders of loci within murid chromosomes are conserved and identifiable in comparisons to ambystoma.

discussion
amphibians occupy an important, intermediate position in the vertebrate evolutionary tree. our study is the first to include amphibian gene order data in a taxonomically broad comparison of vertebrate genome structure. comparisons of genome structure between ambystoma and representative fish, reptilian, and mammalian species revealed extensive conservation of gene location at the intra- and inter-chromosomal levels. overall, we identified conserved syntenies and segmental homologies for hundreds of ambystoma protein-coding sequences . these data provide evidence beyond nucleotide identity that ambystoma genes are annotated with the correct vertebrate orthology. information about gene orthology, conserved synteny, and segmental homology will extend ambystoma as a research model because it will enable development of orthologous probes for comparative molecular studies, and the identification of candidate genes for ambystoma mutants and qtl.

our study shows that the ambystoma genetic map can identify conserved syntenies and segmental homologies when compared to any of the primary vertebrate model organism genome assemblies. overall, we found greater conservation of genome structure between ambystoma and amniotes, however, many conserved syntenies are identifiable between ambystoma and fish . we also found that genome rearrangement rates are not simply a function of phylogenetic distance; there are clear differences in inter-chromosomal rearrangement rates, especially within mammals, as well as between mammals and "lower vertebrates". we elaborate on these points below and describe several new insights that amphibians provide concerning vertebrate genome evolution.

genome conservation between ambystoma and fish
fewer presumptive orthologs, conserved syntenies, and segmental homologies were identified between ambystoma and fish  than between ambystoma and amniotes. this result is expected because of the deeper divergence time of ambystoma and fish; in other words, there has been more time for nucleotide substitutions  and synteny disruptions to accumulate since the divergence of ambystoma and fish from a common ancestor. nevertheless, 57% of ambystoma orthologs were observed in conserved syntenies with four or more orthologs in at least one fish species, and with the exception of ambystoma linkage group  <dig> , all ambystoma linkage groups show discreet regions of synteny with chromosomes of t. nigroviridis and zebrafish. assuming conservation of gene order during evolution, several regions of conserved synteny between ambystoma and fish were likely present in the ancestral euteleostean genome. these include: the right hand portion of ambystoma lg <dig>  which shows extensive synteny with tni <dig> and segmental homology with dre19; and ambystoma lg <dig>  which shows extensive synteny with tni <dig> and dre <dig>  . observation of extensive synteny between ambystoma and fish is interesting because recent evidence suggests a whole genome duplication predating the common ancestor of t. nigroviridis and zebrafish, followed by differential losses of paralogous loci . under such a model of genome evolution, the positions of syntenic ambystoma genes are expected to map to overlapping positions on different fish chromosomes. we do observe this pattern for ambystoma-t. nigroviridis orthologs on a few of the smaller ambystoma linkage groups , however this pattern is not as obvious in larger ambystoma linkage groups, or in comparisons between ambystoma and zebrafish. the observed patterns appear to be consistent with chromosomal duplications in some instances, but may alternately reflect ancient large-scale rearrangements that have since been shuffled to yield interleaving sets of conserved syntenies. better reconstruction of the pre-duplicated, ancestral teleost genome is needed to differentiate between these possibilities.

genome conservation between ambystoma and amniotes
results from our study indicate extensive conservation of gene orders between ambystoma and amniotes, and especially between ambystoma and chicken. many of the orthologs identified on the smaller chicken chromosomes exist in nearly exclusive synteny or segmental homology with discreet regions of the ambystoma genome . this is interesting because of the large difference in chromosome number and genome size between these species. ambystoma has a much larger genome and haploid complement of  <dig> chromosomes  <cit> , whereas chicken has a haploid complement of  <dig> chromosomes  <cit> . because an ancestral chromosomal number of 12– <dig> chromosomes seems most likely for euteleost  <cit>  tetrapod , and reptilian ancestors  <cit> , differences between ambystoma and chicken genomes are largely explained by lineage specific fissions  and a moderate number of large rearrangements. the very high number of segmental homologies observed between ambystoma-chicken suggests they share a large portion of the ancestral tetrapod genome structure. when considering additional segmental homologies identified between ambystoma and mammals, more than half of the ambystoma-amniote orthologs that are currently located on the ambystoma genetic map identify segmental homologies within at least one amniote genome, and by extension, the ancestral amniote and tetrapod genomes.

variation in interchromosomal rearrangement rates
our study corroborates the idea that mammalian genomes are characterized by higher and more variable rates of genome rearrangement in comparison to other vertebrate groups . in comparison to mammals, we estimated lower, but similar genome rearrangement rates for ambystoma, chicken, zebrafish, and t. nigroviridis. our estimates are consistent with cytogenetic data that indicate extensive conservation of the avian karyotype over approximately 80– <dig> million years of evolution  <cit> , with estimates of genome rearrangement rates between chicken and mammals  <cit> , and with comparisons between chicken and reptiles  <cit> . it is curious to find similar rearrangement rates among non-mammalian vertebrates that differ so greatly in life history and genome structure, and whose genomes have been shaped differently by lineage-specific processes during evolution. birds, amphibians, and fish have very different generation times, chromosome numbers, and genome sizes. however, our results suggest relatively constant rates of genome rearrangement from the euteleost ancestor to the origin of mammals.

evolution of human chromosomes
in the remainder of the discussion we provide a few examples to show how ambystoma provides perspective on the evolution of gene orders within the human genome. in general, ambystoma comparative mapping data are useful because they help establish ancestral amniote and tetrapod gene orders. the ambystoma ancestral perspective is needed to identify conserved syntenies and disruptions, and to corroborate evolutionary inferences based only on comparisons between chicken and mammals  <cit>  or only mammals  <cit> .

synteny of hsa <dig> and hsa <dig> loci in the ancestral amniote and tetrapod genomes
a region of segmental homology between ambystoma lg <dig> and gga <dig> overlaps regions of segmental homology between ambystoma lg <dig> and two human chromosomes, hsa <dig> and hsa <dig> . this arrangement suggests that portions of hsa <dig> and  <dig> were joined in the ancestral tetrapod and amniote genomes. fission of this ancestral gene order presumably occurred before the diversification of eutherian mammals  because ambystoma lg <dig> orthologies are distributed similarly among the chromosomes of human, mouse, rat, and dog. the overall distribution of conserved syntenies among ambystoma and amniotes indicates that many ambystoma lg <dig> genes were syntenic in the ancestral tetrapod genome.

synteny of hsa <dig> and hsa <dig> loci in the ancestral amniote, tetrapod, and euteleost genomes
regions of synteny and segmental homology between ambystoma lg <dig> and gga <dig> overlap the positions of syntenic markers located on hsa <dig> and  <dig> . this arrangement suggests that loci of hsa <dig> and  <dig> were syntenic in the ancestral tetrapod and amniote genomes. as was observed above for ambystoma lg <dig>  fission of this ancestral gene order presumably occurred before the diversification of eutherian mammals because ambystoma lg <dig> orthologies are distributed similarly among the chromosomes of human, mouse, rat, and dog. because ambystoma lg <dig> also shows conserved synteny and segmental homology with much of dre <dig>  many ambystoma lg <dig> genes were apparently syntenic in the euteleost ancestral genome.

value of multiple species in comparative genomics
ambystoma lg <dig> and  <dig> show extensive conserved synteny and segmental homology with portions of gga <dig> and  <dig>  respectively. apparently, these homologous chromosomal segments have changed little since diversification of the tetrapod lineage, approximately  <dig> million years ago. however, neither ambystoma lg <dig> nor ambystoma lg <dig> show substantial conserved synteny or segmental homology with any human chromosome. this suggests the possibility of lineage-specific synteny disruptions in the primate lineage, because ambystoma lg <dig> does show conserved synteny with portions of the x-added region of rat and dog  <cit> . this example shows that conserved chromosomal segments may not always be identifiable in the human genome or other mammalian genomes; a multi-species perspective is essential to identify lineage specific effects in comparative vertebrate genomics.

fissions derived within the mammalian lineage
several pairs of human chromosomes may have been fused in the ancestral mammalian genome: hsa3/ <dig>  4/ <dig>  10/ <dig>  7/ <dig>  14/ <dig>  16/ <dig>  and two regions of 12/ <dig>   <cit> . although our current dataset is insufficient to test all of these hypotheses, the ambystoma-human oxford plot  suggests that two of these chromosome pairs were fused in the ancestral tetrapod and amniote genomes . conserved syntenic regions of hsa <dig> and  <dig> adjoin each other in the middle of ambystoma lg <dig> and at the left end of ambystoma lg <dig>  additionally, conserved syntenic regions of hsa <dig> and hsa <dig> adjoin each other on the right end of ambystoma lg <dig>  our data suggest that some of the chromosomal arrangements that have been proposed for the ancestral mammalian genome may trace back to the ancestral tetrapod genome.

CONCLUSIONS
these studies demonstrate the importance of amphibians in revealing key events and trends in vertebrate genome evolution. measurements of conserved synteny using ambystoma orthologies suggest relatively constant rates of genome rearrangement from the euteleost ancestor to the origin of mammals. ambystoma comparative mapping data are also useful in establishing ancestral amniote and tetrapod gene orders and identifying synteny disruptions that have occurred in amniote lineages. more than half of the ambystoma-amniote orthologs that are currently located on the ambystoma genetic map identify segmental homologies within at least one amniote genome, and by extension, the ancestral amniote and tetrapod genomes. comparisons between ambystoma and amniotes also reveal some of the key events that have structured the human genome since diversification of the ancestral amniote lineage.

