BACKGROUND
cardiomyopathy syndrome  is a severe cardiac disease of atlantic salmon  recently associated with a double-stranded rna virus termed piscine myocarditis virus   <cit> . the disease was first described and diagnosed in norway in  <dig>  <cit> , and has since also been diagnosed in the faroe islands  <cit> , scotland  <cit>  and, possibly, canada  <cit> . in  <dig>  the norwegian veterinary institute diagnosed the presence of cms at  <dig> salmon farming sites located in the mid-coast of norway  <cit> . early stages of the disease have been reported in adult atlantic salmon close to harvest, around  <dig> to 18 months after transfer to seawater  <cit> , and so the economic impact can be considerable  <cit> .

histopathologically, cms is characterized by severe inflammation and necrosis of the spongy myocardium of the atrium and ventricle  <cit> , but liver may also be affected due to the circulatory disturbance associated with the heart lesions. mortality is usually moderate although morbidity can be very high with the associated chronic inflammatory response lasting for several months. the pathogenesis of experimentally induced cms was previously assessed by transcriptomic profiling using oligonucleotide microarrays in association with pathology  <cit> . in these studies, cardiac pathology and viral load were correlated, with an up regulation of t cell response genes. it appeared that the cellular effector response mediated by cd8+ t cells contributed to successful clearance of the virus infection, although it was also correlated with an up regulation of apoptotic genes, which could contribute to tissue damage.

the lack of commercial vaccines to cms currently makes the use of alternative therapies crucial. factors that modulate the inflammatory process might be key to mitigate the clinical symptoms and improve the performance of affected fish. the concept of clinical nutrition is well known in humans  <cit> , and is becoming of increasing interest in aquaculture. functional feeds are defined as high-quality feeds that, beyond their nutritional composition, are formulated with health promoting features that could be beneficial in supporting disease resistance and mitigation of clinical disease symptoms. thus a clinical nutrition approach using functional feeds potentially enables a shift away from chemotherapeutic and antibiotic treatments, lowering the costs of disease treatment and management  <cit> . there are several studies in fish linking nutrition and immunology, recently reviewed by kiron . the inclusion in aquaculture feeds of additives such as prebiotics, probiotics, immunostimulants, vitamins and nucleotides, is reported to increase growth and feed conversion efficiency, as well as having positive effects on the immune system and protection against bacterial infections  <cit> . moreover, macronutrients like proteins and lipids are reported to play key roles in the regulation of pathways of the immune system and have been widely studied due to the necessity of the aquafeed industry to replace dietary fishmeal  and fish oil   <cit> .

polyunsaturated fatty acids  are involved in the regulation of both innate and adaptive immunity, and the inflammatory response through four potential mechanisms including gene expression, eicosanoid metabolism, cellular signalling and membrane organization  <cit> . specific transcription factors are activated by a number of pufa, long-chain -pufa and eicosanoid ligands  <cit> , and subsequently regulate the expression of genes related with inflammatory, b-cell and t-cell responses, which play important roles in viral infections. the roles of pufa in cell membrane organization and signalling pathway mechanisms have been widely studied in humans  <cit> . inhibition of t-cell signalling pathways by pufa is mainly linked to the suppression of the elevation of cytoplasmic calcium concentration through the phosphatidylinositol  signalling system, which is a key event in t-cell activation  <cit> . eicosanoids are key mediators of inflammation and the regulation of t and b lymphocyte functions. arachidonic acid  and eicosapentaenoic acid , released from membrane phospholipids through the action of phospholipases, are converted to pro- or anti-inflammatory eicosanoids, respectively and, although the enzymes of eicosanoid metabolism have a preference for ara, increased levels of epa in the membranes of immune cells inhibit the production of pro-inflammatory eicosanoids  <cit> . studies have demonstrated that lc-pufa have similar roles in immune modulation in fish. substitution of dietary fo by vegetable oil , with consequent reduction in the ratio of n-3/n- <dig> lc-pufa, promotes the synthesis of pro-inflammatory eicosanoids  <cit> , and alters humoral immunity and the expression of pro-inflammatory cytokine genes  <cit> . most studies have been performed in vitro
, and so little is known about the roles of lc-pufa during viral infections in fish.

in a previous study, the use of functional feeds led to a milder inflammatory response and reduced severity of heart lesions in salmon experimentally infected by atlantic salmon reovirus , the causal agent of heart and skeletal muscle inflammation   <cit> . as both hsmi and cms have similar symptoms, we have employed a similar strategy in the present study to investigate the effects of functional feeds in controlling cms. the functional feeds contained increased epa levels, from  <dig> % in a reference feed to 14%, and reduced dietary lipid, from 31% to 18% in the functional feeds. supplementation of histidine was also assessed in one of the functional feeds as this amino acid and related compounds, such as n-α-acetyl-histidine , have important roles in muscle ph buffering  <cit>  and tissue antioxidant systems  <cit> . in particular, histidine has been associated with a cardio-protective role in human studies, being potentially beneficial in the alleviation of oxidative stress associated with viral diseases  <cit> . thus, we hypothesized that dietary supplementation of this amino acid could have a potentially beneficial effect in fish suffering cms.

fish were fed the experimental feeds for 8 weeks prior to infection by pmcv and throughout the study post-infection. the incorporation of lc-pufa into membrane phospholipids of heart, the main organ affected by the disease, was assessed, and both heart and liver tissues were subjected to histological evaluation. the inflammatory and immune status in heart tissue was assessed after infection by determining gene expression through oligonucleotide microarray analysis.

RESULTS
lipid and fatty acid composition of heart tissue
the total lipid content of heart tissue was unaffected by dietary treatment and did not show any significant changes over the course of infection . proportions of triacylglycerol  were lower and those of total pl and the major pl classes, phosphatidylcholine  and phosphatidylethanolamine , significantly higher in heart tissue of fish fed the functional feeds compared with fish fed the ref diet  . these differences were particularly apparent at the end of the pre-feeding phase and, after pmcv infection, pl levels generally decreased, significantly for phosphatidylinositol  and phosphatidylserine , over the course of the infection.table  <dig> 
fatty acid compositions  of total phospholipids of heart tissue from fish fed the reference  and functional  feeds at different times before  and after  infection with pmcv



saturated

18:1n-9

monounsat

18:2n-6

20:3n-6

20:4n-6

n- <dig> pufa

18:3n-3

20:5n-3

22:6n-3

n- <dig> pufa

pufa

epa/ara

n-3/n-6

total lipid
ara, arachidonic acid; dha, docosahexaenoic acid ; epa, eicosapentaenoic acid; pufa, polyunsaturated fatty acid.


diet*week indicates the p value of the interaction of those two factors in the 2-way anova statistical analysis.

proportions of lipid classes in total lipid of heart tissue from fish fed the reference  and functional  feeds at different times before  and after  infection with pmcv. data were analysed by 2-way anova with “time-course” and “diet” as the two factors. different letters above time-points indicate significant differences between time-points over the time-course of the infection. the factor diet showed significant differences in pc, pe, total phospholipids and tag . pc, phosphatidycholine; pe, phosphatidylethanolamine; pi, phosphatidylinositol; ps, phosphatidylserine; tag, triacylglycerol.



the fatty acid compositions of total pl of heart tissue of fish fed the functional feeds reflected the composition of the diets showing different proportions of the lc-pufa that could potentially influence the immune response  <cit>  . thus, the proportions of epa, ara and the epa/ara ratio were significantly higher in fish fed the functional feeds compared to fish fed the ref diet . however, levels of docosahexaenoic acid  were similar between the different dietary groups, which was consistent with our previous study using similar feeds in which tissue levels of dha were more conserved despite differences in the composition of the diets  <cit> . the proportions of the inflammation-related lc-pufa in heart total pl changed during the time course of the infection but were similar in fish fed the three dietary treatments . the changes in ara post-infection were not significant, but the proportions of epa and dha were significantly higher at 6-wpc compared with pre-challenge. after 6-wpc, levels of dha progressively decreased during the time-course of the infection but proportions of epa were significantly higher at 10-wpc. as a consequence of the latter, the epa/ara ratio in heart total pl was also higher in all dietary treatments at 10-wpc. there were no differences in the epa/ara ratio in heart pl between fish fed the different diets in the later stages of the infection.

heart and liver tissue histopathology
histological changes were consistent with cms and first observed in the atrium at 6-wpc , characterized by focal infiltration of inflammatory cells dominated by lymphocytes. a degenerative process associated with the inflammatory changes was also observed in cardiomyocytes of the atrium. the most marked increase in histopathological scores was found in the ventricle of fish from all the dietary groups from 6- to 8-wpc. these changes were typified by multifocal infiltration of inflammatory cells, dominated by lymphocytes and macrophages, and concomitant degeneration and necrosis of myocytes. another typical finding was hyperplasia of endothelial cells in inflamed areas. inflammatory changes were greatest in the atrium from 6- to 8-wpc and significantly higher for all groups at both time points. by 10-wpc, the inflammatory changes and myocyte necrosis had levelled off in all groups, and was not different from 8-wpc. at 12- and 14-wpc there was a moderate decline in inflammatory scores .

differences between dietary groups were found mainly in the early stages of the disease, at 6- and 8-wpc. fish fed both functional feeds showed significantly lower histoscores in the atrium at both 6- and 8-wpc compared to fish fed the ref diet . lesions in the ventricle were also lower in fish fed the functional feeds, being significant in both dietary groups at 8-wpc but only for the fish fed with the cms <dig> diet at 6-wpc. there were no differences in inflammation in either part of the heart between dietary groups at 10- and 12-wpc. at the end of the trial, 14-wpc, lesions in the atrium were not significantly different between groups, although fish fed with cms <dig> had lower histoscores compared with the other groups. in ventricle, fish fed both functional feeds showed lower histoscores although they were not significantly different .

the liver histology scores, based on the degree of steatosis were interpreted as vacuole-formation in hepatocyte cytoplasm characterized by both micro- and macro-vesicular lesions. there were clear differences between the fish fed the functional feeds and fish fed the ref diet at all samplings points post-challenge, with the latter group presenting higher micro- and macro-vesicular steatosis. severity of the liver histopathology was significantly higher at the beginning of the infection and greater at the end of the challenge  in salmon fed the ref diet compared to fish fed the two functional feeds .figure  <dig> 
histopathology results in heart tissue. figures on the left are representing incidence  and severity of histopathology  in both parts of the heart, atrium and ventriculum at 6-, 8-, 10-, 12-, 14-weeks post-challenge in fish fed the reference diet , and the two functional feeds cms <dig>  and cms <dig> . figures on the right are representing the statistical analysis of the atrium and ventriculum histoscores. estimated effects of cms <dig> and cms <dig> diets in comparison to the ref diet by sampling weeks. negative estimates mean there are lower scores and positive that there are higher scores than for the ref dietary group. error bars denote approximate 95% confidence limits.
histopathology results in liver tissue. figure on the left is representing incidence  and severity of histopathology  at 6-, 8-, 10-, 12-, 14-weeks post-challenge in fish fed the reference diet , and the two functional feeds cms <dig>  and cms <dig> . figure on the right is representing the statistical analysis of liver histoscores. estimated effects of cms <dig> and cms <dig> diets in comparison to the ref diet by sampling weeks. negative estimates mean there are lower scores and positive that there are higher scores than for the ref dietary group. error bars denote approximate 95% confidence limits.



viral load
viral load was similar for the three dietary groups at 6-wpc, however by 8-wpc, although individual variation in viral rna was observed, heart viral load was higher in fish fed the ref diet compared with fish fed the functional feeds, significantly so in the case of fish fed cms <dig> .figure  <dig> 
viral load in heart tissue of the different dietary groups at 6- and 8-weeks post-challenge. viral load was determined by quantitative real-time pcr analysis of piscine myocarditis virus. results are presented as ct values  as a basis for showing the relative level of virus expression  levels of significant differences  were calculated using the relative expression software tool .



cardiac transcriptomic responses
time-course of disease
comparison of gene expression changes in fish fed the ref diet over the course of infection  relative to pre-challenge levels showed highly co-ordinated up-regulation of genes involved in immune pathways ; data for representative genes included in figure  <dig> are in table  <dig>  the antiviral and ifn response , mainly represented by previously annotated virus-responsive genes  <cit> , showed highest expression at 6- and 8-wpc that levelled off by 14-wpc. the largest group of genes associated with t cell responses  reached peak levels by 8-wpc coinciding with the peak of cardiac histoscores. a similar profile was observed for genes involved in antigen presentation via major histocompatibility complexes , however their induced expression remained stable to 14-wpc. the b cell response, represented by various immunoglobulins , showed increasing expression from 6- and 8-wpc until peak levels at 14-wpc. recovery in cardiac histopathology by 14-wpc was consistent with significantly reduced expression of several inflammatory markers, such as granzyme a, serum amyloid a, tnf decoy receptor  and neutrophil cytosolic factor  <dig>  it is also noteworthy that negative immune regulators such as suppressor of cytokine signaling  <dig> and lymphocyte antigen 75/cd <dig> were induced by 14-wpc.figure  <dig> 
time-course of four immune pathways to pmcv infection examined with microarray in salmon fed with ref diet. boxes show median log <dig> gene expression ratio  between pre-challenge and time points post infection, with the 25th  and 75th  percentile, and whiskers indicate minimum and maximum values. letters indicate significant differences between time points .


examples of immune genes induced in cms challenged salmon. data are challenge to pre-challenged expression ratios  on the fish fed with the ref diet


antigen presentation and vrg

u20945

dy713447

af508864

dw538400

117530907

eg795847
t cells

aj841811

dy710412

nm_0011235

213070237

eg819885
inflammatory markers, regulators

cx032230

117427898

aj517803

cu652893

eg881931

eg904168

117496064

213077403

s48406409

213081931

dw578491
effects of functional feeds pre- and post-challenge
effects on immune responses
a large fraction of differentially expressed genes encoded proteins of the immune system and genes from several functional groups showed similar expression profiles over the course of the infection ; results for selected genes are given in table  <dig>  overall, the functional feeds resulted in down-regulated levels of immune genes, suggestive of immune suppressive actions . at pre-challenge this was most significant for antiviral and ifn responses, which showed reduced expression in fish fed cms <dig> and cms <dig> compared to fish fed the ref diet . this down-regulation was also significant at 8-wpc, although with lower magnitude, and this coincided with the most significant reduction in ventricle histoscore in fish fed the functional feeds . among antiviral and ifn genes, the largest expression differences were found in genes known for potent responses to viruses, such as very large inducible gtpase  <dig>  ifn inducible mx protein and receptor-transporting protein  <dig>  notable exceptions were two genes encoding ifn regulatory factors – irf <dig> and irf <dig> – that had from  <dig>  to  <dig> -fold higher expression before challenge in salmon fed with the functional feeds compared to the ref diet. the expression profiles of immunoglobulin  genes most likely reflected the influx and amount of b cells in the heart. fish fed the functional feeds had slightly lower abundance of  <dig> ig transcripts before challenge that were further reduced by 6-wpc, followed by normalized levels from 8- to 14-wpc. the most striking immunosuppressive effect of functional feeds was observed for t cell response genes, as suggested by significantly reduced expression of  <dig> transcripts at pre-challenge, 6- and 8-wpc, and moderately lower reduction at 14-wpc. down-regulation of cd <dig> beta, granzyme a/k and ifn gamma could imply that a large fraction of this population was represented by cytotoxic t cells. granzyme a and tnf decoy receptor tnfrsf6b, which were also down-regulated by the functional feeds, showed strongest correlation with heart histopathology level in a previous cms study  <cit> .figure  <dig> 
effect of functional feeds on gene expression in heart tissue of atlantic salmon examined with microarray. a: number of differential expressed genes  per time point post infection . b: hierarchical clustering by  <dig> features 


examples of immune genes that responded to the functional feeds


antiviral responses

bq035726

?

dy741158

cb500614

bx909789

213061919

dw538275
t cells

ssa#tc108524

?

ay693394

ca368982

dy710412

?

cr369847
inflammatory markers, regulators

213077403

eg871595

dw576911

213081824

eg881931

213081931

ck888744

s48406409
data are expression ratios  of fish fed the functional feeds  relative to the ref diet during the course of the infection.
effect of the two functional feeds on immune gene expression in heart tissue of atlantic salmon pre  and post  pmcv infection, as examined with microarray. data are log <dig> expression ratios between functional feeds  and reference feed . boxes show median values  with the 25th  and 75th  percentile, and whiskers indicating minimum and maximum values. letters indicate significant differences between time points .

effects on lipid metabolism
differences in expression of genes involved in lipid metabolism that could potentially modulate the immune response were also observed over the course of the infection . among the significantly relevant genes were those related to the pi signalling system  and the biosynthesis of lc-pufa. in general, the expression of the genes related to the pi signalling pathway was not correlated with tissue pathology or the expression of immune-related genes, as there was higher activation of those genes at all sampling points after pmcv infection in fish fed the functional feeds compared with fish fed the ref diet. of the lipid metabolism genes , the most significant effect was detected with probes for the delta- <dig> fatty acyl desaturase  gene . differences between the three dietary groups were most prominent at 6-wpc, when expression of this gene was higher in the fish fed with the functional feeds compared with fish fed the ref diet. however, these differences appeared to correlate more with heart tissue pathology rather than diet as the expression of this gene significantly decreased over the time course of the infection in all dietary groups .figure  <dig> 
expression between functional feeds  and reference diet  of genes related with phosphatidyl inositol signalling pathway. at cut off log2-er =  <dig>  . red/orange colour intensity indicates higher expression and green/blue colour intensity indicates lower expression.
expression of fatty acyl desaturase  gene. a) normalized expression of different probes of the oligoarray from delta- <dig> fatty acyl desaturase  gene over the time course of the pmcv infection on fish fed with the ref diet and the functional feeds . b) expression ratios  of different probes of the oligoarray from delta- <dig> fatty acyl desaturase  gene. data are fish fed the functional feeds  relative to the ref diet during the course of the infection. red/orange colour intensity indicates higher expression and green/blue colour intensity indicates lower expression.



discussion
the present study demonstrated the potential of dietary immunomodulation for reducing the pathological outcome of virus-associated heart diseases in salmon. specifically, increased dietary levels of epa and reduced lipid content were associated with altered expression of genes related with the immune response after an infection with pmcv, significantly reduced pathology in heart and liver tissue, and reduced viral loads at  <dig> wpc when there was a peak in heart pathology. in contrast, the addition of histidine did not appear to improve the performance of the fish as the level of heart lesions and the expression of genes related with the immune response were not further reduced in fish fed the histidine supplemented diet.

the specific mechanism explaining the potential role of reduced dietary lipid content in the effects of the functional feeds is not clearly established  <cit> . previous studies on hsmi showed that there was reduced lipid deposition  in livers of fish fed the functional feeds with lower lipid content at initial stages of the disease and the steatosis was usually more frequent when the severity of the heart lesions was high  <cit> . thus, there was some association between liver lipid metabolism and on-going viral infection, although earlier studies had found no correlation between the severity of heart and liver lesions during different stages of hsmi disease, associating the liver lesions to the circulatory disturbances as a consequence of heart pathology  <cit> . therefore, although the precise mechanism of the reduced liver steatosis index at initial stages in fish fed the functional feeds was not identified in detail, lower dietary lipid was a likely contributing factor  <cit> . the functional feeds used in the present study were beneficial for the prevention of liver pathology associated with cms. fish fed functional feeds showed lower liver histoscores over the whole course of the infection, significantly so at 6-, 12- and 14-wpc, possibly due to the lower dietary lipid content that could reduce liver lipid metabolism when circulatory disturbances are potentially affecting this organ.

levels of epa and ara, and the epa/ara ratio, in heart tissue pl were significantly altered by the functional feeds, and hence one of the main strategies of the experimental design was achieved. specifically, the potential bioavailability of epa and its proportion relative to ara was always higher over the time-course of the infection in fish fed the functional feeds compared with fish fed the ref diet. interestingly, the use of southern hemisphere fo in the functional feeds in the present trial also increased the level of ara in heart tissue pl and thus the epa/ara ratio was actually lower than in heart tissue of fish in the previous trial on hsmi  <cit> . the relative proportions of ara and epa remained generally constant during the time-course of the pmcv infection although, as described above for dha, there were increased levels of both ara and epa when, according to gene expression analysis, there was activation of the immune response. however, this was only significant for epa, possibly reflecting the higher absolute levels of epa generated by the functional feeds in the present trial.

as previously described in humans  <cit>  and fish  <cit> , the fatty acid compositions of membrane pl play a critical role in the regulation of the innate and adaptive immune response. fatty acids such as ara, epa and dha, released from membrane pl through the action of phospholipases, modulate the immune response not only through eicosanoids, but also by modifying signalling pathways and stimulating immune-related nuclear transcription factors  and the production of cytokines  <cit> . the n- <dig> lc-pufa, ara, is associated with pro-inflammatory responses as the precursor of pro-inflammatory eicosanoids, and epa, as well as being the precursor of anti-inflammatory eicosanoids, can also decrease the production of ara-derived eicosanoids through competition for the eicosanoid-synthesising enzymes. dha has also an anti-inflammatory role in humans, particularly relevant at the recovery phase of an inflammatory process, as it is a precursor of immune-resolving resolvins and protectins  <cit> .

although macrophages, primarily produced in the head kidney of fish, are a major source of eicosanoids, production of eicosanoids at the site of the infection  is also highly relevant due to the short life of these lc-pufa derivatives  <cit> . as previously reported in unchallenged  <cit>  and challenged fish  <cit> , dha levels in heart tissue pl did not reflect dietary levels, being generally similar in fish fed the three diets in the present study. this may reflect the fundamental role of dha in the maintenance of cellular membrane structure and fluidity  <cit> . in our previous study investigating the effects of similar diets on hsmi, levels of dha were not significantly affected during the time-course of the infection after challenge with asrv  <cit> . in contrast, the levels of dha in heart tissue pl changed significantly over the time-course of the infection after pmcv challenge. levels of dha were higher when there was enhanced immune response and the heart lesions were more prominent. whether dha levels were related with the activation of immune pathways involved in the control of the inflammatory process requires further investigation in fish. however, the present results suggest that changes in the levels of dha may be associated with pmcv infection and therefore this fatty acid could have a role in the immune response in fish as has been described in humans  <cit> . the associations between levels of ara, epa and dha in heart pl, the extent of heart histological lesions, and cardiac expression of genes related to the immune response, indicated that dietary effects on incorporation of lc-pufa into cell membranes of affected tissues could have important immunomodulatory roles in viral infections.

the relevance of dietary supplementation with epa was supported when evaluating the expression of a key enzyme of lc-pufa biosynthesis, delta- <dig> fatty acyl desaturase over the course of the infection. higher expression of this enzyme and potentially higher biosynthesis of n- <dig> lc-pufa was reported previously in liver of fish fed similar functional feeds compared with fish fed a reference diet  <cit> , later linked to dietary lipid/energy levels  <cit> . however, the present study is the first to report a generally decreased expression of this enzyme in all dietary groups over the course of pmcv infection after 6-wpc, possibly indicating a negative effect of the viral infection on lc-pufa biosynthesis. this highlights the importance of dietary supplementation of anti-inflammatory n- <dig> lc-pufa when fish are suffering viral heart disease although further studies are required.

in addition to fatty acid composition, the pl class composition was also affected during viral infection, with decreased proportions of pi and ps as the infection progressed. phosphorylated derivatives of pi such as phosphatidylinositol  <dig> -bisphosphate  are involved in the production of the intracellular second messengers diacylglycerol  and inositol  <dig> ,5-triphosphate  through the action of the phospholipase c  <cit> . dag and ip <dig> activate calcium channels, increasing ca+ <dig> concentration in the cytosol, with this being an essential step for the survival of some human viruses  <cit> . ps has also been related with this signalling pathway as it is an important activator of protein kinase c  <cit> . the difference in expression of genes related with pi signalling between the dietary groups along with decreased proportions of pi and ps, suggested relevance of this pathway during the infection, and could reflect utilization of these pl classes associated with an immunomodulatory role. this is a novel finding and the composition/content of specific pl classes could be an interesting area for future studies on clinical nutrition in fish.

diet alone had marked effects on the cardiac expression of immune genes prior to challenge with functional feeds suppressing genes related with innate antiviral responses and even those specific for lymphocytes. broadly similar effects were recently reported in a trial investigating substitution of dietary fo with vo in salmon  <cit> . in that study, expression levels of immune-related genes in liver of fish fed a fo diet, with a fatty acid composition similar to the functional feeds, were generally lower than in fish fed a vo diet, with a composition similar to the present ref diet. however, in the earlier study, genes related with the t-cell response were expressed at a lower level in fish fed the vo diet  <cit> . this may be explained by the higher levels of epa present in the functional feeds used in the present study compared with the fo diet used in the earlier study, as the influence of epa in controlling t-cell signalling pathways has been documented previously  <cit> . expression of genes related with non-specific immune responses were also higher in grouper  fed a vo/fo blend compared with fish fed fo alone  <cit> . so it appears that, even without any apparent infection, inclusion of fo could dampen both innate and adaptive immune responses in fish. thus, the generally higher immune status of the fish fed the ref diet could be a factor in the earlier development of inflammation and heart lesions associated with cms in these fish compared with the fish fed the functional feeds. put another way, the functional feeds generally lowered the immune/inflammatory status prior to viral challenge and, in doing so, delayed and moderated the response to the infection. this was supported by the recent finding that showed low-responder fish to cms, which developed high infection levels in the absence of cardiac pathology, had ablated expression of adaptive immunity genes and genes involved in t cell responses  <cit> . however, it must be emphasised that immune and inflammatory responses are essential components of the host defence against infections  <cit> . therefore, strategies modulating the inflammatory response must be a balance between promoting resolution and mitigating negative effects of chronic inflammation that can lead to damaging fibrosis without preventing the initial onset of the response  <cit> .

interestingly, ifn regulatory factors  <dig> and  <dig> were among the few innate antiviral genes that were induced by the functional feeds prior to infection. while irf <dig> presumably is an important regulator of the antiviral ifn response in fish, as in mammals  <cit> , the suggested role of irf <dig> as a negative regulator of tlr signalling and pro-inflammatory cytokines in mice peritoneal macrophages  <cit>  is interesting in view of the down-regulated antiviral state pre-challenge of fish fed the functional feeds and hence the possible implications for the positive effects post-infection. whether irf <dig> has a similar function in fish has yet to be confirmed.

the time-courses for the development and resolution of histopathology and immune gene responses were similar to those observed previously  <cit> . in addition, there were correlations between the expression of genes related with immune responses, viral load and heart lesions, in agreement with timmerhaus et al.  <cit> . importantly, however, the temporal differences observed between the different dietary treatments in the present study strengthened these correlations. thus, the changes in the progression of cms heart pathology, gene expression and viral load, in fish fed the ref diet were temporally similar to the development of the infection described previously  <cit> , whereas there was a clear delay in the appearance of those changes in fish fed the functional feeds. although viral load was not monitored at later stages of the pmcv infection, the aforementioned correlation between histopathology and gene expression in the ref group allow us to hypothesize that viral load in fish fed the functional feeds would be higher at the later stages. therefore, the lower viral load in heart of fish fed the functional feeds at early stages of pmcv infection was probably a direct effect of diet on initial viral replication as reported previously after asrv infection  <cit> . furthermore, in addition to a delay in the appearance of heart pathology in fish fed the functional feeds, a slightly improved performance of fish fed the cms <dig> diet was observed, which could be associated with reduced expression of genes associated with the innate immune response.

at 6-wpc, gene expression and heart tissue histopathology of fish fed the ref diet were in agreement with those reported previously  <cit> . thus, atrium was affected by the infection at 6-wpc with higher histoscores in fish fed the ref diet compared to fish fed the functional feeds, whereas ventricle was only slightly affected. a peak in the expression of genes related with the complement response, b and t-cell responses, and apoptosis was expected at this time post-infection  <cit> , and many of the genes related to these pathways showed lower expression in fish fed the functional feeds compared to fish fed the ref diet. in addition, genes related with antiviral and interferon responses often showed higher expression in fish fed the functional feeds compared with fish fed the ref diet. the peak in expression of the latter genes was reported to be at 2- <dig> wpc in the earlier study  <cit> , supporting the conclusion that there was a delayed response in fish fed the functional feeds. a similar delayed response to viral infection of around 2 weeks was observed previously after asrv infection in salmon fed functional feeds  <cit> .

as the cms disease progressed the extent of lesions in the heart increased in both atrium and ventricle with the differences between the fish fed the functional feeds and fish fed the ref diet being most pronounced at 8-wpc. at this time-point, fish fed the functional feeds presented lower histoscores in both atrium and ventricle compared with fish fed the ref diet, which could be due to the up-regulation of genes related with host immune response observed at 6-wpc in fish fed the ref diet. at 8-wpc, following the hypothesis of delayed development of cms in fish fed the functional feeds, higher expression of genes involved in antiviral and innate immune pathways could have been expected in these fish compared with fish fed the ref diet but, in contrast, these groups showed lower activation of these pathways. dietary modulation of the inflammatory response has, of course, been described previously in fish. higher incorporation of n- <dig> lc-pufa in biological membranes of immune cells led to a lower expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines in gilthead seabream   <cit> , decreased antibody production and macrophage killing activity in rainbow trout  <cit> , and lower production of pro-inflammatory eicosanoids in atlantic salmon  <cit> . furthermore, dietary epa suppressed production and release of tnf, interleukins and ifn in humans  <cit> . dietary epa also suppressed key components of the antiviral response in gilthead sea bream, and dietary vo inclusion modulated the expression of mx proteins, interferon-induced mediators of innate resistance to rna virus  <cit> . according to these previous studies, the increased proportions of dietary epa in the functional feeds used in the present study could be a factor in preventing an uncontrolled immune response that could be more harmful to the fish.

as expected, many genes related with the t-cell response showed lower expression in fish fed the functional feeds compared with fish fed the ref diet  <cit> . although gene expression was not assessed at 10- and 12-wpc, increased transcription of genes involved in virus clearance may be predicted based on histopathology of heart lesions at these time-points. by 14-wpc, there was a clear remission in the lesions in both parts of the heart in all dietary groups and therefore no significant differences in the pathology were observed between them. even though the list of genes differentially expressed at 14-wpc in fish fed the different diets was shorter than the ones from previous sampling points, some pathways represented in the list of genes differentially expressed at 14-wpc in fish fed the different diets could still indicate a more effective remediation of the inflammatory response by the group of fish fed with the functional feeds. thus, important markers of the t-cell response such as t cell receptor alpha, cd <dig> beta and alpha and cd <dig> antigen showed lower expression in fish fed the functional feeds, but expression of genes related with pi signalling was higher in those fish compared with fish fed the ref diet. as mentioned above, the pi signalling pathway is intimately involved in the regulation of the t-cell response  <cit> , and dependent on the levels of membrane pl classes and their fatty acid compositions. as the lesions in heart tissue in cms were associated with the action of cd8+ cytotoxic t-cells  <cit> , factors controlling this response, such as anti-inflammatory n- <dig> lc-pufa, could be key to the general better performance observed in the fish fed the functional feeds. furthermore, results from the previous study evaluating the use of functional feeds in salmon infected with hsmi were consistent with this hypothesis. thus, milder expression of genes related with inflammatory response and virus clearance, including those related with t-cell response, were reported in salmon fed the functional feeds leading to better performance of those fish over the course of the hsmi infection  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
the present study is the first to describe the effects of functional feeds on the expression of genes related with the immune response after infection of atlantic salmon with pmcv. significant differences in immune and inflammatory responses and pathology in heart tissue were found in fish fed the different dietary treatments over the course of the infection, highlighting the potential immune modulatory role of dietary fatty acid composition and lipid content in viral infections in salmon. the strategy was effective in significantly reducing heart pathology and also decreasing the time-course of the viral infection. furthermore, liver pathology was significantly reduced during the time course of the infection in fish fed the functional feeds. molecular signatures showed lower expression of immune-inflammatory genes, especially those reported to be correlated with heart lesions in the clinical phase . moreover, transcriptome analysis revealed a novel pathway of the fish immune response, the pi signalling pathway, that functional feeds could modulate, as well as potential suppression of lc-pufa biosynthesis as the infection progresses, stressing the importance of dietary supplementation with n- <dig> lc-pufa.

