BACKGROUND
gene regulatory transcripts are crucial in expressing or repressing protein coding genes. for example, gene repression in plants can be maintained by micrornas  and small interfering rnas . while mirnas are mainly involved with the post-transcriptional gene repression, sirnas are also involved pre-transcriptional gene repression by the de novo deposition of chromatin marks  <cit> . a new category of rna dependent gene regulators are long non-coding rnas  that can act in the course of pre-transcriptional repression of gene-expression .

long non-coding rnas can silence genes by acting as a sequence-specific template for chromatin or associate with downstream proteins  <cit>  and are transcribed from the intergenic , intronic or anti-sense regions  <cit> . recently it has been shown for the lncrnas coolair in arabidopsis thaliana  <cit>  and for the rice lncrna ldmar  <cit>  how they influence the expression of phenotypically important regulatory genes. coolair  is transcribed from the flowering locus c  and accelerates the transcriptional repression of flc during cold by reducing the gene activating chromatin mark h3k36me <dig>  <cit> . in parallel, the gene silencing chromatin mark h3k27me <dig> is accumulating at the intragenic flc nucleation site by a polycomb-directed process  <cit> . thus, lncrnas coolair contributes to the induction of flowering after vernalization. the mutant rice 58s has infertile pollen under long days, while the pollen are variably fertile under short days. ding et al.  <cit>  found that when lncrna ldmar is overexpressed in 58s rice recovers fertility under long days. the transcription of ldmar in 58s is controlled by a negative feedback loop with a sirna called psi-ldmar. psi-ldmar is transcribed from the promoter region of ldmar. psi-ldmar induces rna dependent dna methylation; this leads to a reduction in the transcription of ldmar and hence reduces the fertility of 58s under long days  <cit> . these recent discoveries of plant lncrnas highlight their influence on important fitness traits, e.g. male sterility  and flowering time   <cit> . the influence of lncrnas on regulating chromatin structure shows their involvement to permit plants to respond to environmental cues  <cit> .

lncrnas have also been identified and studied in other plants, including zea mays, triticum aestivum and oryza sativa . these genome-wide identifications of lncrnas were done using existing est sequences, full-length cdna databases and/or full genome tiling microarrays . li et al.  <cit>  found more than  <dig>  putative lncrnas in rice; although >90 % were assigned to being small rna precursors. a similar result was found in zea mays where ~60 % of the lncrnas are probably small rnas precursors  <cit> . about 40 % of the rice non-exonic transcription active regions seem to be potential non-coding rnas  <cit> . liu et al.  <cit>  found  <dig> lincrnas in the model plant arabidopsis thaliana . some of these putative lncrnas were further validated with expression pattern analyses, custom microarrays and rna-seq . however all these studies have thus far relied on analyses of only a single species.

inter-species genome-wide comparisons have shown that protein-coding genes are not only conserved by sequence, but can also be conserved by their position in the genome   <cit> . the conservation of a genomic position over different phylogenetic scales can indicate that the position of a given gene is under strong purifying selection  <cit> . the genome-wide duplication history of arabidopsis thaliana  was revealed by the identification and analyses of collinear duplicated blocks that arose from multiple ancient whole genome duplications  <cit> . recently, the genome of aethionema arabicum, a member of the tribe aethionemeae in the earliest diverging lineage of the brassicaceae, was sequenced  <cit>  as well as the genome of tarenaya hassleriana of the cleomaceae, the sister-family to the brassicaceae  <cit> . the comparisons of these three genomes provide insights into which genes and intergenic regions may be conserved by position between brassicaceae-cleomaceae. however, the genome sequences are not enough to understand their potential functional significance. hence it is also valuable to have transcriptome data to complement the genome data of species at evolutionary important positions to infer the positional conservation of regulatory transcripts including lncrnas.

here we used the genomes of ae. arabicum, t. hassleriana and a. thaliana in addition to our newly generated transcriptome data of four aethionemeae and two cleomaceae species to understand the conservation of lncrnas in a phylogenomic context . we not only analysed the nucleotide conservation of lncrnas, but also whether or not they were conserved by genomic position. we found that of the lncrnas that seem sequence-specific  to the cleomaceae, brassicaceae or aethionemeae, >25 % are conserved by position. this positional conservation could tell us more about the putative function of these lncrnas, and the evolutionary importance of positional conservation of these genomic features.fig.  <dig> simplified phylogeny of the brassicaceae and cleomaceae highlighting target species used to identify long non-coding rnas . the boxes above the branches represent the studied lineages, their specificity at the sequence level and their abbreviations. pictures show  the inflorescences of arabidopsis thaliana, aethionema arabicum and tarenaya hassleriana




RESULTS
sequence conservation
we identified lncrnas in four aethionemeae and two cleomaceae species from transcriptome data. to assess the sequence conservation of these lncrnas we used orhtomcl  <cit> . for the positional conservation we used the coge tools synfind and gevo  <cit> .

we used a previous classification of lncrnas in arabidopsis  <cit> : 1) lincrna if the transcriptional unit  was ≥500 bp away from the nearest protein coding gene, regardless if on sense or antisense strand. 2) gene associated transcriptional unit  if the tu was within a 500 bp range of a protein-coding gene. 3) ‘tu encoding nat’ if the tu was transcribed from the opposite strand than the sense strand of a protein coding gene. 4) mirna precursors, which can have long transcripts as precursors.

we assessed whether the  <dig> a. thaliana lincrnas  assessed by  <cit>  were conserved throughout the brassicaceae and cleomaceae  with an orthomcl analysis; a cluster algorithm based on reciprocal best blast hits  <cit> . the analysis included ath-linc and the genomes of aethionema arabicum and tarenaya hassleriana . because lncrnas have a higher mutation rate than protein coding sequences  <cit> , the analysis was done using increasing sequence similarity cut-off values of ≥10 %, ≥20 % and ≥50 %. out of the  <dig> ath-lincs only eleven are conserved by all three species at the genomic level. out of these eleven conserved ath-lincs, only nine are transcribed in all three species based on our rna-seq data  and the rna-seq data of  <cit>  . conserved ath-lincs were blasted  against the ncbi-database to assess whether the sequences were conserved in other organisms. at3nc <dig>  with a sequence similarity of ≤20 % with the ae. arabicum and t. hassleriana transcriptomes and genomes, was homologous in sequence to the  <dig> s ribosomal rna gene and internal transcribed spacer  <dig> to the oomycete albugo laibachii. the genomically conserved at2nc <dig>  at4nc <dig> and at4nc <dig> were conserved across most land plants, including the bryophyte physcomitrella patens .

we defined a lineage-specific lncrna that is shared at the nucleotide level by multiple species within our focal lineages , but not found in other lineages. there were fifteen ath-lincs that were specific only to the brassicaceae . to ascertain that the ath-lincs and their corresponding ae. arabicum transcripts were restricted to the brassicaceae we compared them against the ncbi and phytozome databases using blastn, blastx and tblastx . of the fifteen bras-lncs, nine were transcribed by ae. arabicum and/or a. thaliana .

to test for aethionemeae specific lncrnas  we generated rna-seq data for four aethionemeae species: ae. arabicum, ae. carneum, ae. grandiflorum and ae. spinosa. we identified  <dig> lncrnas ae-lncs that were ≥50 % similar in sequence between these four aethionemeae species . these fifteen ae-lncs correspond to  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> transcripts in ae. arabicum, ae. carneum, ae. grandiflorum and ae. spinosa respectively . the average orf length  of the putative lncrnas across all four species was  <dig>  bp  with an average transcript length of  <dig>  bp  . the ae-lnc consisted of two gatus, four tus encoding nats and nine lincrnas . two ae-lncrnas are micro-rna precursors for ath-mir <dig> and aly-mir <dig> . although ath-mir <dig> is not tissue specifically expressed, under hypoxic conditions it is more present in leaves and whole plants than in roots  <cit> . the function and tissue specificity of aly-mir <dig> is not known  <cit> .

for the cleomaceae-specific lncrna , rna-seq data of tarenaya hassleriana and cleome droserifolia were identically analysed as discussed above for the ae-lnc . we identified nine cleomaceae-specific lncrna based on  <dig>  transcripts for t. hassleriana and  <dig>  transcripts of c. droserifolia with ≥50 % sequence similarity. these nine transcripts had an average orf and transcript-length  of  <dig>  bp  and  <dig>  bp  respectively . according to the categorization mentioned above, these nine lncrnas consist of two gatus, four tus encoding nats and  <dig> putative lincrnas. we did not identify any putative microrna precursors.

conservation by position of transcribed lncrnas
to exclude conserved non-coding sequences  and to support functionality we only considered lncrnas that we detected as transcribed by at least one species.

we analysed the transcribed lineage-specific lncrnas per clade and whether or not they are conserved by position within the genome of another lineages. positional conservation was assessed with the coge-tools cogeblast, synfind and gevo . out of the  <dig> lncrnas that seemed to be lineage-specific at the nucleotide level  twelve were conserved by position in at least one of the other lineages . depending on the clade  the percentage of lncrnas that are not conserved by sequence but are conserved by position in another clade varied between 26 %-33 % . figure  <dig> shows the distribution of the positionally conserved lncrnas as positioned in the a. thaliana genome. remarkably  <dig>  %  of the positionally conserved lncrnas are within  <dig>  mb from the chromosome ends, including in the subtelomeric regions . this corresponds with the finding of others that the telomeres and subtelomeric regions, have a higher gene density than the genomic average  <cit> . this could accordingly indicate the high number of gene regulatory elements.fig.  <dig> example of collinearity and a positional conservation analysis of a long non-coding rna . a screenshot from gevo. gevo calculates the collinearity of a query sequence with the genome of a subject organism. the query here is the nearest protein-coding gene of ae. arabicum shown in , the subjects are ae. arabicum and a. thaliana. here there two collinear regions in a. thaliana. the position of the positionally conserved lncrna is shown with a pink box, while the protein coding genes of a. thaliana and ae. arabicum are shown with blue boxes. b screenshot from the plncdb website, shown are the arabidopsis thaliana lncrna  and its nearest protein coding gene . c screenshot from the coge blast hsp. pink is the aethionema arabicum transcript along the ae. arabicum genome. blue is the nearest ae. arabicum protein coding gene. this synfind and gevo analyses can be redone with the following link: https://genomevolution.org/r/fmnf


fig.  <dig> bar-plot of the number of lineage-specific long non-coding rnas . every bar shows the total number of lncrnas that are conserved by sequence within that clade. the green bars are the number of lncrnas that are conserved by position across every clade and the blue bars are conserved by sequence within their lineage. for example: out of the nine lncrnas that are by sequence conserved within the cleomaceae, three are conserved by position in arabidopsis thaliana and six are lineage specific by sequence and position to the cleomaceae. consall = lncrna conserved by brassicaceae, cleomaceae and aethionemeae

fig.  <dig> distribution of the long non-coding rnas  across the arabidopsis thaliana genome. the positions are named as follow: conservation level_lineage of sequence conservation_gene function. conservation level can be p: conserved by position across multiple lineages. s: only conserved by sequence and not by position. ae: conserved by sequence only in aethionemeae. all: conserved by sequence through brassicaceae and aethionemeae. b: conserved by sequence only in brassicaceae, including aethionemeae. cl: conserved by sequence only in cleomaceae. the numbers left of the chromosome are the distances from the gene to the end of the chromosome in mega bases



table  <dig> shows the functions of the neighbouring genes to the positionally conserved lncrnas. the neighbouring genes of brasslnc and ae-lnc  are associated with response to salt stress. the a. thaliana genes neighbouring the positionally conserved brass-lnc and ae-lnc are involved at different levels of morphological and physiological development. these range from influencing root growth, to the development of stomata, to repairing photosystem ii, to embryogenesis and mitochondrial morphogenesis .table  <dig> function of the nearest protein coding gene in arabidopsis thaliana of positionally conserved lncrnas

‘level of sequence conservation’ denotes the level of lineage specificity of the lcnrna at the nucleotide level


ae. specific aethionemeae specific, brass. specific brassicaceae , cleo specific cleomaceae specific, ae aethionemeae, ath arabidopsis thaliana, cleo cleomaceae



some lncrnas have been shown to have a stem-loop secondary structure  <cit> . we looked whether our positionally conserved lncrnas have putative stable secondary structures and whether or not there are common features between the positionally conserved lncrna . the stability of a secondary structure is determined by its minimum free energy , assuming that the lower the energy, the more stable the structure is  <cit> . hence we regard structures with a mfe ≥ −80 kcal/mol as unstable. the secondary structures of the ae-lnc and their ath-linc counterparts are hence unstable . the two cleo-linc and the bras-linc are more stable . in accordance to the secondary structures found with other lncrnas  <cit>  all the stable structures have long stems and big loops on one side .fig.  <dig> secondary structures and minimum free energy  of sequence and/or positionally conserved long non-coding rnas . a lncrnas that have both sequence conversation and positional conservation between arabidopsis  and aethionema   lncrnas that have only positional conservation between arabidopsis  and aethionema   and tarenaya   lncrnas that have only positional conservation between arabidopsis  and tarenaya   the lncrna conserved by sequence and position in a. thaliana, aethionemea arabicum and cleomaceae. the colored bar below shows the baseparing probability for every structure



discussion
as more complete genomes become available, it is possible to use genetic collinearity in addition to sequence similarity to address questions of conservation of noncoding sequences in a phylogenomic context. using a comparative approach with the sister families brassicaceae and cleomaceae, we found lncrnas are positionally conserved and expressed, but highly diverged at the nucleotide level. hence here we found plant lncrnas that are conserved by position but not by sequence, while the lncrnas that are conserved by sequence are not conserved by position. while this result has been described earlier in comparative animal studies  <cit> , to the best of our knowledge our work represents the first example of this trend in plants.

long  non-coding rnas have been shown to affect the expression of their neighbouring genes  <cit> , thus suggesting the importance of positional conservation in properly regulating adjacent genes encoding various traits. for example the positionally conserved lncrnas found here are adjacent to genes involved in: response to salt stress, affecting important physiological functions  or influencing morphological structures .

we based our analysis of positional conservation on the latest available genomes of aethionema arabicum, tarenaya hassleriana and arabidopsis thaliana. the latest published aethionema arabicum genome is >85 % of its total genome size  <cit>  and the latest published genome of tarenaya hassleriana is >94 % of its total genome size  <cit> . although these genomes have already been published our analyses are always limited by quality of the genome assembly.

long non-coding rnas are a potentially important feature of gene regulation and genomes of eukaryotic organisms. to date, research into lncrnas is more extensive in vertebrates than plants. twenty-five out of the forty-eight functionally verified vertebrate lncrnas have been conserved between human and mouse at >50 % sequence similarity  <cit> . liu et al.  <cit> , whose data has been explored here, found that <2 % of all the putative lncrnas they found in a. thaliana are conserved across the plant kingdom. a similar number has been found by comparing maize  lncrnas and a. thaliana   <cit> . the lncrnas of legumes show only 5 % sequence conservation in non-legume plants  <cit> . a much higher percentage of the zea mays lncrnas, <25 %, are conserved in the closely related species sorghum  <cit> . here we found that out of a total of  <dig> transcribed lncrnas that are diverged at the nucleotide level, twelve are conserved by position. this is more than 30 % of the lncrnas that we found in the transcriptomes of aethionemeae and cleomaceae.

studies that take the position of lncrnas into account primarily assume sequence conservation and additionally analyse whether or not those lncrnas are also conserved by position. however in a comparison between zebra fish and humans batista and chang   <cit>  found that lncrnas with weak sequence conservation can still be fully functional, because they are still structurally and positionally conserved. here we show similar results in plants: positional conservation of lncrnas with weak sequence similarity between distantly related species.

the lack of sequence conservation but the presence of positional conservation might be explained by an increase in mutation rate for these regulatory elements. this has already been pointed out by pang et al.  <cit> , who hypothesized, for mirnas and longer non-coding rnas, that the type of interaction within a regulatory network can be under selection pressure rather than the sequence of the regulatory element itself. this hypothesis would fit well with the regulatory function and the position of lncrnas. as lncrnas regulate the expression of their neighbouring protein coding gene their interaction with this gene, and hence their position, rather than their sequence can be under selection.

we compared the secondary structure of the positionally conserved lncrnas . in addition to the positional conservation of lncrnas their secondary structure might also be conserved. the aethionemeae positionally conserved lncrnas are less stable  than the cleomaceae positionally conserved. a similar difference in stability is seen in their positionally conserved counterparts in arabidopsis thaliana. the stability of the lncrna secondary structure might be a step to subdivide the big group of lncrnas.

genomic regions of different species can be similar in sequence and can be completely collinear. however it is not a necessity that these sequences should be transcribed . here we used polyadenylated mrnas to try to assess conservation of lncrnas between different species. it has been shown that although lncrnas can be polyadenylated, they are not always polyadenylated  <cit> . consequently the positionally conservation shows only a subset of the plants possible transcripts. moreover we applied the stringent rule that every lncrna had to be transcribed in at least two species from the same lineage. hence these results in a set of highly confident positional conserved lncrnas that represent only the tip of the iceberg.

the small number of conserved lncrnas found here is in accordance with the findings in other systems as discussed above  <cit> . the consistent finding of low nucleotide conservation raises new questions about the mutation rate of lncrnas. studies have shown that the mutation rate of lncrnas resembles those of introns  <cit> , which could partially explain the lack of sequence similarity between lncrnas over deep evolutionary time. however, this lack of sequence similarity did not result in a lack of conservation by position, which could indicate a conservation of function as it has been shown earlier that positional conservation also accounts for functional conservation  <cit> .

the presence of more than 65 % of the positionally conserved lncrnas only within the  <dig>  mb of chromosome arms is remarkable and unexpected. in many plants the sub-telomeric regions consist of repeats, called satellites though these are absent in a. thaliana  <cit> . their presence varies between species and even individuals within a species  <cit> . the satellites in the sub-telomeric region typically consist of large a-t rich repeat stretches, which makes bending the dna easier and the heterochromatin formation tighter, which is shown by the presence of dense heterochromatin blocks  <cit> . one suggested function of the presence of these satellite arrays is their support of the chromatin states in the sub-telomeric region  <cit> . however the absence of satellite arrays in a. thaliana might be compensated by the presence of lncrnas that regulate the chromatin signatures of the protein coding genes in the sub-telomeric regions. we do not know of a specific reason why positionally conserved lncrnas should be found only at chromosome ends. certainly more research is needed to address this finding and the hypothesis stated above.

preferably we would have tested whether the positionally conserved lncrnas are also within  <dig>  mb of the chromosome arms of aethionema arabicum and/or tarenaya hassleriana. however chromosomal-level genome assemblies of these species are not available yet. however, we are working on these genome assemblies so that we can address these questions in the near future.

long  non-coding rnas have been identified by investigating the deleterious effects of knocking out these conserved sequences on various traits, e.g. flowering time, fertility, etc.  <cit> . these wet-lab experiments are crucial to understand the functionality of any putative pathway . they can confirm the lack of small orfs in lncrnas and understand the full pathway on which the lncrna has an effect, whether that is on neighbouring genes or across chromosomes  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
to summarize, we have shown here, using the brassicaceae and cleomaceae phylogenomic system that transcribed plant long non-coding rnas  that seem to be only conserved within one lineage at the sequence level are conserved in other lineages at the same genomic position. the positional conservation could also imply a conservation of function but a divergence of sequence. moreover, >65 % of the positionally conserved lncrnas are located within  <dig>  mb of the telomeric region. this emphasizes the gene regulatory role that lncrnas can have. these results imply that lineage specificity should not only be regarded at the nucleotide level but also at the positional level.

