BACKGROUND
phylogenetic relationships among gene sequences have been used to reconstruct the evolution and organization of gene functional networks in cells. profiles of orthologous relationships among genomes, specifically the presence or absence of genes across a set of organisms, have proved to be valuable for understanding functional relationships and network organization  <cit> .

the practice of "phylogentic profiling" has successfully penetrated many efforts in comparative genomics including genome annotation and functional coevolution  <cit> . the accuracy and predictive power tends to be modest unless the profiles are reconstructed in a way that accounts for phylogenetic relationships among the genomes, as demonstrated by a few examples  <cit> . most likely due to the computational complexity, few studies have attempted to search beyond just pairwise relationships among proteins. yet, given the nature of cellular complexity and adaptive coevolution, we should expect that high order relations exist that are reflected in the pattern of presence and absence of multiple proteins. indeed, bowers et al. invented logic analysis of phylogenetic profiles  and demonstrated the clear benefits of identifying relationships among gene triplets, as these have greater likelihood of yielding the network organization and providing more information  about the nature of the interactions among triplets of genes  <cit> . recently the concept of gene triplets was applied to gene expression data to study the coordinated regulation of multi-protein complex  <cit> .

with hundreds of genomes spanning a large quadrant of the tree of life, we are now uniquely poised to revisit this hypothesis to determine if higher order logic relationships exist among phylogenetic profiles that are reflective of underlying biological networks and that yield actionable predictions for improved understanding of cellular organization. an important consideration that should have great impact on our ability to decipher complex relationships among triplets of genes is that the network structures and patterns of adaptive coevolution vary across the phylogeny, and thus how the phylogeny is sampled and how it is integrated into the profile comparison to make predictions dramatically impact the accuracy  <cit> . here we infuse phylogeny directly into the search for higher order logical relationships, specifically gene triplets. based on the phylogenetic matrix constructed from a large orthologs database roundup  <cit> , we balanced phylogenetic profiles for each gene triplets so that each scenario of coevolution between genes is equally weighted when computing their logic relationships. after applying our method into lapp, we observed significant performance improvement over profiles with no adjustment on their phylogenetic compositions. we then studied the potential benefit of using logic triplets to detect the organization of biological network, and concluded that it could be a very useful tool in deriving the structure, connectivity, and key proteins in cellular networks.

RESULTS
phylogenetic balance among profiles yields greater detection of biological networks
we selected  <dig> bacterial genomes from the orthologous gene database roundup  <cit>  and generated a matrix of phylogenetic profiles containing  <dig>  rows . each row represented a gene and contained a binary string of 0's and 1's to indicate the presence or absence of that gene in the set of  <dig> genomes. we then randomly selected millions of triplets of genes. through empirical investigation of these triplets, we learned that the genome composition had a tendency to introduce biases towards specific coevolutionary outcomes, especially for the common and rare genes. in any given organism, there are four such possible outcomes, as listed in table  <dig>  between the genes a and b within a triplet containing genes a, b, and c.

if any one scenario is heavily overrepresented because of the genomic composition of the phylogenetic profiles used to decipher logic relationships, and ultimately, to predict network structure, our ability to detect certain logic relationships over others was concomitantly compromised. through our inspection of the compendium of triplets generated from the  <dig> genomes, we learned that this was indeed the case. in each ab pair, the average number of genomes containing one of the four possible evolutionary scenarios was  <dig>  with an average standard deviation of  <dig> . we reasoned that such imbalance among the four scenarios would lead to increased rates of both false positives and false negatives in our predictions.

to address this directly, we devised a strategy to create balanced profiles for each triplet of genes such that the four scenarios of coevolution were equally weighed in those specific profiles, as detailed in the methods. we then tested whether these balanced phylogenetic profiles yielded greater accuracy than our original profiles containing varying weights on the four scenarios of coevolution between genes. to do so, we computed Δu, a measure of deviation in entropy that ranges from - <dig> to  <dig> and, when high, indicates the presence of a nonrandom functional relationship among the three genes in question   <cit> , and mapped the predicted triplet relationships to known biological process annotations from gene ontology . we considered a high scoring triplet with Δu ≥  <dig>  to be statistically significant significance , and called a triplet putative when its three constituent genes contained the same annotation from go.

our computation resulted in  <dig>  triplets with go terms available for three genes and Δu ≥  <dig> . with the increase of Δu, the number of predicted triplets decreases exponentially . we used the percentage of putative triplets in all triplets where go terms are available for all three genes as a measure of accuracy in the prediction of triplets. figure 1a shows that there is a strong positive correlation between the percentage of putative triplets and Δu, suggesting that Δu indeed infers relatedness in biological functions in addition to its statistical significance.

to compare the performance between the balanced profile with equal weight on phylogenetic scenarios of coevolution and the raw profile with varying weights on those scenarios, we ranked the triplets in the descending order of Δu and compared the top  <dig>  triplets predicted using the two types of profiles, which is a common way of evaluating different methods in the prediction of gene pairwise relationships  <cit> . figure 1b shows that the balanced profiles consistently lead to higher accuracy  in the assignment of the triplets than the raw profiles. at the same level of accuracy, the balanced profiles produce many more triplets as well.

as additional file  <dig>  figure s <dig> shows, the top three most frequent logic relationships across the whole spectrum of Δu are type  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> in table 2; type  <dig> is rare, which might be partially due to the exclusion of eukaryotes and archaea in our profiles.

among other possible logic relationships involving three genes, the above eight are most likely to be present in real cellular networks. iff stands for if and only if.

gene triplets reveal biological network at different levels and key proteins at each level of interaction
any cellular network is the result of millions years of evolution, and the power of logic triplets is that it can follow the path of the evolution and deduce the present information on the local, middle, and system levels of the network.

logic triplets can catch not only the relationship among neighboring proteins, but also those well separated in a local pathway. figure 3b gives an excellent example.  <dig> genes are involved in that part of the kdo2-lipida synthesis pathway, constituting  <dig> significant triplets within each of the green and red sections and among the three sections . the whole pathway can almost be deduced accurately from the large number of triplets. for example, triplets "kdsa/b is present iff either gutq or kdsd is present" tell the structure of the red branch; and triplets like "lpxh is present iff both lpxc and lpxk are present" signal the clustering of those genes in the green branch; triplet "waaa is present iff both kdsb and lpxb are present" indicates the mergence of the two branches, which is further strengthened by triplets "lpxh iff lpxc and waaa" and "waaa iff gutq or kdsd".

on an even higher level, the interaction among different pathways in the whole cellular network can also be disclosed using logic triplets, some of which may be very difficult to examine otherwise. figure 3c suggests that rna-binding protein hfq interacts with many other proteins in translation, and surprisingly with lepb, a signal peptidase as well. however, those relationships agree with other studies which suggest hfq stimulates srna-mrna pairing and regulates gene expression and protein secretion  <cit> . furthermore, figure 3c points out the key proteins involved in the coupling between the regulation of translation and protein secretion. another example is the interaction among the catabolic pathway, the biosynthetic pathway, transcription, and translation; they are expected to coordinate, but logic triplets shed light on how they function together and what the key proteins for such coordination are.

we also studied the relationship among the number of triplets a gene was involved in, its role in the triplets , and its essentiality in e. coli. we found that the essentiality of a gene was significantly related to its likelihood to be in significant triplets and was associated with its roles in triplets. essential genes were more likely to be in significant triplets and be in the input role , whereas non-essential genes were more likely to be in the output role . please see the section "triplets and gene essentiality" in additional file  <dig> for details. in addition, we investigated genes and go terms with most triplets, as listed in the section "enriched genes and go terms" in additional file  <dig> 

discussion
the underlying conditions critical for a logic triplet
although the implementation of balanced phylogeny of coevolution into the new profiles helped to recover many more triplets, only a third of e. coli genes were found to have significant triplets with Δu ≥  <dig> ; the remaining two-thirds had smaller or negative Δu. a low Δu value is caused by the genomes with abc coevolutionary scenario incompatible with the logic relationships. for the example in figure 4a, abc coevolutionary scenarios of  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> violate the logic relationship "spee is present iff ldcd or cada is present". when large number of genomes have such violation, as the case in figure 4a, the Δu will be very small. while the reasons for the presence of incompatible genomes could be horizontal gene transfer  <cit>  and errors in genome sequencing, compilation, ortholog identification and clustering algorithms, an important factor could be the directionality of the relationship which reflects the degree of interaction between the members of triplets and surrounding network.

in figure 4a, compatible abc coevolutionary scenarios are  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig>  as explained in the "the bi-directionality of the iff condition in a logic triplet" in the additional file  <dig>  the iff condition in a logic triplet is bi-directional, meaning that ab determines c, and c determines ab as well. for instance, the two directions in the abc coevolutionary scenario  <dig> reflect the interaction with surrounding network as illustrated in figure 4b. in the forward direction, if genes a and b are absent, gene c is absent too; it says that path  <dig> and  <dig> do not exist, meaning that compound y is not synthesized from any other paths and that enzyme c is not involved with other reactions either. that is because enzyme c can still function without a or b if path  <dig> or  <dig> is available and thus gene c will be under evolutionary selection and be kept during the course of evolution. conversely in the reverse direction, if gene c is absent, genes a and b are absent as well; the implication is that path  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> do not exist, which suggests that none of a, b, and y is in other types of reactions for the similar reason in gene evolution. in brief, the bi-directionality of the logic relationship sets the condition of closure that the enzymes and middle compounds involved in the association appear only in that type of local path. if the condition of closure is not met, the logic relationship may change from iff to if, and genomes with abc coevolutionary scenarios incompatible with the full iff logic relationship become common, leading to a small Δu. that could be why the difference between the percentage of putative triplets is small within  <dig>  ≤ Δu ≤  <dig>  in figure 1a; that is because many triplets with small Δu are likely true partial triplets with if instead of iff relationship.

in the triplet of figure 2a, all the five paths in figure 4b are likely to be absent  <cit> , satisfying the condition of closure; as a result, the triplet had very few genomes with incompatible abc coevolutionary scenarios, leading to a high Δu. conversely, path  <dig> and  <dig> are present in the triplet of figure 4a, causing incompatible abc coevolutionary scenarios of  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig>  and consequently low Δu for the triplet. figure  <dig> gives hints to develop a method to identify a partial logic relationship, such as the if logic relationship, which is likely quite common in a real cellular system. with phylogenetically representative genomes, the Δu and the number of genomes with different abc coevolutionary scenarios could infer the status of the five paths in figure 4b. a high Δu indicates the absence of the five paths, and a low Δu suggests the presence of some paths. in figure 4a, the only incompatible abc coevolutionary scenario with large number of genomes is  <dig>  which infers the presence of path  <dig> or  <dig> or  <dig>  and indeed, path  <dig> and  <dig> exist  <cit> . for example, spee also catalyzes the biosynthesis of spermidine from putrescine and s-adenosyl-l-methioninamine. that type of information can be very valuable in the construction of metabolic network.

due to the dramatic difference between eukaryotes and prokaryotes in the complexity and connectivity of cellular networks, probably only a small number of gene triplets can maintain such a condition of closure consistently across both domains; therefore, we did not mix them in our study.

logic relationships can span across different taxonomic phyla or domains
in the study of gene pairwise relationships using phylogenetic profiling, the focuses are the co-occurrence and co-absence between two genes. that restricts the relationships to be within individual genomes. since our method gives equal weight to all of the four scenarios of coevolution, it has the power to detect relationships across different phyla of organisms. in other words, all the three genes in a logic triplet do not have to be present in the same species. a good example is the discovery of vkor, a functional ortholog of gene dsbb that has the same function but shares no sequence similarity with dsbb, by dutton et al  <cit> . enzyme dsbb functions with enzyme dsba to form disulfide bonds in most bacteria but is absent in several major bacterial phyla containing dsba and disulfide bonds. dutton et al. selected vkor as a candidate for the role of dsbb through experiments and finally proved that by unknowingly constructing a type  <dig> logic relationship "dsba is present iff either dsbb or vkor is present"

CONCLUSIONS
in this study, we used phylogenetic matrix of  <dig> bacterial genomes to search gene triplets with eight types of logic relationships. to measure how well a logic relationship holds among all phylogenetic outcomes, we created a balanced profile with equal weight on the four scenarios of coevolution for each triplet. the new profiles significantly improved the accuracy of prediction over raw profiles, and discovered many more putative triplets.

logic triplets have great power in detecting the structure of biological network at different levels, identifying key proteins at each level of interaction, and give inference to the function of proteins. in some cases, parts of a pathway can be deduced in high resolution. in addition, they can also infer the status of other paths where the proteins and compounds in a triplet are involved. those can be very helpful in the derivation of gene and protein networks with details; future work will follow that direction.

searching for higher order relationships would require extremely intensive computation, but with a good algorithm and a limited set of genes such computations would be possible and of great value to our understanding of cellular networks. such relationships, combined with binary and ternary functional gene sets, might be able to derive gene networks with high accuracy. finally, the method can help to identify gene functional orthologs bearing no sequence similarity.

