BACKGROUND
clonal evolution was a long lasting paradigm in mycobacterial research with the highly clonal flagship of the genus, mycobacterium tuberculosis. ultimately the rule turned-out to be the exception and true clonal species are rather rare; the most representative members except m. tuberculosis are yersinia pestis, salmonella typhi and burkholderia mallei. however, there is increasing evidence that horizontal gene transfer  and homologous dna recombination play an important role in the evolution of smooth tubercle bacilli  <cit>  and m. tuberculosis strains . gene transfer networks mostly involving genes related to niche change and antibiotic resistance are significantly shaping the adaptive landscape of pathogenic mycobacteria, therefore deciphering the mechanisms behind these empirical observations becomes mandatory. moreover, knowledge of such mechanisms can shed new light on mycobacterial evolution from saprophytic/commensal organisms to opportunistic or specialized, highly persisting pathogens  <cit> . however, knowledge about hgt and homologous recombination mechanisms in mycobacteria are scarce. studies on the saprophytic laboratory model mycobacterium smegmatis showed that chromosomal dna transfer is mechanistically different from classical hfr chromosomal dna transfer, with multiple and wide-spread transfer initiations events from a donor chromosome  <cit> . this process, called distributive conjugal transfer, creates extensive genome-wide mosaicism within individual transconjugants that generates large-scale sibling diversity conferring the evolutionary benefits of sexual reproduction in an asexual organism  <cit> . the chromosomal region involved in this unique conjugation mechanism is the esx- <dig> secretion system  <cit> , which is also involved in virulence in m. tuberculosis  <cit> .

in the present study, our interest focused on m. abscessus . this mycobacteria is an excellent model to study hgt, homologous recombination and their contribution to pathogenicity in mycobacteria. mab is an emerging opportunistic pathogen, able to cause lung diseases to immunocompetent individuals and that shares a number of characteristics with m. tuberculosis, such as the ability to induce granulomatomatous lesions with epithelioid giant cells, caseous necrosis, and silent persistence for decades within host  <cit> . since the late 1990’s, mab has been increasingly recovered from patients with cystic fibrosis  in europe, asia and north america . together with m. avium, mab represents the most commonly isolated non-tuberculous mycobacteria  from cf lung patients. reports show that mab isolated from cf patients can account for up to 56 % of all isolated ntm  <cit> . compared with other ntm causing pulmonary diseases, mab can be considered as the most pathogenic, since all reports show that this ntm has the highest rate of genuine ‘clinically relevant’ infections in cf patients according to criteria established by the american thoracic society  . antibiotic resistance is also a major factor in the high rate of treatment failure for mab pulmonary diseases  . mab lung infections cause decline of lung function  <cit> , and dissemination of the infectious agent, eventually leading to death  <cit> . moreover, mab is resistant to nearly all antibiotics, including first-line antitubercular drugs  <cit> , and the few active antibiotics only seem to have a bacteriostatic effect  <cit> . taken together, these features make mab an emerging pathogen under close surveillance. furthermore, mab is also satisfying population studies criteria, since large isolate collections are available, with systematically documented clinical profiles and cohort studies, especially in the case of cystic fibrosis  patients  <cit> .

another characteristic making mab a very relevant model for genetic exchange study in mycobacteria is the fact that it harbors various phenotypes such as rough and smooth morphotypes  <cit> , macrolid resistance  <cit> , and anaerobic growth  <cit> . mab encompasses a large genetic diversity  <cit>  that is markedly associated with different prevalence , specific involvement in outbreaks  <cit> , distinct virulence  <cit>  and contrasting clinical outcomes  <cit> .

recent genomic studies comparing the genomes of  <dig> strains from the mab unravelled a large repertoire of accessory genes, suggesting extensive genetic acquisition capacities and high evolutionary potential for this species by hgt  <cit> . this trend was confirmed with the publication of a reference genome sequence obtained by sanger method, showing that some virulence genes might have been acquired by hgt from non-mycobacterial species sharing a similar ecological niche  <cit> . moreover, mab is subdivided into at least two recognized subspecies: mycobacterium abscessus subsp. abscessus and m. abscessus subsp. bolletii  <cit> , making this species an excellent model for studying intra-specific homologous recombination. multi locus sequence typing  studies showed that some clinical isolates have a composite genetic pattern with housekeeping genes corresponding to different subspecies, suggesting that homologous recombination occurs readily within the mab  <cit> . however, unlike m. smegmatis, sequence analysis of  <dig> mab genomes showed that no esx- <dig> orthologous system is encoded within this species, whereas esx- <dig> and esx- <dig> secretion systems are present  <cit> , raising the question whether alternative dct systems might exist. studying mycobacteria-specific hgt dynamics and the involved cellular machinery might definitively improve our understanding of the subspecies border delimitations and the amount of gene flow occurring within the mab.

although hgt  seem to be extensive in mab strains, no quantitative data are available regarding the genetic flux between specific mab subspecies, and the genetic architecture  of these genetic exchanges on the genome are unknown. thus, using an mlst approach, and taking advantage of a set of  <dig> clinical strains, our goal was to extensively characterize the genetic exchanges occurring between mab subspecies. this approach led us to identify a sub-population of highly admixed strains. furthermore, using comparative genomics, we succeeded in generating comprehensive recombination cartography for some of these admixed strains. this highly admixed sub-population was then further investigated for virulence by using clinical records. finally, in-depth genomic analysis was performed in order to identify putative specific dct functions.

RESULTS
phylogenetic signal and analyses
prior conducting any phylogenetic inferences based on the  <dig> mlst gene fragments , we inferred the quality of the phylogenetic information contained in these sequences by plotting transition and transversion rates as a function of genetic distances . this graph shows that neither transitions nor transversions are saturated but, rather, both rise linearly with increasing genetic distance. we then measured substitution saturation using the xia index  <cit>  for all three codon positions. the observed iss.c value of  <dig>  was significantly higher than the iss value of  <dig> , thus confirming that little saturation occurs at these sites.

the evaluation of the phylogenetic content of the dataset was performed with likelihood mapping analyses. the results point to a robust phylogenetic signal , however a low amount of star-likeness with ~1 % of all quartet points in the central region of the triangle indicates that certain parts of the tree are unresolved . these unresolved nodes could be visualized using a densitree, which plots  <dig> different topologies retained during the monte carlo markov chain in beast . though a real support exists for the three main lineages, many alternative topologies were retained, illustrating information conflicts and therefore suggestive of hgt.fig.  <dig> densitree of  <dig> sts belonging to the mab. the phylogenetic reconstruction is based on the concatenated housekeeping genes  and the gtr + i + g evolutionary model was implemented in beast  <dig> . <dig>  the best  <dig> trees generated during the markov chain are drawn transparently . as a result, areas where the vast majority of the trees agree in topology and branch lengths show up as deep green, while areas with little agreement show up as webs. the root canal tree  has a topology that is selected from the set of trees and has the highest probability of clades in the set. the scale corresponds to the genetic distance



population genetics and recombination
neighbor-nets were inferred in order to detect putative recombination signatures that will result in networks. neighbor-nets calculate networks of multiple alternative pathways between taxa whenever homoplasy or recombinations result in phylogenetic inconsistencies. the analysis of the concatenated genes recovered the same phylogenetic clusters as the traditional phylogenetic approaches . however, reticulations are extremely common between all three species, suggesting that recombination is a major driving force in the mab. this observation was independently confirmed by a significant phi test  <cit>  . therefore we decided to implement a population genetic approach by analysing the polymorphisms present in all seven-gene fragments  with structure, which employs a bayesian method to discern groupings among recombining organisms. the linkage model of structure assigns probabilities of derivation from ancestral source groups for each polymorphic nucleotide. the ancestry of each strain is then estimated as the summed probability of derivation from each group over all polymorphic nucleotides. structure recognized three ancestral sources of polymorphisms within the mab  and separated most m. abscessus, m. bolletii and m. massiliense isolates into those groups . those results highlight that the separation into three groups is the most valuable, and thus we will subsequently use the terms m. abscessus, m. bolletii and m. massiliense to identify those  <dig> different groups of mab strains in the following text sections. however, within the entire dataset, numerous strains contained significant ancestry from multiple sources, highlighting therefore their mixed ancestries. we assigned ~90 % of the strains, whose proportion of nucleotides from one of the three ancestral sources exceeded a threshold value of 80 % to the subspecies m. abscessus, m. bolletii and m. massiliense and one tenth  to hybrid profiles .fig.  <dig> ancestry of  <dig> strains belonging to the mab. a distribution of the three subspecies  within a minimal spanning tree  based on the degree of allele sharing. circles are proportional to the number of strains and are colored according to the subspecies identification obtained from the bayesian algorithm structure. the thickness of the line is function of the number of shared alleles. b proportion of ancestry from the subspecies m. abscessus, m. bolletii and m. massiliense as inferred by structure and their assignment to three rpob groups as displayed with distruct  <cit> . c genomic locations of the  <dig> housekeeping genes and the diagnostic genes rpob. d synthetic network representing the amount of gene flow between the three subspecies based on the sole sts and the structure assignments. for each subspecies, percentage of foreign allele  is indicated with 99 % confidence interval. e proportions of admixed st for each subspecies. left bar: not admixed . right bar: at least one exogenous allele . *p <  <dig> ; **p <  <dig>  



allelic flux
after having attributed each sequence type  to a given subspecies, we determined the percentage of exogenous snps for each st . subspecies belonging to m. massiliense and m. abscessus strains display the highest proportion of foreign snps, whereas m. bolletii strains are far more homogenous. moreover, allelic flux going from m. massiliense to m. bolletii was significantly lower than other allelic exchanges . consistently, mosaic strains proportion is significantly higher for m. massiliense sts than for m. bolletii . although they should be confirmed by whole genomic survey, these results suggest that allelic fluxes between the three subspecies are not homogenous. they indicate asymmetrical gene flow between subspecies, especially between m. massiliense and m. bollettii.

we also sought to quantify the frequency of homologous recombination within groups by implementing the composite likelihood of r/μ   <cit> . the test confirmed that significant levels of recombination had occurred within each subspecies . interestingly, if we consider results from the concatenated housekeeping genes , recombination estimates raise dramatically for m. abscessus and m. massiliense. taken together, these data suggest that the main driving evolutionary force is recombination and not mutation in m. abscessus and m. massiliense, and that these recombination events occur at genomic scale involving large inter-locus fragments.table  <dig> population estimates of mutation rates  and recombination rates  per base

θ
ρ
r / μ
m. abs
m. bol
m. mas
m. abs
m. bol
m. mas
m. abs
m. bol
m. mas

argh

cya

glpk

gnd

murc

pta

purh
concat.b
the analyses are realised within lineages and for the mab complex 

values for rho  were obtained by dividing the per-locus recombination rate estimate from ldhat by the sequence length. μ: mutation rate per nucleotide; r: recombination rate per nucleotide.
a: significant recombination estimates. concat. bconcatenated data set. c: recombination significantly higher than intra-genic recombination rates 



rpob typing
a side effect of the allelic flux within mab concerns the suitability of rpob for subspecies identification. indeed, there is no reason that this gene will escape interlineage homologous recombination and consequently using it as a diagnostic marker for species determination within the mab might be misleading . according to structure assignments, and consistent with our previous result emphasizing m. massiliense high recombination rates, the false group identification rate is about 10 % within mab and climbs up to 20 % for strains belonging to m. massiliense .

clinical symptoms of infection and mosaicism
allele-based relationships within the mstree also allowed us to address whether virulent phenotypes are lineage specific. none of the clinical profiles  is restricted to one of the three subspecies . moreover, statistical analyses did not detect any geographical or phenotypic association with one of the members of the mab.fig.  <dig> pathogenic types within an mstree and distribution of admixed strains according to clinical profiles. a each strain is represented by a circle or a fraction of a circle, and colours correspond to different pathogenic types. circled numbers indicate frequently encountered st complexes or outbreak strains. black lines connecting pairs of sts indicate that they share six , five  or four alleles  out of seven. boxed strains correspond to the three mab reference strains. moreover, they include three additional admixed strains selected for whole-genome sequencing and comparative analyses. b pathogenic type distribution according to the three subspecies . c admixture spectrum frequency according to the principal clinical profiles. non-admixed: strain with absence of exogenous allele. admixed: strain with at least one exogenous allele coming from another subspecies. *p <  <dig> ; **p <  <dig>  



clinical information was collected from  <dig> different mab isolates from infected patients with well-documented geographic origins and clinical background . the patients were divided into sub-groups according to the type of infection , and within pulmonary infections patients were divided according to the underlying clinical context . within this sample, cf patients were gathered from a former multi-center study, and were monitored on several years , allowing the identification of chronic mab colonisation. these patients were also precisely identified according to the clinical manifestation of non-tubercular lung disease  showing clinical symptoms suggestive of lung infection. an exogenous allele acquisition index  was computed for each isolate, using structure and rpob results to determine if at least one of the eight sequenced genes came from exogenous subspecies. the results show that strains belonging to mosaic sts are over-represented in cf patients with mab infection or chronic lung colonisation . whereas cf patients with mab infection or chronic colonisation had a majority of admixed mab isolates, most non-cf patients were infected with low proportion of admixed mab strains . these proportions differ significantly . more specifically, the proportion of admixed mab significantly differed between patients with non-respiratory infections, as compared with cf patients with mab infection or chronic colonisation . the most marked difference was observed for patients having mab pulmonary infection with non-pulmonary underlying chronic disease. mab associated with those patients very significantly differed from other stains . in order to exclude potential cross-contamination effect, the same calculations were performed with only single sts, and the differences observed between the most extreme distribution was still significant . those results suggest that different mab populations, showing contrasted patterns of genetic admixture, are preferentially associated with some specific clinical profiles .

hgt mapping and comparative genomics
to obtain a genome-wide perspective of the processes detected using the mlst approach, we decided to fully sequence three genomes  that might be massively affected by inter-strain homologous recombination and hgt and to compare their genomic architecture with three reference genomes . based on the reference strains, species-specific snp density plots were constructed  and we were able to attribute subspecies identity to most of the admixed strain genome positions. the assembled genomes of strains m <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> displayed sequence identity with the corresponding reference genomes over  <dig>   <dig> and 78 % of the sequence, respectively, suggesting that a large proportion of the core genome was recovered in genomic alignment of these strains . these strains also had respectively  <dig>   <dig> and 13 % of their genome belonging to the accessory genome . strain m <dig> showed a large overlap with m. massiliense , whereas 18 % of the sequence was identical to m. abscessus and 8 % to m. bolletii . strain  <dig> was in majority identical to m. abscessus  with another  <dig> and 3 % identical to m. massiliense and m. bolletii, respectively . finally, strain  <dig> was mainly identical to m. massiliense  and 13 % identical to m. abscessus. this strain presented nearly no trace of m. bolletii-like sequences . these comparative genomic results are congruent with our previous results gathered from the bayesian structure program. furthermore, the peripheral position of the selected strains on the mstree is clearly the product of genetic admixture.fig.  <dig> circular representation of mab subspecies reference and admixed strains. a: m. abscessus, b: m. massiliense. c: m. bolletii. d: m. massiliense strain m <dig>  e: m. abscessus strain  <dig>  f: m. massiliense strain  <dig>  for the outer circle, colours were reported following subspecies identification . from outer to inner circle: subspecies type identification; gc% in 5-kb non-overlapping windows ; gc skew in 5-kb non-overlapping windows ; sequenced genes for identification studies  in grey; prophage regions in green; trna in magenta; and is element in orange. circular plots were generated by using circos  <cit> 







orfs were identified on mage plateform, and core genome was defined by bidirectional best blast hit  with a 50 % sequence identity threshold, and at least 80 % coverage



large recombination domains  are also found all along the genomes, and may account for up to a quarter of the genomic content. interestingly, chromosomal mapping domains that are identical to each of the reference strains show a non-random distribution. these domains are clustered together into large continuous regions that are associated with one of the three reference strains . for example, in strain m <dig>  the length of the largest domain similar to m. abscessus was 53 kb ; the length of the largest domain similar to m. bolletii was 48 kb  and the length of the longest domain similar to none of the reference strains was  <dig>  kb . worth mentioning, our results confirm that strain m <dig> belongs to the m. massiliense subspecies and harbours an m. abscessus subspecies erm  allele   <cit> . this erm element is embedded in a large continuous 60 kb genomic region also clearly assigned to an m. abscessus subspecies genetic background . interestingly, the same m <dig> highly mosaic strain also contained a large non-aligned contig containing a locus highly similar to the m. marinum p-raw conjugative mega-plasmid   <cit> . thus, our results show that mab population is structured into three sub-species, and also contains some unclassifiable mosaic strains. these unclassifiable individuals are highly plastic  with a pattern that strikingly resembles dct genome mosaicism reported in m. smegmatis and m. canettii  <cit> .

discussion
here, we sampled and analysed a representative and balanced collection of strains that represents the mab diversity, both at phylogenetic and epidemiological levels, and from different geographical sources. our results obtained from mlst analyses combined with whole genome sequence analysis of some representative strains clearly confirm the existence of  <dig> subspecies and therefore cast some doubts on the classification proposed by leao and colleagues  <cit> . these authors suggested to group m. bollettii and m. massiliense together into a subspecies named m. abscessus subspecies bolletii comb. nov.

on the other hand, according to the large amounts of putative gene flow detected by structure and ldhat , the three entities described here do not fully fit the genospecies described by drancourt and colleagues  <cit> . indeed, our mlst data suggest that homologous recombination in the mab has been frequent enough to generate about one third of strains within the species with traces of mixed ancestries , from which another third  have at least 20 % of their gene content from a foreign source. even more striking is the fact that significant homologous recombination was detected both within and between subspecies . this means that the mab does not fit into a clonal framework and that the amount of genetic exchange detected here resembles the one reported in a previous study on escherichia coli  <cit> . however, the data show that the three subspecies do not behave the same way. indeed, m. bolletii is clearly less introgressed than the two other subspecies, resulting in a relatively homogenous gene pool that might result from a distinct or isolated ecological niche. it is tempting to link this observation with the rather low prevalence of m. bolletii in cystic fibrosis  <cit>  and other chronic pulmonary infections  <cit> . moreover, the limited genic repertoire of this subspecies combined with its mostly clonal propagation will limit its adaptive landscape in a clinical setting.

the situation is dramatically different for m. abscessus and m. massiliense, where homologous recombination is prevalent. for example, in m. abscessus, each nucleotidic change has nearly seven more chances to be generated by recombination than by mutation. there is accumulating evidence that recombinogenic species display higher virulence profiles and plasticity than clonal ones  <cit> . this situation is encountered in the mab, where isolates gathered from cf patient with record of clinical symptoms have exchanged significantly more alleles between subspecies than isolates from patients with other clinical profiles . this observation might also be linked to the fact that the majority of mab infections in cf patients are silent, whereas only 10 % of the isolates are associated with clinical symptoms of pulmonary disease , which is reminiscent of the 10 % of hyper-mosaic strain observed. taken together, these observations show a link between chronic lung colonization and mosaicism in mab. this could be driven by different scenarios: mab mosaic strains might have acquired genes or alleles conferring greater virulence profile and/or lung colonization ability, alternatively the specific conditions associated with pulmonary tissue colonisation  may submit colonizing strain to environmental stresses that favour genetic exchanges.

from a clinical point of view, our study does not provide any trend or information that favours one type of subspecies in a given clinical situation. furthermore, soft tissue infections, lung diseases and systemic diseases were not preferentially associated with any subspecies. this absence of clinical and geographical correlations confirms the opportunistic, accidental nature of the infections, most likely from an environmental source. in terms of clinical diagnostics, we clearly illustrate the lack of power of rpob typing that culminates at 20 % failure rates in the m. massiliense subspecies. accordingly, molecular diagnostics might definitely profit from a multilocus typing scheme.

mlst has proven to be a powerful screening tool in molecular epidemiology  <cit> . however, the use of next-generation sequencing  for full-genome sequence determination by far extends the amount of information gathered by mlst. therefore we decided to initiate a comparative genomic approach that combines three reference strains from each subspecies with three genomes identified as admixed in the bayesian analyses. a venn diagram shows that within the two most recombinogenic lineages, the m. massiliense reference strain has the smallest repertoire of genes within accessory genome , a feature that might correlate with its milder pathogenic profile  <cit> . correlatively, in admixed strain genomes, numerous regions of up to 40–60 kb in size, containing many non-core genes and displaying gc% variation  were detected, providing excellent candidates for putative inserted genomic islands. this is the case of strain m <dig> harbouring a clear m. intracellulare-like region . these regions are distributed all along the genome, and represent  <dig> to 15 % of the circular chromosome. however concomitant acquisition of such genomic islands with the dct-like genomic exchanges observed remain to be investigated.table  <dig> nucleotide blast results of admixed genomes genomic islands


mycobacterium intracellulare mott- <dig>  complete genomeb

mycobacterium sp. jdm <dig>  complete genome b




mycobacterium gilvum spyr <dig>  complete genome

mycobacterium intracellulare mott- <dig>  complete genomeb


mycobacterium ulcerans agy <dig>  complete genomeb

afirst nucleotide blast result with more than 80 % identity, and covering at least 30 % of the sequence of the tested genomic island


bpathogenic mycobacteria



the genetic architecture of the admixed strains advocates for rather rare but massive genetic exchanges between mab subspecies and only hardly fits with long-lasting and regular gene flow that would lead to highly scattered patterns disrupting the genome-wide mosaicism into a gene-wide mosaicism. in the context of an absence of esx <dig> loci in our mab collection and with no evidence that esx <dig> or esx <dig> play a role in m. smegmatis dct , the genetic elements involved in mab mosaicism remain unresolved. however, the two extrachromosomal elements carrying esx/typeiv systems detected in some mab strains share many traits with the novel p-raw plasmids discovered in m. marinum and other sgm  <cit>  . recent investigations also showed that other similar esx/typeiv systems exist in mycobacteria and belong to a quite large and diversified family. taken together, these results raise the hypothesis that, besides the genomic esx1-driven dct, other extrachromosomal p-raw-like esx elements might be involved in mycobacterial conjugation, and allow subsequent dct. we are aware that this novel hypothetical form of plasmid-driven conjugation must be tested in experimental f1-generation transconjugant experiments to evaluate the evolutionary and pathogenic potential behind this system in mab.

CONCLUSIONS
admixed populations of mab seem to display higher abilities for colonizing lungs of cf patients. on the other hand, we cannot exclude that long-term lung colonization might also favour mab genetic admixture and hgt in this very specific ecological niche. our study also strongly suggests that praw-like extra-chromosomal genetic elements might be responsible for the massive genomic exchanges observed in mab, and are reminiscent of those observed in distributive conjugal transfer coded on chromosomal esx <dig> system in m. smegmatis. therefore, their contribution to hgt in mycobacterial evolution and pathogenicity should be assessed in a general context of increasing mab lung infections and mab/tb co-infections.

