BACKGROUND
acacia tortilis is a keystone species growing across arid ecosystems in africa and the middle east, from moist savannas to hyper-arid deserts. it is of importance for people and their domesticated animals, improves soil fertility and increases biodiversity  <cit> . it is well adapted to disturbances such as drought, fire, browsing and pollarding. in spite of its ecological importance and wide distribution, knowledge about its long-term dynamics, including essential life historical characteristics such as longevity and growth is poor. this is also true of other acacia species in this region and of arid land trees in general  <cit> . from a population dynamics perspective and seen in relation to ongoing vegetation changes in arid lands, this knowledge is essential to develop sustainable management strategies.

in the area considered here, the hyper-arid eastern desert of egypt , no studies have attempted to estimate the longevity and growth of a. tortilis. local nomads say that trees grow slowly and date to "roman" times, i.e. the pre-islamic period  <cit> . this view is rendered credible by characteristics such as its great ability to resprout and its investment in defensive characters such as spines and dense, hard wood impregnated with resins and crystals. slow growth is indicated by the results of a change analysis based on historical imagery  and field observations   <cit> . seen from a life historical perspective such characteristics are often associated with great longevity  <cit> .

if trees are old, one might wonder if they are relicts from periods when moisture conditions were more favourable for recruitment. determining the age of tropical and subtropical trees is, however, problematic. in temperate climates annual growth rings are formed in response to climatic seasonality. anatomically, these rings are easily detectable because of distinct seasonal differences between early- and late-wood. in the tropics and sub-tropics, seasonality is less distinct and growth rings, if present, are of a different anatomical type which can be more difficult to detect  <cit> . nevertheless, annual growth rings are known from a substantial number of tropical species  <cit> .

in a. tortilis a narrow marginal parenchymatic band associated with crystalliferous calcium oxalate chains is present in the wood  <cit> , and according to these studies they are formed coincidentally with a temporary pause in growth. such bands are also found in a. tortilis wood from the ed. if these bands are formed regularly, they are internal time markers that can facilitate age determination  <cit> . if regularity is annual, standard dendrochronological methods might be applied to a. tortilis  <cit> . however, even if bands don't provide any chronological information, correlations between individual band patterns are of interest because they mark times when conditions did not permit growth. as such, patterns of bands may provide insight into the spatial variability of growth conditions and consequently into the factors affecting the growth of trees.

another method providing insight into tree age and growth is radiocarbon dating. 14c content is a temporal marker in wood and has been successfully used for dating of wood and to confirm ages or time intervals estimated from ring counts. for wood older than ad  <dig>  conventional radiocarbon ages estimated as years before present  are calculated on the basis of the libby half-life time   <cit> . the radiocarbon age is calibrated to calendar date  based on estimates from dendrochronologically dated tree ring samples  <cit> . because the level of 14c in the atmosphere has not been constant over time, there are variations in the calibration curve, including a number of plateaus. the wiggly plateau period between  <dig> and  <dig> makes tree age estimation difficult since the 14c content of a sample from this period suggests more than one calendar date.

after  <dig> the level of14c in the atmosphere rose to very high levels as a result of the cold war nuclear bomb testing. after a few years of exceptionally rapid increase from the late 50s, this post-bomb 14c signature curve reached a peak in  <dig>  thereafter the ban on nuclear bomb testing has caused a slow decrease up to present  <cit> . this post-bomb 14c makes accurate dating possible and has been successfully used to determine the annual character of rings in tropical trees  <cit> .

in the present study we test the possibility of using pre- and post-bomb 14c in wood samples along with the presence of narrow marginal parenchymatic bands in the wood to gain further insight into the age, growth and growth conditions of a. tortilis in the hyper-arid ed.

study area
material has been collected in the ed  from individuals of acacia tortilis  hayne  <cit> . two subspecies occur in the ed and those sampled here are ssp. raddiana  <cit> . however, we refer to a. tortilis at the species level because gradual morphological transitions are found and desert dwellers shape the very morphology of trees .

a. tortilis is the dominant tree species in the mountainous landscape of the ed and is confined to seasonally dry river-valleys, wadis, where soil moisture conditions permits its establishment and continued growth. rainfall  is temporally variable, rare and spatially scattered. moisture conditions vary among individual catchments and drainage systems. surface water and soil moisture in the upper part of the soil is highly unreliable and trees and other perennial vegetation seem therefore to rely mainly upon deeper and permanent soil moisture during the long dry periods between rains  <cit> .

except for water, important factors influencing tree growth are branch cutting, i.e. pollarding, and extensive browsing by wild and domesticated animals. both are widespread traditional management strategies controlled by the pastoralists, and are securely documented in the ed at least back to ca.  <dig> bp  <cit> . pollarding is performed on all mature trees and contributes not only to the characteristic growth form of a. tortilis, but may even stop growth temporarily. browsing significantly retards growth, particularly in the early stages of a trees' life  <cit> .

RESULTS
14c analyses
all the oldest wood samples  have a 14c content too high to give a unique calibrated date . the wood in most samples was formed between  <dig> and  <dig>  however, for samples with 14c ages greater than  <dig> years, it is possible that the wood was formed as far back as the 16th century.

calibrated dates and subsequent growth rates for hyperactive  samples are reported in table  <dig>  for a few samples calibrated dates are incompatible or ambiguous. for umm dihaysi a, sample i may be contaminated by older material and is therefore disregarded here. calibrations of samples ii and iii give a set of two similar dates. the most likely dates are  <dig>  and  <dig> , when smoothing, combination of suggested dates and subsequent growth rates are taken into consideration. for jimal a, samples iii and iv have about the same possible range . since sample iv is older than iii, we use  <dig>  and  <dig>  to estimate growth rates. for sample v two dates are possible , both giving reasonable growth rates, but  <dig> is less likely than  <dig> 

14c content  and fractionation values ), calibrated dates  and estimated growth rates  are summarised. the intervening gr is estimated, based on the period between the sample under consideration and the next youngest sample. overall gr is estimated based on the period between the oldest date and sample date .

 <dig> for ambiguous dates refer to the text for further explanation.

the calibrated dates of hyperactive samples show that growth after  <dig> varies both temporally and spatially . based on the oldest hyperactive calibrated dates, the overall growth is  <dig> times faster at jimal than at hulus upper. great variation in growth is evident within all cores where more than one sample is dated.

there is no indication in the material that bands can be taken as regular time markers within the core, and bands cannot therefore be used for dating trees . for jimal a there is an apparently significant relationship between the number of bands and the time period in which they were generated , suggesting that one band was formed every  <dig>  years. however, data are far too few to generalize. this relationship is rejected since it would suggest an age of  <dig> years  and consequently that the inner sample  is hyperactive, which is not the case .

age scenarios
age scenarios  used to approximate the age of trees are presented in table  <dig> and fig.  <dig> 

date combinations are based on calibrated calendar dates  of 14c dated samples. some scenarios use other estimates: '*' lower  and upper   <dig> sigma range, '**' lower  <dig> sigma range . 'a' indicates that the alternative date for sample v is used . gompertz parameters in italics are not significant . '-' indicates parameters that couldn't be estimated. establishment date  is defined as the year in which cumulative radial growth was at least  <dig> mm .

for umm dihaysi a three scenarios are plausible, suggesting an establishment date around either  <dig> ,  <dig>  or  <dig> . except for the latter, the same approximate dates are likely for muwaylhah b , but the fit is best for scenario iii. for hulus upper b most of the scenarios propose too fast growth over a continuous period compared to overall recent growth. the two remaining scenarios  again suggest establishment either around  <dig> or 1550; the oldest scenario is, however, in better agreement with recent growth, and the asymptotic value shows greater potential for continued growth. for jimal a four of the scenarios seem impossible: scenario iii, viii and ix because of high asymptotic value , and scenario iv because of the misfit between the calibrated age of the oldest sample in the scenario and its predicted age. the growth equation could not be fitted to scenario v and x. of the remaining scenarios , all predict a very abrupt cessation in growth. consequently, we also considered 2-sigma ranges for sample vi which suggested a possibility for establishment between  <dig> and  <dig> . therefore we fitted additional scenarios, based on 25-year interval dates from  <dig> to  <dig> for the oldest sample , on this basis we suggest a likely establishment for jimal a early  <dig> 

growth conditions and band patterns
distances between bands vary among cores . at hulus upper there is generally a short distance between bands . the same is seen in some of the muwaylhah cores. a few cores have long distances between bands, e.g. sukkari a, nuqrus b and jimal a. several cores have a few bands that are far apart; often near the core pith. in some cores, however, bands might have been overlooked in certain parts because of disturbing knots  or because of slight and patchy wood decay .

correlations  between band patterns of cores within sites are not greater than those among sites . correlation coefficients are generally low, with the mean for both groups around  <dig>  within sites only two sets of cores were significantly positively correlated , while among sites six sets of cores were significantly positively correlated : umm dihaysi a &sukkari b , hulus upper c &  abu ghusun a , nuqrus a &  jimal a , sukkari b &  nuqrus a , abu ghusun a &  jimal b  and muwaylhah b &umm dihaysi a .

the low correlations within sites suggest that factors operating at a local level influence growth conditions and band formation. we tried to remove these local effects within sites by correlating only shorter segments of cores, testing also for shifts of segments in either direction along the core to account for missing/false bands. as expected, within sites the proportion of significantly correlated segments at p <  <dig>  decreases with longer segment lengths  however, the difference is insignificant  =  <dig> ). also among sites the differences caused by segment lengths are insignificant  =  <dig> ). further, the proportion of significantly correlated segments within sites at segment length  <dig> bands is not significantly higher than among sites  =  <dig> ). this indicates that growth conditions are as variable within sites as among sites at time scales down to the time period represented by the shortest segment lengths .

more than 50% of the segments tested  are significantly positively correlated for the following sets of cores ; within sites: hulus upper c &  b, jimal c &b, sukkari b &a and muwaylhah b &d and among sites: umm dihaysi a &sukkari b, umm dihaysi a &muwaylhah d, hulus u b &jimal b, abu ghusun a &jimal b, abu ghusun a &jimal c.

discussion
our results suggest that a. tortilis in the ed grows slowly and that some of the individuals studied could date back to ad  <dig>  one individual even as far back as ad  <dig>  the wiggly plateau in the calibration curve between  <dig> and  <dig> makes accurate estimates of tree longevity based on radiocarbon measurements difficult. we have attempted to obtain probable age estimates by fitting age scenarios that exploit all available and compatible growth rate and date information to the sigmoid gompertz growth model. this model describes well the long-term trend in tree growth  <cit> . growth rate is represented by a bell-shaped curve; i.e. growth rate increases at the beginning and decreases later in the lifetime of the tree. we applied this model because it represents the growth trend in a. tortilis better than a linear model of constant radial growth; a recent overall growth rate of about  <dig>  mm/yr for hulus upper b  would imply an age of more than a thousand years for the oldest sample , but its radiocarbon age contradicts this . we have assumed that there are underlying limits to long-term variation in growth rate; it is not expected to be persistently high, and the bell-shaped curve should therefore have a shallow slope with a low max, rather than a steep slope with a high max. this assumption implies that the long-term environmental factors are approximately constant and they generate the characteristic water-limited conditions of desert environments. however, short term variability in growth is expected and not in conflict with long-term trends of the growth curve model  <cit> .

since only a few points are used in the non-linear regression and the location of core pith was estimated rather than observed, the age scenarios are vulnerable to errors and variations in input data . evidently, estimates of age do not claim to be accurate, but should rather be taken as indications of possible, approximate age. this approximate age will, however, represent an underestimate because we have considered neither the time taken to grow from seedling to sampling height  nor the effect of growth suppression due to browsing and/or drought on saplings. these factors probably add decades to tree ages  <cit> .

an obvious question is how our estimates of longevity and growth relate to other estimates from trees growing in similar conditions. generally, long-term data on individual trees and therefore direct age estimates are lacking. indirect methods such as those based on mortality rates or size-age relationships from periodic size increment measurements avoid the problem of long-term data access, but such estimates may be very inaccurate  <cit> . nevertheless, the conventional wisdom that growth is slow and life is long in perennial desert plants seems to be supported by increasing evidence  <cit> . some tree species have lifespans of more than a thousand years  <cit> . high estimates  have also been reported for savanna trees  <cit> , but newer research based on 14c dating estimates the age of some a. nigrescens and a. nilotica individuals to be less than  <dig> years  <cit> . longevity estimates of greater than  <dig> years are cast in the form of general statements , based on mortality rates  and on repeat photography . however, low age estimates of only about  <dig> years have also been proposed  <cit> . gourlay  <cit>  concluded that acacias are far younger than commonly believed; but the majority of the trees studied grew under an annual rainfall regime, under protected conditions , and perhaps under the influence of underground water seepage from nearby irrigated areas. this estimate should therefore not be generalized for acacias as such. ward and rohner  <cit> , studying a. raddiana in the negev, israel, based their estimate on a size-age relationship from the serengeti. newer data from the negev show that large trees are more probably close to  <dig> years old  <cit> . this estimate is based on mean incremental trunk circumference growth, measured over two consecutive 1-year periods. rain conditions varied greatly for the two periods, and reported statistics suggest annual radial growth of  <dig>  mm  and  <dig>  mm  for a middle sized tree . other growth rate estimates for acacias growing in the arid tropics vary from  <dig> mm/yr in southern turkana  to  <dig> mm/yr in serengeti . compared to these estimates and taking into account the hyper-arid conditions in the ed , our estimates of both growth  and longevity  lie within the ranges cited above.

narrow, parenchymatic bands like those present in all our a. tortilis wood cores have been successfully used as time markers for dendrochronological dating and in climatological studies elsewhere  <cit> , but such methods do not seem to be applicable to a. tortilis wood from the ed. bands are not formed regularly, nor do the band patterns of trees correlate with each other, either between or within sites.

formation of bands is considered to be coincidental with cambial dormancy  <cit> . conditions that retard or interrupt growth can be regional, caused by climatic factors  and/or local, caused by factors operating even on individual trees . several authors found that a main factor inducing cambial dormancy is onset of water stress  <cit> . regularity in surface and shallow soil moisture from floods or rainfall events is not expected in the ed since rainfall is highly irregular. consequently, regular fluctuations in deeper soil moisture are not to be expected. temperature and phenology are also related to cambial activity and band formation  <cit> . in the negev, israel, low activity or dormancy in a. raddiana takes place during the cold winter  <cit> . in the ed too there are seasonal temperature fluctuations  <cit> , and one might therefore expect regular band formation, in particular at high altitudes with low winter temperatures such as at hulus upper. however, the lack of regular band formation suggests that temperature in the ed does not produce significant regular fluctuations or is not low enough to produce a period of persistently low temperature during the winter  <cit> .

that growth conditions vary between sites is indicated by the lack of between site band correlations. however, within sites, regional factors are expected to influence all trees in a similar manner, unless they are significantly modified by local landscape heterogeneity. the cores showing highest correlation  seem to grow under homogenous conditions since these trees lie at short distances from one another and in a level, open part of the wadi . for the same reasons homogeneity also seems to be present at muwaylhah, but there correlation is poor between cores from neighbouring trees .

as for site homogeneity caused by soil moisture conditions, the root architecture of trees is important. globally, rooting depth increases with aridity and roots can occupy large volumes  <cit> . neighbouring trees should therefore draw on similar resources. however, there are also indications that within arid zones a specific rainfall regime might cause one species to invest more either in side root growth if rainfall occurs regularly or in vertical tap root growth if rainfall is more variable  <cit> . in israel it has been reported that acacias are more dependent upon surface water and have shallower roots than previously believed  <cit> . it should also be taken into account that local topography modifies water run-off and therefore soil moisture conditions. this raises questions about the rooting structure of individual trees at a specific site and even at a specific location within a site. it also highlights the need for more studies on the root-root and root-water interactions in arid ecosystems.

as for poor band correlation, factors making band identification difficult must be acknowledged, as summarised by martin and moss  <cit> . taking this into account, a study from marsabit district, kenya, concluded that growth limiting factors were highly variable and not simply related to climate, and further that browsing and lopping were likely to be particularly significant . trees are widely managed also in the ed. since our results too suggest that factors other than climate and soil moisture are important for band formation, browsing and pollarding in particular should be considered.

pollarding is performed at irregular intervals, only on mature individuals and mainly to provide fodder for domestic animals  <cit> ; however, in some cases nomads pollard trees to "cure" individuals that show signs of withering. browsing, on the other hand, is a continuous disturbance. its impact on mature trees is less dramatic since animals are herded rapidly from one tree to the next, and their reach is limited to lower heights and to the margins of the canopy. for saplings, however, the effect of browsing can be severe  <cit> . this suggests that browsing might influence band formation in sapling stages, while pollarding could be a factor in mature stages.

both browsing and pollarding remove green biomass. in severe cases vital processes such as assimilation and transpiration might be retarded or stop completely. when either of these processes is reduced, the water balance of the tree is probably disturbed, perhaps to such a degree that bands form. while water stress and band formation are found to be simultaneous, the causal relationship and physiological and anatomical processes have not been described, and the function of the abundant calcium oxalate crystals in bands in acacia is not properly understood . this should be further investigated to better understand band formation in a. tortilis under hyper-arid conditions. a key question is whether band formation is always related to cambial dormancy, and how long periods without growth might be. this is also of importance for describing growth, and consequently for making reliable age estimates of desert trees.

CONCLUSIONS
the post-bomb 14c content of a. tortilis wood provide valuable information about tree growth and is required to assess the age scenario approach adopted here. only several dated samples from one core can give more reliable age estimates for a. tortilis. it is evident that the approach preliminarily explored in the present study needs to be extended to larger datasets. also alternative methods dealing with whole populations should be further investigated  <cit> .

the possibilities for dendrochronological studies based on a. tortilis from the ed are poor. however, marginal parenchymatic bands can give insight into fine scale variation in growth conditions and the past management of trees. in order to exploit this properly, the mechanisms of band formation should be further studied. current results also suggest looking further into root-root and root-water interactions. based on band patterns, the growth of a. tortilis seems to vary greatly not only temporally but also spatially, suggesting that the landscape heterogeneity is much greater than often assumed for a seemingly homogenous and harsh desert environment. management strategies should take this into account. the great longevity  and slow growth  indicated by our results also show that special care should be taken for the tree population, particularly at sites where mortality is high and recruitment is poor  <cit> .

