BACKGROUND
in rivers of tropical south america, loricariid catfishes  are ubiquitous and easily identified by their distinctive armored plating and ventrally positioned jaws with a fleshy oral disk. loricariid jaws permit efficient foraging on benthic food items and span a wide range of morphologies, from robust jaws specialized for gouging wood  <cit> ; figure 1b, to gracile jaws for winnowing loose sediments, and pincer-like jaws for probing crevices  <cit> ; figure 1a. despite their taxonomic richness and jaw diversity, loricariids display relatively little dietary diversity. we reviewed published studies of loricariid gut contents spanning over  <dig> species,  <dig> drainages, and  <dig> countries . findings from these studies reveal diets dominated by fine particulate detritus, usually of undetermined origin, mixed with lesser fractions of algae, other plant matter, and occasionally benthic invertebrates.

detritus is the principle pathway by which primary production enters food webs globally  <cit> . in rivers, detritus is foundational to metazoan food webs  <cit>  and critical to ecosystem function  <cit> . this is especially true in tropical rivers, where detritivorous fishes are highly diverse and abundant enough to support major commercial fisheries  <cit> . unlike predators, which commonly select prey based on their general morphology  <cit> , detritivores selectively forage based on cryptic and continuously variable aspects of the elemental and nutritional composition of detritus  <cit> . although presumably detectable by detritivores  <cit> , variation in detrital quality is difficult to quantify and remains poorly understood. the extent to which dietary discrimination yields niche partitioning within local detritivore assemblages and the influence of phylogeny on partitioning of detritivore trophic niches are just beginning to be examined  <cit> .

a growing body of theoretical  <cit>  and empirical  <cit>  research suggests that diverse, sympatric, and apparently functionally redundant assemblages of herbivores may coexist via partitioning of relatively cryptic elemental and nutritional gradients of the food resource spectrum. sympatric herbivorous insects partition trophic niches according to ratios of carbohydrate and protein  <cit> , and apparently non-selective, filter-feeding bivalves demonstrate similarly cryptic niche differentiation along stoichiometric gradients  <cit> . taxonomic groupings observed in these and other studies  <cit>  suggest that phylogeny strongly influences the biochemical composition of these consumers’ diets; however, modern phylogenetic comparative methods have yet to be applied to investigations of niche partitioning among detritivores. herein, we examine the evolutionary context of trophic niche diversity among detritivorous loricariids by estimating trophic positions of individuals in local assemblage isotope space, then regressing these data onto the most recent and comprehensive phylogeny for the family.

stable isotope analysis provides a powerful means for investigating trophic ecology  <cit> , in part because it can more effectively reveal trophic partitioning among detritivores than gut contents analysis  <cit> . detritivores have rapid gut passage rates  <cit> , derive major nutritional contributions from microbial decomposers  <cit> , and selectively feed upon heterogeneous yet amorphous detrital fractions  <cit> . these features reduce the utility of visual analysis of gut contents, but lend themselves to isotope analyses capable of quantifying and integrating food items assimilated over periods spanning several days to weeks  <cit> . consumer tissue δ13c reflects an average aggregate isotopic signature of all basal production sources assimilated  <cit> , and δ15n corresponds to variation in trophic level and dietary protein content  <cit> . studies inferring community trophic structure from isotopic data often lack precision in differentiating basal resource categories  <cit> ; however, even without finely resolved basal resource data, distributions of consumers in isotope biplot space can be used to examine trophic niche size, spacing in community niche space, resource partitioning  <cit> , and niche shifts in time or space  <cit> .

herein, we introduce a novel method that builds upon several recently proposed approaches for comparing community trophic structure using the isotopic centroid  as a reference point  <cit> . instead of calculating only distances from the centroid to component taxa  <cit>  or patterns of centroid movement through absolute isotope space  <cit> , we use vectors to describe both distance and position of consumer taxa relative to their local assemblage centroid, and use the centroid as a means of standardization that allows datasets from different times and places to be combined. assemblage centroid-standardized isotope vector analysis  produces a metric that describes an individual consumer’s trophic position in relation to other consumers in the same habitat . acsiva facilitates comparisons across geographic and temporal ranges as well as phylogenetic regressions to reveal evolutionary influence on contemporary assemblage structure.

given that loricariid diets are largely limited to detritus, algae, and in special cases other basal resources such as wood  <cit>  , we predicted that the total range of species δ15n centroid deviations would reflect a single trophic level . also, given recent research  <cit>  suggesting that loricariids with derived jaw morphologies  <cit>  defined by narrow, medial clusters of elongate teeth  could use these teeth to supplement their detritivorous diet with insect larvae pried from holes in benthic substrates , we predicted that taxa with these jaws will be 15 n-enriched relative to loricariids with broader jaws and greater numbers of shorter teeth designed for scraping or raking . finally, given the potential that dietary enrichment with insect protein may correspond with specialized morphologies or behaviors  <cit> , and that vertical  trophic position can likely be maintained across food chains supported by primary production sources with different δ13c signatures  <cit> , we predicted that the relative position of loricariids along the δ15n axis should be more phylogenetically conserved than distributions across the δ13c axis.

RESULTS
mean values for loricariid species displayed a total range of δ15n assemblage centroid deviation spanning  <dig> ‰ and a total range of δ13c deviation spanning  <dig> ‰ . as predicted, total δ15n range fell within the tissue–diet discrimination range , observed in a controlled laboratory study of loricariidae   <cit> , suggesting that loricariids essentially occupy a single trophic level within which δ15n variation corresponds to differences in dietary protein content  <cit> . total δ13c range of species means was less than the distribution of δ13c ranges  reported for entire fish communities in four different neotropical rivers  <cit> , suggesting that loricariids selectively consume and assimilate a restricted subset of the basal production spectrum supporting fish biomass in these ecosystems.

phylogenetic regressions were conducted first on the entire data set of  <dig> individual assemblage centroid-standardized vectors . because of the highly uneven distribution of sample sizes across sites and the potential for site bias, a second analysis was conducted on a more restricted data set consisting of  <dig> vectors representing the mean trophic niche of each genus at each site . in each case, the phylogenetic regression took full consideration of the two-dimensional  character of the data but for interpretational clarity, cladograms color-coded to represent evolutionary shifts along the vertical δ15n axis  are presented separately from cladograms representing variation along the horizontal δ13c axis . in the analysis of individual vectors,  <dig> of  <dig> genera had a mean vector significant at p <  <dig>  . in the analysis of genus mean vectors, the number of genera with statistically significant mean vectors dropped to seven , largely because many loricariid genera have geographically restricted ranges and most were represented in this study at only one or few sites . regardless, the evolutionary patterns recovered by these analyses were nearly identical . both recovered a basal division between 15 n-enriched astroblepidae and 15 n-depleted loricariidae, which is consistent with gut contents data describing astroblepidae as predominantly insectivorous and loricariidae as predominantly herbivorous-detritivorous . within loricariidae, both analyses also revealed seven transitions between relatively 15 n-depleted and relatively 15 n-enriched diets, however the locations  of transition differed slightly . both analyses also recovered a phylogenetically conserved reversion to 15 n-enriched diets at the base of the highly diverse tribe ancistrini, with only three of  <dig> ancistrin genera reverting back to relatively 15 n-depleted diets .


































significance of mean vectors determined by rayleigh's z and uniformity of vector distribution measured by rao's spacing test. taxa with significant mean vectors designated with *  or † . total number of vectors =  <dig> .


































significance of mean vectors determined by rayleigh's z and uniformity of vector distribution measured by rao's spacing test. taxa with significant mean vectors designated with *  or † . total number of vectors =  <dig> .

the only ancistrin exception to be recovered in either analysis as both 15 n-depleted and 13 c-enriched, was panaque, one of only two extant fish lineages– both in the loricariidae – known to specialize on a diet consisting almost entirely of wood  <cit> . the other wood-eating lineage is the hypostomus cochliodon group , a clade that has converged evolutionarily on a panaque-like jaw morphology  <cit>  and was also recovered in the individual analysis as having an isotope vector nearly parallel to that of panaque . moreover, vectors derived from both the individual mean and genus mean for the loricariinae genera loricaria and pseudoloricaria were 15 n-depleted and 13 c-enriched, and these genera have also been reported to consume fractions of allochthonous plant material  in addition to detritus . although these parallelisms provide evidence that vector direction corresponds with dietary niche, the pattern was only partially corroborated in our reduced analysis of mean genus vectors , perhaps due to insufficient sample size. likewise, jaw morphologies among non wood-eating ancistrini displayed gross correspondence with patterns of 15 n-enrichment that were most apparent in the individual analysis . genera for which fewer, larger, and more medially clustered teeth  are taxonomically diagnostic  tended to be more 15 n-enriched than genera with long rows of many small teeth   <cit> .

evolutionary patterns of 13 c assimilation were different from those of 15 n. phylogenetic regression of genus mean vectors computed from individual values recovered  <dig> transitions between relatively 13 c-enriched and relatively 13 c-depleted lorcariids , and regression of genus vectors computed from their means at each site recovered  <dig> transitions . these discrepancies support our hypothesis that loricariid catfishes are more evolutionarily flexible with regard to specific primary production sources consumed compared with the protein content of their diet. nonetheless, δ13c distributions of loricariids also show some evidence of trophic specialization.

most neotropical fish communities, including loricariid assemblages, avoid consuming or assimilating 13 c-enriched c <dig> grasses and selectively consume and assimilate larger fractions of relatively 13 c-depleted c <dig> macrophytes, algae, and particulate organic carbon  <cit> . this may explain the much narrower total range of loricariid mean species δ13c centroid deviation  relative to published ranges of neotropical river fish communities containing diverse species representing multiple families and ecological strategies  <cit> . moreover, this subset of basal resources that are preferentially consumed shows relatively broad but consistent patterns of δ13c variation that can be used to inform our understanding of trophic diversification and specialization among loricariid lineages. particulate organic carbon is typically most 13 c-depleted, c <dig> macrophytes are most 13 c-enriched, and algae, although showing large variation in time and space, tend to have intermediate δ13c signatures  <cit> . phylogenetic regressions based on the individual-based genus means and site-based genus means revealed similar evolutionary patterns among the loricariinae : harttiini plus farlowellini and their common ancestor consume and assimilate relatively 13 c-depleted resources , whereas their sister clade  specializes on relatively 13 c-enriched resources . both data sets also indicate that the genus harttia underwent a reversion to a relatively 13 c-enriched diet. these patterns are corroborated by both gut contents and jaw functional morphological data. gut contents reveal large fractions of higher plants and plant parts in diets of the loricariini genera loricaria, pseudoloricaria, and rineloricaria , and loricariini occupy a unique, non-overlapping region of jaw functional morphospace distinct from all other loricariids  <cit> .

discussion
evolutionary diversification of loricariidae in assemblage isotope-niche space demonstrates the potential for herbivores and detritivores to radiate adaptively by partitioning seemingly homogenous food resources along elemental-nutritional gradients. phylogenetic analyses of both individual and grouped  data partitions revealed concordant patterns of early diversification into opposite ends of a gradient in dietary protein content as inferred from relative 15 n enrichment . in contrast to its sister lineage , loricariidae was recovered as plesiomorphically 15 n-depleted, reflecting an evolutionary transition to a mostly herbivorous-detritivorous diet contemporaneous with the origin of a major functional innovation of the jaw that is synapomorphic for loricariidae: a novel adductor mandibulae division that inserts directly onto the upper jaw  <cit> . within loricariidae, the basal lineages  were recovered as plesiomorphically 15 n-depleted, whereas ancistrini was revealed to have undergone a derived shift back toward 15 n-enriched diets. 15 n-enrichment of ancistrini combined with its nested phylogenetic position suggests that members of this clade may have specializations allowing them to consume basal resources with more protein  <cit> , indicative of a higher quality diet.

several concordant aspects of ancistrini morphology, behavior, ecology, and biogeography point to a mechanism by which community ecological processes may have contributed to observed evolutionary patterns in δ15n. ancistrins are distinguished by having well-developed lateral clusters of quill-like cheek-spines   <cit>  that are forcefully erected and used as weapons during inter- and intra-specific threat displays. in aquaria, these threat displays are particularly associated with competition for food and territory . in natural habitats, ancistrins are known to display remarkably even spacing along the stream bed  <cit> , and biogeographical research  <cit>  has observed that phylogenetically basal, non-ancistrin loricariids are often limited to regions occupied by few or no ancistrins. together with observed patterns of 15 n-enrichment, these lines of evidence suggest that the ancistrini may use aggression and territoriality to outcompete non-ancistrin taxa for access to relatively high-quality benthic resources. this, in turn, may have contributed to their taxonomic and functional diversity: the ancistrini includes almost 30%  of the  <dig> currently recognized species in loricariidae  <cit>  and they demonstrate broader jaw morphological diversity than any other tribe in the family  <cit> .

in addition to the paradox of low apparent dietary diversity  accompanied by high jaw diversity  <cit>  that motivated this study, the loricariidae confront stoichiometric challenges that may partially explain patterns of trophic differentiation that are only chemically discernable. loricariids have a dense endoskeleton and are covered with dermal plates composed primarily of calcium phosphate , giving them a high physiological demand for dietary phosphorus  <cit> . paradoxically, the rivers and streams inhabited by loricariids  <cit>  as well as the detritus and biofilm that most loricariids consume  <cit>  tend to be highly p deficient. discrepancies between dietary p availability and physiological p demand are sufficiently great among the loricariid species investigated to date, that these fishes are the only vertebrates known to have their somatic growth limited by p availability under natural conditions  <cit> . given these extreme stoichiometric challenges, loricariid fitness should be particularly sensitive to variation in the c:n:p ratios of food resources  <cit> , and stoichiometric gradients likely provide an important dimension for niche segregation  <cit> . indeed, in the only loricariid assemblage for which stoichiometric data are available, species exhibited interspecific variation along a continuous gradient in whole-body %p  <cit> . although relationships between the c:n:p ratios and the isotopic signatures of loricariid trophic resources remain uninvestigated, diversification of aquatic consumers along an δ15n/δ13c gradient has been shown to be consistent with differential assimilation of dietary components diverging in elemental ratios  <cit> .

the most remarkable and perhaps most stoichiometrically unbalanced dietary specialists within loricariidae are species of the wood-eating genus panaque  and the hypostomus cochliodon group . both of these distantly related lineages possess specialized jaws and chisel-like teeth   <cit> , and have gut contents dominated by wood particles  <cit> . nearly parallel isotopic vectors between panaque and the h. cochliodon group  recovered in the analysis of individual vectors suggests that these lineages occupy a similar yet distinctive trophic niche relative to sympatric loricariids. nearly parallel isotopic vectors between these wood-eaters and the loricariinae genera loricaria and pseudoloricaria, which are known to consume large fractions of terrestrial seeds, fruits, leaves, and flowers , supports the correspondence of this isotopically defined niche with a diet of allochthonous plant material. despite the convergence of wood-eaters on a diet that is rare among vertebrates and unique among fishes, detailed analyses of the digestive physiology of these loricariids has shown them to be unspecialized and functionally similar to non-wood-eating loricariids  <cit> . loricariids as a whole are largely unable to digest lignocellulose, and instead derive most nutrients and energy from easily digestible breakdown products  that are produced during microbial degradation of submerged, decomposing wood  <cit> .

further examples of correlation between jaw morphology and a lineage’s position in δ15n/δ13c assemblage isotope space can be seen among the non-wood-eating ancistrini and loricariini . ancistrin genera that are diagnosed by having jaws with fewer, larger, and more centrally clustered teeth  are more 15 n-enriched than genera characterized by having larger numbers of smaller teeth arranged in long rows . these data together with limited gut contents data suggest that the pincer-like jaws of the former group may be specialized for consumption of invertebrates residing in holes and crevices in wood, rocks, and clay nodules in a manner also hypothesized for tube-snouted species of electric fishes  <cit> . in contrast, broad, brush-like jaws of the latter group appear specialized for scraping benthic substrates to dislodge and ingest fractions of detritus and biofilm that are lower in protein content  <cit> . the loricariini are distinguished by having jaws that are morphologically and functionally distinct from all other loricariids  <cit>  and they show a derived preference for relatively 13 c-enriched food resources  consistent with a dietary preference for the various parts of true plants . finally, our conclusions are consistent not only with the isotopic signatures of consumers and with an understanding of jaw functional morphology  <cit> , but also with local-scale variation in the taxonomic and elemental composition of benthic algal turfs, biofilms and detritus  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
our study introduces the acsiva method of visualizing a consumer’s trophic position relative to sympatric taxa in isotope biplot space, and uses this method to integrate isotopic data both spatially across landscapes and evolutionarily across a phylogeny. our analysis suggests that loricariidae should be seen not only as a highly diverse phyletic radiation, but also as an ecological radiation that has diversified along trophic niche dimensions that were heretofore cryptic, yet consistent with previously observed jaw morphological diversity  <cit> . current understanding of ecological radiation has been heavily influenced by studies of plants and vertebrates that diversified among island archipelagos and lakes, but there are few prominent examples of ecological radiations in river basins or among the detritivores and herbivores that dominate food webs in tropical rivers and virtually all other ecosystems. the frequently amorphous appearance and low taxonomic resolution achievable for gut contents of most herbivores and detritivores may account for our currently poor understanding of niche relationships within this important trophic guild. detritivores and herbivores appear to select food items based more on chemical and nutritional qualities than taxonomy or morphology  <cit> . by estimating molecular patterns of food resource assimilation over time, stable isotope, fatty acid signature analysis  <cit> , and nutritional physiological approaches  <cit>  provide powerful tools for investigating herbivore and detritivore niche diversification and partitioning.

