BACKGROUND
atlantic salmon  is an important aquaculture species, and there is also a considerable commercial harvesting of wild salmon. as a consequence of the economic interest in salmon, various genomic resources have been developed to identify genes and genomic mechanisms responsible for commercially important traits. these resources include a bac library, the corresponding physical map and several linkage maps  <cit> . in addition several cdna libraries have been constructed  <cit>  and at present  <dig>  ests have been submitted to genbank  <cit> .

the salmon genome is complex due to a relatively recent genome duplication believed to have occurred between  <dig> and  <dig> million years ago in the common salmonid ancestor  <cit> . analysis of segregation ratios in salmonids has revealed disomic inheritance in females while there is a mixture of disomic and tetrasomic inheritance in males  <cit> . divergence of loci duplicated via tetraploidy is depending on complete reestablishment of disomic inheritance, and present salmonids appear to have retained more than 50% of loci as duplicates  <cit> . this suggests that salmonids are in the process of re-establishing disomic inheritance. studies of the salmon genome might therefore contribute important biological knowledge on the evolution of ohnologs   <cit> .

transcript sequences that represent the coding regions of genes may be predicted based on consensus assemblies of overlapping ests such as the gene indices in tigr database  <cit> . these clusters of tentative consensus sequences  serve as a valuable resource for putative gene products. however, these reconstructions are prone to error caused by low quality of single-pass sequences, alternative splice forms, expressed pseudogenes and sequence similarities between transcripts within gene families. one would expect that the large number of almost identical ohnologous sequences would make such gene transcript predictions particularly challenging in salmonid species. in agreement with this, results from studies using salmon est data as a source for snp discovery show that when clustering est-sequences into consensus sequences there is a high frequency of "snps" with heterozygote excess. this indicates that a large amount of the ests in such clusters are derived from different loci  <cit> .

the most useful transcript sequences are derived from high quality full-length sequencing of inserts from cdna clones  that contain the complete protein coding sequence . by determining the ccds from one single clone the errors caused by incorrect clustering of non-allelic sequences are omitted. high quality sequences based on multi-pass reads of the cds from flics are therefore the most reliable source for transcript prediction. in addition to representing the most suitable mean to predict protein sequences, the data from flics might also be used to identify splice variants as well as to differ between closely related paralogs. complete cds flics are also important in genome clustering and annotation. genomic sequencing of atlantic salmon is being organised by an international consortium and due to the problems related to the recent duplication of the salmon genome clustering and annotation of the sequence might prove difficult. thus, a large number of high quality ccds flics would therefore be of great value in a salmon genome sequencing project. finally, in full-length insert sequences, where the boundaries of the coding sequences are defined, the additional transcript sequences provide sequence information from 5' and 3'utrs. within these non-coding mrna segments there are sequence motifs that are important in regulation of gene expression. access to reliable sequence information from utrs is a precondition to identify such functional motifs. together, the above mentioned use of ccds flics and their source cdna clones has led to large scale sequencing of full-length inserts in several species  <cit> . despite the apparent usefulness of ccds flics few salmon flics were available in public databases at the time this study was initiated.

the aim of this study has been to determine the full sequence of the inserts in a set of selected atlantic salmon cdna clones to provide a larger amount of high quality sequenced transcripts with complete cdss from a single tissue and developmental stage. clones were selected from a white muscle tissue specific library from pre-smolt developmental stage since our research at the time this study was initiated also focused on discovering genes that might be important to the ability of depositing dietary cartenoid pigments in muscle tissue. the results from the annotation of full-length sequenced inserts and identification of cdna transcripts likely to contain complete cdss are presented. we also describe some general characteristics of salmo salar transcripts such as the kozak consensus sequence, polyadenylation signal variation and we identify conserved, putatively functional, elements in the utrs.

RESULTS
full- length insert cdna sequences and gene ontology annotation
the cdna clones chosen for full-length insert sequencing were from a white muscle and pre-smolt developmental stage specific library. the library consisted originally of  <dig>  ests that were assembled in  <dig> contigs and  <dig>  singlets  <cit> . one representative clone from each of the contigs as well as all singlets was initially included in our material. the 5' single pass sequences from the selected cdna clones were then used as queries in similarity searches against publicly available databases . the purpose of this exercise was to remove cdna clones not likely to contain inserts with a complete coding sequence. the exercise reduced the number of clones with putative ccdss to  <dig> . the full-length inserts  from these cdna clones were sequenced using a primer walking strategy. manual inspection of all assembled sequences was performed to ensure a high quality on the consensus sequence data from each of the flics. all sequences within the flics likely to represent coding sequences  were covered by at least two reads. the average number of reads  in the finished sequences was  <dig> . the flic consensus sequences from the  <dig> cdna clones were submitted to genbank aug. 20th,  <dig> .

to measure the success rate of our selection procedure we used a homology search based approach to estimate the number of flics in our material that was likely to contain complete coding sequences . we performed these similarity searches with blastx against the refseq database  <cit>  using each of the flic consensus sequences as input. input sequences that returned matches with expectation values  less than 10- <dig> and positives score of at least 60% was further evaluated by manual inspection of the pairwise alignments. if the orf from the flic sequence revealed a startcodon and a stopcodon in agreement with the match in the refseq database, the flic was considered to contain a ccds. based on these criteria there were  <dig> transcripts with complete coding sequences  in our material, indicating a success rate of about 79%. accession numbers to the ccds flics are . the e-values returned from the alignments of those transcripts that we classified as ccds flics were in most cases  below 10- <dig>  some ccds flics with short coding sequences  returned slightly higher e-values. all these alignments revealed positive scores above 80% indicating that the slightly higher e-values were caused by a smaller size of the coding sequences rather than a poor match. a summary of ccds flic data is given in table  <dig> 

1average length of all ccds flics, 2average length of ccds flics

when transcripts annotated as ribosomal genes  were subtracted

3number of ccds flics/total number of flics

functional annotation of the  <dig> ccds flics was performed according to the gene ontology standard  <cit>  using the automatic annotation tool blast2go. blast2go use an initial blast search, the gene ontology terms  extracted from hits in the initial homology search and an annotation rule to assign go terms to the individual query sequences in a dataset  <cit> . one or more go terms were assigned to  <dig> of the ccds flics. figure 1a-c shows the most common go terms assigned to the ccds flics for each of the categories molecular function, biological process and cellular component. the blast2go annotation tool also assigns enzyme codes to the individual sequences, and  <dig> of the ccds flics were assigned one or more enzyme codes. the complete dataset with genbank accession numbers, sequence descriptions, cdna clone reference numbers, go terms and enzyme codes assigned to each of the ccds flics is given in additional file  <dig> 

hundred and five of the remaining flics are, based on results from the blastx analysis, likely to contain partial cdss of protein coding genes. they revealed e-values below the threshold, but lacked the 5' coding sequence corresponding to the first few amino acids of the matching protein. the putative function of a few of the flics remains unknown. the blast2go annotation tool was used to assign go terms to the flics with partial cdss. the complete dataset with genbank accession numbers, sequence descriptions, cdna clone reference numbers, go terms and enzyme codes assigned to each of the  <dig> partial cds flics is given in additional file  <dig>  the insert sequences from the partial cds flics lacked some of the 5' coding sequences, but they are high quality sequences and with a mean average flic size of  <dig>  bp. each of the sequences are derived from a single clone and thus, they represent more valuable data for transcript prediction than data originating from low quality and short est sequences.

paralogous sequence, splice variants and gene prediction from tcs
several ccds flics were, based on sequence similarities in the cds as well as on go annotation, likely to be closely related members of gene families . there was a total of  <dig> cases were two or more transcripts were likely to represent paralogs. a summary of these sequences, including genbank numbers, is given in additional file  <dig>  some of these flics, e.g. the two transcripts annotated as psmd <dig> genes , were highly similar duplicate sequences . the similarity is, however, lower than expected from allelic sequences  <cit> . such highly similar transcripts may represent duplicate sequences originating from the salmonid specific genome duplication. identification of single locus polymorphisms in this kind of sequences followed by linkage mapping could provide further evidence that these sequences are ohnologs. sequence analysis of a number of ohnologs could contribute important knowledge on how genes, which originate from genome duplications evolve.

one of the benefits of retrieving mrna transcript sequence data from ccds flics is the potential identification of splice variants. sequence comparisons between ccds flics in our material suggest that some ccds flics represent alternatively spliced variants of genes. table  <dig> gives an overview of the genes where splice variants were identified. the shorter sequence in each pair revealed a gap of a number of nucleotides when aligned with the other, but apart from that, the pairs were identical, as expected if the shorter transcripts represent splice variants lacking exon sequences that are present in the larger transcripts.

prediction of transcript sequence based on clustering overlapping est data is potentially more error prone in salmon than most other species given the large amount of almost identical duplicate sequences present in the salmon genome. the ccds flics offers a first opportunity to evaluate the robustness of such salmon transcript consensus sequences using high quality reference data. in particular, we wanted to examine the degree of erroneous tentative consensus sequences in databases caused by clustering highly similar ests originating from different loci. to test this we used the ccds flic data from the group of closely related genes in our material as reference sequences. this material was compared to the tentative consensus sequence  in the dfci salmon gene index  <cit>  that contained the est from the same source clone as our reference sequence. a direct comparison of the two sequences could then reveal the amount of sequence difference. thirty-five such pairwise comparisons were performed . the mean size of the sequences compared was  <dig>  bp. all comparisons that revealed more than four inconsistencies in every  <dig> bp compared were defined as non-matches. there were eleven such non-matches in the  <dig> comparisons. measurements of snp density in the salmon genome suggest that there is less than one snp in every  <dig> bp in introns, and less than one in every  <dig>  bp in exons  <cit> . thus, the amount of sequence difference in the pairs of non-matches was far higher than expected if the references and the tcs were allelic sequences. some of the sequence differences observed in the pairs defined as non-matches might be explained by the low quality of est data, however, we do not believe that the sequence differences in non-matches are caused by low quality of the est data alone. in support of this, a measurement of est quality by comparing the full-length insert sequence, not to the complete tc, but to the original single pass est sequence within the tc that where from the flic source clone, shows that the errors  were less than  <dig> in every  <dig> bp. together this indicate that the tcs defined as non-matches consist of one or more ests that are from another locus than that of the flic source clone. approximately one third of the tcs were non-matches when compared to the references. thus, the results confirm suspicions that highly similar duplicate sequences represent a substantial problem when predicting tentative consensus transcripts from salmon ests.

kozak motif and polyadenylation signal  variation in salmo salar transcripts
the coding sequences in the ccds flics define the boundary of the transcriptional unit and the additional flic sequences are from the non coding 5' and 3' utrs. due to the method used for library construction most of the 5'utrs are short and incomplete, but nevertheless, most of the transcripts provide some of the sequence immediate upstream of the start of the coding sequence. the aug start codon context, also referred to as the kozak sequence, is not strictly conserved in eukaryotes  <cit> . the bases most frequently observed in the salmo salar kozak motif are caacatgg. the most conserved bases are, as in other species, position - <dig> , the start codon  and position + <dig> . the frequencies of thymine residues in position - <dig>  - <dig> and - <dig> are low, and the frequency of transcripts with either tc or tt in position - <dig> and - <dig> is less than 1%. the profile of the salmo salar start codon context spanning the positions - <dig> to + <dig>  is illustrated by use of weblogo  <cit>  in figure  <dig> 

in  <dig> ccds flics the 3'end of the insert sequences terminated in a polyadenylation tail  of less than  <dig> adenosine residues. these cases may represent flics with incomplete 3'utrs due to mispriming from internal sites in the library construction. in the remaining  <dig> ccds flics there was a poly a-tail consisting of ten or more consecutive adenosine residues adjacent to the 3' vector sequence. we considered these ccds flics as transcripts with complete 3'utrs. the size of 3'utrs in transcripts annotated as ribosomal mrna  was considerably shorter than the 3'utrs in the other transcripts. the average size of the 3'utr in the ccds flics, not including ribosomal mrnas, was  <dig> bp.

several studies have shown that different variants of the polyadenylation signal  exists, and that the frequency distribution of the most common pas versus alternative less common variants is species, tissue and possibly developmental stage dependent. the choice of which motif is used as pas might be important in gene regulation, possibly by including or excluding downstream regulatory motifs that are located between such alternative pas  <cit> . the most common pas observed immediate upstream of the polya-tail  in the tissue and developmental stage specific salmon transcripts from this study was the canonical aauaaa . the second most common variant was auuaaa present in  <dig> transcripts . these findings are in agreement with pas motif distribution in other species. the remaining  <dig> transcripts, without any of the two most common pas motifs, were analysed using the teiresias algorithm  <cit>  to reveal the most frequently occurring 6-mers . this analysis showed that there was no single motif shared between all the sequences. however, the most frequent hexamers, present in five or more of the  <dig> transcripts , did share sequence similarity with the canonical pas sequence. together with their location, this could suggest these 6-mers as candidate variant pas signals in salmo salar. there was no significant difference observed when comparing the average 3'utr length in the group of transcripts with the canonical pas versus the group of transcripts with alternative pas .

1most common hexamers within 35

nucletides upstream of the poly-a tail

2number of transcripts with this motif

conserved candidate regulatory motifs in salmo salar transcripts
utrs are usually rich in motifs  that contribute in modification of gene expression by binding proteins or micrornas . the utrs from this study provides a first opportunity to identify candidate functional motifs in salmon transcripts. to find such motifs we searched the salmon utrs for matches to evolutionary conserved motifs. the utr database collection  is a collection of functional sequence patterns located in 5' or 3' utr sequences  <cit> . by use of the pattern matcher program utrscan we searched the utrdb using the 5' and 3'utrs as queries to identify putative regulatory motifs in the salmon transcripts. the analysis of the 5'utrs revealed two transcripts  with motifs that were matches to the iron responsive element . ire is a particular hairpin structure located in 5'utrs of mrnas involved in regulation of cellular iron metabolism  <cit> . the salmon transcripts were annotated as two variants of the ferritin heavy polypeptide. the observation that this motif, known to be evolutionary conserved and present in the ferritin genes of vertebrates  <cit> , were located in the 5'utr of these salmon ferritin transcripts supports that the matches were not by chance, but that the motifs are true functional ires. in the analysis of 3'utrs one transcript with a sequence that matched the secis element was revealed. the secis element is a  <dig> bp stem-loop structure located in the 3'utr that directs the cell to translate the uga codons as selenocystein instead of terminating the translation  <cit> . the finding that the salmon transcript with the match to this motif encodes a glutathione peroxidase , a gene that in other species has been shown to be a selenium-containing protein that translate uga codons, supports the fact that also this motif match reveals a true functional element.

micrornas  are a family of 21- <dig> nucleotides small rnas. the first 1- <dig> or 2- <dig> nucleotides of the mirna  binds to a 3'utr target in a sequence specific manner. when base paired to its target sequence the mirna down regulates gene expression of the target transcript. genes that are regulated by mirnas have been identified in vertebrates, plants, flies and worms  <cit> . it would be expected that gene expression is modified by mirnas in salmon as well, but as far as we know, no mirnas or their target genes have so far been described in salmon. a common feature of mirnas is that one mirna often regulates the expression of many genes  <cit> . thus, all genes regulated by a given mirna share an identical  7-mer mirna target sequence. if there were one mirna that regulate expression of a large number of genes in salmon, then the target sequence of that mirna would be present in a larger number of 3'utrs than expected by chance. the 3'utrs from our material provided an opportunity to identify such mirna target sequences. to reveal such candidate conserved motifs we first identified the most frequently occurring 7-mer motifs in the 3'utrs using the teiresias sequence pattern discovery tool  <cit> . we disregarded motifs that matched the pas  or consisted of simple sequence, and were left with  <dig> motifs that were present in more than  <dig> of the 3'utr sequences. if the sequences from all 3'utrs were pooled the size would be  <dig>  bp. a 7-mer motif is expected to occur about  <dig> times by chance in a fragment of that size. this expectation is based on assumptions like an equal proportion of all four nucleotides and do not take into account that some sequences are over-represented cause they originate from interspersed repeats. thus, to better evaluate whether these motifs were conserved in the 3'utrs we compared the number of times a given motif was observed in the 3'utrs to the number of times these motifs were observed in three control sequences. a salmon bac sequence  consisting of  <dig>  bp genomic dna was used as one such control. we did notice that the nucleotide composition in the utrs and the bac salmon sequence was slightly different. in the 3'utrs the proportions were a , g , c , t  while the proportions in the genomic sequence was a , g , c , t . thus, to have a control with an identical nucleotide composition as in the 3'utrs we pooled the 3'utr sequences, created ten randomly shuffled references, and counted the number of times the motifs were present in each of these. finally, the reverse 3'utr strands were used as a third control group. an over-representation of a certain motif in the 3'utrs when compared to the reverse strand could indicate a strand asymmetry in distribution of this motif. the sequences of the eleven motifs, the number of times a given motif was observed in the 3'utrs and in the three controls as well as p-values from comparison with the random shuffle control sequences are given in table  <dig>  the comparisons showed that each of the different eleven 7-mers were about twice as frequent in 3'utrs, and statistical tests  showed a significant over-representation of all motifs in the 3'utrs.

1sequence of common 7-mers in the 3'utrs,

2total number of times the motif was observed in 3'utrs, number of 3'utr sequences with the motif

3number of times the motif was observed in salmon genomic dna 

4mean number of times the motif was observed in ten separate shuffling trials along with standard deviation

5number of times the motif was observed on the reverse strand of the 3'utrs

6chi-square p-value using a  <dig> ×  <dig> contingency table as described in methods

7mirnas or proteins known to bind 3'utr target sequences identical to the motif

conservation of particular sequences could itself indicate some kind of function. to elucidate whether any of these motifs were mirna target sequences we compared the sequence of the eleven conserved motifs to the seven first nucleotides  of mirnas in the mirbase as well as the seeds from mirnas reported in a recent study of rainbow trout  <cit> . this comparison revealed that four of the motifs  were complementary sequences to seeds of one or more mirnas in the mirbase. the mirnas with complementary seeds to a given motif are listed in table  <dig>  the finding that four of these conserved 7-mers are identical to target sequences of evolutionary conserved mirnas further suggested that they were true functional mirna target sequences. the putative target sequences were present in more than hundred of the 3'utrs and if they are true target sequences, this indicates that the expression of more than 20% of the genes in this material may be regulated by mirnas. further experimental validation studies of these genes could confirm that they are true mirna targets.

two other conserved 7-mers  are matches to the puf consensus sequence. the puf family of proteins is an evolutionary conserved family of proteins that, in a similar manner to mirnas, bind target sequences in 3'utrs and repress gene expression  <cit> . the complete consensus puf sequence is an 8-mer , and a search for this motif revealed  <dig> matches in the 3'utrs. this suggests that these conserved motifs represent binding sites for homologous puf proteins in salmon. there were five conserved 7-mers with no match to a 7-mer  sequence with a known function. we note that two 7-mers  are matches to the shorter cfi target sequence tgtan that participate in polyadenylation site recognition  <cit> . we also note that the four first bases of motif  <dig> in table  <dig> is a match to the common pas, and in  <dig> sequences the motif is located in overlap with the pas. this could possibly explain why these three motifs are conserved. the putative causes of conservation of the remaining two motifs are unknown. experimental validation of the motifs could provide further knowledge about their function. a complete list of transcripts with the different putative target sequences is available from author upon request.

CONCLUSIONS
the results from this study demonstrate that a large number of the full-length sequenced cdna clones from the white muscle tissue and developmental stage specific library contained complete coding sequences. we estimated that at least 79%  of the clones selected for sequencing represent transcripts with complete cdss. this represents about a quarter of all different contigs and singlets in the library. the selection and validation methods used in this study are conservative since they filter out clones with orfs that has not been discovered in other species. thus, the percentage of clones with complete ccdss in the library may be slightly larger due to the possible presence of clones with ccdss not yet described in other species or unique to salmon. the salmon genome resources produces by the salmon genome project  <cit>  include another  <dig> tissue and developmental stage specific cdna libraries that were constructed by use of a non full-length enriched method. we have shown by this study that, although our library was constructed with the same method such cdna libraries represent a valuable source for attaining transcripts with complete coding sequences. this is important knowledge since the additional libraries are likely to include transcripts from genes, or particular splice variants of genes, that are tissue and/or developmental stage specific expressed.

the analysis of salmon utrs revealed several motifs that were significantly over-represented in the 3'utrs. the fact that a subset of these motifs was identical to mirna target sequences suggests that they are true mirna targets. although further experimental validation are needed to confirm the putative function of these motifs, the results indicate that the salmon utr sequences retrieved from full-length insert sequencing of cdna clones may be used to identify functional motifs important in regulation of gene expression. salmon has been suggested as a model species to study the evolution of coding sequence divergence in ohnologs. if salmon mirnas and their target transcripts are identified the salmon may also represent a model species for studying the evolution of divergent gene expression in ohnologs.

