BACKGROUND
in the developing embryo blood vessels and later also lymphatic vessels are formed via an initial process of vasculogenesis. this is followed by sprouting and intussusceptive growth of the vessels, termed angiogenesis for blood vessels and lymphangiogenesis for lymph vessels. these mechanisms give rise to a complete blood and lymphvascular system consisting of arteries, veins, capillaries and collectors. endothelial cells  are specified according to the circulatory system  and to the vessel type  to which they belong  <cit> . however, ecs from diseased tissues can have different molecular markers and characteristics from those found in normal vascular beds  <cit> . the interface formed by ecs between blood or lymph and the surrounding tissue has different physiological functions in different organs and is an important attribute for tissue homeostasis. although differentiated endothelium hardly proliferates in most organs, under pathological conditions and in female reproductive organs ecs are replaced and proliferate to support tissue growth and to preserve vascular and organ homeostasis  <cit> . already in the 1970s, the presence of fast-growing endothelial cells within niches of the vessel intima was postulated  <cit> . these early findings together with more recent data suggest that the turnover rate of ecs in conduit blood vessels in vivo is in the range of several years  <cit> . heterogeneity of endothelial cells does not only exist with regard to blood and lymphatic vessels, but also along the arterial-capillary-venule axis, and between capillaries of specific tissues and organs  <cit> . physiological capillary growth can achieve high rates, for example, cyclically capillary growth is found in the corpus luteum to transport blood to the granulosa cells during the menstrual cycle  <cit> . thereby, the proliferation rate of ecs is comparable in its extent to fast growing tumours  <cit> . therefore, at least some microvascular ecs and ecs in specific niches possess high endogenous proliferation capacities in vivo, as well as high angiogenic potential as part of their physiological role.

under in vitro conditions, both microvascular and macrovascular ecs can reestablish their proliferative phenotype but it has been shown that, for example, pulmonary microvascular ecs from rats grow approximately twice as fast as pulmonary artery ecs  <cit> . at the molecular level, microvascular ecs possess higher expression of cell cycle regulating genes and inactivation of antimitogenic proteins  <cit> . based on these results, it is not clear whether all microvascular ecs exhibit a higher proliferation rate or whether only a subpopulation of replication-competent cells, as suggested by schwarz and benditt  <cit>  from their in vivo findings, account for such high proliferation rates.

more recently it has been demonstrated that preparations of human large vessel endothelial cells contain a moderate number of cells that have a higher single-cell-layer growth potential and show endothelial colony-forming activity  <cit> . thereby, it has been demonstrated that ~50% of primary cells seeded as single cells grow, but only ~ <dig> % of these cells displayed a high proliferative behaviour. based on their high capacity for self-renewal and regeneration, fast proliferating endothelial colony-forming cells were considered to be endothelial progenitors   <cit> . interestingly, these isolated epcs demonstrated an intrinsic vasculogenic capacity, as shown by their capability to form de novo vessels in vivo, the most striking function for the endothelium. recently, similar cells were found in rats where they were isolated from the lung as resident epcs  <cit> . a comprehensive list of the different epcs, their nomenclature, source and surface markers can be found in a very recently published review  <cit> . these results support earlier observations by schwartz and benditt for the endothelium of the vessel wall and prove that ec populations from conduit vessels contain progenitor niches  <cit> .

in recent years, we have established numerous endothelial cell lines from different mouse strains and immortalized them by transduction with polyoma middle t  virus  <cit> . however, immortalized ecs may lose some of their typical characteristics, and we, therefore, looked for a reliable source of replication-competent mouse ecs. we finally used lung tissue for the isolation of mouse microvascular endothelial cells and discovered that lung tissue contains a large number of fast-growing resident epcs, with vasculogenic capacity in vitro and in vivo, and capable of forming both blood and lymphatic capillaries. this is the first report, which suggests that blood and lymphatic endothelial cells in the lung are derived from a common progenitor cell.

RESULTS
mouse lungs contain ecs with high proliferation capacity
using adult mouse lung for magneto-bead selection of cd31+ endothelial cells, we discovered that the lung contains endothelial cells, which have a high proliferative capacity. when lungs from three animals were combined and used for tissue homogenisation followed by anti-cd <dig> cell sorting, only very few isolated cells started to proliferate . six days after cell isolation, individual colonies  revealed high-proliferative potential. these cells were capable of forming colonies of >  <dig>  cells . after confluence, cells could be subcultured by splitting them 1: <dig> - 1: <dig> and cells proliferated at a high rate. in early passages, contaminating cells were removed when necessary by a second cd <dig> facs sorting. cells were stable during cell culture conditions up to passage 30- <dig> .

proliferation of mouse lung epcs was compared with endothelioma cells isolated from a cognate mouse strain over a six-day period. after a two-day lag phase, the number of epcs was  <dig> -fold higher than that of endothelioma cells on day  <dig>  the significant difference in cell growth was also present after  <dig> days . the data show that normal mouse lung epcs grow significantly faster than pmt oncogene-transformed mouse endothelioma cells. proliferations experiments in the presence of vegf-a show, that the growth factor has only a low effect  to enhance proliferation in vitro . although the mechanism for such a high proliferation rate remains unknown, the data underline the existence of highly regenerative endothelial precursor cells in the murine lung.

a key feature of stem cells is their ability to maintain stem cell properties after division, known as self-renewal. to exclude the possibility of overestimation due to cell aggregation or formation of secondary colonies, a single-cell clonogenic assay was performed by culturing single cells by limiting dilution in individual wells of 96-well plates. we found that ~15%  of the wells contained highly proliferating colonies. these wells were 80-100% confluent after 18- <dig> days and had a cell number of  <dig> - <dig>  cells/well at the end of the experiment . from the highly proliferating clonal mlmvecs six lines were established and maintained in culture for several passages. clones were cryopreserved at passage  <dig> and  <dig>  from these cultures four clones were further characterized for bec  and lec  markers . the abundance of endothelial precursor cells within the mlmvec population provides an explanation for the accelerated growth of mlmvecs as compared with mouse endothelioma cells.

mouse lung primary epcs in early culture are heterogeneous and have the potential to differentiate into lymphatic and blood endothelial cells
in one of the earliest reports on the isolation of human becs and lecs from a dermal cell suspension, it has been shown that the cells form separate homotypic clusters  <cit> . early after cd31-mediated isolation, our cells formed colonies as described previously for human ecs, in which a cluster of lecs is surrounded by becs . the lecs are positive for the three key lymphendothelial markers podoplanin, lyve <dig> and prox <dig>  becs, which are more strongly positive for cd <dig>  are negative for lyve and prox <dig>  occasionally, becs generate sprout-like structures in these early cultures . some cells express low levels of lyve <dig> as indicated by the yellow color. after lyve <dig> cell sorting clusters were predominantly made of lecs . these observations were made during early passages and we speculated that at least some of the isolated progenitor cells have a dual capacity to differentiate into becs and lecs in vitro.

to study the hypothesis if a dual differentiation capacity can be found in endothelial precursor cells, a single-cell clonogenic assay was performed. four subclones derived from a single-cell suspension were used to study the expression of cd <dig>  lyve <dig>  podoplanin and prox <dig>  the results showed very clearly, that both endothelial cell types could be found in each subclone, indicating that the precursor cells are bipotent. a representative result is shown in figure  <dig>  single epcs from microvascular lung have the ability to generate lymph and blood vessel endothelial cells under in vitro conditions.

we also observed that isolated mouse lung endothelial cells were either lyve1+ or lyve1- and that the majority seems to represent lecs and the minority becs . upon lyve <dig> and cd <dig> cell sorting and further culturing for  <dig> days, a high proportion of the cd31+/lyve1- cells were either positive  or still negative for lyve <dig> , - adjusting to a similar relationship as before . this was again visible after another passage of these cells . this may indicate that early isolated epcs may have the potential to differentiate into becs and lecs. due to the high proliferative capacity of the precursor cells, differentiated cells are "diluted" during cultivation and a fixed segregation of endothelial cell types may occur.

mouse lung epcs are capable of vascular sprout formation
one of the key characteristics of endothelial cells is the intrinsic capability to form vascular networks on matrigel in vitro. we, therefore, examined the capability of our lung epcs at low passage and at high passage and of immortalized endothelioma cells to form networks on matrigel-coated wells. to increase differentiation into radial sprout-like structures, cells were predifferentiated overnight as spheroids in hanging drops. mouse epcs generate capillary sprouts as early as 3- <dig> days after seeding . longer exposure of the cells generates extensive network formation and more cells from the spheroid are involved in vascular sprout formation . however, immortalized endotheliomas are also able to differentiate into vascular sprouts . the length of these structures was measured  <dig> days after plating and resulted in an average range of 200- <dig> μm. the growth factor combination of hepatocyte growth factor  and endothelial cell growth factor  had the most prominent effect on sprout length . the data indicate that mouse epcs from the lung have the ability to form vascular networks under in vitro conditions.

characterization of mouse lung epc and endothelial markers
the use of cell surface markers for the characterization of cell type specificity has greatly improved the phenotyping of mouse endothelial cells, because these change their morphology depending on passage number and rate of confluence. in this study, we sought to determine whether mouse epcs express panendothelial markers as well as markers for progenitor cells and for becs and lecs. the key endothelial marker, besides cobblestone morphology, is cd <dig> . only cells from colonies were used in this study, which were more than 90% positive for this marker. some cells from early passages were cd <dig> facs sorted again if necessary. routine facs analyses between passage 4- <dig> indicated that more than 99%  of mlmvecs were cd31+. other panendothelial markers include cd <dig>  and cd <dig> , which are also expressed in epcs . mlmvecs at low passage were positive for cd <dig>  and the four subclones derived from a single cells suspension were 54-98% positive for cd <dig> . for griffonia simplicifolia lectin, it was shown that this interacts with murine microvascular endothelial cells  <cit> , which could also be confirmed in our study . thus, the isolated mouse lung epcs express classical endothelial cell markers and display a microvascular phenotype. further, we sought to determine whether the epcs express markers for circulating and resident epcs as originally shown by asahara and colleagues for circulating cells and for resident rat epc by avarez and colleagues  <cit> . expression of cd <dig> , vegfr- <dig> , vegfr- <dig> , and cd <dig>  are widely accepted markers for circulating epc. expression of cd <dig>  vegfr- <dig> and cd <dig> , but not cd <dig> define a population of resident conduit vessel wall epcs  <cit> . very similar to circulating and vessel wall-derived epcs, mouse lung epcs express cd <dig>  cd <dig> and vegfr- <dig> . however, cells were negative for cd <dig>  for cd <dig>  and cd <dig>  which are markers for leukocytes and hematopoietic stem cells . as discussed before, our progenitor cells were also analyzed for specific lec markers. expression of lyve <dig>  vegfr- <dig> and podoplanin indicated that a least a subpopulation of the cells are committed to lymphatic endothelial differentiation . on the other hand, these cells express la <dig> and meca-32/pv- <dig>  markers very recently described for mouse blood endothelial cells  <cit> . from two isolates we have also made a two colour labeling using lyve <dig> and meca32/pv- <dig> or lyve1/la <dig> .

mouse epcs are not transformed
based on the high proliferation rate and the high vasculogenic capacity under culture conditions, we investigated the possibility that these cells might be transformed and display a malignant phenotype. therefore, we determined anchorage-independent cell growth in a  <dig> % agar matrix. as a control, a mouse beta tumor cell line  was used in parallel with the same number of cells per well. mouse epcs did not display proliferative capacity, and no clusters of cells were found throughout the agar . also, when epcs from different isolations and passage numbers were used, we could not detect cluster formation or growth on soft agar during a period of  <dig> days. beta cell tumors formed numerous large colonies of more than  <dig> cells . these results support the observation that, although mouse lung epcs are fast-growing cells with a capacity for self-renewal, they do not display any signs of malignancy or transformation.

in vivo vessel formation of mouse epcs in matrigel implants
one of the key questions to be answered was whether mouse epcs possess the ability to generate capillaries and larger blood and lymphatic vessels in vivo. this is a critical issue and should be displayed by any cell type denoted epc. before implantation, we marked cells by lentiviral transduction in order to express gfp, which allows for discrimination between endogenous and exogenous mouse endothelial cells. to facilitate differentiation, epcs were cultured overnight as hanging drops, which allows cells to adhere to each other and to stop proliferation . mouse epcs were then mixed in matrigel  and injected subcutaneously into the neck of a normal mouse. plugs were harvested 10- <dig> days after injection. at that time, numerous blood vessels were found in all plugs that had been seeded with epcs, whereas in control plugs without cells but with vegf and bfgf, only a small number of blood vessels was present. implanted epcs could be visualized by staining with anti-gfp antibodies and we observed that cells started to line up into tube-like structures. tubes which stained positive for podoplanin, a reliable marker for lymphatic vessels could be identified . additionally, cells positive for gfp and la <dig>  a marker for lymph endothelial cells, but negative for cd <dig> could be found in tube-like structures . single cells, positive for gfp and dapi but not involved in tube formation, were either podoplanin-positive or negative . additionally, gfp-transfected epcs were also found in blood capillaries. other matrigel infiltrating cells, which were obviously immune cells and fibroblasts did not contribute to tube formation, and were gfp-negative. triple staining with anti-gfp, anti-podoplanin and anti-cd <dig> indicated that blood and lymphatic networks could exist independently in the same implanted matrigel plug . a dense network of numerous, perfused vessels could be seen, positive for cd <dig> and containing a chimeric pattern of gfp-positive and negative vessels . these vessels obviously contained both endogenous ecs and implanted epcs. for de novo vessel formation, we used epcs from different isolations and found that all cells were able to generate vessels that were structurally similar to the vessels described above. the results illustrated that lung endothelial progenitor cells are able to generated functionally and structurally normal lymphatic and blood vessels.

discussion
endothelial precursor cells are found in different niches
bone marrow as well as peripheral blood of adults and umbilical cord blood of newborns contain special sub-types of progenitor cells, which are able to differentiate into mature endothelial cells. under conditions of tissue regeneration or hypoxia they contribute to re-endothelialization of denuded vessels and neo-angiogenesis  <cit> . these angiogenic cells have properties of angioblasts and are termed endothelial progenitor cells . the three main cell surface markers of this cell type are cd <dig>  cd <dig> and vegfr-2/kdr. within the systemic circulation, epcs gradually lose their progenitor properties and start to express markers for mature endothelial cells, such as ve-cadherin and eno synthase  <cit> . cultured endothelial cells isolated from human umbilical vein or aorta contain a small amount of epcs, which can be discriminated from mature, differentiated ecs by their proliferative, colony-forming potential  <cit> . recently, human epcs have also been characterized and isolated from the internal thoracic artery by their potential to form capillary sprouts. these macrovessel-wall derived epcs express markers for mature endothelial cells after tumorigenic activation  <cit> . very recently these precursors have been described as endothelial outgrowth cells  and differentiated from ec-like cells and circulating endothelial cells  <cit> . together, the data have led to the concept that epcs are a heterogeneous group of precursor cells, which can be found in different niches, for instance bone marrow, circulating blood and vascular wall, participating in both new blood vessel formation  and vascular homeostasis  <cit> .

in the present study we sought to determine whether adult mouse lungs can be used as donor organs for the isolation of vascular endothelial cells, to be used for in vitro and in vivo proliferation studies. we found microvascular ecs, which possess an intrinsic ability to proliferate at high rates and differentiate in vitro into lymph and blood vascular endothelial cells. subpopulations of these cells segregate in early passages and form homogeneous clusters of becs and lecs. a similar behaviour has been reported for cultured human dermal microvascular endothelial cells  <cit> . in vivo, predifferentiated microvascular endothelial cells from the mouse lung can undergo de novo hemangiogenesis and lymphangiogenesis. the high proliferative capacity of a subpopulation of cells and the heterogeneity of early isolated cells suggests the presence of progenitor cells as an essential part of lung vascular cells. our findings demonstrated that in contrast to circulating or resident conduit vessel wall-derived epcs, lung epcs express classical endothelial markers as well as markers uniquely found in circulating progenitor cells. they also express markers typical for lymph endothelial cells and blood endothelial cells but lack the expression of leukocyte antigens as well as  stem cell markers.

during a literature search for similar cells, we found a very recent report by alvarez and colleagues, who describe that rat lung microvessels are enriched with endothelial progenitor cells   <cit> . this report shows that the pulmonary microvascular endothelium contains different subpopulations of ecs, many of which are epcs that can be activated to form capillary-like tubes in vitro and in vivo. they called them resident microvascular endothelial progenitor cells. because of the similarity of the early growth characteristics and the identical organ used for isolation, we assume that we have isolated the corresponding progenitor cells from mice. lung side population  cells are also resident lung precursor cells with both epithelial and mesenchymal potential. neonatal lung sp and subsets of lung sp from neonatal mice are vegfr-2/flk-1+, bind ec specific lectins and form networks in matrigels and therefore demonstrate endothelial potential  <cit> . earlier gene expression profiling studies of lung sp cells from prenatal mice divided into cd45+ and cd45- cells revealed overexpression of endothelial genes within the cd45- side population  <cit> .

mouse lung epcs possess hemangiogenic and lymphangiogenic potential
mouse lung epcs as described in our study are vasculogenic in matrigel assays in vitro and in vivo. to date, mouse and rat lungs represent the richest sources of epcs, which possess high hemangiogenic and lymphangiogenic capacities  <cit> . immunophenotyping has indicated that the cell isolates are enriched with epcs positive for progenitor cell markers. however, the expression of markers specific for blood and lymph endothelial cells indicates heterogeneity of the isolates. whether this heterogeneity develops during cell culture or exists already during the early phase of cell isolation was a major question to be answered. the limiting dilution assays clearly show that progenitor cells are bipotent and differentiate into blood and lymphatic endothelial cells in vitro and form corresponding vessels de novo in normal mice.

together with the recent report from alvarez et al. our findings supports the premise that the pulmonary microvasculature is a rich endothelial progenitor niche, which may regenerate blood and lymphatic endothelium to maintain vascular homeostasis and contribute to tissue remodelling and repair  <cit> .

a further interesting aspect, which however, could not be resolved in this study, is the exact localisation of the epc niche within the lung. in addition to a putative direct position in the endothelial monolayer, a localisation in the vessel wall or in perivascular tissue may be possible. moreover, reliable markers to prospectively identify epcs in the intact lung are still lacking. the existence of human epcs and stem cells that are capable of differentiation into mature endothelial cells, hematopoietic and local immune cells has been studied in fragments of the internal thoracic artery of adults  <cit> . the niche was identified between smooth muscle and adventitial layers of the artery wall. these cells were named vascular wall resident endothelial progenitor cells . although cd45+ cells have been found in the same niche, it has been postulated that these cells differentiate into macrophages and hematopoietic cells, but do not participate in capillary sprout formation  <cit> , which needs to be further investigated.

angiogenic processes within the postnatal pulmonary circulation are difficult to study and the phenomenon is not generally accepted. angiogenesis may occur within the lung systemic circulation to repair pulmonary circulation defects and to restore blood flow  <cit> . lung tissue is densely supplied with blood and lymph vessels and both vessel types possess high plasticity to form new vessels, for example, during inflammation after pathogen infection  <cit> . based on this observation, we assumed that genuine precursor cells have the intrinsic capacity to differentiate into blood endothelial cells  and lymphatic endothelial cells , which could be demonstrated in this study. vessel formation has been studied in mouse models for acute or chronic inflammation of the lung. bacterial infection of the respiratory tract is associated with dramatic morphological changes in the wall of the airways and in the vasculature. remodelling of both blood vessels and lymphatics can be observed when mice are infected with the bacterium mycoplasma pulmonis  <cit> . bacterial infection induces rapid hemangiogenesis and lymphangiogenesis by the increased expression of vessel specific growth factors released either by macrophages or other immune cells and epithelial cells  <cit> . inflammation-induced lymphangiogenesis and hemangiogenesis in the lung obviously prevent oedema formation and facilitate the transport and traffic of immune cells to combat acute inflammation, and support respiration  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
with our results presented here, we finally demonstrate, that mouse lung epcs are intrinsically capable of forming blood and lymph vessels de novo. it will be important to assess how these cells contribute to normal endothelial cell turnover and respond to injury. novel mouse models are needed to elucidate challenging questions concerning the direct involvement of lung-derived epcs in the neoformation of blood and lymph vessels and their fate during remodelling, repair and inflammation.

