BACKGROUND

brucella spp. are gram-negative, intracellular bacterial pathogens that can cause brucellosis in both humans and animals  <cit> . as one of the most common zoonotic diseases, brucellosis is a significant economic and public health problem worldwide with more than  <dig>  new cases reported annually  <cit> . b. abortus, b. melitensis, and b. suis are the most pathogenic strains in humans and have been identified as potential bio-terrorism agents  <cit> . at present, vaccination is the most effective approach for preventing and controlling brucellosis  <cit> . the b. abortus 104 m vaccine strain is the only vaccine that has been widely used in china for the control and prevention of human brucellosis since its approval by the chinese food and drug administration in  <dig>  <cit> . this vaccine strain was isolated from the placenta of a sick cow in a former soviet republic. the strain exhibits strong immunogenicity with low and stable residual toxicity in experimental animals  <cit> .

although the b. abortus 104 m genome has been fully sequenced , it was annotated using in silico methods with many unannotated genes and errors. furthermore, a large number of hypothetical proteins  have yet to be annotated, thereby limiting our understanding of the biological processes pertaining to this strain  <cit> . proteogenomics is an important tool for integrating protein-level information into the genome annotation process, thereby greatly improving genome annotation quality  <cit> . therefore, a proteogenomics study is required to both validate the b. abortus 104 m genome annotation and re-annotate mis-annotated novel genes.

the underlying molecular and physiological mechanisms that cause possible residual toxicity and immune protection following 104 m vaccine induction remain to be elucidated. in our preliminary work, we have determined the whole-genome sequence of 104 m and conducted a comparative analysis against its homologous virulent strain a <dig>  <cit> . it revealed highly similar genome structures but a set of genes missing between 104 m and a <dig> that related to virulence alteration. this observation suggests that the remaining virulence associated genes in the 104 m genome may lead to the residual toxicity associated with the 104 m vaccine. we also observed a number of protective antigens that can promote both humoral and cellular immunity in the 104 m genome. the occurrence of these antigens is likely to result in the enhancement of host defense mechanisms pertaining to bacterial infections. the identification of these pivotal virulence factors and protective antigens at the protein level is likely to be beneficial in the elucidation of mechanisms that underpin residual toxicity and immune protection following induction by the 104 m vaccine.

to this end, we used a proteogenomics approach that combined subcellular fractionation and peptide fractionation to perform whole-proteome analysis and genome reannotation in b. abortus 104 m. virulence factors, known protective antigens and other protein effectors that are critical for bacterial virulence and vaccine protection were identified at the protein level. moreover, differences in protein expression levels between the small and large chromosomes in this multichromosomal bacterium were analyzed. this study presents a comprehensive b. abortus 104 m proteome analysis while also providing a platform to aid in the understanding of the molecular mechanisms pertaining to the 104 m vaccine.

RESULTS
proteogenomic strategy for the analysis of b. abortus 104 m
this study incorporated a genome-wide protein identification survey of b. abortus 104 m using in vitro culture conditions, thereby facilitating refinement of previous genome annotations. traditional approaches to proteomics analyses of b. abortus based on two dimensional gel electrophoresis  and high performance liquid chromatography  coupled with mass spectrometry  have proved successful; however, hydrophobic and low abundance proteins are under-represented using this approach . to enhance coverage of the expressed genome, different strategies for subcellular and peptide fractionation were combined with subsequent lc-tandem mass spectrometry  analysis to resolve b. abortus proteins for global analysis  <cit> . in the present study, we performed subcellular fractionation prior to protein extraction to reduce interference. whole cell protein and membrane protein extracts were prepared for strain 104 m. peptide fractionation prior to analysis is an alternative method that achieves higher proteome coverage. complexity reduction was achieved by sds-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis  and strong cation exchange  hplc separation  <cit> .

in total,  <dig> samples were generated and subjected to lc-ms/ms analysis using a linear trap quadrupole  obitrap velos mass spectrometer. the workflow of this study is summarized in fig.  <dig>  the raw ms data were searched against two databases:  a uniprot protein database  and  a 6 f translated genome database of b. abortus 104 m   <cit> . the search was conducted using searchgui and required four different search algorithms . peptides and proteins were inferred from the spectrum identification results using peptideshaker. peptide spectrum matches , peptides and proteins were validated at a  <dig> % false discovery rate  threshold estimated using the decoy hit distribution . the distribution of precursor mass deviations and the identified peptides that were observed following ms analysis are presented in additional file 2: figure s <dig> fig.  <dig> experimental identification and bioinformatics analysis workflow of the proteogenomics study. whole cell protein and membrane protein extracts were prepared from b. abortus 104 m cultures grown to exponential phase. complexity reduction was achieved by sds-page and scx hplc separation. after protein extraction and pre-fractionation, enzymatically digested proteins or peptides were analyzed by lc-ms/ms. all spectra were searched against the six-frame  database and the uniprot database by searchgui. identified peptides were mapped to the 104 m genome and annotation was refined at three levels:  confirmation of the existing open reading frame  models;  refinement of the existing orf models; and  identification of novel orf models. subsequently, the protein physical\chemical property and function were analyzed




analysis of b. abortus 104 m protein expression
we mapped the unique peptides identified in this study to the b. abortus 104 m uniprot database , and only proteins that were identified by at least two unique peptides were confirmed. a total of  <dig>  proteins  were identified, covering approximately  <dig> % of the predicted proteome . approximately  <dig> %  of the brucella genome is protein-coding with annotations in the 104 m database, and the expressed genome corresponded to  <dig> %  of the annotated protein-coding regions. each identified protein was represented with an average sequence coverage of  <dig> % .fig.  <dig> overview of b. abortus 104 m protein expression. a overview of the proteomic evidence for predicted protein-coding genes in the b. abortus 104 m genome. b venn diagram of proteins identified by four different fractionation methods: whole sds-page , whole scx , membrane sds-page  and membrane scx . c proteome landscape of b. abortus 104 m. peptides were blasted against the 104 m genome using circos. the concentric circles from the center to the periphery represent  b. abortus 104 m chromosomes,  gc content,  orphan peptides identified only in this study,  total peptides identified in this study, and  clusters of orthologous groups  annotation of proteins encoded by 104 m genome




the proteins were identified following in-gel fractionation , in-solution fractionation , whole cell protein fractionation and membrane protein fractionation . many of the proteins that were uniquely identified in the membrane fractions had relatively extreme grand average of hydropathy  scores . large proteins were more likely to be identified after scx separation than by sds-page and approximately all unique proteins with molecular weights  greater than 90 kda were identified by scx . this further emphasizes the advantage of membrane fractionation and scx for protein separation. lamontagne et al. identified  <dig> proteins in preliminary work using three protein separation approaches: sds-page, isoelectric focusing, and off-line 2-d peptide chromatography  <cit> . in this study, a combination of subcellular fractionation and peptide fractionation increased the number of membrane and cytoplasmic proteins identifiable by mass spectrometry; this approach provided a significantly higher degree of discrimination and enhanced coverage of the expressed genome.

physical and chemical property distributions of identified proteins
the proteins identified in this study covered a wide range of mw and isoelectric point  values   <cit> . the theoretical mw distribution for the identified proteins ranged from  <dig>  kda  to  <dig>  kda . moreover, approximately  <dig> %  of all the identified proteins had mws in the range 10–60 kda . the pi values of the identified proteins ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig> . these values are similar to those observed for the total proteome . approximately  <dig> % of the proteins identified in the 104 m database had pi values between  <dig> and  <dig>  eleven proteins with high pi scores  and  <dig> with high mw  were beyond the general separation limits of 2-de.fig.  <dig> distribution of the predicted and identified proteins in the b. abortus 104 m genome according to their molecular function. a distribution of pi values and mw ranges. distribution of identified protein b mw, c pi, d gravy, e tmh, f subcellular localization and g functional classification of proteins identified according to clusters of orthologous groups . annotated and identified proteins are shown in blue and red, respectively




the gravy values for all of the identifications  were used to evaluate protein hydrophilicity and hydrophobicity . a total of  <dig> proteins were identified with high gravy scores ; such proteins are so hydrophobic that they are rarely detected by 2-de due to their susceptibility to precipitation during isoelectric focusing. a total of  <dig> potential membrane proteins with at least one transmembrane helix  were identified   <cit> . among these, the number of predicted tmhs ranged from one to  <dig>  the subcellular localization of identified proteins was predicted using cello <dig>    <cit> . two hundred and eighty-three proteins  were predicted to be localized to the cytoplasmic membrane and  <dig>   of the proteins were identified as cytoplasmic, which is consistent with findings from previous studies  <cit> . each identified protein was classified based on clusters of orthologous groups  and associated with a functional category   <cit> . among the  <dig>  identified proteins,  <dig>  were annotated in the cog database. many of the identified proteins were involved in amino acid transport and metabolism, translation, ribosomal structure and biogenesis, energy production and energy conversion. all of these categories contain key functional proteins that are important for cell growth and reproduction.

identification of virulence factors and function analysis

brucella is unusual because it does not harbor typical virulence factors. instead, its virulence appears to be an integrated aspect of its physiology, exhibiting a tendency to invade and persist in the human host through inhibition of programmed cell death  <cit> . as previously stated, the genomic analysis of b. abortus 104 m revealed the presence of some virulence associated genes in the 104 m genome which may be related to the vaccine residual toxicity. in this study, we confirmed the presence of 104 m-specific virulence factors of 104 m at the protein level following cell culture. the majority of these factors were observed to be involved in intracellular survival, two-component regulatory systems, and the virb secretion or transport system   <cit> . for example, brucella cyclic β- <dig> -glucan  is a key virulence factor that interferes with the maturation of the brucella-containing vacuole and consequently, prevents its fusion with lysosomes  <cit> . the enzyme responsible for the synthesis of cβg  was represented by  <dig> peptides. similarly, the wbka and wbkc proteins, which were represented by six and  <dig> peptides, respectively, are involved in the synthesis of the o-polysaccharide and its translocation to the periplasm  <cit> . in addition, the bvrr/bvrs sensory-regulatory system, which plays an important role in the stealth program, was represented by  <dig> and eight peptides, respectively  <cit> . moreover, t4ss, which is encoded by the virb operon , is also a vitally important factor used for the translocation of virulence factors into mammalian cells and is required for brucella trafficking diversion  <cit> . finally, in total  <dig> pivotal virulence factors in 104 m were identified at the protein level following cell culture. we speculate that the identification of these factors will help us to elucidate the mechanisms that underpin residual toxicity pertaining to the 104 m vaccine.table  <dig> the virulence factors and known protective antigens of b. abortus 104 m identified in this study




identification of known protective antigens and function analysis
the efficacy of the 104 m vaccine against brucellosis has been largely confirmed following its widespread application in china; however, the predominant protective mechanisms associated with the vaccine remain to be elucidated. interestingly, almost all of the widely reported putative brucella protective antigens listed in the protegen database were observed to harbor high peptide numbers   <cit> . for example,  <dig> peptides derived from the molecular chaperone, dnak, were identified. this is a member of the highly conserved 70-kda heat-shock protein  family, which assists in folding nascent polypeptide chains and is a known protective antigen  <cit> . in addition,  <dig> peptides were identified to be derived from the l7/l <dig> ribosomal protein, which is a major constituent of the brucella nucleoprotein fraction used in brucella skin tests as a vaccine candidate  <cit> . moreover, the outer membrane proteins of b. abortus, including the omp <dig>  omp <dig>  and omp <dig> potential immunogenic antigens, which have been widely explored as subunit vaccines, were represented by  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> peptides, respectively  <cit> . similarly,  <dig> peptides derived from the antigen periplasmic binding protein p <dig> were reported. the latter has been reported to be a t-cell immunodominant brucella antigen that induces a th1-type immune response  <cit> . furthermore, peptides derived from other confirmed or putative protective antigens that induce different levels of protective immunity and cellular immune responses against brucellosis, such as trigger factor  chaperone protein, cu–zn superoxide dismutase  proteins, and the transcriptional regulatory proteins asnc, were also identified in this study  <cit> . taken together, our results indicate that b. abortus 104 m expresses  <dig> known protective antigens under in vitro culture conditions. these antigens could promote both humoral and cellular immunity, resulting in the enhancement of host defense mechanisms pertaining to subsequent bacterial infections. our analysis of protective antigens provides the basis for further research to elucidate the mechanisms of immune protection induced by the 104 m vaccine.

identification of hypothetical proteins and function analysis
since a large number of hypothetical proteins  remain to be annotated, our understanding of the biological processes associated with this strain is limited. in this study,  <dig> hypothetical proteins were identified in the proteomics analysis of 104 m . among these,  <dig> hypothetical proteins were allocated gene ontology  terms as assigned by blast2go   <cit> . many of the identified hypothetical proteins were involved in cellular metabolic process with catalytic activity. in addition,  <dig> of the hypothetical proteins  were identified as “probable antigens” following alignment-independent prediction by the vaxijen server  <cit> . thirty-two of the hypothetical proteins  were identified as “virulent proteins” by the mp <dig> tool  <cit> . distribution of the main “probable antigens” and “virulent proteins” among the hypothetical proteins are shown in fig. 4b. twenty-one unique peptides were mapped to a hypothetical protein  re-annotated as “antifreeze protein” in 104 m. the “antifreeze protein” has both a high vaxijen score and mp <dig> score and is likely be involved in antigenicity and virulence . in summary,  <dig> hypothetical proteins of b. abortus 104 m that were functionally uncharacterized in preliminary studies were confirmed at the protein level during this study. in addition, several of these hypothetical proteins were predicted to be “probable antigens” or “virulent proteins”, which may have some influences on the bacterial virulence and vaccine protection. the conservation of the new virulence factors and protective antigens were assessed at both the nucleotide and predicted amino acid levels using the genome sequences of  <dig> different b. abortus strains  <cit> . overall, these analyses demonstrate that thus the newly identified virulence factors, and protective antigens were well conserved among the analyzed isolates.fig.  <dig> function analysis of the hypothetical proteins identified in b. abortus 104 m. a biological processes, molecular functions, and cellular localizations of all identified hypothetical proteins with go terms as assigned by blast2go. b distribution of the main “probable antigens” and “virulent proteins” among the identified hypothetical proteins




refinement of genome annotation by proteogenomic analysis
all spectra were searched against the 6 f database. the detected peptides were further analyzed via the visual exploration and statistics to promote annotation  tool and were then mapped to the b. abortus 104 m genome  <cit> . of these,  <dig> peptides were orphans that did not map to any annotation in the 104 m genome . based on our analysis, we identified six novel orfs and modified three existing orf models . all of the corrections and identifications were assigned to at least two unique orphan peptides. blast analysis of these novel annotation orfs across related species revealed the presence of orthologous for all of the novel unannotated orfs; the analysis also revealed errors in other b. abortus strains  <cit> .table  <dig> the novel orfs and annotation errors of b. abortus 104 m identified in this study




among the novel orfs identified, two unique peptides were mapped to a novel orf  located in the intergenic region between two annotated orfs . this novel orf contains an aldedh pfam structural domain that shares high homology with the aldehyde dehydrogenase protein  in b. abortus  <cit> . reverse transcription-pcr  analysis confirmed that this progenitor orf is transcribed; suggesting that our identification of novel orf models was reliable . we also identified some erroneously assigned orf translation initiation sites . for example, four peptides were first observed to match the upstream region of an existing orf  that has previously been shown to contain a virj pfam structural domain . we found an additional  <dig> amino acids upstream of the protein start site compared with the annotated genome. validation of these upstream regions by rt-pcr allowed us to annotate a new accurate start site . we analyzed protein tis by probing n-terminal acetylation modification. the modification directly marked the tis of protein-coding genes  <cit> . based on peptides identified at 1% fdr, and their upstream codons, we confirmed the annotated tis for  <dig> genes. list of n-terminal acetylation identified in this study are presented in additional file 1: table s <dig> fig.  <dig> refinement of b. abortus 104 m genome annotation validated by rt-pcr. a novel orf models and b annotation errors of b. abortus 104 m were detected and validated at the transcriptional level by rt-pcr. for the pcr amplification: template, novel orf models and errors cdna; negative control, rnas; positive control, groel cdna




in this study, we integrated the b. abortus 104 m proteomics information with genome annotation data to identify novel orfs and validate existing modified orf models. these observations showed that the identified protein coding genes of the b. abortus 104 m genome are well annotated with only six novel orfs and three existing orf model errors. exploring the biological functions of these novel orfs are under investigation. the refinement of b. abortus 104 m genome annotation in this study improved its genome annotation quality. we also confirmed the annotated tis for  <dig> genes through n-terminal acetylation analysis. further research pertaining to n-terminal peptides from other internal digested peptides is required to identify n-terminally modified peptides and gain more information about tiss in b. abortus.

differential protein expression between the two bacterial chromosomes

b. abortus is a multichromosome bacterium, with the associated genome harboring two replicons of unequal sizes  <cit> . in b. abortus, the large chromosome  encodes for most of the house-keeping functions, while the small chromosome  contains genes mostly of unknown origin and function  <cit> . the protein expression from multipartite genomes has been poorly investigated. protein expression and subsequent stability requires a series of linked processes including transcription, processing and degradation. protein abundance reflects the dynamic balance of these processes and, therefore, may has a positive correlation with expression levels  <cit> .

in general, an increase in protein abundance typically results in an increase in the number of proteolytic peptides, and vice versa. a resultant increase in the number of  digests will usually result in an increase in protein sequence coverage, identified unique peptides, and identified total ms/ms spectra  for each protein  <cit> . the protein abundance associated with  <dig>  proteins relative to their chromosomal location in b. abortus 104 m were analyzed using identified unique peptides and psms of each protein. the wilcoxon-rank-sum test was applied to determine statistical significance. according to our results, the average identified peptide number and psm number was higher for chr i compared with chr ii .fig.  <dig> large chromosome and small chromosome of b. abortus 104 m exhibit differences in protein expression. a comparison of protein abundance  between the small and large chromosomes of b. abortus 104 m. b range of protein abundance expressed by the small and large chromosomes listed in nsaf order . c model of the b. abortus cell cycle. replication of chr i is initiated before chr ii. d distribution of cogs within two different chromosomes of the b. abortus 104 m genome




since larger proteins would be expected to generate more peptides and, therefore, more spectral counts than smaller proteins, we used normalized spectral abundance factors  for comparison of relative quantitation  <cit> . the nsaf values for each detected protein are presented in additional file 1: table s <dig>  after comparing protein abundance between the two chromosomes using the nsaf values, we observed that the relative abundance of proteins pertaining to chr i was generally higher compared with chr ii . the differential protein abundance between the two chromosomes in b. abortus 104 m was considered to be statistically significant, which may reflect the differential protein expression between the two bacterial chromosomes.

proteins were ranked from highest to lowest according to the nsaf values . if the expression levels of proteins located on the large and small chromosomes are randomly distributed, then the expected ratio of chr ii proteins would be  <dig> / <dig>   in any arbitrarily selected range. however, according to our results, the actual proportions of chr ii proteins  were lower than expected for the upper range of expression levels, except for those proteins with the highest expression levels. for example, of the proteins with expression levels ranging from  <dig> to  <dig>  only  <dig> proteins  were located on chr ii. the protein expression levels pertaining to chr i were generally higher compared with chr ii.

it is well known that the replication of the b. abortus genome occurs concomitantly with cell growth and division. the origin and terminator regions of multichromosomes in b. abortus have distinct dynamics and localization patterns, whereby the large chromosome is replicated prior to the small chromosome   <cit> . in addition, the replication of chromosomes results in an increase in the copy number of genes located near origins of replication compared with genes located near termini. this may be a potential reason for the differential protein expression between the large and small chromosome. moreover, an analysis conducted to elucidate the cog categories of the  <dig> most highly expressed genes in b. abortus 104 m suggests that the proteins associated with rapid cell growth are expressed at relatively high levels. the genes encoding for these proteins were over-represented on the large chromosome and concurrently under-represented on the small chromosome .

we also analyzed the gc composition and codon usage between the two chromosomes in b. abortus that may affect translation or protein expression. the results showed that there was no significant difference in gc-content  and codon usage between the two chromosomes   <cit> . the potential reason for differential protein expression may be related to the replication dynamics and gene function differences of the two chromosomes in this multichromosomal bacterium. this study is the first to report differences in protein expression levels in two chromosomes in this multichromosomal bacterium and is in accordance with a similar pattern reported for vibrio cholera following transcriptome analysis  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
brucellosis is a significant economic and public health problem worldwide. the b. abortus 104 m vaccine strain has played an important role in the prevention and control of brucellosis in china. in this study, we used a proteogenomics approach that combined subcellular fractionation and peptide fractionation to perform whole-proteome analysis and genome reannotation in b. abortus 104 m. in total,  <dig>  proteins , including  <dig> hypothetical proteins, were identified under the culture conditions given in this study. as part of this analysis,  <dig> pivotal virulence factors,  <dig> known protective antigens and other important protein effectors that are related to bacterial virulence and vaccine protection were confirmed. these data represents a dataset of proteins identified following growth of 104 m under conventional culture conditions. it is possible that some coding sequences did not express under the conditions chosen in this study. analysis of differential proteome expression patterns of b. abortus in other culture conditions can serve as a starting point in the discovery of protein determinants associated with pathogen adaptation and pathogenesis. these differentially expressed genes potentially promote pathogen adaptation to more complex in vivo environments and, therefore, require further study.

in this study, we also validated the b. abortus 104 m genome annotation and re-annotated mis-annotated orfs; validation improved the quality of the genome annotation. six novel orfs and three modified existing orfs were also identified as part of this study. we confirmed the annotated tis for  <dig> genes through n-terminal acetylation analysis. furthermore, after comparing protein abundance using nsaf values, we observed differential protein expression between the two bacterial chromosomes in in b. abortus 104 m. the potential reason for this differential expression may be related to differences in the replication dynamics and gene function pertaining to the two chromosomes; further work is required to verify this hypothesis. in conclusion, this study represents a comprehensive proteogenomics analysis of b. abortus 104 m and is likely to improve our understanding of the mechanisms that underpin residual toxicity and vaccine-induced immune protection.

