BACKGROUND
sleep is characterized by a reversible reduction in consciousness, an increase in arousal threshold, and a characteristic body posture  <cit> . sleep is defined as a behavioral state and most theories as to the function of sleep have naturally focused on the brain. the synaptic homeostasis theory  <cit> , the brain energetic restoration theory  <cit> , the memory consolidation theory  <cit> ; and the macromolecular biosynthesis theory  <cit>  have all placed a central emphasis on the importance of sleep for the brain. indeed hobson famously declared sleep to be “of the brain, by the brain, and for the brain”  <cit> .

yet, the effects of sleep and sleep deprivation on the body at large are hard to ignore  <cit> . in humans there are well characterized changes in metabolism  <cit>  and hormone secretion  <cit>  associated with sleep and sleep deprivation. sleep state is known to impact the pathophysiology of several diseases including asthma, and vaccine based studies suggest that sleep can alter immune function  <cit> .

over the last decade the functions of sleep have been explored through microarray studies  <cit> . these studies have evaluated the nature of the genes in specific brain regions whose expression varies between sleep and wake and with sleep deprivation. such studies have been conducted in rats  <cit> , mice  <cit> , drosophila  <cit> , and sparrows  <cit> . the results of these studies have, in many ways, spurred the development of the theories discussed above  <cit>  and have been combined in a recent meta-analysis  <cit> . statistical and experimental differences among these studies, particularly in sample size, led to variation in the absolute number of differentially expressed transcripts identified. however, taken together, these studies point to several key pathways being regulated in the brain as a function of sleep/wake behavioral state. cholesterol synthesis  <cit>  for example is relatively up-regulated during sleep while genes involved in synaptic plasticity such as bdnf, arc, homer 1a  <cit>  are up-regulated during wakefulness. moreover, in all species studied to date, deprivation of sleep leads to up-regulation of molecular chaperones  <cit>  suggesting that sleep deprivation leads to endoplasmic reticulum  stress in brain with activation of the unfolded protein response  <cit> .

by design, these studies have all been focused on changes in gene expression in the brain. the seminal study of maret et al. included microarray profiling of both brain and of liver and is, to date, the only study to evaluate genome wide changes in expression in a peripheral organ as a function of sleep state  <cit> . in that study, sleep deprivation induced statistically significant expression changes in nearly three times as many genes in liver as compared to brain. moreover, mouse strains that showed different susceptibilities to sleep deprivation and differential transcriptional responses to sleep loss in whole brain also showed different transcriptional responses in the liver. however, maret et al. specifically used changes observed in liver to help evaluate the changes observed in the brain, assuming that gene expression changes in liver are only tangential to the function of sleep. the transcriptional changes induced by sleep and sleep deprivation in other tissues remain generally unexplored.

here we report the molecular consequences of sleep and sleep deprivation in lung and heart. we probed the transcriptional differences between sleeping and sleep-deprived states and further challenged the concept that the molecular consequences of sleep state are primarily limited to the brain. matched animals from both groups were sacrificed at the same circadian times to control for time of day effects. groups were euthanized after  <dig> different durations of sleep and sleep deprivation. we identified those transcripts that had both significantly different expression as a function of sleep/wake behavioral state  and showed a definite positive or negative change with time in the spontaneously sleeping groups. our data indicate that sleep state has a marked transcriptional effect in peripheral tissues. sleep reduces markers of er stress in both heart and lung and sleep enhances metabolic process in an organ specific fashion. our data also suggest that sleep plays a role synchronizing transcription of certain pathways in the lung.

RESULTS
given the established consequences of sleep deprivation on the immune  <cit> ,cardiovascular  <cit> , metabolic  <cit>  and musculoskeletal function  <cit> , it is reasonable to suspect that sleep state impacts a broad array of peripheral tissues. we evaluated the molecular consequences of sleep and sleep deprivation on two peripheral tissues -- lung and heart. while this choice of tissues is somewhat arbitrary, these tissues have undeniable physiologic importance. moreover the rhythmic beating of the heart, like breathing, continues unabated throughout the entire sleep wake cycle. thus the direct influence of sleep on these tissues presents an important test of ubiquitous influence of sleep/wake behavioral state on molecular physiology. we used microarrays to compare the gene expression in sleeping and sleep-deprived mice euthanized at the same diurnal time .

the animals used in this study were also used in a previously published study investigating the transcriptional impact of sleep and sleep deprivation on gene expression in different brain regions  <cit> . heart and lung tissues were obtained along with brain at the time of animal sacrifice. the details of the experimental method and behavioral analysis have been reported previously  <cit> . in brief, male mice  were housed in a 12 h: 12 h light/dark cycle . all mice were acclimated to the experimental environment for 14 days prior to the study. during this period, mice were fed only at night to avoid differential food intake between sleeping and sleep-deprived mice during the day of study. ten undisturbed animals were euthanized at lights on  to establish baseline transcript expression. the remaining animals were split into two main groups: one group was allowed uninterrupted sleep opportunity while the other group underwent continued sleep deprivation. the fraction of the sleep opportunity during which the control animals slept  is shown in figure 1b. deprivation through gentle handling was initiated at lights-on. eight or nine animals were subsequently euthanized from each of the two groups  after  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  and 12 hours from lights on. total rna was isolated from heart and lung samples. transcript levels were assayed with the genechip® mouse gene  <dig>  st array . experimental costs limited the number of tissues samples from brain that were profiled in the previous study  <cit> . as a result, the data for a larger number of animals and microarray results are reported here. one of the primary limitations of our study, like other microarray studies of sleep, is that we do not distinguish the transcriptional effects of sleep from those imparted by isolated physical rest. for simplicity we refer to sleep induced changes. however, in the work that follows it is important to note that the relative contributions of sleep and physical rest remain uncertain.

sleep and enforced sleep deprivation have a marked and coordinated impact on transcription in lung and heart
we identified genes in lung and heart that were differentially expressed as a function of behavioral state at an fdr  cutoff of 1%. of the  <dig>  probe sets and  <dig>  unique named genes annotated on the array,  <dig> genes  were differentially expressed between sleeping and sleep-deprived mice in the heart, while  <dig> genes were differentially expressed in lung. thus, significant fractions of genes in peripheral tissues are affected by sleep and/or sleep deprivation. moreover, the degree of overlap in the lists of differentially expressed genes for the heart and lung is more than expected by chance , suggesting a common function and/or regulation.

many of the genes identified as being differentially expressed in these tissues were also found to be differentially expressed in brain in previous studies  <cit> , again suggesting that behavioral state imparts coordinated transcriptional changes throughout the whole organism. a recent meta-analysis of transcriptional changes in brain by wang et al.  <cit>  enumerated  <dig> unique named genes that have been identified in multiple studies as being differentially expressed as a function of sleep state in different brain regions and in different species. this number of genes probably underestimates the expression changes induced by sleep/wake behavioral state in the brain given the limited statistical power of some of the component studies. nonetheless, of these  <dig> genes, we found  <dig>  were also differentially expressed in heart and/or lung at an fdr of 1%. again, this degree of overlap is more than would be expected from random chance , especially considering that many genes expressed in brain are not expressed in these peripheral tissues.

defining “strict sleep enhanced/repressed genes” highlights transcriptional changes that result from sleep/wake state as opposed to deprivation protocols
sleep deprivation studies have been criticized with the concern that observed changes may reflect the consequence of a particular artificial deprivation protocol rather than natural sleep/wake physiology  <cit> . indeed it can be similarly argued that extended sleep deprivation may induce physiological responses that are distinct from, as opposed to an augmentation of, the responses to normal wakefulness. moreover, a direct comparison between sleep and sleep-deprived expression alone would not permit us to assess whether sleep or sleep deprivation induced the observed expression changes. to better address these concerns, we supplemented the above analysis to include baseline data from the animals sacrificed at lights-on. this additional baseline time point reflects gene expression immediately prior to the initiation of the major sleep period. for each transcript that had significant differential expression between sleep and sleep deprivation, linear regression was used to fit the time course of transcript expression in unperturbed animals starting with baseline expression and continuing with expression in spontaneously sleeping mice sacrificed after  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and 12 hours. we then defined “strict sleep enhanced” or “strict sleep repressed” genes as those differentially expressed genes that also had a significant non-zero slope of gene expression with time  among the non-perturbed sleeping animals. the use of regression was not intended as a test of a true linear pattern, but rather as a tool to assess the general temporal trend in expression over time with undisturbed sleep. the direction of the temporal changes induced by spontaneous sleep was required to be commensurate with the direction of change observed when comparing the naturally sleeping and sleep-deprived mice. thus, to identify a gene as a “strict sleep enhanced gene” we required both that its transcription be significantly greater in sleeping animals when compared to circadian matched sleep-deprived animals and that transcript levels increase over the time course of the natural sleep period. the converse criteria were required of genes said to be strict sleep repressed genes. by restricting our attention to genes that were observed to also have temporal expression changes among undisturbed, spontaneously sleeping animals, we safeguarded against the possibilities that the changes were solely the result of stress due to gentle handling or an artificial facet of the deprivation protocol.

using these strict criteria, a total of  <dig> genes in the lung and  <dig> genes in the heart showed sleep specific changes. these genes are listed in the additional file  <dig>  thus 3% and 6% of the assayed transcripts showed “sleep specific” changes in the lung and heart respectively and there was a significant overlap between the two tissues .

further suggestion that sleep state imparts a coordinated effect on peripheral transcription can be found in noting the similarity in the temporal profiles of the sleep specific transcripts in both tissues. as shown in figure  <dig>  we compared the difference  between gene expression in sleeping and sleep-deprived animals as a function of time. an agglomerative clustering algorithm was used to order transcripts based on the temporal pattern and results are plotted as a heat map. the temporal progression for each gene in the lung is plotted alongside the results for the same gene in the heart. not only was the direction of differential expression highly consistent across the tissues, there is also a marked similarity in temporal progression.

to generate hypotheses as to the molecular consequences of sleep in peripheral tissues we uploaded the four lists  to the nih database for annotation, visualization and integrated discovery  data analysis suite   <cit> . we evaluated these lists for overrepresentation in one of the following categories: gene ontology  biological process, protein information resource  key words, and kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes  pathways. the david functional clustering tool was used to group overlapping biological terms or pathways into clusters that likely reflect common physiology. the results are shown in tables  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig>  tables  <dig> and  <dig> show the functional annotations enriched among the sleep repressed genes in the heart and lung respectively. only annotations enriched at an fdr <5% are retained. tables  <dig> and  <dig> show the functional annotations enriched among sleep enhanced genes in these same tissues. in both tissues, sleep specific transcriptional changes demonstrated significant enrichment for various physiologic processes.

sleep repressed transcripts demonstrate both significantly reduced expression in sleep as compared to sleep deprivation  and a decreasing expression as spontaneous sleep progresses . overrepresented functional annotations describing this group of transcripts that met a fdr cutoff of 5% are shown. clusters describe overlapping gene annotations as determined by the david functional clustering feature.

sp_pir: swiss-prot protein information resource; goterm_bp_fat: gene ontology term biological process; keeg: kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes.

sleep repressed transcripts demonstrate both significantly reduced expression in sleep as compared to sleep deprivation  and a decreasing expression as spontaneous sleep progresses . overrepresented functional annotations describing this group of transcripts that met a fdr cutoff of 5% are shown. clusters describe overlapping gene annotations as determined by the david functional clustering feature.

sp_pir: swiss-prot protein information resource; goterm_bp_fat: gene ontology term biological process; keeg: kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes.

sleep enhanced transcripts demonstrate both significantly increased expression in sleep as compared to sleep deprivation  and increasing expression as spontaneous sleep progresses . overrepresented functional annotations describing this group of transcripts that met a fdr cutoff of 5% are shown. clusters describe overlapping gene annotations as determined by the david functional clustering feature.

sleep enhanced transcripts demonstrate both significantly increased expression in sleep as compared to sleep deprivation  and increasing expression as spontaneous sleep progresses . overrepresented functional annotations describing this group of transcripts that met a fdr cutoff of 5% are shown. clusters describe overlapping gene annotations as determined by the david functional clustering feature.

sleep reduces markers of er stress and the unfolded protein response in both tissues
there were  <dig> sleep-repressed genes in the lung and  <dig> sleep repressed genes in the heart. the david analysis of both of these lists  showed a prominent overlap in the top categories of enrichment: chaperone proteins, endoplasmic reticulum -related transcripts, and heat shock proteins were all highly overrepresented. relative to wake and enforced deprivation, sleep reduces the transcription of key chaperone proteins. notably these categories actually represent highly overlapping biological features involved in the protein folding and the unfolded protein response . figure  <dig> shows the annotated kegg pathway describing protein processing. sleep repressed transcripts in the heart are shown in orange, sleep repressed transcripts in the lung are shown in yellow, and sleep repressed transcripts common to both are shown in red. as already noted, the relative up-regulation of the upr with wakefulness has been a prominent finding among transcriptional studies in the brain. thus, the transcriptional pathways affected by sleep are shared, in part, between heart, lung, and brain. indeed sleep/wake behavioral state influences key molecules throughout the pathway. expression profiles for several of the genes repressed by sleep in both the heart and lung that have annotations related to er stress are shown in figure  <dig> 

the upr was first connected to the molecular response to sleep deprivation in the fly brain  <cit>  and has since been found to be up-regulated by sleep deprivation in different brain regions across multiple species . in the brain, the differential expression of molecular chaperones and the upr between sleep and sleep deprivation is maintained in mice after adrenalectomy  <cit>  and is thus not the result of hpa axis stress. the upr was also up-regulated with extended wakefulness in the liver  <cit> , and pcr confirmed that sleep deprivation enhanced the transcription of bip , a master regulator of the upr, in skeletal muscle  <cit> .

the upr is a highly conserved response to cellular metabolic stress and the accumulation of misfolded proteins . this three-armed response to the accumulation of misfolded proteins involves:  reducing further protein translation to avoid further overtaxing the endogenous chaperones,  up-regulating the transcription of chaperones to assist in proper protein folding, and  inducing apoptosis if cellular homeostasis cannot be restored  <cit> . in mouse cerebral cortex, all three arms of the unfolded protein response occur and are up-regulated after 6 hours of sleep deprivation  <cit> . diverse metabolic challenges can all ultimately induce the upr  <cit> . it is unknown if the metabolic alterations induced by sleep loss are the same in heart, lung, and brain. the metabolic insults may reflect the unique demands of each tissue. regardless of the inciting mechanism, the common downstream consequences of the upr and the resulting reduction in protein translation are expected to impact these peripheral tissues as well as brain. it is also worth noting that while several genes in the upr pathway met the strict criteria for sleep repressed genes in both tissues, a larger set met the criteria in only one. for example, bip  met criteria for a sleep repressed transcript in the lung. in the heart, bip expression showed a reduction in sleep relative to enforced sleep deprivation but this reduction did not meet the pre-defined level of significance.

sleep enhances molecular processes in an organ specific manner
using david, we identified kegg pathways and go biologic categories overrepresented among the strict sleep enhanced genes in the lung: carbohydrate metabolism, glycoproteins and sulfur metabolism.

these classes are of broad physiologic importance and the global metabolic consequences of the sleep-induced changes are thus difficult to simply characterize. however, more focused attention to the particular genes involved suggests that sleep-dependant processes are important in the regulation of oxidative stress in the lung. for example, pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase isozyme  <dig>  is among the many sleep-enhanced genes involved in carbohydrate metabolism. pdk <dig> phosphorylates, and thereby inactivates, the mitochondrial pyruvate dehydrogenase complex that catalyzes the rate-limiting step in the initiation of the citric acid, or krebs, cycle  <cit> . thus, the translation of pdk <dig> serves to slow a major checkpoint of oxidative metabolism.

sulfur metabolism is a similarly ubiquitous biological process, yet the sleep-enhanced transcripts in these pathways also appear to protect the lung in the face of oxidative stress and free radicals. glutathione s-transferase  <dig> and  <dig>  were up-regulated with sleep and are part of a multigenic family responsible for the conjugation of oxidized, toxic, molecules with reduced glutathione  <cit> . thioredoxin reductase  <dig> , another sleep enhanced transcript, is an enzyme with glutathione and thioredoxin reducing activity – and thus enhances the ability to buffer oxidative free radicals  <cit> . taken together these changes will serve to slow the generation of oxidative stressors and free radicals, increase the generation of reducing agents, and enhance the conjugation of these scavengers with extant free-radicals.

there is a long history of studies connecting sleep with the response to oxidative stress. oxidized glutathione itself has been shown to have somnogenic properties  <cit>  and sleep deprivation has previously been reported to decrease glutathione protein levels in both brain  <cit>  and liver  <cit> . mackiewicz et al. showed increased expression of antioxidant enzymes during sleep in the hypothalamus  <cit> . while these results are in contrast with ramanathan’s report of an increase in brain anti-oxidant responses in the setting of short term sleep deprivation  <cit> , the bulk of the data suggest that sleep is a time for the brain to buffer the oxidative load imposed by wakefulness. the lung, like the brain, is subject to considerable oxidative stress  <cit> , and sleep appears to also provide the lung with a temporal compartment favoring the electrochemical reduction of free radicals.

sleep enhances targeted protein breakdown and dna repair in the heart
vagal tone and the baroreflex contribute to cardiac control and change during both rem and nrem sleep  <cit> . as a result, heart rate and blood pressure decline during nrem sleep and the heart has a reduced workload  <cit> . surprisingly, the most significantly enriched annotations among the strict sleep enhanced genes in the heart related to the catabolism or breakdown of macromolecules. sleep enhanced transcripts in the heart were enriched for the ubiquitin–proteasome system  pathway . the ups tags intracellular proteins by conjugation with ubiquitin and marks them for degradation  <cit> . we observed sleep enhanced expression of several fbox family molecules including fbxo <dig>  fbxo <dig>  fbxo <dig> and fbxo <dig>  these fbox proteins are components of skp, cullin, f-box  containing complex that catalyzes the ubiquitination of target proteins  <cit> . e <dig> ligases that covalently attach ubiquitin to specific target proteins also showed sleep enhanced transcription. enhanced transcription of the machinery for protein degradation is at odds with our initial hypothesis that sleep is an anabolic period. however, targeted protein breakdown is distinct from generalized protein degradation. we speculate that, in the heart, sleep may provide a temporal window for the targeted breakdown of errant peptides. targeted breakdown reflects a checkpoint where damaged proteins and now un-needed regulatory factors may be removed prior to new synthesis  <cit> . in addition, the ups maintains the quality of nascent proteins emerging from the er  <cit> . this hypothesis requires further experimental verification, but is consistent with the sleep induced down regulation of the upr. the removal of damaged peptides during sleep would prevent their accumulation and cellular stress.

the second functional cluster overrepresented among sleep-enhanced genes in the heart involves dna repair and regulation. the adult mammalian cardiomyocyte cell is a “textbook example” of a terminally differentiated, non-dividing cell  <cit> . while growing evidence suggests that there is cardiomyocyte turnover in the adult heart, the slow pace of division , suggests that dna synthesis is not a major metabolic demand on the cardiomyocyte  <cit> . in that context, the importance of dna metabolism appears questionable. however, dna damage is a well characterized consequence of both mechanical and oxidative stress in cardiomyocytes  <cit> . increasing dna damage likely impedes proper transcription and evidence of dna damage is associated with the progression to heart failure regardless of the underlying etiology  <cit> . thus repair of dna in the relatively fixed number of cardiomyocytes places a unique burden on the heart  <cit> .

ogg <dig>  one of the sleep enhanced transcripts, has been specifically shown to function in the excision repair of dna in cardiomyocytes from human patients with end stage cardiomyopathy as well as from mouse models of cardiac stress  <cit> . decreased levels of brca <dig>  another sleep induced gene involved in dna repair, have been shown to worsen doxorubicin induced heart failure  <cit> . dna repair is an essential requirement for the continued health of the myocardium. while a circadian rhythm in dna repair has already been described in other cells  <cit> , in the heart this essential function is augmented by sleep.

sleep state effects circadian clock expression in the lung
discrete and independent circadian and homeostatic processes are believed to regulate sleep. yet recent evidence suggests that at the molecular level these processes are intertwined  <cit> . at its core, the molecular circadian pacemaker is driven by the clock/bmal transcriptional activator complex. in the cerebral cortex the expression of several canonical circadian genes increases with sleep deprivation  <cit> . moreover, a variant discovered in the dec <dig> gene , a modulator of clock/bmal mediated transcription  <cit> , has been shown to influence sleep need  <cit> . separately, recent work from the takahshi and schibler labs has demonstrated that small changes in temperature, as are expected from the normal physiology of sleep, are powerful time cues for peripheral oscillators  <cit> . cold induced rna binding protein  has been implicated in this effect  <cit>  and cirbp demonstrated sleep enhanced transcription in both heart and lung. maret et al. similarly noted sleep induced changes in liver cirbp expression <cit> , thus we questioned if sleep and sleep deprivation specifically influence the expression of core clock genes in heart and lung. most core circadian genes were unaffected by sleep state . however, dec <dig>  <cit>  , clock and fbxl <dig>   <cit> , all showed significant differential expression between sleep and sleep deprivation  in the lung. dec <dig> expression was also significantly affected by behavioral state in the heart, but with a smaller fold-change. given the increase in clock and decrease in dec <dig> expression observed with sleep deprivation, we expected an increase in the canonical, e-box driven, clock output genes dbp, tef, and hlf  <cit> . unexpectedly, but in accord with previous observations in the cerebral cortex  <cit> , dbp transcript levels fell during sleep deprivation. in the cortex this decrease has been ascribed to reduced binding of bmal <dig> and npas <dig>  to the dbp promoter with sleep deprivation  <cit> .

sleep synchronizes gene expression in the lung
given the changes in lung clock-gene expression with sleep deprivation, we hypothesized that sleep and its associated changes in body temperature could function in synchronizing the peripheral circadian oscillators with behavioral rhythms. by extension, such changes would be expected to synchronize the peripheral oscillators of different animals with each other. thus, we investigated the influence of sleep on the inter-animal variability of gene expression in the lung and questioned if the inter-animal variation of expression is a function of sleep duration. bartlett’s test of homoscedasticity   <cit>  was applied to the five groups of experimental animals  not subjected to artificial deprivation. the analysis yielded  <dig> probes and  <dig> unique named genes that showed changes in variability as a function of sleep duration . bartlett’s test is statistically powerful but sensitive to outliers and departures from normality. to safe-guard against this possibility we applied the more robust, but less powerful, brown-forsythe test  <cit>  and retained only those transcripts that also showed significant  changes in variability with this test. a total of  <dig> probes and  <dig> unique genes met these combined criteria for sleep/circadian related changes in inter-animal variability. we plotted  the coefficient of variation  of gene expression in each of the sleep groups as compared to its coefficient of variation at baseline. the genes identified as having statistically significant changes in variability were labeled red. interestingly, these genes remain clustered and show the same temporal pattern in variability. the genes in the cluster become more variable during early sleep and more coherent at the end of the sleep period. additional file 3: figure s <dig> confirms that these changes in variability are not the result of sporadic outliers as the same pattern is observed with median absolute deviations. further evidence that this group of genes is indeed a physiologically relevant cluster and not a random collection of genes is obtained from go and kegg-pathway overrepresentation analysis . this transcript cluster is highly enriched for annotations relating to oxidation/reduction, drug metabolism, and wound healing.

annotation clusters were provided by david. only annotations with an fdr <5% are retained and only the top  <dig> clusters are shown.

as the five experimental groups considered in this analysis differed not only in sleep duration but also in circadian time, we next plotted the cvs among the four sleep-deprived groups as compared to baseline . the same transcripts are labeled red. despite being identified from the analysis of an independent group of animals under different conditions, these genes remain a single cluster but demonstrate a different temporal progression during sleep deprivation. among sleep-deprived animals, the genes exhibit increased coherence during early sleep deprivation but later return to, and then exceed baseline variability. thus, the inter-animal variability of this gene cluster changes systematically with both circadian time and sleep/wake behavioral state. when the coefficient of variation in gene expression among sleeping animals is compared to the coefficient of variation among diurnally matched sleep-deprived animals , this pattern becomes clear. the cluster of genes rotates in a counter clockwise direction as the animals allowed undisturbed sleep show synchronization during the later sleep period, while sleep deprived animals sacrificed at the same diurnal time show increasing inter-animal variability. finally  we followed all  <dig> probes that mapped to gene ontology  annotations “go:0055114 ~ oxidation reduction” and all  <dig> probes that mapped to “go:0009611 ~ response to wounding”, both of which were highly enriched in the transcript cluster. these entire gene groups demonstrate the same systematic changes in transcript variability with sleep and sleep deprivation.

the same classes of transcripts that were synchronized by sleep have been identified among the most enriched annotations describing circadian transcripts in the rat lung  <cit> . the ability for sleep to act as a synchronizing cue for peripheral oscillators suggests that sleep may have a role in coordinating the physiology of peripheral tissues and matching that physiology to behavioral rhythms. we hypothesize that sleep itself, or the extended periods of altered temperature and neurohumoral tone associated with sleep, can act as a “reset button” for peripheral tissues. moreover, this effect is likely to be most pronounced in tissues, like the lung, with poor intercellular communication and less robust rhythms  <cit> . as a result, the metabolic consequences of sleep deprivation on peripheral tissues may be intimately connected to the effects of chronic circadian disruption and jet lag with. without the synchronizing effects of sleep, peripheral tissues are apt to become progressively out-of-sync and poorly coordinated with behavior.

CONCLUSIONS
taken together, these results show that the transcriptional effects of sleep extend beyond the brain to include peripheral tissues. the physiological roles of the heart and lung show a stereotyped consistency between sleep and wake. yet, these tissues show considerable transcriptional changes with sleep/wake behavioral state. the transcriptional response to sleep and wake in peripheral tissues shows a marked similarity to that observed in brain. in the heart and lung this similarity in the response to sleep extends beyond the names of the genes and pathways that are regulated and includes a similar temporal pattern of activation. sleep reduces expression of genes involved in cellular stress and enhances the transcription of reducing agents. these results are generally consistent with transcriptional changes observed in the brain across various model species. in contrast to the commonality of gene pathways repressed by sleep, different molecular processes were enhanced by sleep in heart, lung, and brain. in each case sleep seems to provide a temporal compartment to cope with the tissue-specific molecular consequences of wakefulness.

a fundamental limitation of our study is that it does not partition which of these effects are due to physical rest and inactivity as opposed to true sleep. while similar criticisms could be leveled against previous transcriptional findings in the brain, there is plentiful evidence that some elements of cognitive recovery after sleep deprivation specifically require sleep rather than physical inactivity. further research will be needed to elucidate which of the transcriptional consequences ascribed to sleep and sleep deprivation are more general results of physical rest.

as has been noted before, animals in the undisturbed sleep group were active during a portion of the sleep period while it is very likely that some of the sleep-deprived animals did get short periods of sleep. given the lack of eeg monitoring we cannot quantify the extent of this limitation. while we identify a significant fraction of the heart and lung transcriptomes as being influenced by sleep, the presence of sleep in the sleep-deprived group may have reduced the sensitivity of the experiment in identifying sleep responsive transcriptional changes. it is also worth noting that while the restricted feeding paradigm used in this study ensures that the sleep deprived and undisturbed animals did not have a differential food intake during the study, we cannot exclude that a physiologically important interaction between dietary restriction and sleep deprivation may contribute to our results.

finally, our data show that sleep or behavioral activity may play a role in synchronizing the peripheral transcription of a group of physiologically important transcripts in the lung. this finding requires further exploration, but suggests a unique role for the function of sleep in peripheral tissues. indeed, a recent study in humans concluded that the chronic sleep deprivation blunts circadian oscillations in blood  <cit> . our data are limited to a 12 hour window of acute deprivation and thus do not permit the assessment of circadian amplitude. however, the finding that sleep synchronizes cellular oscillations and influences cibp expression may help explain that result. thus, this data adds to the growing evidence that the functions of sleep extend beyond the brain and also include the modulation of peripheral circadian rhythms.

