BACKGROUND
polymicrobial bloodstream infections are commonly due to coagulase-negative staphylococci  and candida species
 <cit> . candida infections are important nosocomial infections in intensive care units and approximately 25% of patients with candidemia also have an associated bacteremia
 <cit> . polymicrobial infections are associated with significantly worse clinical outcomes than monomicrobial infections
 <cit> . mortality due to polymicrobial infections is twice that of monomicrobial infections in non hiv infected adult patients, children and neonates
 <cit> . pediatric polymicrobial infections also increase length of intensive care, therapy, hospital stay and healthcare costs
 <cit> .

although high mortality has been observed in animal models of polymicrobial infections of staphylococci and candida, the mechanisms for increased mortality and morbidity have not been fully elucidated
 <cit> . in vitro interactions of candida albicans and s. epidermidis in mixed species biofilms and decreased antimicrobial susceptibility have been reported
 <cit> . interactions of s. epidermidis with candida in mixed species infections may influence gene expression that may lead to enhanced virulence, biofilm formation, biofilm dispersal and tissue pathology have not been well studied.

a significant risk factor for human polymicrobial infections is the presence of indwelling vascular catheters that are sites for mixed species biofilm formation
 <cit> . biofilms are structured three dimensional microbial communities that are attached to a surface and encased in an extracellular matrix , which comprises extracellular dna , polysaccharides and proteins
 <cit> . edna is formed by release of bacterial genomic dna mostly by cell lysis or less commonly by active excretion into the biofilm matrix in some bacteria 
 <cit> . extracellular dna of the biofilms facilitates the initial stage of adhesion to biomaterials, forms the structural backbone and acts as glue that promotes biofilm aggregation
 <cit> . clinically significant mixed species biofilms of the pathogens s. epidermidis and candida and the specific role of edna in mixed species biofilms have not been investigated.

in this study, we investigated mixed species biofilms of s. epidermidis and c. albicans, both in vitro, and in a clinically relevant mouse model of catheter biofilm infection, in vivo. we evaluated genome-wide s. epidermidis transcriptional responses in mixed species biofilms with c. albicans, to evaluate alteration in gene expression that causes increased virulence and pathogenicity of mixed species infections. we identified the significant role of edna in the enhancement of mixed species biofilms that may explain adverse outcomes due to clinical polymicrobial infections.

RESULTS
mixed species biofilms are larger than single species biofilms of s. epidermidis and c. albicans
representative confocal images of s. epidermidis, c. albicans and mixed species biofilms grown in microwell petridishes for 24 hr, stained with live/dead, at 40× magnification, in the green, red and merged channels are presented in figures 
1a,
1b and
1c respectively. mixed species biofilms that were developed using equal, half volumes of both organism suspensions  grew more profusely than single species biofilms. z-stacks of the biofilms at  <dig> μm intervals in the z axis at 40× magnification were analyzed by phlip software using matlab imaging toolbox. biovolume of s. epidermidis , c. albicans  and mixed species biofilms  are represented in figure 
1d. biovolume of mixed species biofilms was significantly increased when compared to single species biofilms of either s. epidermidis or c. albicans.

scanning electron microscopy of explanted catheter segments confirms catheter biofilm infection in vivo
scanning electron microscopy  of explanted catheter segments from mice on day  <dig> of insertion confirms catheter biofilm formation in the subcutaneous catheter model of biofilm infection. when examined using 250× magnification, s. epidermidis  and mixed-species biofilms  are seen coating the luminal surface of the catheter. s. epidermidis biofilms  when examined at 5000× magnification, reveal grape-like clusters of staphylococci. mixed species biofilms have more organisms and extracellular material compared to single species s. epidermidis biofilms . candida hypha and s. epidermidis in mixed species biofilms are presented and labeled in figure 
2e and figure 
2f.

evidence for increased catheter infection and dissemination of s. epidermidis in mixed-species biofilm infection in a subcutaneous catheter model
figure 
3a depicts catheter cfu/ml and figure 
3b blood cfu/ml  of s. epidermidis and c. albicans in single species and mixed species biofilm infections. increased catheter biofilm formation was evidenced by significantly higher mean number of viable s. epidermidis in mixed species infection  compared to single species s. epidermidis biofilm infection  . this is all the more significant since the pre-insertion catheter cfu/ml in the mixed species infection before subcutaneous insertion in mice were  <dig>  to  <dig> × 104 cfu/ml of s. epidermidis compared to catheters incubated in single species s. epidermidis infection . since the pre-insertion cfu/ml were lower in the mixed species infection compared to single species s. epidermidis infection, adhesion phase of the biofilm formation is not altered by the presence of c. albicans. however, presence of c. albicans in the preincubation solution increases s. epidermidis biofilm formation on catheters in vivo possibly by increased biofilm aggregation resulting in increase in cfu/ml  and extracellular matrix. mixed species environment also increased dispersal of s. epidermidis as evidenced by increased blood dissemination of s. epidermidis in mixed species infection . c. albicans blood cfu/ml was similar in single and mixed species infection even though the catheter cfu/ml of candida was significantly less in mixed-species biofilms compared to single species candida biofilms .

genome-wide transcriptional changes in s. epidermidis in mixed species biofilms compared to single species s. epidermidis biofilms
microarray data have been deposited at the ncbi gene expression and hybridization data repository , . s. epidermidis gene expression in mixed species biofilms revealed  <dig> genes that changed ±  <dig>  fold with an adjusted p value >  <dig> . upregulated s. epidermidis genes  included sarr and the hrca transcriptional regulators, heat shock protein grpe, genes involved in nucleic acid metabolism and other proteins . down regulated s. epidermidis genes  included the highly down-regulated lrga and lrgb genes , carbohydrate, amino acid and nucleotide metabolism, transporters and other proteins. hierarchical clustering of data resulted in separation of samples of s. epidermidis and mixed-species biofilms, as expected . the cluster analysis illustrates the quality of the biological replicates and the differential regulation between the two sample types. we selected three genes of known function that were upregulated >  <dig> fold  and the two most down regulated genes  and performed real-time pcr to compare our microarray results . real-time pcr results were not statistically different from the microarray results for each of the genes evaluated .

evidence for increased edna in mixed-species biofilms
quantification of the bacterial edna in the extracted biofilm matrix using s. epidermidis specific primers  showed significantly increased bacterial edna in mixed-species biofilms of s. epidermidis and c. albicans compared to single species biofilms of s. epidermidis . extracted biofilm edna was normalized for cfu/ml of the initial organism suspension used to form the biofilms. in order to understand the contribution of edna from candida, we assayed the edna with candida chromosomal gene specific primers rip, rpp2b and pma <dig> . candida specific edna was identified in single species candida biofilms , none in s. epidermidis single species biofilms and negligible in mixed species biofilms. this confirms the predominance of bacterial  in the extracellular matrix of mixed-species biofilms.

disrupting edna by dnase decreases single and mixed-species biofilms
we further confirmed the presence of edna by estimating the effects of dna degradation on single and mixed species biofilms. dnase i treatment for 16 hrs disrupted both single and mixed species biofilms of s. epidermidis significantly and in a concentration dependent manner compared to control biofilms  . in order to understand the effects of dnase at different stages of biofilm formation, we exposed developing biofilms to dnase  at  <dig>   <dig> and 18 hrs and developed the biofilms up to 24 hrs . at all starting exposures, dnase decreased biofilm formation at 24 hrs significantly compared to controls . percentage reduction in biofilms was more pronounced for mixed species biofilms compared to single species biofilms, indicating the higher edna content of the mixed species biofilms .

discussion
we evaluated the morphology of mixed species biofilms of s. epidermidis and c. albicans, in vitro. we observed enhancement of biofilms in a mixed species environment. in a mouse subcutaneous catheter model of biofilm infection, we noted increased catheter infection and systemic dissemination of s. epidermidis in a mixed species environment. to further explore the reasons for increased pathogenicity of s. epidermidis in mixed species biofilm infections with c. albicans, we evaluated the transcriptome of s. epidermidis in a mixed species environment and found that the repressors of autolysis, lrga and lrgb were highly down regulated. down regulation of repressors of autolysis, is associated with increased edna in the biofilm matrix, possibly by increased bacterial autolysis. we confirmed the significance of increased biofilm edna by evaluating its degradation by dnase.

mixed species biofilms of s. epidermidis and c. albicans were significantly thicker and voluminous compared to single species biofilms of either organism in vitro. increased thickness of mixed species biofilms can be due to increase in the number of organisms or increase in the extracellular matrix or possibly both. in mixed species biofilm infections in vivo, at 8 days of infection, we observed increase in catheter cfu/ml of s. epidermidis associated with blood dissemination. mixed species biofilms in vivo may further be modified by environmental milieu e.g. conditioning of the catheter implants with host proteins that may increase biofilm adhesion and aggregation.

in mixed species biofilms of other bacteria with candida species, bacterial association with hyphae predominates association with yeast cells
 <cit> . hogan et al. evaluated interactions of pseudomonas aeruginosa and candida, and found that pseudomonas aeruginosa had a predilection for the hyphal form without affecting the yeast form of the fungus
 <cit> . in studies of mixed species infections of s. aureus and c. albicans, similar to p. aeruginosa, adherence to the candida hyphae was nearly 30-fold more than adherence to the yeast form of candida
 <cit> . in our experiments  we found adherence of s. epidermidis to both yeasts and hyphae of candida which may facilitate mixed species biofilms of these two organisms and partly contribute to the increased clinical frequency of mixed species biofilm infections of c. albicans and s. epidermidis. the yeast and hyphal forms of c. albicans may act as a scaffold on which biofilms of s. epidermidis are formed
 <cit> . candida infection is associated with tissue invasion by hyphae and it been hypothesized that staphylococcal tissue infection is facilitated by its association with candida hyphae
 <cit> . synergistic effects of c. albicans and s. epidermidis have been reported by other investigators
 <cit> . in mixed species biofilms of c. albicans and s. epidermidis, presence of slime producing strains of s. epidermidis decreases antifungal susceptibility related to decreased penetration of the fluconazole through the ecm and conversely the fungal cells protected slime negative s. epidermidis against vancomycin
 <cit> . in an in vitro study of mixed species biofilms of c. albicans and s. epidermidis, enhanced the growth of s. epidermidis was observed
 <cit> .

we used a clinically relevant model of subcutaneous catheter biofilm infection to evaluate the clinical implications of mixed species biofilm infection
 <cit> . in mixed species biofilms, catheter biofilm infection of s. epidermidis increased in the presence of c. albicans. pre-insertion cultures revealed lower catheter infection of s. epidermidis in mixed species infection compared to single species s. epidermidis but on day  <dig> of insertion in vivo, we found increased catheter infection of s. epidermidis in the mixed species infection. this suggests that mixed species environment facilitates biofilm aggregation and not the initial phase of s. epidermidis adhesion to catheters. enhanced biofilm aggregation was associated with enhanced dispersal that led to increased systemic dissemination of s. epidermidis in the mixed species infection. increased virulence and mortality has been described in mouse models of dual infection with c. albicans and s. aureus but not with s. epidermidis <cit> . peters et al. using proteomic techniques found that the global transcriptional repressor of virulence was down regulated thereby increasing virulence of the dual species biofilms of s. aureus and c. albicans <cit> . enhancement of biofilms, increased catheter infection and dissemination of s. epidermidis in mixed species biofilms in vivo may partly explain clinical therapeutic failures and contribute to increased mortality and morbidity in polymicrobial infections.

we performed microarrays to delineate changes in staphylococcal gene expression that lead to increased catheter infection and dissemination in mixed species biofilms with c. albicans. we noted that the lrg operon comprising lrga and lrgb was highly down regulated  in mixed species biofilms. lrg operon along with the cidr operon represents the molecular elements of programmed cell death or apoptosis in staphylococcus aureus <cit> . the lrg operon is a repressor of murein hydrolase activity that hydrolyzes components of the cell wall, involved in autolysis. lrg protein has also been shown to affect antibiotic tolerance, biofilm formation  and acetoin production in s. aureus <cit> . lrg operon is regulated by the lytsr two component regulatory system in s. aureus and transcriptional regulators agr and sar that regulate virulence also influence the lrg operon
 <cit> . down regulation of the lrg operon  in mixed species biofilms is associated with enhanced release of edna possibly by autolysis
 <cit> . extracellular dna plays a significant role in biofilm aggregation
 <cit>  and it is conceivable that increased edna enhances aggregation of mixed species biofilms of s. epidermidis and c. albicans. most bacteria have cardiolipin synthases that convert bacterial membrane phosphatidyl glycerol to cardiolipin, during the transition from logarithmic phase to the stationary phase and may help survival during prolonged high salt stress conditions
 <cit> . s. aureus and s. epidermidis have  <dig> orfs cls <dig> and cls <dig> <cit>  and we found cardiolipin synthetase  was significantly down regulated. other down regulated genes included those associated with carbohydrate, amino acid and nucleotide metabolism, transporters and other proteins. biofilm as a whole may be metabolically less active compared to actively dividing planktonic organisms and that may explain the down regulation of metabolic processes and overall more down regulated genes  than upregulated genes 
 <cit> .

genes upregulated in mixed species biofilms include transcriptional regulators , genes associated with nucleic acid metabolism, some transporters and other proteins. sarr is known inhibitor of sara, a transcriptional regulator that represses extracellular proteases and that may influence virulence determinants in s. aureus <cit>  but its role in s. epidermidis is not known. therefore the net effect of sarr upregulation is to facilitate secretion of extracellular proteases that may function as virulence factors. heat shock protein grpe protein of the dnak family of shock proteins is upregulated indicating an adaptive response to polymicrobial stress by s. epidermidis in mixed species biofilms. adaptation to competition for iron in mixed species environments is facilitated by the increased transcription of transferrin receptor, which facilitates uptake of iron from human transferrin by a receptor-mediated energy dependent process
 <cit> . genes related to nucleic acid and glycerol metabolism  were also upregulated.

we measured the edna content in the extracellular matrix of single and mixed-species biofilms and confirmed that s. epidermidis derived edna predominated in mixed species biofilms. candida derived edna was barely detected indicating the predominant role for bacterial edna in the enhancement of mixed-species biofilms. low candida edna may be also partly due to decreased growth of candida in mixed species biofilms. indirectly, this indicates that bacterial autolysis, the most important mechanism for producing bacterial edna, is strongly implicated in the enhancement of mixed species biofilms.

we evaluated the effects of disrupting edna by dnase on mature  and developing single and mixed species biofilms of s. epidermidis and c. albicans. dnase decreased biofilm metabolic activity  by a concentration dependent manner in both single and mixed species biofilms. we also evaluated the effects of dnase on a developing biofilms by initiating exposure to dnase at different time points . exposure at earlier time-points would decrease adhesion of the microbial cells and exposure later would affect biofilm aggregation. we observed that dnase decreased biofilm formation significantly at both adhesion and aggregation stages in biofilm development. the reduction in biofilm formation as a percentage of that of untreated biofilms was more pronounced in mixed species biofilms compared to single species biofilms, due to an increased edna content in the mixed species biofilms. other investigators have found similar inhibiting effects of dnase on biofilm adhesion and aggregation outlining the essential role of edna in biofilm development
 <cit> .

we confirmed increased edna in mixed species biofilms by quantitation of edna in the biofilm extracellular matrix. increased edna in the biofilm matrix is probably caused by autolysis as active secretion of edna has not been reported in s. epidermidis biofilms. staphylococcal biofilm aggregation is enhanced by edna and increased quantity of edna may explain the increased thickness of mixed-species biofilms. significant down regulation of repressors of autolysis  also point to increased bacterial autolysis in mixed species biofilms. the lrg operon that represses murein hydrolase activity and thereby autolysis in s. aureus has not been studied in s. epidermidis so far. in staphylococcus aureus, cida and lrga genes encode homologous hydrophobic proteins that function similar to bacteriophage coded holin  and antiholin , respectively. the s. aureus cidb and lrgb genes also encode homologous hydrophobic proteins, but their functions are unknown
 <cit> . in a model proposed by bayles et al., the lytsr two-component regulatory system senses decreases in cell membrane potential due to cell membrane damage and responds by inducing lrgab transcription. the cidr protein, a lysr-type transcription regulator, enhances cidabc in response to carbohydrate metabolism that enhance murein hydrolase activity thereby enhancing autolysis
 <cit> . lrgab operon in s. aureus also influences penicillin  tolerance
 <cit> . in s. epidermidis, lytsr knockout strain exhibited decreased extracellular murein hydrolase activity and mildly increased biofilm formation but did not differ in triton x- <dig> mediated autolysis or in murein hydrolase zymogram patterns from the parent strain
 <cit> . mutation of saers  in s. epidermidis increased autolysis and biofilm forming ability
 <cit> . association of autolysis and increased biofilm formation is also confirmed by studies on autolysin atle in s. epidermidis <cit> . therefore, autolysis and release of edna has a significant role to play in staphylococcal biofilm formation and enhancement of mixed species biofilms.

the limitations of the study include using a single clinical strain each of s. epidermidis and c. albicans. findings of this study will have to be confirmed using multiple strains of s. epidermidis and c. albicans. the subcutaneous catheter biofilm infection in mice is an appropriate and reproducible model to evaluate foreign device biofilm infections i.e. pacemaker and shunt infections but an intravenous catheter model will be more appropriate for indwelling vascular catheter infections. nevertheless the subcutaneous catheter model has been successfully used to study biofilm infections and to evaluate anti-biofilm strategies. in our microarray experiments, s. epidermidis probes on the microarray that might hybridize with candida rna were eliminated in the design of the microarray. also, those probes that actually hybridized with candida rna were also eliminated from data analysis. it is possible that some transcriptome data was lost due to the elimination of candida cross-reacting probes.

CONCLUSIONS
biofilms are enhanced in a mixed-species environment of s. epidermidis and c. albicans both in vitro and in vivo. enhanced mixed-species biofilms are associated with increased s. epidermidis-specific edna in vitro and greater systemic dissemination of s. epidermidis in vivo. down regulation of the lrg operon, a repressor of autolysis was associated with increased edna. we propose that bacterial autolysis may play a significant role in the enhancement of mixed species biofilms and which needs to be confirmed by mechanistic studies. enhancement of biofilms and systemic dissemination of s. epidermidis in polymicrobial environments may explain increased clinical mortality and morbidity. elucidation of polymicrobial interactions in mixed species biofilms may lead to novel strategies to treat human polymicrobial infections.

