BACKGROUND
combination chemotherapy for cancer was introduced in the 1960s  <cit>  as a means to increase the efficacy of anticancer drugs, avoid problems with drug resistance, and/or reduce adverse effects. while today almost all anticancer drugs are administered in combinations, or mixtures, an urgent need remains to develop mixtures that are more effective and safe. the mixture development process typically occurs after individual drugs are approved for clinical use. ). as such, the pool of drugs that is available for creating mixtures is small compared to a pool that also includes unapproved but potentially useful compounds. by incorporating mixture design early in the preclinical phase of development and by considering all potentially useful components regardless of their approval status, more opportunities exist to optimize mixture action. a greater number and variety of candidate compounds should allow increased flexibility and control with regard to affecting therapeutic target. in the remainder of this paper, the term drug is used to refer to both approved compounds and potentially useful compounds.

in addition to using a larger pool of candidate drugs, it is of interest to consider large mixture sizes as an aid to gaining greater control over mixture action. typically, most mixtures used in the clinic contain two to five cytotoxic drugs. the tendency to limit mixture size to this range is due in large part to concerns over overlapping toxicity profiles. one can speculate, however, that if some drugs in a mixture were of low systemic toxicity but still somewhat cytotoxic to cancer cells  a larger number of drugs could be safely used. if the inclusion of such drugs improved mixture efficacy via synergism, then the larger mixtures might be clinically useful.

one difficulty that arises with large candidate pools and large mixture sizes, however, is the combinatorial explosion of mixtures that can be created. for n drugs, 2n-n- <dig> fixed-ratio mixtures of two or more drugs can be created. from a pool of  <dig> drugs,  <dig>  mixtures are possible. the problem is considerably aggravated if ratios between drugs in a mixture are allowed to freely vary. for practical reasons, this study was limited to a pool of ten drugs, with fixed concentration ratios used between drugs. ratios were based on relative ic <dig> values. mixtures consisted of doxorubicin and one or more of nine natural compounds, with the later chosen from a pool of  <dig>  natural compounds. criteria for choosing the nine included commercial availability, a prediction of low systemic toxicity in rats, a prediction of modest or stronger in-vitro cytotoxicity in multiple nci cell lines, and activity in the cytotoxicity assay used here. thus the nine compounds are thought to be relatively non-toxic to mammals but still cytotoxic to cancer cells at reasonably low concentrations. indeed, several of the compounds, including curcumin, quercetin, and egcg, are regularly ingested by humans in the diet.

the use of fixed ratios resulted in  <dig>  mixtures, which are still too numerous to comprehensively test. therefore, the goal of this study was to develop a modeling approach that would be useful in predicting which mixtures are likely to be highly synergistic. classification models for drug interaction were developed and trained on a small fraction of the  <dig>  possible mixtures. the training set consisted of  <dig> mixtures, or about four percent of the total sample space.

the responses modeled were derived from confidence intervals of a loewe-additivity drug interaction index that was estimated using the mixlow method  <cit> . to account for concentration-dependent changes in interactions, a function of the interaction index was integrated over a moderate range of fraction-affected values . thus, responses represented the degree of synergism or antagonism averaged over a moderate range of mixture concentrations. in the remaining text, responses will sometimes be referred to as synergism scores.

one or more of three sets of explanatory variables were used to construct the models. one set was comprised of binary indicators of mixture composition – where a zero indicated that a drug was not in a mixture, and a one indicated otherwise. there are at least two drawbacks to models based only on this set of variables, however. first, the models would not be able to make predictions for mixtures containing drugs that the models had not been trained on. second, the explanatory variables do not contain direct biologic information and so biologic interpretation of the results is limited.

a major challenge in devising other sets of explanatory variables is to find suitable methods for encoding the characteristics of a mixture into a form that can be manipulated mathematically. one approach, introduced by sheridan  <cit> , is to develop quantitative structure-activity relationship  models using "pseudomolecules" to represent mixtures. pseudomolecules represent the average of molecular descriptors over all component drugs. using this approach, explanatory variables for a given mixture might include the average number of nitrogen atoms over all drugs in the mixture, the average molecular weight, and so on. one drawback to the pseudomolecule approach is that like composition data, the information contained in pseudomolecules does not have direct biological meaning. the pseudomolecule approach was used to construct the second set of explanatory variables. this is the first time the approach has been used to predict drug synergism.

the third set of explanatory variables is constructed using a new approach whereby mixtures are  represented as a function of predicted protein binding patterns of component drugs. most drugs influence cellular activity by binding to one or more proteins and therefore a mixture's activity should be dependent on the protein-binding characteristics of the component drugs. by using protein-drug binding data as explanatory variables, a systems biology frame of reference might be gained.

unfortunately, protein-drug binding data are expensive to generate in the laboratory. one alternative is to use docking scores generated by virtual docking software. unfortunately, state-of-the-art virtual docking programs cannot predict protein-drug binding affinity with high accuracy  <cit> . docking programs can, however, be useful for classifying drugs into high and low affinity categories, although high rates of false-positives remain a common problem  <cit> .  despite their limitations, virtual docking scores are used in this paper. a set of explanatory variables was created based on docking scores generated by the commercial docking program ehits  <cit> . docking was conducted for  <dig> selected drugs and  <dig>  proteins whose structures were obtained from the protein data bank . of these,  <dig> proteins were successfully docked to all  <dig> drugs and were predicted to bind strongly with at least one of them.

protein-drug docking scores have already been used as substitutes for molecular descriptors in qsar models  <cit> . in these studies, however, models were constructed for single drugs. a means to use docking scores for modeling mixtures has not yet been developed. a straightforward method is proposed here in which scores are first converted to binary values. a value of one is assigned to any protein-drug combination for which the docking score is both below a low threshold and below that calculated for the co-crystallized ligand – low docking scores are associated with a higher chance of binding. a value of zero is assigned otherwise. next, mixture-protein scores are assigned by counting the number of drugs in a mixture that are predicted to bind to a given protein. the hypothesis is that the effects of a mixture may be related to how many of the component drugs bind to individual proteins. if many drugs in a mixture bind to a given protein, the chance of inhibiting the protein may be greater than if none or only a few drugs bind. because each column in the explanatory data matrix corresponds to count data for one protein, and models use multiple explanatory data columns, the models should ideally be able to identify relationships between synergism scores and inhibition of multiple proteins . a hypothetical example of calculating mixture-protein scores is presented in table  <dig>  informative reviews of the relationships between protein networks, multi-target therapies, and synergism were published by araujo et al.  <cit>  and zimmermann et al.  <cit> . for the remainder of this paper, the mixture-protein scores are referred to as docking data.

as noted above, docking software is not able to predict binding affinity with high precision. even though the docking scores are used here only to classify the drugs into high and low affinity groups, it is highly likely that some drugs are misclassified. using current software, the degree to which the derived docking data is an accurate reflection of true binding affinity is uncertain. at worst the derived docking data is unrelated to binding affinity and must be viewed simply as a set of mathematical descriptors that may possess discriminative ability. at best they modestly reflect true binding affinity and therefore possess some biologic meaning. to be conservative it is prudent to consider the current docking data simply as mathematical descriptors. as docking software improves, however, the approach outlined here should be better able to generate descriptors with true biologic meaning.

leave-one-out and leave-many-out cross validation was used to assess the accuracy of models constructed here. results based on docking scores were contrasted with results based on pseudomolecule data. in addition, a regression model was constructed using docking scores and the model was used to make predictions for all  <dig>  possible mixtures. from these results an additional  <dig> mixtures were selected for testing. synergism scores obtained from these experiments were used to create an additional test set for the classification model. lastly, models were constructed using pseudomolecule and docking data where synergism scores were scrambled. overall, results suggest that accuracies of the pseudomolecule and docking-data models were similar. a larger training set would be needed to better determine if one method is superior to the other. in addition, both models performed significantly worse on scrambled responses, indicating that the relationships found were not due to chance alone. this paper presents a new method to generate discriminative descriptors for mixture models and to our knowledge is the first published report of a predictive model for drug synergism based on virtual docking data. using a different approach and a yeast proliferation assay, lehar et al.  <cit>  have produced a model to predict the type of synergism  based on the type of protein interaction . their method also appeared useful for cytotoxicity data. to use the model, drug targets must be known.

RESULTS
ic <dig> values of drugs and mixtures and synergism scores
ic <dig> values and their standard errors , along with synergism scores  are listed in table s. <dig> of additional file  <dig>  for the reader's convenience, ic <dig> values for single drugs are given in units of both μl and μg/ml .

mixture composition was based on preliminary ratios of ic <dig> values between the  <dig> drugs. these ratios differed only slightly from the ic <dig> values listed in table s. <dig>  a list of mixtures and their compositions is given in table s. <dig> of additional file  <dig> 

classification models of drug interaction
a classification model was constructed using only the docking data as explanatory variables. the model was assessed by a nonstandard leave-many-out cross validation  procedure in which each cv training set included all mixtures except those that contained a specified drug. the corresponding cv test sets consisted of all mixtures that did contain the specified drug. in this way, models were used to make predictions on mixtures that contained a drug the models had not been trained on. in practice, it is desirable to have an accurate predictive model that is trained using only a subset of candidate drugs. to assess this capability, the nonstandard leave-many out procedure was used rather than a standard one where assignment of mixtures to training sets is done randomly.

note that by design the leave-many-out procedure created challenging cv training/testing sets. first, only  <dig> of the  <dig> examples were used in a given cv training set, on average. second, as already mentioned, the cv test sets were constructed of mixtures that contained a drug the model had not been trained on.

because a given drug appeared in several mixtures, each mixture appeared in several different cv test sets. as such, the total number of predictions made on all cv test sets was  <dig>  not  <dig>  rather than form a consensus prediction for each mixture across all cv test sets , all  <dig> predictions were used in assessing model quality.

precision for the docking-data model was  <dig>  on the positive labels and  <dig>  on the negative ones. relative to other cv testing sets, predictions for mixtures in the doxorubicin hold-out set were poor – precision was  <dig>  on positive labels and  <dig>  on negative ones. excluding these  <dig> predictions, the precision was  <dig>  on both the positive and negative labels.

the feature selection algorithm for this model identified about  <dig> columns of explanatory variables as being important, depending on the training set. across all cross-validation models, the ten most common proteins selected during feature selection were 1pxj , 1jyx , 1yta , 1nai , 2h <dig> , 17gs , 2itm , 1xoq , 1uho , and 1n <dig> . of these, cyclin dependent kinase  <dig> has a clear role in cancer cell proliferation  <cit> .

a second classification model was constructed using the pseudomolecule data and leave-many-out cross-validation. for this model, precision on the positive labels was  <dig>  and precision on the negative labels was  <dig> . the difference in prediction accuracy between the docking-data and pseudomolecule models was not significant based on mcnemar's test .

to determine if the leave-many-out models were finding spurious relationships, each was compared to three models that used scrambled synergism scores. to conservatively account for family-wise errors in mcnemar's test, the bonferroni adjustment suggests that an α of  <dig>  be used rather than  <dig>  for determining significance . the p-values for the docking-data models were  <dig> e- <dig>   <dig> , and  <dig> e- <dig>  the p-values for the pseudomolecule data were  <dig> e- <dig>   <dig> e- <dig>  and  <dig> e- <dig>  thus for both models, p-values indicated that scrambling the observations produced results incompatible with a null hypothesis that scrambled and non-scrambled models were identical.

the average precision for the scrambled docking-data models was  <dig>  and  <dig>  on the positive and negative labels, respectively. the average precision on the scrambled pseudo-molecule models was  <dig>  and  <dig>  on the positive and negative labels, respectively. the precision was not close to  <dig>  on the scrambled models because the data sets were unbalanced, and in addition the training algorithm favored models that exhibited similar precision for positive and negative labels.

the precision values on scrambled responses,  <dig>  and  <dig> , is lower than the precision on nonscrambled responses,  <dig>  and  <dig> , for non-synergistic and synergistic classes, respectively. this suggests, for example, that if  <dig>  mixtures were suitably modeled, and model precision did not change, the scrambled response model would generate  <dig>  times more false positives  and  <dig>  times more false negatives  than the model with nonscrambled responses.

leave-one-out cross-validation was also conducted for the docking-data and pseudomolecule models. because leave-one-out cv training sets contained  <dig> rather than  <dig> mixtures, and training set mixtures included all drugs, it was expected that precision would be higher in the leave-one-out models. indeed, precision on the negative labels  was markedly improved for both the docking-data and pseudomolecule models. for the docking-data model, precision was  <dig>  and  <dig>  on the positive and negative labels, respectively. for the pseudomolecule model, precision was also  <dig>  and  <dig>  on the positive and negative labels, respectively.

additional model validation based on  <dig> new samples
to provide an additional test set,  <dig> new mixtures were tested in the laboratory. a regression model based on the  <dig> core mixtures was constructed that used binary indicators of mixture composition and docking data as explanatory variables. using this model, predictions were made for all  <dig>  mixtures. ten of the mixtures predicted to be most synergistic for different mixture sizes were selected for additional laboratory assessment. predictions made by the regression model are not discussed in detail here, as the model itself was only modestly accurate as demonstrated by leave-one-out cross validation . in effect, the regression model was only used to identify  <dig> mixtures for additional testing.

results from the laboratory analysis suggested that five of the mixtures were highly synergistic. observed synergism scores are listed in table s. <dig> of additional file  <dig>  along with predictions made by the regression model. the docking-data classification model, which was trained on the  <dig> mixtures, was used to make predictions on these  <dig> new mixtures. precision was  <dig>   and  <dig>   on the positive and negative labels, respectively.

dose reduction through use of mixtures
the degree of synergism may not be the best index for identifying promising mixtures. an alternative index is the degree of dose reduction that can be achieved for a given drug. for example, one of the dose-limiting side effects of doxorubicin is cardiac toxicity  <cit> . to prevent this, mixtures could be chosen to minimize the dose of doxorubicin required for a given effect level. based on the experimental data listed in tables s. <dig> and s. <dig>  doxorubicin dose-reduction values for the  <dig> doxorubicin-containing mixtures tested are plotted in figure  <dig> against the number of drugs per mixture and observed synergism score. the mixture with the greatest dose reduction was m <dig>  which contained doxorubicin, curcumin, and juglone. the ic <dig> of doxorubicin alone was  <dig>  μl and that of m <dig> was  <dig>  μl. the fraction of doxorubicin in the mixture was  <dig> . therefore, m <dig> allowed a  <dig> / =  <dig> -fold reduction in doxorubicin concentration to achieve the same effect  as doxorubicin used alone. some larger mixtures also showed high dose reduction, even though they were less synergistic. for example, dose reduction values for m <dig> and m <dig>  which had five and six components, respectively, were  <dig>  and  <dig> , respectively. the dose reduction value for m <dig>  with seven drugs, was  <dig> .

discussion
mixtures can be designed to produce a wide range of effects. the work in this paper focused on cytotoxicity, but other possibilities include inhibition of invasion, metastasis, angiogenesis, drug resistance, or any combinations of these. all processes present worthwhile targets for drug therapy and ideally, mixtures to affect them would be rationally designed. such a design could be based on protein-drug affinity and the topology and dynamics of the protein-protein and signaling networks involved. much of the needed network and affinity data are not yet available, however, and therefore the approach taken in this paper is much more modest. here, mixtures are modeled using virtual docking data as a surrogate for binding affinity values.

as previously noted, the degree to which virtual docking data reflects binding affinity is uncertain for the compounds modeled here. thus, while the binding data can be viewed as useful mathematical descriptors for discriminating between highly synergistic and modest or non-synergistic mixtures, the data cannot be confidently interpreted in a biologic sense. in the future, as virtual docking programs become more accurate, the method proposed here could lend itself to biologic interpretation. in this sense, the proposed method has greater potential than the pseudomolecule approach.

if biologic interpretations were to be made, several issues would remain to be addressed. for example, does the drug in fact enter the cancer cell at sufficient concentrations and in an active biologic form that is similar to the one used in virtual docking? is synergism against cancer cells likely to be greater than synergism against normal cells? in addition, care must be taken in assessing the feature selection choices. real-valued docking scores were transformed into binary scores and these scores were transformed into counts. the loss in numerical diversity resulted in high correlations between the docking data for some proteins. the average squared correlation coefficient between the 45-element docking-data vectors  of different proteins was  <dig>  . of the  <dig> vectors,  <dig> duplicates occurred, leaving  <dig> unique vectors. therefore, a particular choice by the feature selection algorithm would also implicate any other proteins that have highly correlated  scores. training on a larger data set could reduce the number of duplicates.

while much work would remain to demonstrate that any of the mixtures studied here are clinically useful, the reported results do have an immediate value. they suggest that reasonably accurate predictive models of drug synergism could be constructed using relatively small training sets, and that the models could have sufficient generalizability to allow predictions on mixtures that contain drugs the model had not been trained on. this means, potentially, that promising mixtures created from drug libraries could be identified after sampling only a small fraction of possible mixtures. training and testing sets larger than the ones used here may be desirable, however, as they might improve precision and aid in model assessment.

when constructing models, training sets should be selected to adequately sample the space of explanatory variables that is of interest. the classification models were able to accurately predict which mixtures that contain a new, unseen drug would be highly synergistic, except when that drug was doxorubicin. for the doxorubicin cv test set, the precision on negative labels was only  <dig> . the low precision can be explained by the fact that doxorubicin is quite different from the other drugs studied, both in structure and effect. for example, it was more cytotoxic and its binary protein docking scores were different than other drugs. the average squared correlation coefficient of 286-element binary docking score vectors between doxorubicin and other drugs was  <dig> , compared with a mean of  <dig>  for that of all other drugs. the correlation for doxorubicin was markedly lower than that for any other single drug. to obtain accurate predictions for doxorubicin, it would be necessary to train the model using mixtures that contained drugs somewhat similar to doxorubicin. doxorubicin itself, or its minor variations, would not necessarily be needed, however. thus, while the leave-many-out model was not able to accurately predict the synergism class for doxorubicin-containing mixtures, the leave-one-out model was able to do so.  also, precision in the leave-many-out model for doxorubicin mixtures could likely be increased by including additional drugs in the training set that are similar to doxorubicin.

when identifying promising mixtures, the potential for dose reduction may be an important characteristic to consider. as shown in figure  <dig>  dose reduction for doxorubicin can be increased both by increasing synergism and by increasing the number of drugs in a mixture. the ability to target multiple proteins is also a characteristic worth considering. larger mixtures may therefore have advantages even if they afforded slightly less dose reduction than smaller, more synergistic ones. while increasing the number of drugs could increase the risk of adverse effects, that risk may be minimized if a low dose of each individual compound is used  and if several of the drugs in a mixture are relatively non-toxic .

many other characteristics of drugs and mixtures that are important in mixture design are not addressed here. for example, the toxicity patterns of component drugs are important. in general, mixtures will show lower systemic toxicity if the organ toxicity patterns of individual drugs do not overlap. the pharmacokinetic properties of component drugs in a mixture are also important, as useful plasma concentrations of each drug must be achieved. investigations of these and other topics remain for future work.

CONCLUSIONS
there is need within the drug development and toxicology fields for accurate, predictive models of drug interaction. the models proposed here suggest that synergism can be predicted and that measures of protein-drug virtual docking can be useful as explanatory variables. cross-validation results presented here suggest that the docking-data approach may be useful, even when training sets derive from a small fraction of the sample space. experiments conducted here identified synergistic mixtures, some of which could allow substantially lower doxorubicin concentrations without a reduction in in-vitro efficacy.

