BACKGROUND
european clam aquaculture production is centered in three major species of clams: ruditapes philippinarum, the manila clam, ruditapes decussatus, the grooved carpet shell clam and venerupis pullastra, the pullet carpet shell clam. according to fao and fishstat reports, most of the relevant increases of production have been concentrated in r. philippinarum and r. decussatus, both of which have been severely affected by perkinsosis during the last years. historical records show that r. decussatus was one of the major aquaculture species in europe, but due to overfishing, recruitment failures and some outbreaks of bacterial infection and parasitism, producers started to substitute this species for a closer but exotic clam from the same family, the manila clam r. philippinarum <cit> . the introduction of this species, with a faster growing rate and believed to be more resistant to some diseases, originated a progressive replacement of the native clam and nowadays the production of grooved carpet shell clam is almost insignificant in most mediterranean countries. however, its commercial, historical and gastronomic values are still high making the production of this clam an important niche to explore. despite the fact that its culture decreased considerably in countries such as france, italy, portugal and spain, there is some desire to increase r. decussatus production. yet, because of the potentially high vulnerability of its production, management and control strategies and their implications when implemented are key factors for protecting this industry from the effects of diseases. one of the most persistent infections is caused by the parasite perkinsus sp., a facultative intracellular protist parasite belonging to the phylum perkinsozoa. interestingly, perkinsus is also considered a model organism to understand adaptations to parasitism  <cit> .

parasites from perkinsus sp. family are considered to be one of the most problematic agents being blamed for mass infections leading to dramatic reductions in culture beds of clams ruditapes descussatus in southern portugal  <cit> . some reports indicated mortalities up to 80% in portugal, with more than 90% of the clams infected in a specific season/area. also spain and france reported high mortality rates reaching up to 100% in cultures of manila clam in spain  <cit> . although clam perkinsiosis was first identified in r. decussatus, the manila clam can also be affected and perkinsus was first detected in south korea in  <dig>  <cit>  and later in china  <cit>  and japan  <cit> . the agent responsible for these mortalities, perkinsus olseni is the same that caused similar episodes in europe but it can also infected abalones, pearl oysters, oysters and other species of clams besides ruditapes sp. although the clam infection process is not entirely unveiled, it starts when the perkinsus trophozoites, a free living stage, are uptake by the host, followed by their engulfment by bivalve hemocytes in which are capable of remaining viable, proliferate by successive bipartitioning in the connective tissue of all organs and disseminate throughout the entire organism  <cit> , leading to host death in most cases. in the case of infection, lectins are the main mechanism responsible to trigger bivalve’s defenses by recognizing and preventing infection  <cit> . other mechanisms are involved such as the generation of proteases inhibitors  <cit> , lysosomal enzymes and ros species and parasite encapsulation  <cit> .

the routine use of high throughput sequencing and microarrays is becoming more frequent and it is revolutionizing the study of host-parasite interaction  <cit>  revealing some key molecular interactions and modulation of host-species to parasite. the scientific community is paying more attention to marine organisms and in the last 3– <dig> years some important commercial species of fish and shellfish were sequenced and became the target of gene expression studies  <cit> . the importance of mollusks as biological filters and thus potential bio-monitors cannot be sub estimated and this tool can also be applied to infer some facts about how pollution and other antropogenic activities can influence clam transcriptome, increasing the range of future applications for the platform presented here. in the present study we aimed to infer how a parasite can influence host gene regulation by looking at host gene profile and expression and interpreting the basis of molecular determinants by pinpointing host gene clusters, processes and mechanisms of defense and co-existence with the parasite. in conclusion we present a set of new tools for the grooved carpet shell clam, comprising a transcriptome survey, web database integrating gene annotation and blast search and the introduction of an adaptable microarray platform for r. decussatus.

RESULTS
next-generation sequencing and hybrid contig assembly
using roche  <dig> flx technology, two sets of libraries  consisting of a total of  <dig>  reads were sequenced using normalized cdna libraries constructed using either a mixture of adult tissues or containing gonadal tissue and entire larvae. the same libraries were used to obtain respectively  <dig>  and  <dig>  ests with traditional sanger sequencing analysis. using all data available, amounting to a total of  <dig>  reads plus ests, a assembly was performed and grouped them into  <dig>  contigs.

the average read size from  <dig> sequencing was  <dig> bp  and quality level of the reads was assured by a distribution of the sequences with 96% of reads with phred sequence quality > <dig>  while ests of r. decussatus have a mean length of 604 bp. the gc content of the reads was in average 33% ±  <dig> % similar with the est sequences of r. decussatus deposited in genbank , with a maximum of 74% . all  <dig> reads have been deposited in genbank  with the accession number .

transcriptome annotation and microarray quality assessment
to determine the putative identities of assembled contigs, blastx and blastn similarity searches on several protein and nucleotide sequence databases were performed. of  <dig>  unique sequences,  <dig>   showed at least one significant match  in the ncbi non-redundant protein database . in addition to the annotation with blast2go, blast searches against uniprotkb/swiss-prot database, uniprotkb/trembl database and  <dig> different species-specific data bases  were implemented in order to further increase the number of putatively annotated r. decussatus contigs . this approach provided a significant match for additional  <dig>  transcripts, which previously showed no correspondence with the ncbi non-redundant protein database, bringing the final number of clam entries associated with a known protein or transcript to  <dig>  . the percentage of annotated expressed sequences is very similar to that obtained for r. philippinarum  by milan and co-workers  <cit> . the highest number of significant similarity scores  was obtained with crassostrea gigas protein database, second best-matching species lottia gigantea  and third danio rerio  in accordance to what was previously observed for r. philippinarum annotation .

probe design took into consideration all annotated entries . non annotated transcripts with sequence lengths ≥ <dig> bp and average phred sequence quality >  <dig> were also considered. a total of  <dig>  target sequences were obtained and for each of them, two probes with opposite orientations  were designed. a total of  <dig>  out of  <dig>   probes were successfully obtained, representing  <dig>  r. decussatus transcripts. the percentage of annotated transcripts represented in the microarray was 57%. annotated genes were categorized according to gene ontology  functions in the three root categories and also in terms of main families of genes using a previously defined go classification . probe sequences and other details on the microarray platform can be found in the geo database under accession number gse <dig> 

validation of microarray data by quantitative real-time pcr analysis of gene expression
comparative analysis of microarray and qpcr expression data is presented in figure  <dig>  pearson correlation indicated coefficients of  <dig>  for  <dig> compared genes and a p < <dig>  when comparing data for microarray probe and correspondent qpcr, corroborating the good reliability of the microarray platform. fold change is always higher by qpcr than measured by microarray with one exception, a common situation with agilent microarrays  <cit> .

microsatellite content 
the genome of bivalves is known to harbor a large number of microsatellites  <cit> , that can be useful for as markers for different kinds of studies such as population genetic structure, demography, selective breeding and quantitative trait loci studies in clam  <cit> . nevertheless microsatellite marker development can be difficult to develop in mollusk for many reasons, some of them still unknown  <cit> . est derived microsatellites have some advantages such as being more conserved across species and be more adequate for selective pressure studies for example  <cit> . previous studies have characterized some est-ssr in clams using  <dig>  <cit>  but none used r. decussatus as a model.

we used two similar approaches to determine if microsatellites are transcribed into r. decussatus rna, one using misa script  <cit>  and msatcommander  <cit> . table  <dig> reflects the occurrence of single ssr, combined ssr and the most abundant motifs longer than  <dig> bp. we have found  <dig> dinucleotide,  <dig> trinucleotide and  <dig> tetranucleotide,  <dig> pentanucleotides and  <dig> hexanucleotides across  <dig> transcripts with a size superior to  <dig> bp. sixty nine transcripts contained more than one microsatellite, and five transcripts contained  <dig> ssrs and one 6ssrs. unexpectedly was the higher number of repeats containing tri, tetra penta and hexa units, being more abundant than for example dinucleotides ssrs. although most of the sequences with ssr detected allowed primer design it will require further testing to determine their utility as markers. however our dataset increased the number of markers available for r. decussatus with the advantage of being linked to known genes, facilitating linkage map development or gene mapping.
ruditapes decussatus 
transcriptome

rdecusdb, a ruditapes decussatus database
rdecusdb  is centered on contigs sequence and annotation. all contig sequences as well as different layers of results for data analysis will be available through tripal  <cit> . tripal is an open source and freely available collection of drupal modules for management and visualization of data stored within a gmod chado database. analysis results are indexed by drupal’s full text searching mechanism, allowing the users to find data of interest. for each contig, a gene-like entry shows different data and bioinformatic analysis results, being identified with a description together with a sequence in fasta format along with blast hits and the reads that assembled that same contig. in addition, for each contig and whenever predicted, gene ontology is given for biological process , molecular function , and cellular component . it includes several analysis such as: the analysis blast homology module, the analysis interpro module, the analysis kegg module; and the analysis go module for displaying trees and charts for go mappings. recently the sequences were update due to a new assembly. the assembly used in this article and the recent one can be download from the website.

comparison of gene expression in infected versus non infected clams
clam gills were used because they are the main connection with the outside environment, together with the siphons which are one of the most affected tissues upon perkinsus parasitism  <cit> . they participate as defense barriers sharing functions in the respiratory process and being also involved in the elimination of ros molecules by endogenous antioxidant genes  <cit> .

data captured from transcripts fluorescence hybridization derived from four non infected and four infected clam gills was normalized and used to identify transcripts differentially expressed between the two conditions. principal component analysis of conditions proved the good clusterization of samples  and consistence of the results between replicates, allowing the differences in steady-state mrna levels between infected and non infected clams to be reliably measured.

all microarray data was deposited in the geo database  <cit>  under accession numbers gse <dig> 

to perform microarray analysis a two unpaired class significance analysis of microarray  test was carried out on normalized data. by imposing a false discovery rate  of 5% and fold change  > <dig> , a list of  <dig> probes, was obtained . from these, a total of  <dig> transcripts were up-regulated in infected clams versus non infected clams with a fc ranging from  <dig>  to  <dig> while a total of  <dig> transcripts were down-regulated with a fc ranging from  <dig>  to  <dig> 

genes were identified and categorized in terms of percentage using go categories  and specifically according to possible role in the immune response. for up regulated genes , more than half were found to be involved in general metabolism  and in protein, lipid and carbohydrate metabolism  and in specific processes like stress response  and response to biotic stimulus . expression of several genes associated with mitochondria represented two per cent of genes up regulated. among the genes found to be down regulated, 46% were associated with general metabolism while only 1% was associated with lipid metabolism. for both categories, percentages were lower than those found for up regulated genes. other gene clusters were also less represented when compared, such as those related with biotic stimulus , stress response  or even not present such as mitochondria related.

in contrast, the percentage of down regulated genes associated with apoptosis , defense , immune response  and response to external/internal stimulus  increased when compared with up regulated genes . altogether, data suggests that metabolic and stress related genes are the most affected by perkinsus parasitism, reflecting changes in growth and clam survival.

from all genes found to be differentially expressed upon perkinsus infection , only  <dig> of a total of  <dig> up regulated genes and  <dig> from a total  <dig> down-regulated genes were annotated successfully based on ncbi  amino acidic non redundant  database. some annotation was trivial and a second search using ncbi nr together with nt database was conducted, obtaining a more accurate annotation, returning  <dig> genes for up-regulated , and  <dig> for down-regulated . from these two lists we can identify lectins and a number of genes associated with immune/stress response. up regulated genes include matrilin, a gene already associated with zebra mussel hemocytes host defense  <cit> , methionine-r-sulfoxide reductase, a gene linked with antoxidant stress  <cit> , exosome component  <dig>  a set of genes capable of an immunomodulatory activity  <cit> , different kinds of proteases , some already described as defenses against perkinsus in different bivalves  <cit> , acid phosphatases-like genes and dimethylarginine dimethylaminohydrolase, a gene associated with immune response in amphioxus  <cit> .

among the down regulated genes , we can point out several related to calcium binding such as calmodulin. this finding is in agreement with previous data. indeed, one of the majors players during perkinsus infection is hypoxia  <cit>  and calmodulin is known to be down regulated during hypoxia events in mussels  <cit> . calmodulin can be associated with almost all cellular processes, including apoptosis, metabolism, inflammation and the immune response. some immune responses such nf-κb signaling pathway in pearl oyster are regulated by calmodulin binding proteins such as calcineurin  <cit>  and calmodulin was shown to be an important molecular determinant response to perkinsus infection  <cit> .

the presence of lectins among the down-regulated genes constitutes an indication that perkinsus parasitism can also negatively affect expression of some lectins as already shown for mussels  <cit>  where multiples genes involved in immune defense are down regulated upon exposure to an infectious agent. glutathione s-tranferases  are also less expressed in this situation, a result contrary to our expectations since due to their role in cell detoxification and oxidative stress response, necessary for protecting the clam from the oxidative burst, we expected these levels to be up-regulated. however, and in agreement with our findings, some authors already demonstrated that in other mollusks, gst is up-regulated during the initial steps of infection but decreases when infection is established  <cit> . other genes related with oxidative stress, such glutaredoxin a, aldo-keto reductase, hmgb-like protein, hephaestin, glucose dehydrogenase, peptide o-xylosyltransferase-like or agglutination  and anti-apoptosis related genes  were also down regulated, supporting the theory that after the initial infection period there is a relaxation of immune defenses.

in order to obtain a more systematic functional interpretation of the set of differentially expressed genes, enrichment analyses using the database for annotation, visualization, and integrated discovery  was performed. indeed, among the up-regulated cluster of ests, we found a high number of transcripts coding for immune response related genes as expected. the immune system of clams and bivalves in general is deprived of an adaptive system and fight pathogen aggression through an innate immune response  <cit>  exerted by humoral factors and cell-mediated mechanisms . humoral factors include lectins , lysosomal enzymes , antimicrobial peptides and protease inhibitors, among others  <cit> . the constitutive or induced expression of such genes can potentially be directly linked to an effort to arrest perkinsus infection as observed in other systems. it is interesting to observe that oxidative processes, hydrolase activity and nucleic acid binding are the main processes represented and most were already pointed out as having influence during resistance to microorganisms . at the cellular level we could also highlight a number of genes linked to non-membrane bounded organelles and to intracellular non-membrane bounded organelles, suggesting that activity from these organelles  is necessary for the entrapment of microorganisms and for protein synthesis.
perkinsus 
infected and non infected clams

importance of lectins on host parasite interaction
due to the important role of lectins upon perkinsus infection, this family of genes was chosen to be the subject of a particularly detailed characterization. three different families of lectins were identified: c-type lectins, c1q-lectins and galectins. the members of these families were identified using conserved residues as patterns for search. a search into rdecusdb revealed over than  <dig> sequences using lectin as keyword, but some genes were just classified as having a lectin domain. for classification purposes all the transcripts were organized in families and superfamilies and respective fold change annotated. also the domain architecture and presence of signal peptide was deduced . nevertheless  <dig> of those genes  were differentially expressed when comparing infected with non infected clams, one of them being the identified gene with the highest fold change in the array .

c-type lectins presented some conserved domains such wxd   <cit>  and ce  as shown in figure  <dig>  cysteines are maintained due to their capability of forming disulphyde bonds  <cit> , while wxd region is associated with calcium binding. most of the lectins known to be linked to perkinsus response are c-type lectins  <cit> . they have diverse carbohydrate specificities and present multiple structural domains. they can be classified in different groups including collectins, proteoglycan core proteins, selectins, endocytic receptors, and the mannose-macrophage receptor, some of them directly or indirectly involved in immune function  <cit> .

galectins, which constitute one family of lectins, are characterized by a conserved sequence motif in their carbohydrate recognition domain  and a specific affinity for b-galactosides. when compared with other bivalves galectins, ruditapes decussatus galectins present some conserved signature residues fxr, xxxn and wgxerxr  <cit> . interestingly, despite the large evolutionary distance between invertebrate and vertebrates galectins, they still share more than 30% of homology. host galectins are also known to be related to presence of parasite and in oysters it was previously shown that some galectins are induced following perkinsus marinus infection  <cit> .

c1q domain containing proteins are essential in the innate immune system of invertebrates, and can be the link between innate immune system and adaptive immunity as seen in lamprey, where mammalian homologous c1q was shown to be act as a lectin in lamprey  <cit> . the c1q has a globular domain  <cit>  and is one of the most represented lectins. c1q can be involved in a variety of immune related processes such as activation of complement system or pathogen recognition and even mediating cell migration  <cit> . the r. decussatus sialic binding lectins  namely rud_dec_c <dig> were shown to be highly expressed in the presence of perkinsus olseni. to improve c1q pattern recognition all sequences from bivalve c1q lectins deposited in genbank were collected  and conserved residues were analyzed, allowing us to identify a bivalve c1q signature .

CONCLUSIONS
high throughput methodologies such as ngs and microarrays are changing our approach to biodiversity in a way that makes possible to understand changes in adaptation of a semi closed microcosm, like the one represented by a bivalve and its parasite , at the transcriptomic level. this should allow us to acquire a broader understanding of all its molecular determinants, in particular those involved in host defenses and adaptation to parasite and thus contribute to unveil weak or advantageous host genetic characteristics in order to select more resilient clams. this approach will be of relevance to start a selection program based on specific genetic characteristics. in the case of bivalves, transcriptomic approaches can shed light on delicate issues for aquaculture such as the effect of pollutants, infections and human environmental interference. clams can be very sensitive to these factors and the availability of new biomarkers can boost the use of clams as water quality biomonitors. this study is relevant for addressing the high mortalities associated to perkinsus sp. in different mollusc species, and the consequent impact and losses at economic/social level.

although clams can express specific cellular and humoral responses to perkinsus infection, until now the invertebrate innate immune system might have been underestimated and over-simplified  <cit> . yet, through the use of microarrays to assess the hosts’ immunological and physiological responses to perkinsus infection, we could identify some factors related to the first line of defense against the parasite’s invasion. from this study we can conclude that a number of genes are altered by perkinsus infection, in particular those belonging to important gene families such as lectins, which are part of the host defense system and capable of recognizing specific molecules through their carbohydrate recognition domains. some of them were already characterized, such as the specific galectin that is used by the host to recognize p. marinus or others that are differentially expressed upon perkinsus infection. in oyster, this specific galectin can be responsible for subverting the host's immune/feeding recognition mechanism, giving perkinsus marinus a passively gain entry into the host hemocytes, the first line of defense  <cit> . these families of lectins were identified in r. decussatus and are now being subjected to a more detailed characterization. in r. philippinarum some lectins, known as manila clam lectins  were also associated with perkinsus infection and are able to bind to the surface of perkinsus hypnospores, indicating that mcl plays a particular role in clam defense  <cit> .

p. marinus and his most affected host, the oyster c. virginica, was already the subject of a similar microarray study  <cit>  again emphasizing the importance of solving this problem that affects at the moment the bivalve production worldwide. in the case of c. virginica the response of the oyster was mainly at levels of antimicrobial and oxidative stress, consistent with the microarray results obtained for infected r. decussatus, and thus providing additional information on the molecular determinants involved in host interaction, by identifying the corresponding genes. also suppression subtractive hybridization was used to attest genes differentially expressed in r. decussatus during perkinsus olseni infection  <cit>  confirming that the major genes involved were related with immune and stress response.

non annotated genes which expression was found to be substantially altered during perkinsus infection are also being the focus of specific analyses and in a near future we expect that they will be identified and their role during that process documented. nevertheless, the most important aspect of this study is its contribution to increase the number of ests available for bivalves genetics studies. it is also expected to provide tools to infer some facts like how pollution and human related activities can influence clams transcriptome or the effect of some biological events such as metamorphosis or reproduction.

although we believe to have a good representation of ruditapes decussatus transcriptome, and despite the use of normalized libraries of adult and larvae stages, the representation of the clam transcriptome is incomplete and some of the contigs are not fully represented, often missing its 5’ extremity, a problem associated with cdna library construction. the continuous technological advances and ngs cost drop should provide, in a near future, full coverage of relevant transcriptomes for this and other organisms, allowing the identification and use of more biomarkers or defense related genes to characterize different populations of bivalves of a specific area. furthermore they should allow us to also identify the specific adaptations of each species to adverse and/or favorable conditions. but already at present, with the availability of two ruditapes species transcriptomes , we can start to identify the genetic differences behind their susceptibility to different pathogen organisms and point out resistance factors.

